<title>Understanding farmers' communication networks: an experience in the Philippines. Understanding farmer's communication network: an experience in the Philippines</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
PREFACE
It is morning time in Mamala 1, a village in the Quezon province, last ten years: How has farmers gather around a wooden table in the barangay hall. Several deal with those major crops guage among the farmers and have asked for a meeting; they claim they want to learn about farming. After some hesitation, at the request of the visiting workers, institutions and the felt pens and start out by drawing a map of the barangay. The farmers discuss the detailed locations of fields and roads, farms and crops. As other men and women come by, they are absorbed by the group's illustration effort; each one insists on including the exact location of their farms and homes. Corrections are made; unexpected details of the local environment appear. A map of their own environment emerges with their major crops and enterprises carefully illustrated on the large piece of paper.
The researchers ask the group to reminisce on what has changed over the are, how the information farming changed? What have been the major changes in the way they is useful as a common lan-wandering around the area map? Who brought about the new ideas and innovations? Anecdotes emerge along with names of farmers, vendors, extension emerge as well, like the organizations who over the last decade have shaped and influenced farming in the area. From this history of innovation, the "actors" and their interactions start to appear as a network of knowledge and information exchange. It is now late moming; after some refreshments, this time the researchers offer to do some drawing in return. They group and draw the actors who work at the village, municipal and regional level; they draw a map showing their relationships. A pattern of information exchange emerges on the map; who their partners are, where their sources of knowledge Philippines, and a group of has circulated, who has
controlled the linkages, who has reamed. The map researchers have been which are drawn on the and the researchers. From "reading" the map, major stories surface, such as the problems with cabbage pests; major possibilities researchers, they pick up pineapple contract production which is under way. The last decade in the evolution of the farming system is mapped out in terms of the major players. The farmers have visualized a reality and it has been analysed using a common language with the researchers; a sense of fulfilment permeates the group as communication takes place. It is now time to meet and interview the other actors and start investigating the linkages; it is time to look for entry points for their possible improvement.
ACRONYMS
AKIS Agricultural Knowledge and Information System
AT - Agricultural technician (extension worker)
BPI Bureau of Plant Industries
DA Department of Agriculture
DANIDA Danish International Development Agency
DENR Department of the Environment and Natural Resources
DOST Department of Science and Technology
DSC Development support communication
FPR Farmer participatory research
FSD Farming systems development
IRRI International Rice Research Institute
ISATGaT Integrated System for Agriculture Technology Generation and Transfer
KADA Key agricultural development area (Department of Agriculture)
KPA Key production areas (Philippines 2000 medium term strategy)
LGC Local Government Code
LOU Local government unit
MAO Municipal agricultural officer
NARRDN National Agricultural Resources Research and Development Network, PCARRD
NARS National agriculture research systems
NEDA National Economic Development Authority
NIA National Irrigation Administration
PCARRD Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development
PHILRICE Philippines Rice Research Institute
PRA Participatory rural appraisal
PTD Participatory technology development
R & D Research and development
RAAKS Rapid appraisal of agricultural knowledge systems
RLARC Regional Integrated Agricultural Research Centre
RRA Rapid rural appraisal
SCU State colleges and universities
STAND Science and Technology Agenda for National Development (1993)
STARRDEC Southern Tagalog Agriculture and Resources Research and Development Consortium, Los Banos, Region IV
T & V Training and visit system
TOT Transfer of technology model
UPLB University of the Philippines at Los Banos
CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION
For several years there has been an awareness in the Philippines of the need to ensure that investments in natural resources research produce options which farmers may adapt and adopt. The Philippines Council for Agriculture and Resources Research and Development (PCARRD) 1991 Review highlighted the need to address inadequate links between farmers, outreach systems and research. The report underlined the limited number (11 percent) of "mature technologies" which had been adopted by farmers.
This case study grew out of an FAO/UNDP communication for development project which aimed at improving the exchange of relevant agricultural information between research, extension networks and farmers in five regions of the Philippines. The field work in each site was started using rapid appraisal techniques. It soon became evident however, that technology and information per se were insufficient elements to propel an increase in agricultural productivity and rural incomes. Other demands were voiced by the communities, which in turn pointed to the need to make services in all sectors more responsive to barangay needs, including credit supply, infrastructure development, marketing, health and education. The farmers' definitions of problems and their underlying causes indicated the limited impact which agricultural information and communication have, if not coordinated, with other services. This explains why agricultural development needs to have a systems perspective. From a
systems perspective, it is necessary to identify all the actors involved. In this context it was clear that the Department of Agriculture's extension system is only one of many actors which influence farmers' decision making
hence the necessity for systematic mapping of the agricultural information linkages that are important to farmers.
Farmers' capacity to control their environment is the result of the resources at their disposal; among these, knowledge and skills are key components. Indeed, the evolution of farming is influenced as much by changes in the environment, the marketplace and culture, as it is by the information which flows into a farming society.
Farmers communicate with multiple sources of information to shape and enrich their knowledge base. This study focuses on developing an approach to map the communication networks which exist in an agricultural system and to identify the main actors which play a role in shaping agricultural and rural development.
This study proved timely because of the new Local Government Code (LGC) implemented in April, 1993. The LGC has decentralized the Philippine extension service to the provincial and municipal levels. This authority is already in the hands of provincial governors and municipal mayors. Many extension workers have now become municipal employees, which means their job descriptions require reviewing. This decentralisation also calls for the development of new relationships among researchers, universities and municipal authorities. It was therefore deemed imperative to develop innovative approaches for diagnosis and decision-making regarding agricultural development at the local level. The new municipal agricultural officers (MAOs) need to be equipped for the additional responsibility granted by the LGC, especially as their new supervisor is a democratically-elected mayor with a constituency to serve.
THE CONCEPTS
The many levels of the knowledge and information networks emerged during interviews conducted by a multi-disciplinary team that went to several farming communities to develop a participatory rural appraisal approach to understanding how villagers receive and process agricultural information.
In order to understand a farming system, it is just as important to understand its information networks as it is to understand its environmental situation or changes in its market place.
An agricultural knowledge and information network describes the interactions among the institutions or individuals - researchers, public sector workers, private tradesmen, non-governmental organizations and farmers - who are part of the system in which agricultural information is exchanged. Yet it is seldom perceived as researchable. The study team sought to develop a quick method for identifying actors and assessing the strengths and weaknesses of a barangay information network. By understanding all of the links and sources of agricultural information and knowledge, it becomes possible to plan interventions that could improve farmers' agricultural knowledge.
By using existing tools of communication for development, farming systems development (FSD), participatory rural appraisal (PRA), and agricultural knowledge and information systems (AKIS) analysis, the multi-discipline team developed an approach for farmers and municipal level officers which will serve as a compliment to FSD and PRA. The team was made up of specialists from FAO and consultants in the fields of communication for development, farming systems, and agricultural research (see Appendix 1).
The study began at the farmer level. The team joined farmers in an exercise to identify the actors in their information network. It then moved up the system, to interview those actors- barangay organizations, municipal agricultural technicians, and officers, input tradesman and middlemen, provincial agricultural officers, regional representatives of government departments and national level officials of the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Science and Technology.
In the study, the method proved useful at the barangay level when it was possible to gather farmers for open informal discussions about their farming system. In the process of working together to map linkages, the farmers and team members developed a common language and farmers' analytical abilities were enhanced. The process also proved useful in a group meeting with municipal agricultural technicians.
In all communities visited, the agricultural information which had reached the users was found to be, at best, limited, and in most cases, inadequate. Farmers' primary source of information was other farmers. In general, the agricultural technicians (ATs- formerly, extension workers) were not meeting the farmers' needs. The information programmes handed down from researchers to the ATs for transfer to farmers were not adequate. It was evident there was a need to transform the role of the AT into a facilitator or information broker. Some of the ATs themselves recognised the need to improve their skills and redefine their roles. The roles of several of the private sector actors appeared to be complimentary to the ATs, and there is ample room for improving the link between research and farmers.
THREE MAJOR LESSONS:
* Mapping linkages in a knowledge system uncovers information exchange mechanisms. Evaluating the performances of these linkages is a first step toward a systematic linkage analysis. For rural development programmes which target poverty alleviation, it is especially important to understand the control of a linkage because it reveals who is being served.
* There is a need for a new role for municipal ATs. The farmers proposed a shift in functions. The ATs are committed workers who are more effective when facilitating than when instructing. The farmers' needs as well as the professional goals of the ATs call for these new roles.
For municipal leaders, the approach provides a tool to assess farmers' needs, identify networks and identify the appropriate actors with whom to collaborate. Municipal agricultural officers (MAO) and mayors will be better equipped to negotiate with all sectors when they understand the needs, resources and patterns of information demand and supply. For the MAO, the approach provides a management tool.
* These developments suggest that this study was not only timely, but of relevance to several governmental departments that play a role in agricultural development. They also show that there was a methodological gap to fill in order to operationalize the new relationships between the local government units (at the municipal and provincial levels) and national government agencies.
The approach developed by this research team can contribute to the process of decentralisation by providing a cost-effective mechanism to bring farmers, field workers and municipal officers together through a common learning process.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
CHAPTER 2 - COMMUNICATION IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
This section has two parts. The first gives the background of the principles that led to this study and explains the increasingly important role of communication in participatory and client oriented agricultural research & development (R & D). The second describes policy changes in the Philippines which are creating a need for the new R & D approaches. The bibliography offers a guide to other literature related to this approach.
THE R & D EVOLUTION
For a better understanding of the R & D evolution, the following main models and trends of the last three decades are described: the "transfer of technology (TOT)" model; the "systems perspective from cropping systems to farming systems development"; the "participatory approach"; the "agricultural knowledge and information systems" model; and finally, the "rapid and participatory appraisal of agricultural knowledge systems".
The transfer of technology model: no room for communication
Since the late 1960s, the National Agricultural Research Systems (NARS) of many nations have been centralised. The transfer of technology (TOT) model, which considers research the starting point for disseminating agricultural knowledge, has been the standard for NARS in many countries.
In a simplified form, TOT calls for the delivery of research results from scientist to the extension agent, who in turn will transfer the information to the farmer. This model performs well when the scientist, extension agent and farmer come from similar backgrounds, speak the same language and share information of common relevance. The design of extension systems has followed this model.
TOT has been successful in terms of increased food efficiency in favourable areas of many countries. However, TOT has often had inadequate results because of its centralisation of research resources (human and capital), its specialisation of research and the distance of research programmes from small farmers. The yield potential of the best endowed areas is often reached, but at the cost of environmental degradation. In terms of equity to resource-poor farmers, the R & D systems of many countries did not meet the expectation.
In the last two decades, many NARS have become concerned with how to service the technology needs of the large numbers of farmers who have remained outside R & D systems. These are farmers who work with small, fragmented plots of land in rainfed, sloping, droughty, and/or low fertility conditions. Their production systems are complex and diversified. There are no single solutions. Often, the conditions at research stations are different from conditions at the farms, farmers cannot afford to implement recommended technologies or do not have the resources to apply them. As a result, the farmer cannot adopt what the research and extension system offers.
NARS trying to respond to small farmers' needs have faced the constraints of TOT's unidirectional information sharing. In the TOT model, the research system (including basic research, applied research, adaptive research) passes on research results and technology to the extension worker. The extension worker is expected to package this information for dissemination to the farmer. This unidirectional process makes the farmer the receiver of "packaged wisdom". As Roling (1988) put it, the extension worker's job was essentially to get the farmer to do what the extension worker wanted the farmer to do. Then, if the technology was not adopted, it was blamed on the farmer's resistance to change.
The diffusion of innovations model (as developed by Everett Rogers (1983) and others) was based on this blame-the-victim concept.
That model was accompanied by the "training and visit system" (Benor & Harrison, 1977) in which farmers were categorised by their willingness and capacity to innovate. Homogeneous categories of farmers were targeted by extension programmes. Research results were matched with "recommendation domains", that is, homogeneous farmer groups for whom the technology was relevant.
The role of communication in the TOT model is merely to produce information materials for the transfer of knowledge from researchers to farmers through the extension system (Figure 1). This unidirectional transfer leaves little room for communication.
Figure I The TOT model concept.
The research system with its TOT model failed to question its own weakness. It did not ask why the client (farmer) was not adopting its product (improved technology). Instead, it searched for groups of clients willing and capable of adopting it, and for extension mechanisms such as "training and visit systems" (T & V) to reach them more efficiently. It did not seek to communicate, but rather to inform.
The TOT model seeks to sell (disseminate for adoption) a product (technology) by identifying potential customers (homogeneous groups of farmers) and improving the advertising (social marketing for extension). It fails however to feed back information systematically to its R & D department on the clients' views that might make the product more relevant. Feedback only happens when the recipient group is a well-organized and influential farmer lobby: pressure [from a farmer group] implies that farmers have some power to ensure their preferences are considered (Kaimowitz, 1992). Increasingly, compelling evidence suggests that interaction with and external pressure on research from farmers is essential if research is to generate technology options relevant to farmers' needs and opportunities (ISNAR: 1994, p. 3). In addition to external pressure from the farmers, others argue that researchers in the public sector also need to become more accountable to their clientele: "One of the
biggest obstacles to institutionalising participatory, client-driven R & D is that presently most public sector agricultural research systems and staff are not penalised for producing technologies that farmers cannot use." (Ashby, 1993: p.2).
The systems perspective: an opening for communication
Cropping systems development was the first attempt by R & D subsystems to respond to the complexities of farming systems and was a significant first move away from the monocropping laboratory conditions which dominated commodity-based research.
Its approach of looking at the relationship among the many crops grown by small farmers led researchers to consider a broader set of variables - labour availability, gender roles, household economies, markets, supply and availability of credit and inputs, price policies, interactions among the different components of a diversified farm (livestock, trees, pasture, annual and perennial crops, aquaculture, etc.), energy, etc. The "farming systems development" (FSD) perspective invited the social scientist into the agricultural R & D arena. As an interdisciplinary approach, FSD has battled to gain recognition in the R & D community made up of specialised expertise and compartmentalized mandates. Not surprisingly, FSD has come under attack. After all, the TOT model has never welcomed critiques.
The systems approach makes an effort to close the gap between the research systems' agenda and the resource-poor farmers' needs. FSD recognises that the nature of research itself needs modification, but FSD still offers only unidirectional transmission of information. The control of decision making remains in the hands of the experts, although at least now they come from both the natural and the social sciences (Chambers & Jiggins, 1986).
Figure 2 Farmers' diagram (from Lightfoot, Feldman and Abedin, 1991)
The systems approach has at least provided a foothold for the field of communication. After all, systematic farming-systems surveys require contact with the farmers. Even though the survey tool remains researcher-controlled, the dialogue which develops is already an improvement. "Rapid rural appraisals" (RRA) are an example of the contribution of the FSD approach in terms of a cost-effective tool to obtain a multi-dimensional picture of a farmer's situation. However, RRA is researcher-controlled. The farmers are surveyed but their answers are used as part of an outsider's study. Participatory rapid appraisals tools have been developed to shift the control over the diagnosis from researcher to the audience. In this instance, the tools by which the audience expresses itself are in fact communication tools. The work done by Lightfoot & Minnick (1991), and Lightfoot, Feldman and Abedin (1991) using diagrams for improved FSD analysis with farmers is an important accomplishment
because the farmer can contribute his own perspective, language or voice.
The systems approach courts the participatory approach: a red carpet for communication
Parallel to the evolution of FSD, the development of farmer participatory research methods brought attention to several previously-ignored issues. Farmers' indigenous knowledge, their experience in doing research (often dealing with multiple variables and risk considerations) and their capacity to share information are crucial assets. The development of participatory appraisal tools reflects the need to shift the control of FSD diagnostic tools from specialist to farmer. PRA methods have evolved through communication tools that are already part of farmers' livers (Haverkort, et al. 1991).
The field of participatory technology development began with the PRA diagnostic stage, but now involves farmers in several other steps of agricultural research. The communication possibilities for this kind of horizontal interaction are wide open and most promising. "Farmer participatory research" (FPR) requires communication to make use of its full potential as a facilitator of exchange between cultures and perspectives. Much work has already been done in terms of integrating communication tools into those PRA methodologies that include visualized analyses. This study drew on several:
* participatory mapping and modelling (resource and social maps)
* aerial photograph analyses
* seasonal calendars
* daily and activity profiles
* historical profiles and trend analyses
* time lines and chronologies
* preference ranking
* Venn and network diagrams
* systems and flow diagrams
* pie diagrams
(Cornwall, Guijt and Welbourn, 1992, p.14)
Figure 3 Overlapping domains in the systems approach
From the point of view of information exchange, the above methodologies call for close interaction among researchers, field workers and farming populations (Figure 3). The interaction between researchers and farmers refers to the growing field of participatory research, also referred to as farmer participatory research (FPR).
The interaction among research, extension and farmers as portrayed in Figure 3 is referred to as participatory research and extension or, in other words, the joint search for solutions to problems. As is highlighted in the last chapters of this report, the role of the extension worker in this context is one of facilitation of common learning. The field worker becomes a facilitator, a broker of knowledge supply and demand.
Agricultural knowledge and information systems: the door to integrate communication into agricultural R & D systems
As the systems approach to agricultural R & D evolves to accommodate participatory approaches, the underlying TOT linear model is stretched to its limit. This is evident when institutions try to adopt newer methods and find that the underlying TOT model blocks the way. For example, the FSD units of many NARS function effectively as add-on services, but have not become part of the major commodity programmes.
Figure 4 The AKIS (from Roling, 1988)
The TOT model is being eclipsed by newer models which acknowledge the overlapping of researchers, outreach workers and farmers. (Christoplos & Nitsch, 1993). Rather than focusing on the technology itself, the new systems recognise that information and knowledge provide a common denominator among farmers, extension workers and researchers. In the late 1980s, researchers at Wageningen Agricultural University in the Netherlands proposed the "agricultural knowledge and information systems" (AKIS) model.
The model describes the two-way flow of information and knowledge among the research, dissemination and utilizer sub-systems (see Figure 4). These sub-systems play equally important roles in the system.
The utilizer sub-system is a source of information and knowledge that feeds into the other two. For the utilizer sub-system to be on a more equal footing with the other two, the sub-system must have a demand capacity. After all, the best extension systems in the world develop where farmers are organized and able to lobby for the technical assistance which they consider priorital (Roling, 1988). It is the demand capacity of farmers that dictates the quality and effectiveness of the extension support. The opposite process, whereby extension systems conceivably strengthen farmers' production systems through technology, is more a myth of the TOT model than an observable reality.
In the AKIS, the two-way exchange of information is crucial for effective generation and transfer of relevant technology. As a consequence, the role of the dissemination sub-system (the extension organization) has been reformulated from a one-way TOT persuasive channel into a two-way channel for requests and answers which facilitates the learning process for both farmers and researchers. But the change from disseminating to facilitating requires staff with fundamentally different attitudes, skills and knowledge. From the point of view of the AKIS, and of participatory research, the facilitator can be described as a broker of information demands and supplies.
The model is aimed at "supporting decision making, problem solving and innovation in a given country's agriculture" (Roling, 1990). The AKIS model is based on systems theory and is therefore difficult to operationalize in the context of existing linear systems which were developed in the NARE; under the TOT model. The model must first be tested by using it to analyze a given AKIS. Roling (1990) suggests eight different research methods to study AKIS:
1. Comparative analysis of two systems
2. Comparing the formal and the actual system
3. Linkages matrix
4. Tracing one successful innovation back through the system
5. Comparing the ideal theoretical system with the actual
6. Analysing the transformations (research findings into recommendations, messages, etc.)
7. Participating in linkage events
8. Assessing corporate ideology
However, the above choices remain research-controlled and do not necessarily incorporate the participatory dimension.
AKIS and participatory rapid appraisal: the starting point for this study
The main contribution of this study has been the experimental development of an approach to make the AKIS model operational. "Rapid appraisal of agricultural knowledge systems (RAAKS)", a methodology pioneered by Engel and Solomon (1983) provided a concrete starting point - an operational method with steps to follow. Using RAAKS to study an AKIS provides a strategic diagnosis in support of knowledge management.
As developed by Engel and Solomons, RAAKS may be used as a management tool for understanding an agricultural knowledge system, or for any other system where knowledge is the common denominator among groups of individuals and institutions. RAAKS is rapid and very systematic, but it is also a complicated exercise. The project team borrowed heavily from RAAKS but tried to make it more accessible to farmers. Following a growing trend of participatory analyses (Dela Cruz, et al., 1992; Lamb, R., 1993), this study explored network analysis from the user perspective.
The team focused on communication linkages and the patterns of exchange in the context of the AKIS. It also focused on mapping the AKIS from the farmer level up. For a farmer, the AKIS is basically a communication network for the exchange of information. "Communication does not take place randomly, but within patterned networks. Network analysis, when applied to communication about agriculture in rural communities, reveals those people who are regularly used as sources of advice and information and agriculture and conversely those who are not well connected to establish networks (Garforth, 1993: p.2).
In the analysis of the major linkages, the relevance of other actors' services was used as a criterion to review linkages. This criterion refers to the usefulness of a service for the other actors' learning process.
At this stage it may seem tempting to try to develop a blueprint for the new tasks of the extension organization and its field workers. However, the nature and structure of an AKIS are not static - they differ according to site and level of analysis. In terms of change through time, farming systems' "evolvability and flexibility are critical characters for survival" (Lightfoot, Pingali and Harrington, 1993: p. 18) and therefore contribute to the evolving nature of an AKIS. In addition, the extension organization is only one among the many actors in the AKIS and therefore the role of a field worker and the organization must be flexible - flexible enough to exploit the strengths and maybe overcome some of the weaknesses of an existing AKIS.
A future step would be the description of the AKIS as a learning system: 'What we are suggesting through our parading of systems agriculture is a further shift towards the creation of new learning systems. Here, agricultural professionals will be engaged in the process of collaborative inquiry with farmers, in action-oriented research towards the establishment of sustainable relationships between people and their environment" (Sriskandarajah, 1991:p. 3). "The focus is then less on what we learn, and more on how we learn. The need is for learning environments: conditions in which learning can take place through experience, through open and equal interactions, and through personal exploration and experiment" (Pretty & Chambers, 1992: p. 5).
Knowledge management is defined as the activities people perform to facilitate collective learning and local knowledge processes among individuals and organizations. RAAKS is a participatory communication method that enables the actors in an AKIS to diagnose and define problems and plan interventions. This feature of the RAAKS has proven important in the present study in terms of the potential application of the approach as a management tool for agricultural decision making at the municipal level.
POLICY CHANGES IN THE PHILIPPINES INFLUENCING R & D
In this section particular attention is paid to the significance of the approach in the context of the new policy framework with examples drawn from experiences in integrating the above R & D models and methods in the Philippines.
In 1987 the Department of Agriculture (DA) was given the mandate "to use a bottom-up, self-reliant, farm systems approach that will emphasise social justice, equity, productivity and sustainability in the use of agricultural resources" (Dar, 1993: p. 1). However, the same author acknowledges that "in many instances, farming systems technologies developed by R & D institutions failed the test of site realities... The lesson is that in the formulation of interventions we have to begin by taking as the point of departure the existing tradition and resources of farmers." (ibid, p.5).
The constraints are not merely methodological or technical. Land tenure and migration to the highlands are major constraints to effective agricultural development in the Philippines. The FSD perspective has become integrated into some R & D programmes, yet its impact has been limited because of inadequate diagnosis of existing practices (knowledge). This has lead to technological packages which do not respond to farmers' predicaments or issues which influence the farming systems but which are not of a technical nature.
The Philippines 2000 medium-term strategy calls for an intensification of agricultural production - rice, corn, vegetable and other cash and commercial crops in key production areas (KPAs). Increases in yields per unit area will free an estimated 1.3 million hectares of marginal rice and corn farms for cash crops and livestock. However, it is the marginal farms, requiring assistance in technology, services, skills and organization, that are most difficult to service.
Experience in Leyte (Eastern region) shows the difficulty in servicing marginal farmers with the tools used by conventional R & D: "research activities ... continue to focus on testing and transfer of technologies with the agenda set by bureaucrats and researchers, not farmers." (Go & Go, 1992: p. 5).
The Philippines 2000 policy proposal was designed at the top. However, the implementation of the programme at the field level, particularly in regard to those resource-poor farmers who will be encouraged to shift into other commercial crops, will need to be addressed. Go & Go (1992) add: "the desire for a bottom-up approach remains little more than part of the conceptual undercurrent." On the other hand, the new patterns of decision making imposed on Local Government Units (LGUs) by the Local Government Code also changes the control over the process at the field level. This is particularly important in terms of both technology development (through the DA network of regional research centres) and extension, which is now a LOU activity. "Not only will there be a redistribution of R & D responsibilities but the thrust and demands for services may change. Local needs are expected to be given more impetus as they become a local concern." (Villanueva, 1991: P. 7).
A "key agricultural development area (KADA)" programme proposed by the DA is "an area-based strategy to attain production of selected agricultural commodities and the promotion of agribusiness activities through the delivery of agricultural support services from the DA, the LGUs, peoples' organizations, non-governmental offices and private organizations" (Dar, 1993b: p. 4). Through the KADA programme, the DA hopes to find an adequate agreement with the LGUs in those key production areas identified by DA. However, it remains to be established how LGUs in non-KPAs will access DA services. The DA is proposing new linkages with the LOU extension facilities through work complementation. In addition, the DA recognises the importance of work complementation with other actors in the system- state colleges and universities (SCUs), NGOs and the private sector.
In 1994 the Congress of the Republic of the Philippines was to have voted on the act to establish an "Integrated System for Agriculture Technology Generation and Transfer" (ISATGaT). In addition to dealing directly with the need for functional linkages with the LGUs, the problem of the gap in technology generation, transfer and adoption is ably summed up in the explanatory note of the act:
'The traditional system of separating research and extension activities among and within government agencies and academic institutions has been frequently cited as the main reason for the ineffective transfer of technology to farmers and other end-users. The recent Revolution of the agricultural extension services from the DA to the LGUs has even further worsened this situation. While most of the extension workers have been transferred to the LGUs, the researchers remained with the national and regional centres. The SCUs, in the mean time, continued with their R & D and extension activities as usual independent of the programmes of the DA and LGUs. As a result, many activities were unnecessarily duplicated and many important problems and opportunities are left unattended.
"Planning and implementation of agricultural R & D and extension activities whether by government agencies or SCUs, have been conducted almost entirely without farmers' participation. In many cases, this results in a very poor fit between the technology the farmers need and the technology that is generated and hoped to be transferred."
When the act is operationalized, the system for technology generation and transfer in the Philippines would become more integrated and streamlined. It is important to note that there is an increasing realisation and appreciation of the fact that extension workers, in order to be more effective in their work, would need to embrace new identities as facilitator/enablers and capacity/builders.
The above scenario, as seen from the LOU point of view, becomes increasingly complex in light of other policies and programmes such as the Department of Science and Technology's (DOST) Science and Technology Agenda for National Development for the year 2OOO (STAND), espoused by PCARRD, or the Agrarian Reform Communities of the Department of Agrarian Reform. The LOU's will be faced with competing and often contradictory proposals from different departments, university researchers, development projects, NGOs and the private sector. On the basis of a review of the sections in the Local Government Code pertinent to the Department of Agriculture, which defined the agricultural extension and on-site research services to be provided by the LGUs, there appears to be very little mention of mechanisms by which the code will be implemented. The LGUs will need a platform for negotiation (Roling, 1993), otherwise they will be overwhelmed by the agendas of the other actors in the system.
This points out the need for increased attention to mechanisms by which the LGUs may link with farmers on the one hand, and regional- and national-level institutions on the other. The following section describes the approach as a possible management tool which the municipal level LOU could use to diagnose problems, identify potential partners and negotiate assistance.
back contents next
<section>3</section>
back contents next
CHAPTER 3 - THE APPROACH DEVELOPED BY THIS STUDY
OBJECTIVES
1. To develop a rapid diagnostic approach for identifying and assessing the strengths and weaknesses of a given AKIS, in order to be able to plan the interventions needed for its improvement.
2. To shed light on the principal linkages between - and among -farmers, technology transfer workers, researchers, policy makers, and other actors of the AKIS in the sites where the approach will be tested.
3. To make recommendations on how to strengthen the municipal and provincial capacity to identify and enhance two-way linkages in technology identification, generation and transfer activities.
THE APPROACH
This approach allows researchers, field workers, and rural communities jointly to identify the networks of information exchange. It brings farmers, field workers and municipal actors together in a closer learning and planning process.
The approach draws on several fields including communication for development, participatory technology development (PTD), and farming systems development (FSD). It also draws on models such as the agricultural knowledge and information systems (AKIS) and on field research and diagnostic methodologies including rapid appraisal of agricultural knowledge systems (RAAKS) and on the tools used in participatory rural appraisal (PRA). The approach constitutes an addition to the PRA toolbox [of methods] for focusing on identifying the networks of information exchange.
The jeepney approach to research methodology
After the Second World War, the US Army left in the Philippines the seed for another model which resembles the approach of the study: the jeep. The jeep, a versatile and simple means of transportation, was adopted by the Filipinos as a piece of appropriate technology. This model set the standard for the development of an indigenous industry which produces a wide variety of vehicles, now called jeepneys, for private and public use. The front design of most jeepneys still resembles that of the original jeep model, even though they may be extended to function as either buses or trucks. Jeepney production is decentralized - there are dozens of shops along the roads where jeepneys are assembled by the unit or by the dozen. It is a fascinating example of an artisan appropriation and popularization of the factory assembly line. Each jeepney is assembled from parts originating from multiple sources and, as a result, each jeepney is unique. The engines are recycled from Japan but
most other components are made in the Philippines by specialized suppliers. The analogy continues as we think of conventional research station R & D methods as equivalent to the procedures which rule the factory assembly line. Assembly line procedures are Standardized and controlled. Jobs are sequential, specialized and compartmentalised (except for the Japanese concept of integrated production teams). One unit receives an input from the previous one, transforms it, and passes it on to the next unit. It is a linear unidirectional flow of a product, such as extension work in the TOT model. On the other hand, bringing R & D into the systems approach means decentralizing to some extent the control and location where the research and development of a technology takes place. It is expected that this will permit the development of more effective, situation-specific technologies which respond to particular agroecologic & socioeconomic conditions. Just like the Japanese model of
integrated production teams which follow the production of a car from start to finish, the research team would likewise "move along the line" and bring its technology right through the system to discuss with the farmers. Specialization and compartmentalization is no longer possible. That is why the jeepney approach may yield some lessons. The methodology assembled for this study resembles the jeepney. Components have been gleaned from an evolution of methods and have been incorporated into this approach. Hence the approach is not BRA per se, nor is it purely PRA or RAAKS; nor is it farming systems development; but rather, it is a jeepney approach in methodological terms called "participatory rapid appraisal of farmers' agricultural knowledge and communication systems".
Figure 5 A methods jeepney
Creating a common language
"Any interpretation, translation and representation ... cannot be assumed to be neutral or objective.... Our language is directly linked to our ways of reasoning and therefore only providing us with partial views of our world." (Scoones and Thompson, 1992: p. 7-8). Through the use of participatory rural appraisal tools (PRA) a common language develops between farmers and outsiders that enables them to discuss situations realistically and plan accordingly. Creating a common language is only one of the functions of communication. Communication also allows individuals to express themselves effectively and to create an identity for themselves or their group. People develop a sense of community through communicating. They also communicate to share information and increase their knowledge. Also, through communication there is the possibility of creating joint action, which can lead to improvement of environment or situations.
STEPS
In order to reach an understanding of farmers' information networks, the following steps were chosen:
* presentation to farmer group of study goals
* map making by farmers themselves
* identification of major enterprises in farming system
* ranking of enterprises
* description of the major changes for each enterprise in last ten years
* identification of actor responsible for each major change
* summary of linkages by (research) team
* verification and discussion with farmers
* analysis of major linkages on the basis of six criteria (awareness of actors' functions, relevance, timeliness and accessibility of actors' services, contribution to farmer learning cycle; use of/access to communication media).
LEVELS OF ANALYSIS
By "levels of analysis" we refer to a segregation of the AKIS for a farming system on the basis of knowledge networks. In the Philippines the following levels may be studied:
Farmer group - Barangay level: male and female farmers, farm families, and farmer groups; rural and migratory members of a family group; local religious and political leaders; socioeconomic groups in the barangay, etc.
Barangay/municipal level: farmer organizations, input suppliers, credit suppliers, middlemen, local government units, municipal extension workers, NGOs' cooperatives, etc.
Municipal/provincial level: farmer organizations/cooperatives; NGOs, municipal agricultural officers; private sector enterprises.
Provincial/regional level: regional PCARRO consortia representatives including RACO staff. RLARCs, etc.
Regional/national level: DA, Research stations, DENR staff, universities, NGOs, NARRDN/PCARRD, DA, DENR, NEDA, etc.
SITE SELECTION CRITERIA
It was agreed that criteria used for site selection should not affect the validity of the study, especially as it would be undesirable to generalise the findings. The first objective of the study was to develop a diagnostic communication approach that could be used in any given barangay or municipality, and to some extent at higher levels of analysis.
Sites were selected according to the following criteria:
* resource-poor and relatively resource-rich communities (so as to contrast networks)
* coastal versus upland communities (which may overlap with first criterion)
* communities where agriculture is the main economic activity
* farming systems made up of multiple crops and production systems
* communities made up predominantly of small farmers
HOW THE APPROACH WORKS AT THE BARANGAY / MUNICIPALITY LEVEL
Gathering farmers for the PRA
The most delicate aspect of the approach is gathering a small group of farmers into small discussion groups. Formal gatherings are cumbersome and are easily manipulated by existing leaders, yet they offer the venue to inform a barangay about the goal of a PRA exercise. Informal, road-side gatherings are necessary to complement the formal meeting; the latter permits the assembly of barangay members in random manner. Semi-formal gatherings which are pre-arranged with barangay organizations or informal groups allow for more systematic interaction with the outsiders. The approach requires a combination of all three.
Diagramming with farmers
By putting a large piece of paper on a table and asking farmers to illustrate their barangay, the research team delegated the first part of the diagnosis to the farmers who took over the mapping. Farmers were asked to draw a map of the barangay that would illustrate the main features of the barangay and farming system for the outsiders. In this instance, the team focused on a general physical map, but this PRA tool can also be used to cover specific issues such as land tenure, ethnic group distribution, soil type, land uses, etc.
The process involved farmers and allowed late-comers to join the groups and the exercise without hesitation. Farmers took great care in describing their communities and the group collaborated or corrected what they said. Men and women discussed the illustration on an equal footing.
During the mapping, the research team prompted the group with questions on the basis of a farming systems checklist developed before the field work. Once the map was complete, the research team asked them to rank their agricultural production enterprises or commodities in order of importance. The criteria for importance was left undefined. On the basis of the group's agreement, the major three to four enterprises were listed vertically next to the map.
Figure 6 Diagram of hypothetical barangay map and of enterprise/time matrix
Next, a ten-year time-line was drawn along the sheet of paper to show the evolution of each major enterprise. This enterprise/time matrix served as the basis for identifying changes in the production systems over the last decade. (Figure 6).
Enterprise by enterprise, the farmers were asked to describe the major changes which had influenced the production and marketing patterns during the last ten years. Each change was written in, indicating the source (name of person or institution) of the new information or technique and the approximate time. This constituted the identification of major actors at the barangayand municipal levels. This process took over two hours and what emerged was a history of the villages' innovations.
The research team then offered to feed back and confirm its understanding of the information through a third diagram. The linkage map was drawn step-by-step, describing and agreeing with the group on each linkage as it was drawn. Linkages within and among communities were drawn first. Then came linkages with municipal "actors" described by the farmers: agricultural technicians, pesticide salesmen, middlemen and tradesmen. Linkages with provincial, regional and national actors (agencies of DA, DOST; SCUs, research stations and industry) were added last. As the map appeared on the paper, farmers confirmed that it described their views.
The team followed up with some of the identified actors and revalidated their perceived roles with the farmer barangay. (Refer to the linkage maps which appear in figures 7 and 8 in the following section.)
The discussion which followed in Mamala 1 after the map was completed was an indication of the power of farmer participation in diagnosis of agricultural and development problems. The map allowed them to verify whom they had trusted and received support from, whom they had failed to contact, whose functions needed review. In essence, the discussion gave both the farmer groups and the outsiders an understanding of actors' goals or mission statements as well as information needs and supplies of each major actor in reference to a farming system. The map allowed for the identification and analysis of major linkage mechanisms and communication channels among actors.
Analysis of major linkages
The analysis of performance of the main linkages followed after the field work. The major linkages identified needed to be understood and analysed under a given set of criteria. The following criteria were developed:
* actors' awareness of other actors' functions in a linkage;
* relevance of other actors' services;
* timeliness of other actors' services;
* accessibility to other actors' services;
* communication media through which link was mediated;
* control over the initiation and management of a linkage.
Figure 7 Linkage analysis matrix (a full set of matrices appears later)
site: Barangay Mamala
- CRITERIA FOR ASSESSING PERFORMANCE
LINKAGE
AWARENESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
RELEVANCE OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
TIMELINESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
ACCESSIBILITY TO OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
C0MMUNIICATION MEDIUM THROUGH WHICH LINK IS MEDIATED
LINKAGE CONTROL
REMARKS
Farmer --> "TPM" private farm contractor group
F aware of TPM commercial interest; F appreciates the TPM's resources invested in the linkage (without understanding where thehidden costs are)
F considers TPM's proposal very promising
Regular, following crop growing cycle
F able to access TPM package as it includes credit + marketing
Interpersonal communication
F control limited to negotiating terms of contract
F is very optimistic about economic prospect and not aware/concerned with risk
"TPM" private farm contractor group --> Farmer
(linkage outcome: pineapple contract production)
TPM aware of F's needs for economically viable attention
TPM chooses farms with the necessary conditions to guarantee production
(as above)
TPM has means of transportation for regular visits to F
Good quality brochures in tagalog; business-like negotiation
TPM-initiated + controlled via contractual agreement, terms set by TPM
TPM relationship with F considerably superior to AT as it includes credit + market commitments and regular visits
This was a first attempt to assess linkage performance systematically. The criteria in the matrix may well serve in future as a means of defining new and desirable functions and linkages among actors in an agricultural knowledge and communication system. While there is no quantitative indicator of performance, in essence, an effective linkage contributes to the learning processes of both actors.
The findings of this kind of appraisal may only be logically derived from the linkage matrix and are therefore location specific.
Step Tool
description of barangay
description of enterprises
ranking of enterprises
recent changes in practices
identification of linkages
linkage analysis
actor potential maps drawn by farmers
maps + discussion guideline
ranking exercise
discussion guideline/date line
linkage map drawn with group
matrix analysis
matrix analysis
In summary, at the barangay level, the research followed the following:
* presentation to farmer group of study goals;
* map making by farmers themselves;
* identification of major enterprises in farming system;
* ranking of enterprises;
* major changes for each enterprise in last ten years;
* identification of actor responsible for each major change;
* summary of linkages by (research) team;
* verification and discussion with farmers;
* analysis of major linkages on the basis of six criteria (awareness of actors' functions, relevance, timeliness and accessibility of actors' services, contribution to farmer learning cycle; use of/access to communication media).
back contents next
<section>4</section>
back contents next
CHAPTER 4 - CASE STUDIES FROM FIELD VISITS
This section refers to a major objective of the study:
To shed light on the principal linkages between - and among - farmers, technology transfer workers, researchers, policy makers, and other actors of the AKIS in the two sites where the approach will be tested.
The site-specific farming systems information and researchable issues identified in this section indicate the extent to which the diagnostic tool allows for a rapid appraisal of entry points for more in-depth appraisals of a farming system. Reference is made to conclusions and recommendations specific to the findings in each of the sites.
The researchers broke up into two smaller teams and worked in separate municipalities. These case studies describe the findings separately for Teams 1 and 2. The different findings of each team are compared and explained.
CASE STUDIES FOR GUISGUIS AND MAMALA 1 (TEAM 1)
The field visits were conducted in the municipality of Sariaya in Quezon province. Two barangays, Guisguis and Mamala 1, were visited by the mission. The municipality consists of 13 barangays with economies based on agriculture, fishing and beach resorts for visitors. More recently the making of nata de coca (for industrial purposes) from coconut has become a major home industry.
Visits were made to both barangays. In Guisguis no formal or informal groups could be identified. Farmers were interviewed in three informal gatherings. The first was a group of fishermen whose livelihood is being threatened by the expansion of beach resorts. The second was a wayside group that gathered spontaneously as the mission was talking to two farmers who were picked at random. The third developed from a semi formal group brought together by the barangay captain at his house at the request of the mission.
At the first meeting at Mamala 1, around 65 farmers were present. The smaller working meetings were with farmers selected from the Farmer Association and the Irrigators Association. There was also a meeting with the Rural Improvement Club (women group) and the Young Farmers Association (4-H Club). The farmers association meeting had 15 farmers including officers of the association and women farmers representing their husbands who were in the field.
The emphasis of this field work was the identification of the individuals responsible for interventions and change (actors), their linkages with the farm barangay, among themselves or with outsiders at the municipal, provincial, regional or national levels. The information gathered focused on the crops and livestock in the barangay and on the management practices of farmers in crop and livestock husbandry. However it was not possible - and beyond the scope of the exercise - to gather adequate information for a good analysis of the farming systems of the barangay and the immediate environment.
The team followed-up farmer linkages to the municipal level: meetings were held with the municipal agricultural officer (MAO), the agricultural technicians (ATs) at the Municipality of Sariaya, and with vendors at the Lucena and Sariaya markets.
Barangay: Guisguis
Guisguis is located in the Sariaya municipality. Farmers grow both perennials (coconut, banana) and annuals such as paddy. There is also a community of fishermen who are being requested to move out of the area due to the expansion of beach resorts along the coast. The resorts offer opportunities for non-farm income sources, which are being exploited to some extent by the farm families.
The farming community in Guisguis is relatively poor. Most farmers are tenants of five landlords who own most of the land. Infrastructure is poor. There is a meagre network of roads within the barangay. The case study for barangay Guisguis is presented in two parts since one sub-group is solely fishermen.
Sub group 1: Profile of fishing sub group
Located in the sitio Silang beach resort, it has a population of 30 households. The primary employment is fishing. The technology used is traditional and confined to shallow sea. The technical knowledge of the farmers seems acceptable and they are aware of the newer technologies but are not able to afford them. They use small boats that are not suitable for deep sea fishing. The indiscriminate dynamiting by large-scale fisherman from Lucena reduces their catch significantly and the increasing number of beach resorts is forcing them out of their only regular livelihood. Other income is from chickens, cattle and hogs, yet they have no technical information on the rearing of these animals except what is provided by the Magnolia farm (private enterprise owned by the San Miguel Corp. group) where they buy the chicks. There is no formal or regular health care or sanitation. If animals become sick they are immediately sold. In the last five years, only one vaccination was
conducted. Marketing of fish and other produce (if in large quantities) is to the Lucena market. Alternatively the produce is sold locally. The fisher farmers are very insecure about the future since they may be forced to leave if the process of building beach resorts continue.
The main actor in the community is an NGO helping them to keep their fishing areas. Traders from Lucena provide them information regarding markets and prices of fish and chicken. No technicians have ever visited them. As indicated above, a livestock inspector visited them five years ago.
This part of the barangay did not have any more information to identify nor apparently any further linkages. It was futile to produce a linkage map under such adverse circumstances.
Sub-group 2: Farmer groups at road side and barangay captain's house
The main crops cultivated are coconut, paddy, coconut inter cropped with banana. The varieties used for coconut are the traditional ones and no change has been reported. For paddy the varieties used are the following (dates acquired and source indicated in brackets): IR 42 (1983, IRIS), C4 (1983, other farmers), IR-10 (1985, NIA), IR-66, GRINGO (1986, from other barangay), DINURADO (1991, other farmers).
The cultural practices consist mainly of fertilizers. However the quantity and types are unknown and when applied are below the recommended levels. Coconuts are not fertilised. The yields of paddy are not known but are characterised as low. Coconut, harvested monthly, provides a regular source of income. Exact yields are not known.
Livestock includes cattle, buffalo, hogs, ducks, chickens and horses. Breeds are native except for chickens from the Magnolia farm. Hogs are purchased from a piggery which gives technical advice. There are no common grazing grounds available to the farmers. However there is an understanding among all farmers that animals are free to graze in the barangay areas if no damage is done to the crops, a practice that all appear to follow.
There are no perceived problems regarding the marketing of produce. Information on marketing is provided by other farmers or the radio. Traders from Lucena purchase most of the coconuts, chickens, and hogs. Paddy is mostly for subsistence requirements.
Input/output price information comes from other farmers but technicians give information once in a while as well. Farmers indicate that profitability of farm enterprises is not very good. When prices of coconuts dropped, many landlords cut the trees for cocolumber. Off-farm income sources are obtained by some of the farmers' children involved in the buying and selling of banana and coconut or work abroad.
In terms of the actors involved in the supply of information or new technology, farmers indicated that the agricultural technician - the AT visits them once or twice a year, mostly regarding the supply of certified seed paddy (Figure 8). No advice for paddy production has been given in the last six years. The livestock inspector comes once in a while. The main source of information has been other farmers who have provided the new seeds of varieties that they have found useful and are presently continuing to cultivate.
Figure 8 Linkage map for Guisguis
Analysis / conclusions
The farmers do not get any technical guidance or planting material from the ATs. The noteworthy observation is the intensive intercropping of bananas and coconuts, a practice they began as a result of their own observations of this practice in other communities in the municipality.
An interesting feature of the team's visit was the indication that this was the first occasion that outsiders have had such an in depth discussion with the farmers. As one farmer dramatised, the training method of the technicians had consisted of a lecture, with farmers having to take notes all the time, and had offered little value.
It is apparent that in the case of Guisguis the process of information transfer is extremely weak. While the ATs seldom provide needed information, the private sector traders and other input suppliers have very little to feed into the system. The linkages that the farmers have with the outside technical world is confined to the exchanges they appear to have had with contacts at IRRI (International Rice Research Institute) and UPLB (University of the Philippines at Los Banos).
Barangay: Mamala I
Located in the municipality of Sariaya in Quezon Province, the barangay of Mamala 1 has a total population of 4,103 - approximately 390 families and 450 households. The main crops are vegetables (peanut, carrots, camote, cabbage and petchai), paddy, pineapples, coconuts and banana.
After explaining the purpose of the meetings, the team requested individual group meetings. However the president and secretary of the farmers association agreed only to small group meetings at which the secretary would always be present. The exchange of information during the first formal meeting was very poor and no real progress was made.
Thereafter, a most productive meeting and discussion took place with a farmer group in the barangay hall with about 15 farmers attending. The secretary of the farmer association, along with other members including several women, helped map the barangay. The following information emerged.
The discussions centred around the significant interventions of the last ten years on the most important crops as perceived by the farmers.
According to the farmers the land is mainly cultivated with vegetables followed by partially irrigated paddy of 35 hectares. The dark alluvial soils are rich in humus and therefore fertile. The crop that interests the farmers most is cabbage, which was introduced in 1970 by "Jack", a Peace Corps worker. It was the most successful crop over a long period of time. In 1983, the introduction of new varieties further increased its profitability. However, in 1989, increased input costs and decreasing output prices led to large losses. This also coincided with the outbreak of a major pest - the diamond back moth. Since 1989, the crop has been profitable only when pests are controlled and the market prices are good. In 1991 a new variety of cabbage called "Baguio" (the original name cannot be remembered by the farmers) was introduced by a trader who brought it from Baguio city. The initial supplier of the seeds has his own land in Mamala 1 and he cultivates it there.
Figure 9 Linkage map prepared with a farmer group in barangay Mamala 1
Another important vegetable is camote(sweet potato) which farmers have used traditionally. The only significant intervention was the introduction of chicken manure in 1985 which increased yields and profits. The manure is brought from outside, sometimes from as far as San Pablo City, a distance of 80 kilometres. In 1985 a new variety of sweet potato called Tarlac was introduced.
Mani(peanut) was introduced in 1988 by BPI (Bureau of Plant Industry). The variety presently being cultivated is referred to as "Bureau". A trader called Eddie brought it to the village. It is interesting that it is the same trader that introduced the cabbage variety called Baguio. Farmers like the crop and did not report any major problems of the cultivation.
The cultivation of carrot has had no major breakthroughs, except that since 1985 yields have increased with the use of chicken manure.
Farmers also attach significant importance to the cultivation of palay (paddy). The major varieties grown are C1 (1985, AT from UPLB) and C22,C4 (1985, farmers in other barangay), UPL (1990, Other farmers ) and C137 (1992, farmer named Alvarez from same barangay). Farmer Alvarez - who was present at the meeting - indicated that he got this from UPLB through a relative who worked at UPLB.
Farmers did not show an appreciable knowledge of the recommendations for paddy, except to indicate they used very little fertilizer. Often, the seed variety of a technical package has been adopted, but not the crop management practices associated with that variety. Yields are severely low. A major problem faced by the farmers growing paddy is water availability - the irrigation system is owned by one individual who does not want to share it.
The other crop of economic significance is coconut. The farmers indicated that there is no problem with the crop. No hybrids have been planted. The only technological innovation is the farmers' intensive intercropping. The concept was first introduced by a farmer, Rahim, who had seen it in Cavite, a distant municipality that is well known for its cultivation of a three-tier system of inter-cropping with coconuts. From then on the AT also brought further details as to the crop husbandry. The farmers have no special cultural or management practices for the crop. It is mainly looked on as a supplementary source of income.
A joint analysis of options and of opportunities enabled by a linkage map (refer to Figure 9)
While sitting around the final linkage map we asked the farmers to compare the services of the private farm contractor (who was introducing pineapple production by providing a package comprising credit, regular technical advice and an assured market) with the public sector technical assistant (AT). While they trust the latter, they suggested that the AT's service needed to resemble the private contractors'. We suggested that the contractors' price which they would be receiving in the future for their pineapples would in all likelihood be reduced by the cost of the advice - in other words, they would be paying for the advice. This generated an excited discussion, after which we asked whether one day they would be willing to subsidise the AT's service. The cautious answer was: yes, but conditional to the AT working for the communities' interests; and the payment calculated according to their real capacity to pay. The map became the language through which the villagers and the
outsiders could understand each others' perspectives.
Analysis / conclusions
This particular case study provides an opportunity for the identification of a number of actors and linkages. One of the main actors identified was the agricultural technician (AT) who offers little technically, but is very useful in providing contacts and introducing outside sources. He is the most trusted, and the farmers have confidence in him. They expressed concerns that the technician was ill prepared with new technology. He is very useful in providing for government-sponsored programmes such as the supply of certified seed, (which incidentally was not completed). The AT has been more successful in helping the barangay establish a multipurpose cooperative.
Another important actor is the pineapple technician from a private farm contracting group. This technician is considered useful, since he provides technical knowledge, pamphlets, brochures and helps with bank loans for the cultivation. He visits very often, has a vehicle and is available when needed. He also looks after the marketing of the crop.
The other important actors are the private traders who provide seeds, fertilizer and chemicals and are regularly accessible. However, the farmers do not get much from the traders in terms of technical knowledge.
A lively discussion with the farmers as to their perception of the future provided significant insights. They are open for innovative ideas that will further enhance their agricultural information system. While the AT is at times helpful and trusted, they recognise that the AT is limited in effectiveness due to the facilities provided to him. They would like to have the AT as a well trained diagnoser of problems and a provider of information, similar to the private sector technicians.
When questioned as to whether the association would pay for the type of service they needed from the AT, they agreed - as long as the AT looked after all their requirements. Further, they agreed to the suggestion that when the association is further strengthened, they would consider the possibility of paying for one student from the barangay to study at UPLB and then return to be their AT. This barangay provided an opportunity to identify the complex nature of the farming systems and also the large number of actors that service them. The roles of the technicians (from the government and the private sectors), the traders and the individual market operators are most revealing. The depth of the analysis reached with the farmers on potential improvements to the functions of the AT is noteworthy.
Discussions at the municipality of Sanaya
In order to follow up on what happens at the municipal agricultural officer (MAO) level, discussions with all the technicians of the municipality were held at the municipal office in Sariaya. The MAO agreed with the findings as seen from the farmers' point of view. A simplified linkage map of the ATs' knowledge and communication system was produced with them. Their inability to feed field problems "up" the system to researchers was evident: their only link with researchers are the seminars, which take place once or twice a year, where they receive training on new technology.
The MAO's main concern was his inability to provide for the farmers, since the resources at his disposal had been significantly reduced with the transfer of extension services to municipal governments. Among the problems described: there were no funds for travel for the ATs, and the seed paddy promised to the farmers was not provided by the central government, (which confirms the farmers' assertion on the failure to deliver the seed).
As for the future, the AT's indicated that they felt inadequately trained to meet the problems facing them. They regarded themselves as generalists who are not trained to diagnose problems. A few felt they needed specialised training to become specialists in a particular programme and make them more effective. In any event one thing was clear, namely that the ATs were presently inadequately equipped to undertake the job they were supposed to do.
Discussions at the Lucena and Sariaya markets
As a follow up on some of the aspects identified by the farmers, the mission visited the markets at Lucena and Sariaya. The team focused on vegetable crops as this activity led to a vast number of actors which were easily accessible. At the Lucena market the team interviewed Eddie - a trader who was identified by the farmers. He markets vegetables at both the wholesale and retail levels.
The discussion with him revealed:
1. As a trader, he provides seeds and sometimes advice on cultivation, primarily of the cabbage crop;
2. He brings new seeds from Baguio when farmers need them;
3. He does not purchase the cabbage from Mamala 1 since it is sprayed with too much insecticide and has a bitter taste;
4. He himself cultivates land at Mamala 1, but his use of pesticide is low;
5. If he or other traders purchase cabbage from Mamala 1, they pay a lower price than for produce from Baguio, where he purchases 90 percent of the vegetables he sells at the market;
6. He sees little future for the cabbage crop in Mamala 1 due to the pest problem.
The team spoke with a number of traders in the Lucena market and observed:
1. They rarely purchase cabbage from Mamala 1 for the same reasons indicated by Eddie. If they do purchase it, they pay three to four pesos less per kilo than the Baguio cabbage;
2. The same situation is true regarding other vegetables from Mamala 1, such as carrots, which are considered to be more succulent. However, the Baguio ones are preferred as they have e longer keeping quality;
3. The most popular variety of paddy in the market is C4 DINURADO which also fetches a price of two to three pesos higher than all other varieties. The rice varieties sold at the market correspond to most of the varieties named by the farmers.
The team also visited the Sariaya market and met principally the trader who provides seeds, fertilizers and pesticides to the farmers in Mamala 1.
The following is a summary of the discussions:
1. Regarding cabbage, the trader is the main supplier of the KY variety of cabbage which is a high yielder. However six years ago his warehouse burned down and since then, he has not been able to obtain the same variety. Consequently he now provides other varieties based on his supply from Manila;
2. He provides a number of pesticides to farmers, but does not provide any technical information regarding their use. When new pesticides are introduced into the market by his dealers in Manila, he passes them on to the farmers. He had no brochures on pesticides to give out;
3. If the Mamala 1 farmers move away from cabbage, the trader will not be affected since he has a diversified portfolio of business activity. His main area of business is in providing livestock feed.
Analysis / conclusions
The experiences from both communities in the municipality provide adequate information to come to the following conclusions:
1. There is a gap in the farmers' need of information and its availability;
2. The ATs cannot meet all the needs of the farmers, even though they are trusted and can at times be useful providers of information;
3. The need for further studying the "Mamala 1 cabbage problem" is an interesting and important challenge to the research system;
4. If this type of problem identification and assessment of farmer needs had been undertaken before, the problems of the farmers in Mamala 1 would have surfaced earlier.
CASE STUDIES FOR LAUREL AND DOLORES (TEAM 2)
Municipality: Laurel
Field visits were conducted in barangays Gulod and Dugan, Laurel municipality, Batangas province, where 16 of the 21 communities are considered rural. Of the 24 000 people living in the municipality, only 10 percent are characterised as urban population. The total land area is around 7 000 hectares, with 73 hectares of irrigated lowland, 3 000 hectares each of coconuts and hill rice, and various other crops of lower importance.
Only the Irrigators' Association was interviewed, as no other formal group in the municipality was available. Further information was obtained from individual farmers selected at random, a dealer, traders at the market and officials at the municipal level.
The field work emphasised identifying linkages, changes in the crops grown, management practices, marketing arrangements, etc. It was beyond the scope and the possibilities of the exercise (time constraints, lack of farmer representation) to obtain a comprehensive picture of the communities' farming systems.
Very few active groups could be identified in the municipality. The women's RIC club and 4H-Club appear to have lost their importance with the DA reorganization and the removal of funds. The Irrigation Association manages and maintains the irrigation scheme which was constructed in 1986. Around 80 percent of farmers who have land in the irrigation scheme are members. Reasons for non-membership appear to be lack of interest of farmers and some cases in which the farmers did not cultivate their land themselves. Non-members have to pay the same fee for the amortisation of the scheme (3.1 million pesos over 45 years, which is paid in kind: 200 kilograms of paddy per hectare at harvest) and cannot benefit from a distribution of zinc-sulphate fertilizer channeled through the association. The paddy for the amortisation is stored in the association's warehouse and marketed. Payment is made to the National Irrigation Administration (NIA) which has also provided a training course in
financial management. The group seems to be dominated by former staff of DA: a retired municipal agricultural officer (MAO) and an agricultural technician (AT). No other group activities could be identified.
Paddy is the main crop in the irrigated areas. Since 1986, two paddy crops have been grown per year. The activities are carried out according to a cropping calendar designed with the assistance of the NIA.
The farmers prefer rice that is fluffy and soft when cooked, even when it cools off. The common varieties used are C-4 (63G) and IR-10 because of the quality of the rice. They have experimented with many other varieties (IR 42, 36, 72, 74, 64, 5 and 8) but rejected them all for this quality reason. The local market, where they sell their surplus, prefers the same "taste" characteristics. The dry season crop yields around 4.5 tons per hectare and the wet season 3.5 tons per hectare, both after deduction of 20 percent for harvesting and threshing. They receive the varieties as certified seeds from IRRI/UPLB through the contact of the former MAO. No fertilizer is applied in the nursery nor as basal application after transplanting. Farmers have been advised to use complete fertilizer (one bag per hectare) and urea (five bags per hectare) for the dry season crop, but they think it is too expensive and that the complete fertilizer is not appropriate for the sandy-loam type of
soil. For the wet seasons they have been advised to use half doses, but it is not clear to what extent they follow the advice.
They commonly use pesticides against leaf roller. After zinc deficiency was identified, they applied zinc sulphate (16 kilos per hectare) when it was distributed free by the MAO. Even though they recognised the benefits of the application, nobody purchases this fertilizer privately.
Most of the produce is used for subsistence requirements. Rice production is considered secure, compared to cash crops that are dependent on fluctuating market prices.
Onions are the most important vegetable crop. They are cultivated, along with beans, chili, eggplants and garlic, between the rice crops. Very few changes have taken place in the selection of the varieties. In response to the market there was a shift to longer beans and from white to purple eggplant. The variety of onions was said to have been the same for the last 15 to 20 years. Only the local small bulb variety seems appropriate, because its growing period fits exactly between the two rice crops. The planting material is obtained from the province of Nueva Ecija, whose cultivation techniques they also copied. Direct seeding would not be possible between the rice crops, and the climate does not seem to be favourable for local production of planting material. The crop is fertilised three times with a mixture of urea and complete fertilizer. No pesticide application was reported. Pest problems (probably a fungus disease) occur in periods with windless humid nights and hot
days. However, no action has been taken to find a solution.
Even though onions appear to be profitable, not many farmers were growing them. Besides the unsuitability of lower-lying areas, the required working capital (60 percent for planting material and 30 percent for labour) is the main limiting factor for the cultivation. Also the fluctuating prices probably prevent smaller farmers from taking the risk of investing in this crop.
For upland areas (typified by barangay Gulod which was also visited by the team) local rice varieties (Kinanda and Buluhan) have been used for a long Lime on the same fields. Shifting cultivation had to be terminated 30 years ago due to lack of land. Therefore, areas outside the municipality are also cultivated. Yield declines due to drought were mentioned for every other year, but no means of mitigating this problem had been sought, even though it was a major concern expressed by the farmers. For many years they have used fertilizer because yields started declining. Ammonium sulphate is the preferred fertilizer. It is cheaper than urea and its effects, the greening of leaves, are assumed to be better than urea. Pesticides are applied against leaf roller after the identification of the pest. Rice is stored in plastic and jute bags without any treatment but no major losses were mentioned. Crop management practices were said to be copied from the lowlands.
Banana lost its importance because of an unknown disease which appeared around ten years ago and weakened the plant considerably The farmers requested advice on a solution, but the crop was somehow abandoned and replaced by horseradish, which has the advantage of continuous harvesting of leaves and roots. Horseradish was characterised as a good cash crop and no desire was expressed to move back to banana. It could not be determined exactly when horseradish was introduced, nor whether this was related to the problems with banana. The team was told that a farmer in a neighbouring village had cultivated it and had supplied the planting material. No indication could be found of the involvement of government services.
Coconut covers around 40 percent of the agricultural area of the municipality. Mostly, it is intercropped with maize, cassava, horseradish, mango or others, depending on spacing and age. Replanting is done with the nuts of good trees. Varieties from outside are rarely used. Dwarf varieties have been tested on a small scale but do not convince the farmers. Crop management is at a very low level. Fertilizer is applied if received free from the Philippines Coconut Authority. It was assumed that the palms would obtain sufficient nutrients through the fertilisation of the inter crops. Furthermore, one farmer feared that coconut palms would become addicted to fertilizer and not grow without it afterwards. In addition to the low requirements for labour and capital, the regular income from harvests in 45-day intervals was mentioned as an advantage.
Analysis/conclusions
The contact with the MAO and the ATs appears to be relatively erratic and their advice was neither sought nor appreciated.
The Department of Agriculture (DA) staff considers the area too large to cover, considering the lack of transport and allowances. The DA staff tasks are: follow-up of the livestock distribution programme, collection of agricultural loan repayments, preparation of statistics and carrying out the national programme. The national programme defines drought and soil erosion as main problems for the area and prescribes contour planting and plantation of trees as solutions. The DA staff is aware that this is either already practiced by the farmers (contour cultivation) or not very relevant. The MAO claimed that he organises three to four annual meetings of the farmer leaders and one demonstration of ~ new variety is conducted at the highway. However no other potential improvement of the agricultural production could be suggested by the MAO.
Recently a local radio unit was established in the municipality (by the Tambuli Project, DANIDA/ UNESCO). It is appreciated by the farmers for the local gossip and information, but still is not an effective source of agricultural information. It broadcasts daily from 8 to 12 am, a time when most farmers have to work in their fields. Further technical information is sought from UPLB and PCARRI) without any adaptation to the local conditions or involvement of the local population in the selection or preparation of the subjects.
As already mentioned, the brief field work reported here cannot offer definitive conclusions; it can only give indications of developments and possible entry points for improvements.
Generally agriculture does not appear to be very dynamic in the municipality. Relatively recent changes were new varieties in paddy, beans and eggplants, and the introduction of horseradish as a new crop. The reaction to recurring problems in certain crops has been simply the change to another crop without any active search for alternative possible solutions. Problems were discussed neither with the DA staff nor with private traders or input suppliers. It cannot be assessed to what extent this is a result of past experience.
Many reasons could have influenced this rather passive attitude. Many families have relatives who are living in Manila or elsewhere, and it was reported that support could be expected when needed. Land is mostly rented from landlords who receive 20 to 25 percent, and land is cultivated without any legal entitlement - two major deterrents to making investments in land or intensifying production. Also the unfavourable infrastructure and the absence of effective agricultural support services probably play a role.
From an agronomic point of view many, entry points for improvement of agriculture could be found. On the other hand it appeared rather improbable that an active participation of the people in this process could be achieved in the short term.
Barangay: Pinagdanlayan
Team 2 did an additional site test in the municipality of Dolores, in order to test the tools used by Team 1 in a different site on a one-day field visit. The following summarises the findings from this additional site. After only one day in the barangay of Pinagdanlayan (municipality of Dolores) sweet potato was selected as its the priority problem. The upland farming systems has focused for the last ten years on its production as an annual crop, and banana, coffee and coconut as perennial crops. Sweet potato production has faced great difficulties in the last two to three years due to pest infestation and increasingly production has shifted towards taro and back to nce. Even though the farmers suffer Mom the yield declines of sweet potato, it is apparently not entirely substituted; there is always the hope that the next harvest will go back to normal. The people encountered from the cooperative, farmers' union and the women's Rural Improvement Club, characterised their
linkages to the MAO and ATs as good, and appreciated their effort. However, the former DA staff could not solve the sweet potato problems and could not provide answers to their questions concerning pigs, banana and coffee.
Contrasting outcomes from field work at barangay/municipal levels
As the above sections show, the two study teams comprising this study experienced different results. A number of conditions were identified which may explain these contrasting outcomes:
Communication networks are more developed in better-off communities. It would appear from the maps prepared that the relatively better-off barangays (for example, Mamala 1) enjoy a more developed agricultural knowledge and communication system than the poorer sites, such as Laurel and one sitio in Guisguis. The mapping exercise was more rewarding in the former where there is more to discover, map and analyse with the farmers. The common language the enhances a form of discussion in which the farmers themselves propose alternative solutions to problems. There was little to map in Laurel as the evolution of the farming system over the last ten years appeared to be minimal, especially with the fisherfolk in Guisguis who were facing a desperate situation. However, regardless of the resource endowment and predicament, it must be said that all farmers were open to the approach. They were very willing and able to identify constraints and search for solutions.
When small groups of farmers were convened in a relaxed manner around a table, the mapping exercise and the subsequent analysis were rewarding. Convening farmers for such an event is the key to success. In addition, gathering different organized groups and groups from different sitios within the barangay, allows a certain degree of verification of the patterns of networking and power relationships. Knowing who one has talked to is important in gauging the biases in the information provided; in future, a stratification of socio-economic groups should be done before a linkage map is produced.
The tools of PRA proved useful in handing control of the diagnosis to the farmer groups. Both teams witnessed the difficulty of interpreting loose information from different people in a gathering when there was no common structure or sequence of steps. The sequence of steps described earlier proved very effective in at least two communities. Otherwise, when the sequence was not followed, it was not possible to produce a linkage map.
The farmers met were able to express their main problems. There seems to be no need for further improvement of their linkages or their awareness. In the short time of the visit it could not be verified whether this applies also to the majority of the inhabitants who are not organised in the above mentioned groups. Also, it was not possible to meet the MAO and the ATs to learn why their advice is often inappropriate for the farmers' problems (are they just disseminating the national programme, are they not able to correctly assess farmers' problems or do they have no access to relevant research results?). This has to be clarified before specific recommendations can be given. A continuation of the linkage analysis would help reveal the roles of the other actors in the barangay - other formal or informal farmers' groups, the Department of Agrarian Reform, IRRI, the private sector - and assess their potential involvement in development activities. However, it can be stated that
the formal groups encountered would probably participate actively in a further diagnosis of their problems, which is more than what could be identified in Laurel municipality.
ANALYSIS OF MAJOR LINKAGES AT THE BARANGAY/ MUNICIPAL LEVEL
As indicated in chapter 3, the last step of the approach is the analysis of the linkages. While the approach proved to be useful in identifying linkages in several of the sites visited, the analysis of the major linkages is just as important because it may guide policy decisions aimed at poverty oriented agricultural research, development and extension. Several criteria were chosen for the analysis of linkage performance. These criteria are meant to provide guidelines for the assessment of linkages in terms of their efficiency and effectiveness as channels of communication for rural development:
* Awareness of other actor's function: This refers both to what another actor can and cannot do. Often there is an awareness of the other actor's official functions yet these are only relevant if performed on a timely basis;
* Relevance of another actor's service. From the point of view of the farmers, when a linkage feeds into their leaning needs, it is considered an effective linkage;
* Timeliness of other actor's service. If the information input is programmed to coincide with the availability of other inputs, then the service is timely;
* Accessibility to another actor's service. Any field worker willing and able to visit his/her clientele regularly establishes a condition of accessibility which often enhances the relevance and timeliness of the service;
* Communication medium through which link is mediated. Communication media may enhance several of the other criteria. For example broadcast media may enhance the awareness of an agricultural service for an agricultural barangay;
* Linkage control. The first four criteria above depend to a large extent on linkage control; when farmers have demand capacity over the services in their area, the above first four criteria are managed by the interested clientele according to their own needs.
While the first four criteria are very much influenced by the last one, they are not entirely shaped by it. Take the example of the linkage between the private farm contractor and the farmers of barangay Mamala 1: the linkage was initiated and controlled by the contractor, yet their visits are timely and regular and the outcome of the linkage was perceived by the farmers as very promising. In fact the linkage is to some extent controlled jointly through a commercial contractual agreement which established a set of commitments and responsibilities. Linkage control is a very influential factor in the linkages between farmers and ATs, and between ATs and researchers. A pattern of topdown control establishes a unidirectional flow of information from research to AT to farmers with few opportunities for ATs to feed problems up from farmers to researchers.
The following matrices refer to the linkages described in the map for Mamala 1 and the municipality of Sariaya (Figure 9). Considering the large number of linkages mapped, only a selection of those where both actors involved were interviewed are analysed systematically in this section. The last column, "Remarks", constitutes a qualitative and narrative assessment of each linkage performance.
site: Municipality of Sariaya
- CRITERIA FOR ASSESSING PERFORMANCE
LINKAGE AWARENESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE RELEVANCE OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE TIMELINESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE ACCESSIBILITY TO OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE C0MMUNIICATION MEDIUM THROUGH WHICH LINK IS MEDIATED LINKAGE CONTROL REMARKS
Agricultural Technician --> DA Researcher AT aware that R has expertise Limited, as it is based on R's research programme AT meets R when R offers training seminars Irregular, 2-3 times per year Seminars (a traditional lecture approach which the AT then repeats with the farmers) AT has no control The linkage is predominantly a one-way transfer of research results
DA Researcher --> Agricultural Technician
Linkage outcome: ineffective transfer of research results; no feedback up the system of farmer concerns)feedback up the system of farmer concerns) R depends on AT for dissemination of research results AT does not provide inputs into R's work, rather R hands down DAprogrammes to AT (as above) (as above) (as above) R controls when/how linkage takes place with ATs 
AT lacks prestige and his/her feedback on technology's performance is not part of the aim of the linkage. While exceptions exist, the AT is not expected to "feed-up" farmers concerns to challenge researchers
site: Barangay Mamala- CRITERIA FOR ASSESSING PERFORMANCE
LINKAGE AWARENESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE RELEVANCE OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE TIMELINESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE ACCESSIBILITY TO OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE C0MMUNIICATION MEDIUM THROUGH WHICH LINK IS MEDIATED LINKAGE CONTROL REMARKS
Farmer
Farmer
(linkage outcome: seed variety exchange)
Empathy; sharing same predicament
High
Regular contact
Fully accessible
Oral; demonstration
Equally shared by both actors
Effective link between two actors who share same reality: a linkage with unexploited potential
Farmer --> AT: agricultural technician (Extension worker)
F aware that AT's function is not open to his influence; aware that AT lacks expertise in most topics
F has experimented but rejected the recommendation.; the service is therefore considered to be of limited relevance
F received information/advice without timely supply of technology or inputs. At times these become available one year later
Irregular
F describes AT's message delivery as traditional and top-down (black-board lecturer) without printed materials
F has no control
Very little impact in terms of technology transfer. Sometimes useful impact in enhancing F's organization
AT: agricultural technician (Extension worker) --> Farmer
(Linkage outcome: Limited dissemination of technology; some support to F organization)
AT only partially aware of F's strengths and needs
AT does not perceive F's knowledge as worthy; AT has no training to diagnose/assess needs with the participation of F
AT plans visits as per instruction and schedules agreed with the M.A.O. AT has 6-7 barangays to visit and lacks funds for travel
AT's access to farmer is irregular
AT lectures but does not diagnose or learn from F
AT controls, although under directives handed down from M.A.O. (institutional control)
(As above)
site: Barangay Mamala
- CRITERIA FOR ASSESSING PERFORMANCE
LINKAGE
AWARENESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
RELEVANCE OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
TIMELINESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
ACCESSIBILITY TO OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
C0MMUNIICATION MEDIUM THROUGH WHICH LINK IS MEDIATED
LINKAGE CONTROL
REMARKS
Farmer --> UPLB University
(linkage outcome: information/advice obtained from specialists in plant protection)
F aware of University's expertise
Highly relevant to F's needs as he/she decides what advice is needed
decides what advice is needed
F decides when to go to seek advice
Limited, all cost borne by F
F travels to University to seek advice
F initiates
A symptom of lack of relevance of other institutionalized linkages for dissemination of agric. information
Farmer --> Produce trader
Farmer aware of T's commercial interest
F reluctantly accepts prices and seed varieties brought in
F approaches T when harvesting or when in need of cash
F awaits T to come
Interpersonal communication
F rarely exercises any control (except when organized as a coop.)
Trader decides on price info. and on seed varieties to introduce)
Produce trader --> Farmer
(linkage outcome: price info. often distorted; new seed variety)
T aware of F's limited access to markets and info.
T links with/ chooses F on basis of commercial potential of his produce
T approaches F regularly as long as there is a regular profitable market for his produce
T travels to many farms/ markets at times in other regions
(as above)
Trader- copntrolled
F plays a passive role
site: Barangay Mamala
- CRITERIA FOR ASSESSING PERFORMANCE
LINKAGE
AWARENESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
RELEVANCE OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
TIMELINESS OF OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
ACCESSIBILITY TO OTHER ACTOR'S SERVICE
C0MMUNIICATION MEDIUM THROUGH WHICH LINK IS MEDIATED
LINKAGE CONTROL
REMARKS
Farmer --> "TPM" private farm contractor group
F aware of TPM commercial interest; F appreciates the TPM's resources invested in the linkage (without understanding where thehidden costs are)
F considers TPM's proposal very promising
Regular, following crop growing cycle
F able to access TPM package as it includes credit + marketing
Interpersonal communication
F control limited to negotiating terms of contract
F is very optimistic about economic prospect and not aware/concerned with risk
"TPM" private farm contractor group --> Farmer
(linkage outcome: pineapple contract production)
TPM aware of F's needs for economically viable attention
TPM chooses farms with the necessary conditions to guarantee production
(as above)
TPM has means of transportation for regular visits to F
Good quality brochures in tagalog; business-like negotiation
TPM-initiated + controlled via contractual agreement, terms set by TPM
TPM relationship with F considerably superior to AT as it includes credit + market commitments and regular visits
Farmer --> Input Supplier in market place
Farmer aware that IS has potential solutions to his problem
F ignores the criteria by which IS recom mends inputs
F goes to IS when required by crop cycle F returns to lS regularly notwithstanding limited results of his recomm-endations because he lacks an alternative source of information
F goes to IS who is in marketplace
Misleading/ inaccurate info. tthrough interpersonal communication
F controls time but not content
A linkage with potential improvement with provision of relevant info. (e.g. DA publications or pesticides and plant production)
Input Supplier in market place --> Farmer
(Linkage outcome: pesticide and fertilizer recommendation for sale)
IS aware that F has unmet info. needs
For IS, the F is merely a client
IS recommends products without full technical knowledge
IS unable to diagnose the cause of the client's pest problems
(as above)
(as above)
IS often receives products brochures from suppliers, but often lacks technical knowledge to interpret
IS-controlled in terms of his alleged expertise on the basis of which products are recommended IS's role is key and yet no research info. seems to reach him
Public + private sector could easily agree to enhance the role + performance of this linkage
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The conclusions specific to the sites have two dimensions: the matrix column "Remarks" provides an assessment of the linkage performance; secondly, several researchable problems specific to each farming system were also identified during the exercise. These "entry points" are very useful outputs of the approach.
Mamala 1 (example from team 1)
The barangay of Mamala 1 in Sariaya municipality showed the most dynamic farming systems and the most developed linkages. The farmers have been involved in vegetable production since its introduction in 1975 by a Peace Corps volunteer. In addition to their continuous and less successful struggle against insect pests in cabbages, they see a future in the approach of the pineapple contractor/ extension agent, who visits them frequently and provides them with credit from the bank, well-presented technical advice, and a guaranteed market. Therefore, the farmers were able to specifically define how they would like the MAO and ATs to perform. In spite of all technical shortcomings, the farmers clearly pointed out the advantages of the MAO and ATs: they do not have a vested interest and are therefore the most trustworthy of all the actors.
Hence the conditions are very favourable for testing the approach whereby technicians acquire the new role of brokers of information or become problem solvers for farmers, rather than disseminators of national programmes. The farmers also expressed their general willingness to pay, within their means, for services they receive, if these really suit their needs. Another supporting factor in the municipality is the ATs and MAO staff who are frank about their limited assistance to the farmers and can identify some of the reasons. It can be assumed that they would be cooperative for a further test of the approach.
The continuous problems with cabbage production and marketing would be a suitable entry point in the barangay. In future sessions the problem should be further investigated. It would be an advantage to involve not only the MAO and ATs but also pesticide suppliers, pest-management researchers and traders in the process, who would all play an important role in solving the problem. In Mamala 1, farmers already have more frequent contacts with input suppliers and traders, and their capacity and willingness to express their problems and needs appear much greater.
Laurel (example from team 2)
Agriculture appears to be generally on a relatively low level of intensity. Few changes in production patterns have occurred during recent years. Contacts between farmers exist, as well as with neighbouring communities, but there are rarely exchanges of experience concerning agricultural production. Input dealers and purchasers of produce were not reported to provide any technical or managerial advice. The MAO and the ATs were not described as very effective for the improvement of production. It was assumed that they do not have much knowledge relevant to farmers' problems, and their advice was not really appreciated.
Various agricultural problem areas could be identified in barangays Bugaan East, Poblacion 3 and Gulod in Laurel municipality, which deserve research attention. Among others are:
* taste requirements versus yield potential of present and potential lowland rice varieties and the reasons for not applying fertilizer in recommended quantities;
* further reasons for not producing highly-profitable onions beyond high working capital requirement and the fungus disease, which does not seem to be controlled;
* the banana disease - the question whether virus-free planting material encourage a return to banana production from horseradish;
* occurrence of drought in uplands and its impact on selection of varieties of rice; and
* reasons for reluctance to use fertilizer for coconut in spite of profitability, and the hesitation to plant dwarf varieties.
None of the above mentioned agronomic problems have been reported as very important, nor have any measures been taken to resolve them. Hence it is not known to what extent farmers are motivated and willing to collaborate in a more specific analysis of these, or other problems. However, their participation is absolutely necessary to find appropriate solutions for the problems. Therefore any further outreach activities should begin by raising their interest and capacity to analyse their own situations, identify their priority problems and express their most important needs.
Even though the MAO and ATs are aware that their assistance is not sufficient for the farmers, they do no have any vision of how the situation could be improved (beyond the traditional increase of resources). Therefore the municipal technicians (former DA staff have to be prepared mentally for a new role, moving from disseminators of national programmes towards more advisory positions, diagnosing the problems and finding solutions in cooperation with the other actors. By participating in the linkage analysis the municipal staff should be made aware of the agricultural knowledge and information system of the communities, and also understand the farmers as decision makers within their priorities and possibilities. Further training is necessary to strengthen their diagnostic skills and their capability to communicate identified problems to the research institutions and other relevant actors.
Generally the preconditions are not optimal in Laurel municipality. Not only is there limited awareness and initiative on the sides of farmers and DA staff, but also the private sector does not appear to be very active in the municipality with regard to providing information or innovation.
FINDINGS AT PROVINCIAL/REGIONAL LEVELS OF ANALYSIS
Interviews held with actors at the provincial and regional level were mostly with officials from agencies belonging to the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Science and Technology. A group interview was held with representatives of the PCARRD's consortium in Region 4: the Southern Tagalog Agriculture and Resources Research and Development Consortium, (STARRDEC).
The steps of the approach in these interviews were less structured than those with the farmers. The team tried to use a matrix for identifying and analysing inter-institutional linkages; however the results were disappointing both at the provincial level and at the regional consortium level. Because of a climate of institutional reform, many government officials were not able to provide substantial inputs because the new linkage mechanisms were not yet in place. They could only cite existing and proposed administrative orders to effect the linkages. In addition, they felt understandably uneasy about the exercise as they did not know the background nor the scope of the study.
Most information gathered referred to official protocol: contractual agreements and letters of understanding which enable different department to collaborate. Less information was available on the nature of the exchanges which take place as a result of these agreements. Moreover, the Local Government Code is a central concern to all, as the rules and patterns of control have shifted substantially. The newly-acquired power of the local government units (be they provincial governors or municipal mayors) has left many departments at a loss in terms of how to implement national programmes. The lack of a line of authority all the way down to the farmer was mentioned as a concern.
A subsequent additional study was implemented by a national consultant at the beginning of 1994 to gather additional information on the nature of institutional linkages at the regional and national level. In particular, the newly proposed Integrated System for Agriculture Technology Generation and Transfer (ISATGaT) will undoubtedly need to address a new set of institutional linkages among the national, provincial and regional levels of analysis.
This review was unable to document in a systematic manner the linkages at the regional and national level, but was successful in identifying them at the barangay/municipal level. The policy framework at the national and regional levels is undergoing a swift change. The new act will need to be operationalized and linked from the national to the local level in light of the Local Government Code.
back contents next
<section>5</section>
back contents next
CHAPTER 5 - APPLICABILITY OF THE APPROACH
This section summarizes the options and conditions for future application of the approach, as well as its scope and limitations. Because this study focused mainly on understanding communication linkages from the farmer upward, more time was spent at the barangay level than at the municipal, provincial and regional levels.
The exercise through which this approach was developed and tested was expensive. It was necessary to have a team of international specialists from different fields in order to develop, test and propose an approach with potential application in the current national policy context and in the context of a bottom-up sectoral review. The approach may easily be replicated without an international team, but the inter-disciplinary make up of the team is essential.
The approach requires a relatively short period of time. However, the case studies included in this report are indicative of the extent and limitations in terms of the information gathered. A more relaxed time frame for consultation with farmer groups is necessary. The replicability of the approach requires a significant input in terms of training field workers capable of using and adapting it.
Using these PRA tools at farmer level proved participatory, unthreatening and appropriable. An important aspect is leaving all analyses and diagrams with the farmers.
The two study teams had different experiences. The reasons for these contrasting results are important in terms of future use of the approach. The main implication is that the poorest farming populations will require a flexible approach with a tangible linkage that could offer support to the barangay.
The methodology was field tested in several sites, yet it requires further refinement. It should be seen as an addition to existing rapid appraisal and farming systems development tools, not as a substitute.
The approach did not address land tenure, which is a paramount factor in agricultural development as it determines the scale of a farming system. In addition, there were no attempts to identify and segregate the socio-economic strata within a barangay. Both issues would need to be dealt with when testing the approach further.
APPLICATION OF THE APPROACH
The approach developed has already demonstrated tremendous value for identifying the actors and linkages at the farmer level. It can also be of value at other levels such as agricultural technicians, municipal agricultural officers (MAO), researchers and policy makers and donors.
The value and the usefulness to the different categories may vary. However the underlying benefit of being able to reflect the needs translated as farmer demands and their inherent problems is the common denominator. The value to the different stakeholders inflow discussed.
Farmers
The ultimate beneficiary of new technologies or programmes should be the farmers and likewise, farmers will receive benefits from the application of this approach.
* The approach provides a common language that enables farmers to identify demands and channels with outsiders. This can be a dialogue with individuals from different levels of organizations that work or service the barangay, particularly in the agricultural activities.
* The linkage analysis provides the opportunity for understanding the present farming system in the barangay and for developing an awareness of the changes that have taken place over a certain period. While it can be argued that farmers are already aware of their situation, it is not always the case that farmers analyse the number of positive/negative interventions that they could recall. This was evident during the field visits. Some of the changes that have taken place became evident only when farmers began to discuss those interventions among themselves. In this process the mission members had the role of outsiders acting as facilitators who helped place issues in a correct perspective. The resulting conclusion is that outside facilitator must play a supporting role, while the main actors are the farmers themselves.
* The farmers can identify the real actors and the roles each of them play in the agricultural development process in their communities. The approach allows the farmers to identify the large number of individuals who provide services in the barangay and differentiate between major and minor actors.
* When able to identify the actors and their roles, the farmers can analyse the sources of intervention and information provided, and understand better the roles played by the different actors.
* This approach provides an opportunity to identify potential improvements to the existing system.
Agricultural technicians
The ATs are potentially the most important link between the farmers and the outside world as far as new technologies are concerned. However, at present their effectiveness is limited and to a large extent absent. Interaction with the farmers using this tool could help the ATs.
* In addition to the ATs, many other individuals provide information and play a role at the barangay and municipal levels. This approach allows them to identify these individuals and their functions, helps them understand the relative importance of each of them and helps avoid duplication. This helps the AT place him or herself in the supplementary position relative to all other actors.
* The recognition of farmers as decision makers mainly in the production process becomes evident. The sources and type of information obtained by farmers become clear.
* The AT can appreciate the fact that he/she and the farmers can and should be partners. The partnership is necessary for the AT's work to be effective and relevant to the farmers. Both have the objective of increasing agricultural production and their incomes, which contributes to the overall economic development of the barangay.
* Information obtained from this approach can help ATs prioritise the needs within a barangay and between communities. Since an AT has responsibility for a number of communities, this activity becomes very important. Moreover they can also identify the trends of the progress or interventions that have taken place over time and analyse the effect such interventions have had.
A systemic undertaking of this approach by the ATs can be of immense value to the identification of farmer demand and priorities. It can be the cornerstone for the development of a strong research and development base that will serve the immediate requirements of the farmers.
Municipal agricultural officers (MAO)
The MAO has the most critical and important role in a municipality's agricultural programmes. With decentralisation and almost total independence granted to the mayors in matters pertaining to agriculture, the MAO will play a pivotal role from the point of view of the municipality as well as the central government. He Drill be the link between these two agencies. Therefore he should have at his disposal tools that can be used to help recommend priorities and make decisions regarding implementation. The tool used in this study can be used effectively.
* One of the significant findings of the field visits was the identification of a large number of individuals and institutions serving the farmers. For example from a research point of view, regional integrated agricultural research centres (RIARC's), UPLB, PHILKICE, IRRI and BPI have all given the farmers new technologies. This is in addition to the help of private sector institutions. the media and NGOs. Therefore this approach helps the MAO identify the sources and channels being used that are available for contact and further cooperation.
* As indicated by the ATs in their discussions with the teams, AT training is an important area. However it is up to the MAO to determine the areas and degree of training required' taking into consideration the roles of other actors and avoiding duplication of training for tasks other actors are involved with. The information provided by the ATs can be a basis for future training assessments for the technicians.
* The information obtained from the ATs and their own analysis will allow the MAO to identify priorities for the municipality.
* Given the present situation with the decentralisation, the MAO could play an important role in the research activities of the province and the central research institutions since the municipalities will now have more financial authority. This will be an interesting feature given the fact that most of the implementation the PHILIPPINE 2000 programme will be top down. The information made available from the use of this approach will improve the bargaining position of the MAO with the RLARCs, provincial agricultural officers and other organizations. The MAO can tell the concerned organizations the priorities of the municipality and the technical demands that the individual or collective communities have. This should lead to an increase in the adaptive research being conducted in the field which reflects the needs of the farmers.
It is clear that this tool can be used effectively at the barangay and municipal levels to identify problems, significant actors at the field level, and research areas and development activities that can be implemented at the municipal level.
Researchers
Many researchers make a genuine effort to determine and understand the real life problems facing farmers in the cultivation of crops. They approach their activities in a problem-solving manner, and attempt to design research programmes that can solve those problems. However, the techniques researchers use to identify problems in the field are few and not well used. An effective use of RRA or PRA techniques by the researchers in collaboration with the AT's and MAO's will provide a good basic framework to identify the problems.
The advantage of this approach is the active participation of the farmer in mapping the different actors and their roles which can provide the researchers with information on alternative sources of interventions. Moreover this approach can help researchers translate farmers problems into researchable issues.
* The adoption of the approach used - either directly by them in the field, or from information obtained by the farmers, ATs or MAOs - will help researchers obtain information on field problems and networks. Understanding the networks of actors that serve the farmers will help the researcher obtain the cooperation of the different actors. For example, the private sector traders who provide seeds and agricultural chemicals can help design adaptive trials providing those inputs. Additionally, information on credit availability and market options can also be easily obtained by this approach.
* The results provide a scientific basis for the recommendation and also provides a sound source of information to the farmers.
* Most researchers are commodity oriented and their appreciation is mostly from a cropping systems perspective. Interacting with farmers and identifying researcher problems with them adds a holistic nature to the research activities. It brings together all the actors involved, namely the farmers, researchers, technicians, the private sector input suppliers, and credit and market agencies.
* As a result of this close collaboration the research agenda of the RIARC or any other organization reflects the farmer demands.
Policy makers
This approach can be of great value to policy makers interested in better welfare for farmers and the development of the agricultural sector. The policy makers' sources of information are numerous, however, with access to information obtained from this approach (by farmers, ATs, MAOs), the development of agricultural programmes will be more pragmatic. The following benefits can be seen:
* The programmes could reflect farmer demands better and make implementation of the programmes more meaningful.
* An insight into possible new roles for the ATs will emerge. The compatible information given at Mamala l and by the ATs at Sariaya municipality is an example of how responsibilities for ATs could be changed.
* An additional tool for the farmer-centred farming systems approach to agricultural extension is provided. The basic principle in this method of extension activity and the approach used is compatible. In fact the operational tool used in this study further enhances the quality of extension planning since it provides for greater farmer involvement and a clearer reflection of their needs.
* The approach is potentially cost effective when implemented in the field. The initial training costs of farmers and all those involved in the system are insignificant compared to the large amount of information that will be made available at the field level. The ultimate implementation of the programme in the field can be relatively inexpensive.
Since the underlying goal of the approach is to react to farmer demands with a more responsive system, the answers this approach provides are cost effective, because they are provided by support services responding to questions formulated jointly by farmers and technicians.
CONDITIONS FOR APPLICATION
This approach provides a diagnostic tool as much as a management/planning tool. As a diagnostic tool, it constitutes an additional contribution to the PRA toolbox for farming systems diagnosis. As such, it contributes to the communication domain. As a management and planning tool, it also helps identify individuals and institutions who play specific roles within a production system. The identification of linkages and the analysis of their performance provides a simple guideline by which to assess and improve linkages and functions.
For the approach to operate as a planning tool, it is necessary to have an open ended diagnostic/planning agenda in which all of those involved understand the goal and scope of the exercise (this was accomplished at the barangay/municipal levels, but not at the provincial/regional ones). It is also important to have facilitators from the fields of communication, farming systems and research who will work in an inter-disciplinary fashion
As a diagnostic tool, the approach needs additional time to follow up with in-depth analyses using other FSD diagnostic tools to get a grasp on the issues which are identified as researchable problems.
back contents next
<section>6</section>
back contents next
CHAPTER 6 - LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The study leans on the theoretical frameworks of the agricultural knowledge and information system (AKIS) and the farming system perspective and utilizes tools from participatory rural appraisal. Due to the time constraints and the different focus on linkages, the exercise can only offer a few specific recommendations for some problem areas identified in particular sites. The true potential lies in identifying these problem areas in a rapid and participatory manner. Further to PRA, it identifies the different actors, their roles and their constraints which future communication activities need to address. The methodology cannot give final answers, but it does provide entry points. It is a starting point for more focused sessions on specific problems which could be related not only to technology, but to marketing, credit, health, education, infrastructure. It calls for a process in which ATs and/or MAO take the positions of facilitators for the identification and assessment of
problems and initiation of solutions. The adoption of the approach requires a shift from the linear transfer-of-technology model to the systems approach.
This chapter includes recommendations on how to strengthen the municipal and provincial capacity to identify and enhance two-way linkages in technology identification, generation and transfer activities.
LESSONS LEARNED
Mapping linkages in a knowledge system uncovers the mechanisms which are functional to the exchange of information demands and supply. The matrices for evaluating linkages is a first step in the systematic analysis of linkages following several simple criteria, of which the one referring to the control of the linkage appears most important. For rural development programmes which target poverty alleviation, this criteria is of fundamental importance as it reveals who is being served by a linkage.
This study provides ample evidence of the need for a new role for the AT. These committed workers are already most effective when facilitating rather than instructing. Their professional aspirations and the farmers' needs call for this new role.
For the elected mayors and their staffs, the approach provides a tool to assess farmers' needs, identify networks and seek out those actors with which to strike agreements for collaboration. The MAO will be best equipped to negotiate with all sectors if and when he/she has an understanding of the existing needs, resources and patterns of information demand and supply.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Analyse the problem of linkages for agricultural development at the local (LOU) level using a knowledge and communication system perspective.
In order to strengthen the municipal and provincial capacity to identify and enhance two-way linkages in technology identification, generation and transfer activities, the problem must be tackled from a knowledge and communication systems perspective. The review indicates that mapping networks of information exchange with the active participation of its actors provides them with immediate charts of possible action. Existing patterns of access to information point to the services which are already functional as well as to those which could be established or abolished.
The fragmentation between LGU and regional and national research centres was a natural result of the Local Government Code. New linkages must be designed on the basis of a systematic understanding of the knowledge and communication systems at the LGU level as much as at the regional and institutional levels.
Example: Several of the linkage maps show farmers travelling directly to universities to ask for answers to new or specific problems because their linkage to the university is often through a personal contact rather than through an established university clinic/advisory service. SCUs could review their outreach strategies in light of what would appear to be client-driven demand for advice.
Recognize and make use of multiple sources of innovation and information.
There are multiple sources of innovation and information within a given farming system. In addition to the formal research institutions (DA research stations and state colleges and universities), input suppliers, credit suppliers, traders and private individuals all demand and supply information. The linkages among them can be identified and their performance assessed in order to recognise and remedy bottlenecks in the system.
It is telling that most of the institutional linkages mapped during this review are vertical. However, there are practically no horizontal linkages at the municipal level. Such linkages would entail collaborative arrangements between public and private sector institutions to strengthen their relative advantage in specific information areas.
Example: In the case of Mamala 1, had the pesticide supplier received the DA materials on pest identification and product recommendations, the supplier would have been able to respond to farmers' needs in a professional and scientific manner. A municipal "facilitator" (AT) equipped with diagnostic and communication skills could establish and improve such linkages on a regular basis.
Horizontal linkages at the LOU level will enhance the integration of public and private sector actors, especially if there are incentive mechanisms for production (such as contracts for yield achievement for a given commodity) and for applied research (such as financial support for applied research on themes/subject matter determined on the basis of aggregated farmer demands).
Establish a common set of criteria on which to develop, monitor arid evaluate linkages
The criteria utilised for the assessment of linkage performance in this review is a beginning. Further refinement will be necessary. In order to improve linkages in a system, the criteria by which their performance is assessed may in turn constitute the guideline for their improvement.
Example: The job description for a new agricultural facilitator (former AT) which addresses such criteria as relevance, timeliness, or control in terms of functions, would lead to a realistic and rewarding job.
The redefinition and rationalisation of the functions of municipal agricultural workers must be designed on the basis of common criteria dealing with linkage performance.
Establish new roles for the agricultural technician and the municipal agricultural officer as information brokers, facilitators, enablers and problem solvers
A new role of facilitator, enabler and problem solver requires "new" ATs in terms of their professional identity, attitudes, skills and knowledge. This profile constitutes a true broker of information demand and supply. A problem solver, rather than a conveyor of standardised recipes, is required.
The private sector, namely NGOs, have experience training personnel in this capacity. In contrast, the public sector has a major job ahead if it is to revise the definition of the AT. Among the new skills, the facilitator will need to become an expert communicator. A professional communicator will need professional and financial incentives, just as other professionals expect them. However, a new professionalism for the public sector facilitator will require modified rules for other actors with whom they often interact, namely researchers. Incentive packages which increase accountability of research (on the basis of responding to farmer demands) will render the facilitators' job more competitive.
For a policy decision to be taken in this direction, the following elements will need attention:
* Redefinition of the roles of the municipal ATs and MAOs as information brokers, facilitators/enablers, capacity-builders and problem-solvers;
* Determination of the terms of reference for the ATs and MAOs, (the criteria used to assess linkage performance could be a guide);
* Design of new training curricula with a strong focus on communication and facilitation skills;
* Establishment of incentives to provide stature for the new professionalism.
The training task required is daunting; however, there are few options. Continuing with the conventional job description of an extension worker is not desirable in an era of diminished government services. The LGC provides an opportunity to redefine the role of the municipal `'facilitator" within the new decision-making patterns. The new municipal facilitator must be part of a local agricultural problem-solving system. In this context, the approach developed by this study may enhance decision-making capacities at the local level.
In essence we are talking about agricultural learning systems. Researchers and farmers already follow the cycle of agricultural learning, trial after trial, and season after season. If we are able to provide facilitators with a learning cycle as part of their job, we will have the building blocks for agricultural learning systems.
back contents next
<section>7</section>
back contents
BIBLIOGRAPHY
This bibliography concentrates on the following areas: technology transfer systems, communication for technology transfer, new extension and systems paradigms, rapid and participatory appraisal, participatory research and distance learning. It is by no means an exhaustive bibliography. Additional annotated bibliographies were prepared during the study dealing with farming systems research in the Philippines but which were not added to this report due to space limitations.
AED/USAID
Communication for technology transfer in agriculture. Washington: CTTA.
Ashby,
J.A. 1993. Identifying beneficiaries & participants in client-driven on-farm research. AFSRE Newsletter Vol. 4. No. 1.: 1-10.
Ashby,
J.A. 1987. The effects of different types of farmer participation on the management of on-farm trials. Agricultural administration and extension. Vol. 25: 235-52.
Ashby,
J.A. 1986. Methodology for the participation of small farmers in the design of on-farm trials. Agricultural administration 22: 1-19.
Bebbington, A.J. et al.
1993. Rural people's knowledge, farmer organizations and regional development: Implications for agricultural research and extension. (or From farming systems to food systems) London: ODA/ODI Network Paper 41.
Bennor
D. & J.Q. Harrison. 1977. Agricultural extension: The training and visit system. Washington: The World Bank.
Biggs, S.
1988. Resource-poor farmer participation in research: A synthesis of experiences from nine Naliona1 Agricultural Research Systems. OFCOR Comparative Study Paper No. 3. The Hague: ISNAR.
Bonifacio, M.F.
1992. Images of agriculture: Issues, problems an trend in technology transfer. Socioeconomic Research Division. Los Banos: PCARRD.
Bourgeois, R. 1990.
Structural linkages for integrating agricultural research and extension. ISNAR Working Paper No. 35. The Hague: ISNAR.
Calumpang-Malicsi, L.
1989. Communication flow and adoption of artificially induced breeding technology to upgrade native carabaos: A case study. Unpublished M.Sc. thesis. Los Banos, UPLB.
Chambers, R.
1993. Methods for analysis by farmers. Journal for farming systems research-extension. Vol 4, No. 1.
Chambers, R., A. Pacey & Led Thrupp.
1989. Farmer first: Farmer innovation and agricultural research. London: Intermediate Technology Publications.
Chambers, R. & J. Jiggins.
1986. Agricultural research for resource-poor farmers: A parsimonious paradigm. IDS Discussion Paper 220. Brighton (Sussex): IDS.
Christoplos I. & U. Nitsch.
1993. Changing extension paradigm. IRDC Currents No. 6: 22-26.
Coldevin, G & T. Stuart.
1993. Initiatives development support communication for agricultural technology transfer in the Philippines. The Journal of Development Communication No.2 Vol 4: 18-28.
Cornwall, A., I. Guijt, & A. Welbourn. 1992.
Acknowledging process: Challenges for agricultural research and extension methodology. (Overview paper for Beyond Farmer First workshop paper). University of Sussex: RED/IDS.
Dar, W.
1993. Philippine farming systems: Recent developments. Paper for the 12th session of the FAO Regional Farm Management Commission for Asia and the Near East. December 11 - 14, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Dar, W.
1993. Strengthening the extension- research linkage and technology transfer: The DA's continuing commitment. Paper presented at the DOST forum on the same topic. March 25, Bicutan, Metro Manila.
Dela Cruz, C.R., C. Lightfoot & R.C. Sevilleja.
1992. Rice-fish farming in the Philippines: The farmers' perspective. World Aquaculture 23 (1): 5255.
Delman,
J. 1991. Agricultural extension in Renshou County, China. A case study of bureaucratic intervention for agricultural innovation and change. R&H Bulletin No.28. Virum (DK).
Drilon, J.D.
1974. Spreading new rice varieties: Then and Now. Communication strategies for rural development. Proceedings of the Cornell-CIAT 1974 International Symposium, Call, Colombia.
Engel, P. and M. Salomon.
1993. Rapid appraisal of agricultural knowledge systems (RAAKS) (version 4.1, unpublished). Agricultural University Wageningen (NL).
Eponou, T.
1993. Partners in agricultural technology: Linking research and technology transfer to serve farmers. ISNAR Research Report No. 1. The Hague: ISNAR.
Escalada, M.M.
1985. Participatory media-assisted reaming system for small lowland rice farmers. Ph.D. thesis in Development Communication. UP, Los Banos.
Farrington, J. & A. Martin.
1988. Farmer participatory research: A review of concepts and recent fieldwork. Agricultural Administration & Extension 29: 249-264.
Flinn, A.J.
1982. Professional communication between researchers of UPLB and IRRI. MSc Thesis in Development Communication. UP, Los Banos.
Garforth, C.
1993. Communication models in extension research. Unpublished BAES seminar. University of Reading.
Gapasin, D.P.
1990. Decentralizing agricultural research management: The case of the regional consortia in the Philippines. ISNAR Working Paper No.34. The Hague: ISNAR.
Go, S. & A. Go.
1992. The construction and application of rural people's knowledge: Upland rice production in Leyte, Philippines. London: TIED/IDS (Paper for the Beyond Farmer First Conference.)
Goonasekera, A. 1990.
Mass media campaigns for development: Some practical guidelines. The Journa1 of Development Communication, No. 1 ,Vol. 1.
Gundaya, E.A.
1991. Communication in the adoption of village-level root crop flour processing and utilisation technology: A case study. MSc thesis in Development Communication. UP, Los Banos.
Haverkort, B. et al.
(eds.). 1991. Joining farmers' experiments: Experiences in participatory technology development. London: IT Publications.
Hechanova, R.S. & E.C.
Macabiog. 1987. Technology delivery systems development for Region 02. Unpublished research report. Isabela State University & Department of Agriculture, Philippines.
Heinrich, G.M. et al.
1993. Local institutional linkages in farming systems research and extension. ODA/ODI Network Paper 39. London: ODI.
Heron,
J. 1989. The facilitator's handbook. London: Kogan Page.
Hiemstra, W. et al.
(eds). 1992. Let farmers judqe: Experiences in assessing the sustainability of agriculture. London: IT Publications.
Hossain, S.M.A. et al.
1993. Informal agricultural communication patterns in a remote area of Bangladesh. Journal for Farmer Systems Research-Extension. Vol 3, No. 2: 39-58.
ISNAR.
1994. Farmer's organizations offer research institutes prospectives for partnership. ISNAR Newsletter. No. 24.
Kaimowitz, D. 1992.
Motive forces: External pressure and the dynamics of technology systems. ISNAR Linkages Discussion Paper No. 11. The Hague: ISNAR.
Kaimowitz, D., M. Snyder, & P. Engel.
1990. A conceptual framework for studying links between agricultural research and technology transfer in developing countries. In: Kaimowitz, D. 1990. Making the link: Agricultural research and technology transfer in developing countries. London: Westview Press (ISNAR).
Lamb, R.
1993. Designs on life. New Scientist, 30 October, 1993: 37-40.
Librero, F.1990.
Development communication strategies: Some experiences in the Philippines. The Journal of Development Communication, No. 1 ,Vol. 1.
Lightfoot, C., P. Pingali & L. Harrington.
1993. Beyond romance and rhetoric: Sustainable agriculture and farming systems research. NAGA, The ICLARM Quarterly Jan 1993: 1 7-18.
Lightfoot, C., S. Feldman & M. Zainul Abedin.
1991. Households agroecosystems and rural resource management Manila: BARI/ICLARM.
Lightfoot, C. & D. Minnick.
1991. Farmer-based methods: Farmers' diagrammes for improving methods of experimental design in integrated farming systems. In Haverkort et al. (eds.) Joining farmers' experiments: Experiences in particpatory technology development. London: IT Publications.
McKee, N.
1992. Social mobilization and social marketing: Lessons for communicators. Penang: Southbound.
Merrill-Sands, D. & M.H. Collion.
1993. Making the farmer's voice count in agricultural research. Q.J. International Agriculture. July-September, 1993: 260-279.
Merrill-Sands, D., D. Kannowitz, K. Sayce & S. Chater.
1989. The technology triangle: Linking farmers, technology transfer agents, and agricultural researchers. The Hague: ISNAR.
Oepen, M.
1990. Development support communication in Indonesia. Old and new paradigm in Indonesia.
Ortiz, R. et al.
1991. A new model for technology transfer in Guatemela: Closing the gap between research and extension. The Hague: ISNAR.
PCARRD
. 1990. Applied Communication Division Info. Bulletin No. 22.
PCARRD
. 1989. National management information system. Proceedings of the workshop on national management information system. Los Banos: PCARRD, IDRC & ISNAR.
PCARRD
. 1991. Observations and analysis of the PCARRD organization and management system. Review and Evaluation Committee. Los Banos: PCARRD.
PCARRD.
1988. Research management in agriculture and natural resources in the Philippines. Proceedings of the workshop on research management in agriculture and natural resources in the Philippines. Los Banos: PCARRD & ISNAR.
Pretty, J.N. and R. Chambers.
1992. Turning the new leaf: New professionalism, institutions and policies for agriculture. London: IIED/IDS (Overview Paper for the Beyond Farmer First Conference.)
Quebral, N.C.
1988. Communication in the National Azolla Action Programme: A case study. DCC-UPLB College of Agriculture, Los Banos: UPLB.
Quebral, N.C.
1982. The C72E study: Piloting a distance reaming system for small farmers. Manila: Ministry of Education and Culture.
Rerkasem, K. et al.
1988. Roles of village information network in technological changes in northern Thailand. pp: 145-159. In K. Rerkasem and A.T. Rambo (eds) Agroecosystem research for rural development. Selected papers presented at the third SUAN Regional Symposium, Chiang Mail 22-24 October, 1986. Chiang Mai, Multiple Cropping Centre of Chiang Mai University and Suan.
Rivera, F.T.
1992. A review of the state-of-the-art in extension science for rice. (preliminary report) PRRI, Munoz, Nueva Ecija, Philippines.
Rogers, E.
1983. Diffusion of innovations. third ed. New York: Free Press.
Roling, N.
1988. Extension science: Information systems in agricultural development. Cambridge University Press.
Roling, N.
1990. The agricultural research-technology transfer interface: A knowledge systems perspective. In Kaimowitz, D. (ed.). Making the link: Agricultural research and technology transfer in developing countries. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Roling, N.
1993a. Kaleidoscopie voor Voorlichters: op zoek naar bevrydende perspectieven. Lecture notes. Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Roling,
N. 1993b. Communication support for sustainable natural resource management. Preliminary version for the IDS Bulletin.
Roling,
N. (unpublished). Platforms for decision making about ecosystems. Draft chapter to appear in: L.O. Fresco et al. (1994).The future of land: Mobilizing and integrating knowledge for land use options. Proceedings of a conference held in Wageningen, the Netherlands, August, 1993.
Salk Yoon, C.
1992. Evaluation report on Project for Broadcasting in Development. CIDA/AIB/RIDC.
Santiago, T.C. 1982.
Factors that affect distance learning: The case of the Matangtubig utilisation site. UP, Los Banos.
GLOSSARY
Actor
A person, group (formal or informal), organization, or institution involved in demanding, supplying or exchanging information.
Barangay
A village with legal standing, represented by a barangay captain.
Communication
The process of information exchange through messages which enables information linkages to exist over space and time. Communication is manifested through message exchange.
Data
Measurements on perceived components of reality.
Information
A set of data organised according to patterns of interpretation.
Information linkage
An exchange of information between two actors which persists over a period of time and space.
Knowledge
A property of the mind; knowledge processes take place at the individual level and may be enhanced by group learning.
Knowledge management
The activities people perform to facilitate collective learning, and local knowledge processes amongst individuals and organizations.
Level of analysis
The level of authority and organization (e.g. barangay, municipality, etc.) for which the interaction and information exchange are assessed.
Message
Information which is coded through a given medium with the purpose of exchange.
Network
The congregation of information linkages.
Sitio
A subdivision of a village, the smallest settlement with legal standing, tends to include at least 100.
back contents
