<title>Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry - Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry. Trade restrictions affecting international trade in non-wood forest products </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Trade restrictions control and influence international trade in forest products, as they do for most products that cross international borders. They range from tariff to the less obvious, but often more complex, non-tariff restrictions. Their significance to countries engaged, or wishing to move into trade, can be quite significant. Without an awareness of the range and size of barriers that must be faced, it may be difficult to plan effectively - or in the initial stages to even determine whether it is preferable to trade outside the country.
Often just determining which, if any, restrictions exist can be a complex, or at the very least, time consuming job. In the case of non-wood forest products (NWFPs) the difficulties are increased because of the wide variety of products involved and the many different levels of their processing.
The present study was developed by FAO to partially remedy this situation. It provides information on the range of restrictions facing various NWFPs, and indicates the degree to which these may present problems to those seeking to develop their international trade in these products. In this it complements an earlier FAO study "International trade in non-wood forest products: an overview" by M. Iqbal, 1993, FO:Misc/93/11 Working Paper, Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome, which provided a preliminary coverage of the characteristics of trade in NWFPs but did not consider the subject of trade barriers.
The present study was undertaken by Dr. Mohammed Iqbal and is based on information found in a wide variety of sources, but particulary individual country customs schedules and the UNCTAD trade database TRAINS. It was funded by FAO's Regular Programme, and was under the supervision of Dr. I.J. Bourke, Forest Products Division.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
ABBREVIATIONS
ACP African, Caribbean and Pacific Countries
BSI British Standards Institution
CACUM Central American Common Market
CCCN Customs Cooperation Council Nomenclature
CITES Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
CENTA Combined Edible Nut Trade Association
EC European Community
EFTA European Free Trade Association
EOA Essential Oil Association of USA
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FDA Food and Drug Administration
FEMA Flavour and Extract Manufacturers Association
FMA Fragrance Materials Association of USA
FTA Free Trade Agreement
GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GEFCA Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives
GSP Generalized System of Preferences
HS Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding System
IFEAT International Federation of Essential oils and Aroma Traders
ISO International Organization for Standardization
LDCs Least Developed Countries
MFN Most Favoured Nations
NAFED National Association for Export Development
NTM Non-tariff measures
NWFPs Non-Wood Forest Products
NTFP Non-Timber Forest Products
nes not elsewhere specified
nesi not elsewhere specified or included
OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
SITC Standard International Trade Classification
TRIFED Tribal Development Federation
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
WTO World Trade Organization
WWF World Wide Fund for Nature
<section>3</section>
I
INTRODUCTION
1. BACKGROUND
In the context of this report, non-wood forest products (NWFPs) are considered to be as all the biological materials (other than timber and firewood) that may be extracted from natural ecosystems, managed plantations and semi-wild trees growing on farmlands and be utilized within the household, be marketed, or have social, cultural or religious significance. Both plant and animal products are included.
Whereas, the products collected from wild sources (natural forests) can be easily seen as NWFPs, some confusion exists about products collected from plantations (e.g. rubber, some condiments, certain medicinal plants and essential oils), particularly when part of the supplies come from natural forests and part from plantations/cultivations. Between these two extremes are also some products which originate from semi-wild and/or farmland trees. Products originating from all these sources have been considered NWFPs in this report.
NWFPs are of significance primarily in household and local economies. Many also, however, channel into international markets, mostly in unprocessed or semi-processed forms. Such products play a significant role in earning foreign exchange, so valuable for most of the developing economies. These commercial NWFPs which enter international trade are the focus of this report.
International trade in NWFPs, as that in most other products, is controlled and regulated by various trade measures. A wide array of these exist and their nature, significance, extent and impact vary considerably from nation to nation and product to product. Whereas some studies have investigated the effect of such restrictions on wood products (e.g. Bourke, 1988; Bourke, 1991; and Bourke, 1992), no systematic study has so far been conducted to identify such measures and to assess their impact on NWFPs.
2. REPORT OBJECTIVES
This study provides information on restrictions facing the international trade in NWFPs. The specific terms of reference of the study were:
i. To identify information on tariff and non-tariff measures affecting
international trade in NWFPs and prepare a listing of these.
ii. To review the extent to which these measures are affecting international
trade in NWFPs and evaluate their impact on trade.
iii. To identify possible policy action which might be taken to overcome
the negative impact of trade restrictions.
iv. To provide an assessment of the impact of any reductions agreed to in
the Uruguay Round on future international trade in NWFPs.
v. To identify any new restrictions which may increase in future.
3. APPROACH
NWFPs entering international trade were identified in an earlier study by the author by reviewing explanatory notes of the harmonized commodity description and coding system 1 * (HS) together with other secondary sources (Iqbal, 1993). This information was further refined and up-dated for the present study. Trade restrictions were then investigated primarily using the UNCTAD trade data base 2 * for major products/group of products thus identified. Other available secondary sources, in particular individual country custom schedules, were also reviewed. The report refers to the total range of products that may be considered as NWFPs.
4. SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS
NWFPs face both tariff and non-tariff trade restrictions. The nature of these restrictions varies from country to country and product to product. As the list of importing countries is quite large and the range of products extensive, analysis of the trade restrictions has been restricted to the markets of EC, USA and Japan, which collectively account for about 60% (by value) of international trade in NWFPs (Appendix I).
Although an attempt has been made to give as comprehensive a treatment to the NWFPs entering these markets as possible, some of minor ones may have been missed. The problem of dealing with cultivated products like natural rubber, mulberry silks, honey, beeswax, cultivated medicinal plants like ginseng roots, sisal, etc., is recognised but they have been included because of their connections with the NWFPs, in one form or another or because it has been impossible to differentiate between these and non-cultivated products.
Finally a word of caution regarding the international trade statistics presented. As a very large volume of NWFPs are being traded unregistered, under-reporting or non-reporting, double counting, grouping of NWFPs among themselves and with other products, particularly with agricultural-based products, and the use of unrealistic prices are among the systematic shortcomings of these statistics. At the same time, since there is considerable overlap between some of the NWFPs and agricultural commodities in the trade statistics, there is every likelihood of distortion of the figures. Further, because of the variable availability of trade statistics, the quantities and values indicated for various countries reflect data from different years.
For all of the above reasons the statistics should be accepted with some caution. They do, nevertheless, provide a reasonable indication of the level of magnitude of trade in the various products.
<section>4</section>
II
INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN NWFPs
1. MAIN COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS
International trade in NWFPs is composed of imports and exports of numerous products at different stages of processing. Some of the products are unprocessed goods, while others have undergone various degrees of processing.
At least 150 NWFPs, including 26 essential oils are of major significance in international trade. In addition, a large number of botanicals (ranging between 4,000 to 6,000), enter international markets. A summary of NWFPs of commercial significance is given in Tab.1
Most NWFPs are traded in rather small quantities, but some such as ginseng roots, natural honey, walnuts, gum turpentine, rosin, rattan and gum arabic do reach substantial levels. Over US$ 380 million of ginseng, for example, is imported annually; while natural rubber imports reach well over US$ 1,000 million, although there is obviously some question as to whether to classify this as a NWFP or an agricultural crop since most is grown in agricultural plantations.
Pine nuts (seeds of Pinus gerardiana, P. pinea, P. korainsis and P. cambra) are an important NWFP with a growing and high-value market, particularly in countries with a health food awareness. Seeds of Chalghoza pine (P. gerardiana) are produced and exported by Afghanistan and Pakistan. China is the world's largest producer and exporter of Pinus korainsis seeds - one of the bigger-seeded species- and seeds of Pinus cambra - the Siberian equivalent to the edible European nut species (P. pinea) (Richardson, 1993). Spain and Portugal are the major producers and exporters of pignolia nuts (P. pinea).
Similarly black mushroom or morels, belonging to genus Morchella, are another product of considerable economic and commercial significance. The morels are prized for culinary uses, particularly as a gourmet food. Morels grow naturally in temperate forests of many European countries, USA, Canada, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, China, Turkey, Nepal, and Bhutan. Total world production is estimated to be approximately 150 tonnes. Pakistan and India are the main producing countries, each producing about 50 tonnes of dry morels annually (equivalent to fresh morels of 500 tonnes), all of which is exported. Total world trade in morels is of the order of US$ 50 to 60 million.
Like morels, truffles are also highly favoured by gourmets in various European countries and USA. France and Italy are the main producers. Whereas production in France was around 1,000 tonnes, 95 years ago, it had fallen to 20 tonnes in 1988^/. In Spain, about 15 to 30 tonnes of truffles are collected each year, of which the bulk is exported to France (FAO/ECE, 1988). Truffles are exported in fresh as well as preserved form. In 1989, USA imported 5.4 tonnes of fresh or chilled truffles, mainly from Italy and France, valuing US$ 1.477 million (c&f) or US$ 273 per kg^/.
Table 1. List of NWFPs of commercial significance
S.No.
Category
Products
I Food products
1. Nuts. Brazil nuts, pine nuts, pignolia nuts, malva nut,
walnuts and chestnuts.
2. Fruits. Jujube, sapodilla and Ginkgo.
3. Edible fungi. Morels, truffles and pine mushrooms.
4. Vegetables. Bamboo shoots, osmunds, reindeer moss
and palm hearts.
5. Starches. Sago.
6. Birds' nests.
7. Oils. Shea nuts, babassu oil,sal or tengkawang or
illipe oil.
8. Maple sugar.
II Spices, condiments and culinary herbs
1. Nutmeg and mace.
2. Cinnamon and cassia.
3. Cardamom.
4. Galanga
5. Allspice
6. Caraway
7. Bay leaves
8. Oregano, etc.
III Industrial plant oils and waxes Tung oil, neem oil, jojoba oil, kemiri or candle or
lumbang oil, akar wangi, babassu, oiticica and kapok oils.
Carnauba wax.
IV Plant gums
1. Gums for food uses. Gum arabic, tragacanth, karaya
and carob gums.
2. Technological grade gums. Talha and combretum gums.
V Natural pigments Annatto seeds, logwood, indigo.
VI Oleoresins
1. Pine oleoresin
2. Copal, Damar, Gamboge, Benzoin gum, Dragon's blood
(Benjamin), and Copaiba oil.
3. Amber
VII Fibres and flosses
1. Fibres. Bamboo, rattan, xateattap, aren, osier, raffia,
toquilla straw products, cork, esparto, Erica and other
broom grasses.
2. Flosses. Kapok or silk cotton.
VIII Vegetable tanning materials Quebracho, mimosa, chestnut and catha/cutch.
IX Latex Natural rubber, gutta percha, jelutong, sorva and chicle.
X Insect products
1. Natural honey.
2. Beeswax.
3. Lac and lac-dye.
4. Silk. Mulberry and non-mulberry silks
5. Cochineal
6. Aleppo galls
7. Kermes
XI Incense woods Sandalwood, gharu or aloewood.
XII Essential oils
XIII Plant insecticides Pyrethrum, Derris, Medang and Peuak Bong.
XIV Medicinal plants
XV Wild plants
XVI Animals and animals' products Ivory, trophies, bones, feathers, maleo eggs,
butterflies, live animals and birds.
XVII Miscellaneous products
1. Bidi leaves.
2. Soap berries (soap nut).
3. Quillaia bark.
4. Betel and cola nuts.
5. Chewing sticks.
6. Lacquer.
7. Dom nuts or ivory nuts.
Source: Iqbal (1993).
Bamboo shoots represent an expanding and fashionable export market. China (Taiwan) alone exports over US$ 20 million annually. In China, tender shoots of about 100 species are edible; their production averaging one million tonnes annually (Sulthoni, 1989). Thailand exported 31,730 tonnes of canned bamboo shoots during 1989, valued at 460.62 million bahts^/. The bulk of the exports went to USA and Japan, followed by UK, Germany, Australia, the Netherlands, Canada, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, France and Republic of Korea. Japan is the main market for bamboo shoots in Asia. Small quantities of bamboo shoots are also exported from Indonesia.
Sago is a starch rich food obtained from a fresh water palm (Metroxylon spp.). Indonesia is the major producing and exporting country. During 1991, it exported 10,107.7 tonnes of sago flour and meal to Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore, valuing US$ 2.32 million (fob). Malaysia, also produces small volumes.
Illipe nuts are oil-bearing seeds of sal trees (Shorea spp. and Madhuca spp.) The oil resembles butter in its physico-chemical properties. Indonesia dominates world trade in illipe nuts, exporting about 15,000 tonnes annually, worth about US$ 8 million.
Salanganes' or birds' nests are built by two species of cave dwelling swiftlets, Collocalia fuciphaga and C. maxima in Malaysia and Thailand, which are collected for sale to a Chinese market at home and abroad. Malaysia is the major producer and exporter of birds' nests. Malaysian exports during 1991 totalled 18.6 tonnes, mainly to Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan and China (Taiwan), valuing Malaysian $ 2.93 million.
Spices, condiments and culinary herbs are another important group of NWFPs which constitute a significant component of world trade. Indonesia is the largest world producer of nutmeg and mace and accounts for three-quarters of world production and export. Grenada is the second largest producer and exporter. Indonesia produced 15,800 tonnes of nutmeg during 1990, whereas Grenada produced 2,700 tonnes of nutmeg and 200 tonnes of mace, in 1991^/.
World trade in cinnamon is between 7,500 to 10,000 tonnes annually. Sri Lanka contributes 80% to 90%, most of the remaining balance coming from Seychelles and Madagascar (Smith, 1986). The world trade in cassia is of the order of 20,000 to 25,000 tonnes annually, of which Indonesia accounts for two-thirds and China most of the remainder. Minor producers include Viet Nam and India. About 2,000 to 3,000 tonnes of cassia bark are exported from Viet Nam annually (de Beer, 1993). The EC, USA and Japan are the major markets.
Gum arabic, an exudate of Acacia senegal, is the most widely used and traded plant gum. Current worldwide trade is around 25,000 tonnes, of which about 20,000 tonnes comes from Sudan alone. The remaining 5,000 tonnes originates from other African nations, notably from Nigeria^/. The USA is the largest single market, accounting for 25% of the world market. The EC, Switzerland and Scandinavia collectively account for 40% of the world imports, and about 10% is channelled into Japanese markets.
Gum tragacanth is the second most important commercial gum and is produced by several shrubby plants of the genus Astragalus, growing from Pakistan to Greece, particularly in Iran and Turkey. Iran and Turkey are major exporters. Total world trade is around 400 tonnes. The EC, USA, Japan and former USSR are the major importing regions.
Gum karaya, also known as Indian tragacanth, is obtained almost exclusively from Indian plantations of Sterculia spp. India is the only regular producer, overwhelmingly dominating international trade in the gum. Total world production is about 5,500 tonnes per annum.
Carob or locust bean gum is obtained from the endosperm of the beans of carob tree (Ceratonia siliqua), which grows in abundance in the mediterranean region. Total world exports of locust bean gum are currently about 12,000 tonnes per annum, of which over 80% is attributable to Spain, Italy and Portugal.
Gum Talha is a water soluble gum derived from a number of Acacia species like A. seyal, A. sieberana, A. hockii, A. ehrenbergiana and A. karroo. Production remains fairly constant at around 6,000 tonnes per annum (Anderson, 1993). About 3,000 to 5,000 tonnes are exported annually, mainly from Sudan.
Combretum gum is obtained from Combretum nigricans, occurring throughout tropical West Africa, particularly in northern Nigeria, Mali and Niger.
Annatto is a reddish-orange colorant, called bixin, derived from seeds of achiote tree (Bixa orellana). Average annual production is in the range of 10,000 to 11,000 tonnes. Peru is the largest producer, accounting for 32% of the world's total, followed by Kenya and Brazil.
World production of oleoresins (naval stores) from all the sources, is almost stable, ranging between 1.1 and 1.2 million tonnes annually. China and Indonesia dominate the world's production. China has emerged as the world's largest producer of rosin, with annual production level of nearly 400,000 tonnes (Richardson, 1993). The world's annual trade in gum rosin is around 330,000 tonnes. Portugal and China with total annual exports of around 200,000 tonnes, dominate this trade, and China accounts for about one-third of total world's production and exports. The list of countries importing naval store products is quite long ? well over 100; Japan, Germany, UK, France, the Netherlands, Italy, Belgium/Luxembourg, Australia, Austria, Canada, Colombia, Switzerland, South Africa, Zaire and Nigeria being the major importers. Japan is the largest importer. About 50% of the total exports of gum rosin from China enter Japanese markets.
The average value of the world's trade in rattan is US$ 66 million. Malaysia, Indonesia, Viet Nam and China, are the main origins. Small quantities also originate from Myanmar, Thailand, and the Philippines. Italy, USA, Spain, France, Japan, the Netherlands and Germany are the major destinations.
Average value of world trade in bamboo is of the order of US$ 36.2 million^/. China and Thailand are the main origins; Malaysia, Myanmar, Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Viet Nam, the Philippines and Bangladesh being minor exporters. France, Germany and the Netherlands are the main markets.
Kapok is a mass of silky fibres that clothe the seeds of ceiba tree (Bombax ceiba) and is used as a filling for mattresses, life preservers, and sleeping bags and as insulation. The tree grows in many South Asian countries, but Thailand and Indonesia are the main suppliers in the world trade. Japan, China, EC and USA are the major markets. During 1992 total value of world trade was of the order of US$ 11 million^/, of which about 66% was contributed by Thailand and 16% by Indonesia.
Spain, France, Italy, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco are the main cork producing countries. Total world production is estimated to be 250,000 tonnes per annum, of which about 50% is produced in Portugal, 25% in Spain, and remaining 25% in Italy, France, Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia. Morocco's cork oak forests are spread over an area of 100,000 ha. Cork oak cultivation and processing is a very important industry for Moroccan economy, and cork is one of the country's main export earners. Portugal, Spain and Morocco are the major exporting countries; EC and USA being major markets.
Thailand and India dominate world trade in shellac, each exporting, on an average, about 6,000 tonnes per annum. Vietnamese annual exports average around 300 tonnes. China produces about 4,000 tonnes, but export statistics are not available. Shellac is exported to about 45 countries, but Germany, Italy, Egypt, Indonesia and USA are the major markets.
World trade in natural honey is of the order of 300,000 tonnes, valued at US$ 300 million. Former USSR, China, USA, Mexico, and Turkey are the major producing countries. Germany, USA, UK and Japan are the major world markets. Whereas treating wild honey as a NWFP would be easily understandable, inclusion of cultured honey as a NWFP could be questioned. Nevertheless, because many plants growing in forests and a number of semi-wild trees constitute an important nectar and pollen source for foraging bees at least a part of cultured honey should be considered as a NWFP. Actual apportionment, however, remains difficult as trade statistics lumps honey from all sources together.
Total value of international trade in insect waxes ranges between US$ 23 to 26 million. The bulk of it is contributed by beeswax, which like natural honey, originates from wild as well cultured sources. China, United Republic of Tanzania, Germany, Canada, the Netherlands, Brazil, Japan, USA and Ethiopia are the main origins; collectively accounting for 70% of the total trade volume. Australia, France, Chile, UK, Dominican Republic and New Zealand are some of the minor origins.
World trade in essential oils is of the order of US$ 1 billion, including both the wild as well as cultivated sources. China, Indonesia, Thailand, India and Brazil are the major suppliers of some of the oils. The EC, USA and Japan are the principal import markets, accounting for 72% of the total world imports.
Indonesia and Malaysia are the world's leading producers of natural rubber; collectively accounting for 47% of the world's total output of 5.54 million tonnes in 1992^/. Sri Lanka, India, Viet Nam, Papua New Guinea, Cambodia, China and Myanmar are other producers. Entire production of natural rubber in these countries, however, comes from plantations. Separate statistics on rubber extracted from wild sources, however, is not available. The EC, USA and Japan are the major markets.
Gutta percha is a tough plastic-like substance from latex of several Malaysian trees of genera Payena and Palaquium that resembles rubber but contains more resin and is used especially as insulation and in dentistry. Malaysia and Indonesia are major producers. Small quantities are also produced in Thailand. Total value of the world trade in gutta percha and other similar lattices is of the order of US$ 27 million. Japan, EC, USA, Republic of Korea, China and Australia are the major markets.
Total value of world's trade in tannin extracts of vegetable origin (HS 3201) was of the order of US$ 102.7, 102.5, 116.7 and 123.3 million during 1988, 1989, 1990 and 1991^/, respectively, which shows a slightly rising trend. During 1991, 50% of the world's supplies of vegetable tannin extracts originated from Argentina (34%) and Brazil (16%). The USA, Italy, former USSR and Japan are the major markets.
Out of the long list of medicinal plants, about 4,000 to 6,000 botanicals are of commercial importance. Total world trade in 1992 in medicinal plants was of the magnitude of US$ 171 million. China is the biggest producer as well as exporter of medicinal plants, accounting for 30% of total world trade (by value) in 1991, followed by the Republic of Korea, USA, India and Chile. Singapore and Hong Kong are the main re-exporters in Asia. Japan, USA, Germany, France, Italy, Malaysia, Spain and UK are the major markets. Hamburg is the world trade centre. About 53 countries supply medicinal plants to Germany, of which important ones are India, Argentina, former Yugoslavia, Greece, China, Poland, Egypt, Hungary, former Czechoslovakia, Zaire, Albania, the Netherlands and France (Iqbal, 1993).
2. MAJOR SUPPLIERS AND MAIN MARKETS
The total value of world trade in NWFPs is of the order of US$ 11 billion^/, of which about 60% is imported by EC, USA and Japan (Appendix I). General direction of trade is from developing to developed countries (Iqbal, 1993). Information on major suppliers and markets for some of the important NWFPs is summarized in Table 2.
The list of countries contributing to the world trade in NWFPs is quite diverse, but the forests of Southeast Asia have traditionally remained the major source for many of these. There has been a significant trade in furs and skins, fruits, resins (naval stores, copal), fungi, wild honey, medicines, aphrodisiacs, oil (Cassia, Citronella), sandalwood, bamboo and rattan ware.
Recently, NWFP trade has reached new heights in China. Probably no country in the world processes as many wild products and there is growing interest worldwide in its natural foodstuffs and medicines. Consequently, it dominates world's trade. India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and Brazil are other major suppliers of NWFPs to the world markets.
Table 2. Trade direction for major NWFPs
Product
Main origins
Main markets
Brazil nuts Brazil, Bolivia and Peru USA, UK, Germany, Australia and Canada
Pine nuts China, Afghanistan and Pakistan Middle Eastern countries
Pignolia nuts Spain, Portugal USA, Canada, Hong Kong, Japan and EC
Walnuts China, India, Afghanistan and Pakistan EC, Japan, Canada and Switzerland
Morels Pakistan, India and Afghanistan. France, Switzerland and Germany.
Truffles France, Italy USA
Pine mushrooms Chile USA, France, Peru, Holland, Switzerland.
Bamboo shoots China, Thailand and Indonesia USA, Japan, UK, Germany, Australia, the Netherlands, France and Rep. of Korea.
Sago Indonesia, Malaysia Japan, Hong Kong and Singapore
Shea nuts (Karite nuts) Burkina Faso, Mali, Côte d'Ivoire, Benin, Togo, Ghana, Nigeria, Guinea and Central African Republic Japan, Sweden and EC.
Birds' nests Malaysia Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan and China (Taiwan).
Nutmeg and mace Indonesia and Grenada. USA, EC and Japan.
Cinnamon and Cassia Sri Lanka, Seychelles and Madagascar USA, EC and Japan.
Gum Arabic Sudan and Nigeria. USA, EC (UK and Germany), Switzerland Scandinavia and Japan
Gum tragacanth Iran and Turkey EC, USA, Japan and former USSR.
Gum Karaya India USA, Japan, France, Germany, UK, Belgium, United Arab Emirates and the Netherlands.
Carob gum Spain, Italy and Portugal Western Europe, USA and Japan.
Annatto Peru, Kenya and Brazil USA, EC and Japan
Gum rosin China, Indonesia, Portugal Japan, Germany, UK, France, the Netherlands, Italy, etc.
Rattan Malaysia, Indonesia, Viet Nam and China Italy, USA, Spain, France, Egypt, Japan, the Netherlands, Germany, Greece and Thailand.
Bamboo China, Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar, Rep. of Korea, Indonesia, Viet Nam, the Philippines and Bangladesh. France, Germany and the Netherlands.
Cork Portugal, Spain and Morocco EC countries.
Lac India and Thailand Germany, Egypt, Indonesia and the USA.
Natural honey Former USSR, China, USA, Mexico and Turkey Germany, USA, UK and Japan
Beeswax China, former USSR, Morocco, Tanzania, New Zealand, Canada and the Netherlands EC (Germany, France, Italy and UK)
Mulberry and non-mulberry silk China, India and Brazil Italy, Germany, France, Switzerland, the UK, Japan, Rep. of Korea and Hong Kong.
Cochineal Peru and Canary Islands EC, the USA and Japan.
Liquorice roots China, Pakistan, Syria, former USSR, Turkey, Afghanistan and Iran. USA, Japan and EC.
Ginseng roots Japan, China, Singapore and EC. USA, Rep. of Korea, Canada and China
Essential oil China, India, Indonesia and Brazil. EC, USA and Japan.
Medicinal plants China, Rep. of Korea, USA, India, Chile, Egypt, Argentina, Greece, Poland, Hungary, Zaire, former Czechoslovakia, and Albania. Japan, USA, Germany, France, Italy, Malaysia, Spain and UK.
Bidi leaves India Pakistan and Sri Lanka
Source: Iqbal (1993).
3/. Financial Times, 30 June 1988.
4/. The USA Import Statistics, 1989
5/. Thailand Foreing Agriculture Trade Statistics, Office of Agriculture Economics,Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperation, Bangkok.
6/. Fruit and Tropical Products, 1992
7/. Chemical Marketing Reporter, 15 February 1993; pp 18-19
8/. COMTRADE data base
9/. UNCTAD data base
10/. Ruibber Satistical Bulletin; 47(7). International Rubber Study Group.
11/. COMTRADE data base
12/. UNCTAD data base. The figures are, however, indicative only and are to beused with caution.
<section>5</section>
III
TRADE RESTRICTIONS
1. GENERAL
Both tariff as well as non-tariff measures (NTMs) are applicable to international trade in NWFPs. They are applied by both importing and exporting countries for a variety of purposes. Tariffs, safety regulations and technical standards are the most common restrictions imposed by the developed countries on the import trade in NWFPs. Developing countries, which are the major suppliers to world markets, also impose measures which restrict or regulate export trade. The most common form is the use of export tariffs levied with the objective of raising revenue for the government.^/
2. TARIFF MEASURES
2.1. Import tariffs
Identification and analysis of tariff measures and their impact on the NWFP trade is relatively straight forward. In addition to the country custom schedules, information is also available in the UNCTAD computerized trade data base. Detailed results of the analysis of the EC, USA and Japan are given in Appendices II, III and IV, respectively, and a summary is given in Table 3.
Table 3. Summary of tariffs faced by NWFPs in EC, USA and Japanese markets
Market
No. of NWFP- containing tariff lines
No. of national lines of NWFPs falling under the tariff range (%) of
EC^/
USA^/
Japan^/
The concept of "protection" through imposition of import taxes to weaken the competitiveness of the imported products in domestic markets does not hold true in the case of the majority of the NWFPs, particularly in the markets of developed countries, since these products are not produced or collected in these latter countries. Collection and processing of NWFPs is quite labour intensive, and in developed countries labour is more expensive. Moreover, such jobs are often considered dirty, tedious and arduous. Consequently, developed countries tend to maintain low tariffs on NWFP imports, in order to ensure a sustained supply of these products to meet their domestic demands.
Generally the tariffs on NWFPs are quite low. For example, custom schedules of EC group NWFPs under 91 tariff lines. Of these 39.6% have no duty, 26.4% are levied a nominal duty of 1-5% (ad valorem), 26.4% face a tariff of 6-10%, 3.3% fall in the tariff range of 11-15%, and a few products (4.4%) like natural honey, truffles and spices face rates above 15%.
USA tariffs are even lower. Out of 98 NWFP-containing tariff lines, 47% are free of import duty, 33.7% face a nominal duty of up to 5% (ad valorem) and 14.3% are levied a duty of 6-10%. Only one product (luggage and handbags lined with bamboo) faces a duty of 12.50% and four tariff lines, containing various articles of natural cork, face a duty of 18%.
Similarly, in Japan out of 95 NWFP-containing tariff lines, 46.3% are duty-free and 27.4% are levied a nominal duty of up to 5%. Another 17% tariff lines face a duty from 6% to 10%. Only six tariff lines, containing products like nuts (walnuts, chestnuts, etc.), lac and some kinds of processed truffles face duties ranging between 17.5-20%. Three tariff lines containing products like natural honey, maple syrup and truffles (packed in air tight containers) face high tariffs of 30%, 35% and 25%, respectively. In addition to the import duty, consumption tax of 3% is levied on almost all products imported into Japan.
Tariffs on NWFPs imported into developing countries are, however, considerably higher. Tariffs for China and India, two of the main NWFP trading nations, are summarized in Appendices V and VI, respectively. MFN tariffs for these products range from 12% to as high as 65% (ad valorem) for China and from 30-60% for India. Here the tendencies of protectionism and/or revenue generation for the respective governments are quite obvious.
2.2. Export tariffs
Export tariffs (taxes) are also commonly levied on NWFPs exported from most developing countries. Their main objective is to secure revenue for the state. As examples: a 12% tax is levied on Brazil nuts exported from Brazil. LaFleur (1992) suggests that if these were removed, there would be an increase in price paid to the nut collectors, increase in total export prices, and enhanced environmental benefits intrinsic to nut gathering. Similarly, a high export tax of 40% is levied on gum arabic exported from Sudan. Such a high tax rate is counter-productive, by encouraging cross-border smuggling of the product, and by causing a reduction in price paid to the collectors. Overseas earnings are therefore reduced as a result (Iqbal, 1993).
3. NON-TARIFF MEASURES
Details of non-tariff measures (NTMs) faced by NWFPs entering EC, USA and Japanese markets are given in Appendices II, III and IV, respectively. Species protection controls (CITES) and health and safety regulations are the main categories of NTMs applicable to NWFPs in these markets.
3.1. Species protection controls (CITES)
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) regulates trade in plants and animals. Over 110 countries are now signatories to CITES, but little progress has been made in enforcing its requirements in respect of plants. CITES has three lists or Appendices. Appendix I lists species, subspecies or populations in which trade is prohibited. Appendix II lists all those in which trade is regulated by requiring an export permit issued by the competent government authority in the exporting country. The permit must only be issued if the specimen was legally obtained and export will not be detrimental to the survival of the species. Regulated trade is allowed in these species. Appendix III contains species subject to regulation in individual countries, thus it covers species which are subject to trade controls from certain countries only.
A few countries ban import or export of wild plants, and Australia has developed a comprehensive system of export controls for all its native wild plants. Some individual countries protect certain species by controlling their export; examples are Harpagophytum procumbens, a medicinal plant in Botswana, many wild orchids from Costa Rica, the medicinal plant Rauofoliaserpentina and wild orchids from India.
3.2. Health and safety regulations
Regulatory requirements of many countries are being continually tightened and becoming more demanding. There are increasing regulations concerning, in particular, contamination of edible products, medicinal plants (botanicals) and their derivatives by pesticide residues, and insistence on a high level of active ingredients and purity. The governments of most industrialized countries insist that plant product be inspected before it is allowed into the country, because many botanicals can be contaminated with micro-organisms or bring unwanted forms of animal life into the country. Exporting countries are sometimes required to furnish phyto-sanitary certificates. Imports of edible fungi (morels, truffles, etc.), for example, are subject to phyto-sanitary regulations as elaborated in the CODEX worldwide standards for dried edible fungi (CODEX STAN 39-1981).
Similarly, spices imported into the major markets must face with phyto-sanitary regulations, and checks to detect microbiological contamination (particularly that of pesticide residues) are carried out. Some fumigants are banned in Europe, as a result there is a need to develop suitable processes for removing bacteria from spices, and from other wild edible products. Suitable post-harvest handling, storage and packaging methods are also required (Husain, 1992).
Various residues left on plant material (all foreign matter such as grit, sand or other residues) must be removed. Many industrialized countries refuse admission for consignments of plants that show signs of pesticide residues. For example, Germany has regulations concerning the maximum allowable residue level in or on phytogenic foodstuffs. Similarly, it is mandatory that all plant material be free from microbial contamination.
Although considerable trade distortion is caused as a result of these regulations, they are not unreasonable controls since their enforcement is essential for health and safety reasons. Thus all suppliers of NWFPs must realize that their products, both the samples used for market promotion and the bulk consignment, must conform to the requirements of the country to which they are delivered. Complaints concerning the quality of NWFPs received from developing countries are frequent and in many cases the product received does not correspond to samples on the basis of which the purchase contract was made (ITC 1982).
3.3. Quality and technical standards
3.3.1. Botanicals
The regulations and requirements regarding identification, medicinal qualities, characteristics and storage for medicinal plants and their derivatives are well defined in national pharmacopoeias and formulary standards. The EC has unified its national standards into European Pharmacopoeia while specifications for Japan and USA are listed in Pharmacopoeia of Japan and the United States Pharmacopoeia, respectively. WWF has also drawn up certain principles relating to large international trade in medicinal plants.
In general fumigation is not mandatory for botanicals from developing countries, although many of the products will be fumigated on arrival at their country of destination.
3.3.2. Edible Products
Like most other food products, quality is the most important factor for successfully exporting edible NWFPs and the laws of importing countries must be adhered to. National food legislation is probably the major obstacle for many potential exporters of edible NWFPs. Most major markets, for example, set legislative requirements for foreign as well as domestic honey. These requirements are stringent and often difficult for developing countries to meet (ITC 1986).
All food items imported into UK are subject to the Food and Drug Act, administered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. The Act includes both general food hygiene regulations and food labelling and other regulations. The Combined Edible Nut Trade Association (CENTA) has compiled and published rules and regulations affecting the trade in edible nuts undertaken by its members (Gunnerod, 1994). For most kinds of nuts internationally recognized standards are used. These are usually produced by the largest producing countries. For example, for Brazil nuts, Brazilian standards are used.
Quality considerations are of primary importance in the trade of culinary herbs. Cleanliness, flavour, colour and aroma are the most important factors considered by importers and buyers, but no standardized grading system is used. Quality criteria vary from one country to another and from herb to herb and are usually imposed by large importing and processing companies. Requirements regarding cleanliness and admitted levels of pesticides and herbicides are becoming more strict. Most purchases are made on the basis of an analysis of the samples supplied by the exporter in a laboratory selected by the buyer (Maftei, 1992).
3.3.3. Essential oils
Numerous bodies monitor product quality and trading procedures and draw up specifications for essential oils. The most widely recognized standards are those set by the International Organization for Standardisation (ISO). Standards have also been established by various national pharmacopoeias. The general interests of traders and users are served by trade associations such as Flavour and Extract Manufacturers Association (FEMA) in USA. International Federation of Essential Oils and Aroma Traders (IFEAT), based in Geneva, monitors toxicological and other hazardous aspects of various raw materials used in perfume compounds.
International (ISO) standards exist for majority of the essential oils. In the case of cinnamon leaf oil, for example, different ranges for the major constituent, eugenol, exist. All major importing countries have established standard specifications for Brazilian rosewood oil and there is also an international (ISO) standard. National and international standards exist for eucalyptus oil and there is an international (ISO) standard for sandalwood oil. Citral content is the most important indicator of oil quality of Litsea cubeba oil and an international (ISO) standard specifies a minimum value.
An international (ISO) standard exists for "gum spirit of turpentine" intended for use in paints and varnishes. Turpentine purchased by the chemical industry as a source of isolates for conversion to pine oil and fragrance and flavour compounds is assessed on the basis of its composition.
While overall olfactory properties are important and will be judged by prospective buyers, the use of cedarwood oil as raw materials for derivative manufacture means that chemical composition is also important. International standards exist for Texas and Virginia cedarwood oils. In USA, recent FMA standards replace older EOA ones and are available for Chinese as well as for Texas and Virginia cedarwood oils. Compositional data for the American oils are somewhat different to those cited in the ISO standards and illustrate the fact that standards can only be treated as guidelines for facilitating the assessment of quality.
3.4. State control and policies
State control on production, prices and trade also affects international trade of some NWFPs. Such controls have often proved self-defeating in the long run. The Iranian government, for example, fixed prices that made gum tragacanth non-competitive in international markets. Iran's recent recovery internationally highlights the fact that a correct understanding of the world market and supply is important to securing improved markets.
Banning or restricting collection of NWFPs by governments also restrains their trade. The Indian government, for example, has closed some forests for collection of gum karaya, on the basis that it damages trees, although gum collection is done from mature trees. The Indian Government also tried to control exports, and prohibit private Bombay merchants from shipping gum karaya on the ground that they were making greater financial gains than the tribal populations who tapped the trees and collected the gum. Government exports through the National Association for Export Development (NAFED) were attempted at higher farm-gate prices. These events coincided with an upsurge in availability of substitutes and stimulated replacement of gum karaya. In 1989, NAFED was replaced by another Indian government agency, Tribal Development Federation (TRIFED) to regulate trade in gum karaya, and a certain amount of trading was restored to the traditional Bombay merchants (Anderson, 1993).
Even state regulations at the collection stage are known to have adverse effects on international trade in NWFPs. In Pakistan, for example, two systems of collection of medicinal plants have remained in vogue in coniferous forests in north-western parts of the country. Whereas an elaborate system of annual leases through tenders for extracting predetermined and fixed quantities of the herbs was adopted in the forests of Hazara, their collection remained free and unregulated in neighbouring forests of Malakand, where anybody could collect and trade them. An authorization from Forest Department for their transportation out of Malakand and a fixed amount of royalty and duty were the only restrictions in that region.
Surprisingly, in spite of elaborate departmental controls and regulations, over-exploitation of medicinal plants as well as other NWFPs took place in the forests in Hazara, resulting in a complete ban on their collection. Consequently, none of the forests have been leased out for collection of the herbs for more than a decade. On the contrary, however, there is a flourishing business of medicinal plants and morels collected from forests in Malakand, to the extent that most of these products are exported to other countries directly from the central town of Mengora (Iqbal, 1991a and 1991b).
4. IMPORT BANS AND BOYCOTTS
NWFP trade does not face import bans and boycotts such as those proposed against timber since most groups, including environmentalists, consider on both economic and ecological grounds, that increased international trade in NWFPs could help reduce the pressures on forests. Analysis of economic and ecological "advantages" of extractivism can be found for example in Peters et al. (1989) and Fearnside (1990). Varangis etal. (1993), however, note that economic feasibility of large scale extractivism is difficult and may in some case be questionable given the limited size of markets for these products.
13/. A full discussion of the various types of trade restrictions their characteristics and functions can be found in Bourke (1988).
14/. Autonomous tariff rates have been considered for the products to which conventional rates are not applicable.
15/. MFN Tariff.
16/. GATT bound tariff.
<section>6</section>
IV
URUGUAY ROUND
1. BROAD FEATURES
The recently concluded (April 1995) Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations is expected to usher in a new era in world trade. Estimates of the benefits to the world economy of GATT tariff cuts on all goods range from US$ 212 to US$ 270 billion a year by the year 2003 (Dunn, 1994). A study by the World Bank and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) envisages 90% of the annual benefit will come from trade reform, with the remainder reflecting tax cuts on industrial goods. The wealthy industrialized nations of the OECD are expected to reap two-thirds of the benefit from trade liberalization in goods and almost all the gains from liberalization of services. Most countries, developed and developing, will gain on balance, but those likely to suffer most from the new agreement are those which can least afford it: the poorest food importing countries, such as those of the Sahel.
Enhanced market access, through a general reduction in tariff rates, is a feature of the agreement. This will have positive effects on trade not only between developed countries but also between the developed and less developed countries. Developed countries have agreed to reduce tariffs on manufactured goods by 38%, which would mean that the average tariff rate on manufactured products will come down to 3.9%. At the moment, 7% of the total imports of developed countries are subject to high tariff rates (15% and above); after the new trade agreement, only 5% of their imports will be subject to such high rates.
The implementation of the Agreement on Agriculture, which covers many of the products considered to be NWFPs, will start in 1995. There are three elements to the commitment on market access: tariffication, tariff reduction and access opportunities. Tariffication means that specific non-tariff barriers (quotas, variable levies, minimum import prices, discretionary licensing, state trading measures, voluntary restraint agreements and similar border measures) should be converted to equivalent tariff levels. Ordinary tariffs, including those resulting from tariffication, should be reduced by an average 36% (24% by developing countries), with a minimum rate of reduction of 15% for each tariff item. These tariff cuts will be implemented over a period of six years (by the year 2000) for the industrialized countries, while the period being ten years (by the year 2004) for the developing countries.
Of note is the fact that while the commodities included are those normally considered as part of agriculture,^/ forest products are excluded as are rubber, jute, sisal, abaca and coir, but includes essential oils and spices^/. Forest products were covered under a separate category in the GATT negotiations, not that on agriculture, and agreements of relevance include tariff reductions and changes to regulations relating to NTMs.
2. EFFECTS ON NWFP TRADE
Trade in NWFPs is expected to benefit from the overall trade liberalization policies adapted in the Uruguay Round, as well as from direct tariff reductions.
Although tariff rates with few exceptions are already quite low for most of the NWFPs, the situation will improve further after reductions are implemented. Average reductions of 49.85%, 67.62% and 44.88% are expected in the tariff rates for NWFPs entering EC, USA and Japanese markets, respectively. Average bound rates of custom duty on NWFP-containing tariff lines are 1.70%, 1.95% and 2.96% in the markets of EC, USA and Japan, respectively.
Table 4. Detail of NWFP-containing tariff lines facing import duty of
more than 10% in EC, USA and Japanese markets
Market
HS code
Product description
Bound rate of duty (%)
EC 04090000 Natural honey
07123000 Mushrooms and truffles
20032000 Truffles
USA 20049090 Other (bamboo shoots)
45039060 Some articles of natural cork
46021029 Some articles of rattan or of palm leaf
Japan 040900 Natural honey
110620 Flour and meal of sago for purposes other than feeding
130110 Shellac and other refined lacs
152190 Beeswax
170220 Maple syrup
200320 Some kinds of truffle packings
200490 Bamboo shoots
Source: UNCTAD 1994. Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations,
Vol. 8a, 11 and 19.
After the GATT reductions have been implemented, duty on the majority (more than 97% of the tariff lines) of NWFPs will be less than 10% (largely less than 5%) in the three major markets of EC, USA and Japan. Only three NWFP-containing tariff lines will be facing duty rates higher than 10% in EC and USA markets, while seven tariff lines will do so in the Japanese market. A few products like natural honey (EC, USA), some articles of rattan or of palm leaf (USA), flour and meal of sago (Japan), shellac (Japan) and maple syrup (Japan) will, however, still be facing custom tariffs higher than 15%.
17/. A forthcoming FAO report will provide details of the conditions and likely effects concerning forest products.
18/. Underlined products also contain NWFPs
<section>7</section>
V
CONCLUSIONS
1. CUSTOM TARIFFS
EC, USA and Japan, collectively account for 60% of the world import trade of NWFPs. Custom duties on NWFPs in these markets are generally quite low; 40-47% of the NWFP-containing tariff lines face no duty, while another 24-27% of the tariff lines face a nominal duty of 1-5%. Only a few tariff lines (4% in case of EC and USA and 9.5% in Japanese market), containing products like natural honey, truffles, spices, maple syrup and certain articles of natural cork and bamboo face custom duty higher than 15%. In addition to the import duty, a consumption tax of 3% is levied on almost all products imported into Japan.
Tariffs on the NWFPs imported into developing countries, however, are considerably higher. For example, import tariff rates as high as 60-65% are not uncommon for some NWFPs in the major exporting nations of China and India. Such high tariff rates reflect both the tendencies of "protectionism" as well as revenue generation for the state.
2. URUGUAY ROUND
Tariff rates will be reduced further after implementation of decisions of the Uruguay Round. Average bound rate on NWFP-containing tariff lines will be reduced to 1.70%, 1.95% and 2.96% in the EC, USA and Japan, respectively. More than 97% of the NWFP-containing tariff lines will then face import duty less than 10%. A few products like natural honey, some articles of rattan or of palm leaf, flour and meal of sago, shellac and maple syrup will, however, still be facing custom tariffs higher than 15% in these markets.
3. EXPORT TAXES
Tariffs (taxes) levied on NWFPs exported from developing countries are also common and can reach high levels. The main objective of these is to secure revenue for the state, although such high rates can prove counter-productive by reducing the profitability and hence the extent of the trade, encouraging cross-border smuggling and reducing the standard of care and protection of the forests and their products.
4. NON-TARIFF MEASURES
Species protection regulations (CITES) and health and safety regulations are two common forms of NTMs facing NWFP trade in EC, USA and Japanese markets. The former attempts to regulate trade in plants and animals in order to protect them from extinction; the latter attempts to stop the introduction of micro-organisms and unwanted forms of animal life into the importing countries. The latter are important for legitimate health and safety reasons and hence their enforcement is essential, despite their distorting effect on international trade in NWFPs. It is therefore important that suppliers in developing countries are aware of the importance of effectively meeting the phyto-sanitary regulations and standards of developed countries.
5. TECHNICAL STANDARDS
Elaborate technical and quality standards exist for a number of NWFPs and most purchases are made on the basis of a product analysis of samples supplied by the exporter in a laboratory selected by the buyer. Although most of these are not formal trade restrictions imposed for protective reasons they do constitute major barriers to many suppliers. Most are however legitimate regulations that exporters must adapt to if they are to trade internationally. The more effectively exporters can meet the regulations the more effective their trade will be.
6. STATE CONTROL AND POLICIES
State controls over collection, processing, pricing and trade are common in developing countries, and tend to distort and restrain international trade in NWFPs. Thus, steps should to be taken to minimize these wherever possible, since regulated trade through the private sector is likely to be more effective.
7. CONSUMER/TRADE BOYCOTTS
NWFP trade does not face the same problems of restriction and controls such as consumer/trade boycotts, direct control or bans which face international trade in timber and some other wood products. These are being promoted as solutions to the problems of the world's forests. These efforts to sustain forests do offer good opportunities and prospects for international trade in NWFPs since they are seen as being beneficial to the protection of the forests. Thus this may in fact provide a strong tool for the marketing of NWFPs.
<section>8</section>
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, D. M. W. 1993. Some factors influencing the demand for gum arabic (Acacia senegal (L.) Wild.) and other water soluble tree exudates. Forest Ecology and Management, 58:1-18.
Arora, S.C. and Sierra E. 1991. India's export quality control system. International Trade FORUM; 4/1991.
Bourke, I.J. 1988. Trade in forest products: a study of the barriers faced by the developing countries. FAO Forestry Paper 83. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Bourke, I.J. 1991. The impact of trade restrictions in the developed countries. A paper presented to Training Course on Export Marketing of Mechanical and Secondary Wood Products, 22 July ? 2 August 1991, Nairobi, Kenya. Forest Products Division. FAO Forestry Paper 83. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Bourke, I.J. 1992. Restriction on trade in tropical timber. Paper for agenda item No. 6 of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission, Rwanda, August 1992. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Coppen, J.J.W. 1994. Flavours and fragrances of plant origin: A review of the production, markets and development potential of selected essential oils and resins and their plant sources. Natural Resources Institute/Overseas Development Administration.
de Beer, J. H. 1993. Non-wood forest products in Indochina Focus: Viet Nam. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Dunn, K. 1994. Waiting for the dust to settle. Cerescope. May-June; pp 4-7.
FAO/ECE. 1988. Forest produce other than timber prepared by ICONA (National Institute for Conservation of Nature) and transmitted by Government. of Spain. Economic Commission for Europe/Food and Agriculture Organization Timber Committee/ European Forestry Commission. Seminar on Products from the Mediterranean Forests, Florence, Italy, 20-24 September 1988.
Fearnside, P.M. 1989. Processos predatorios na floresta tropical umida da Amazonia Brazileria. Estudos Avancados, January/April, p.21.
Gunnerod, P.K. 1994. Tropical nuts: strong demand in the United Kingdom. International Trade FORUM; 2/1994.
Husain, F. 1992. Spices: trends on the world market. International Trade FORUM; 4/1992.
Iqbal, M. 1991. Non-timber forest products: a study on their income generation potential for rural women in North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), Pakistan. Planning and Development Department, Govt. of NWFP and International Labour Organization, Peshawar (under publication).
Iqbal, M. 1991a. State of non-wood forest products in Pakistan. Paper presented at the Regional Expert Consultation on Non-Wood Forest Products at FAO Regional Office, Bangkok, from 5th to 8th November 1991.
Iqbal, M. 1991b. Present situation of collection, identification, preservation and storage of medicinal plants. In: Proceedings of the national workshop on appropriate use of medicinal plants in traditional medicines held from 20-21 November, 1991. World Health Organization/National Health Institute of Health, Islamabad.
Iqbal, M. 1993. International trade in non-wood forest products: an overview. FO: Misc/93/11 Working Paper. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
ITC. 1982 Markets for selected medicinal plants and their derivatives. International Trade Centre/UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva.
ITC. 1983. The gum arabic market and the development of production. International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva and the United Nations Sudano-Sahelaian Office.
ITC. 1986. Honey: a study of major markets. International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva.
ITC. 1986a. Essential oils and oleoresins: a study of selected producers and major markets. International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/ GATT, Geneva.
ITC. 1990. Annatto seeds. Market brief. International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva.
ITC. 1992. Silk Review. A survey of international trends and trade. International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva.
ITC. 1992a. Medicinal plants. Germany. Market Brief. International Trade Centre/UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva.
ITC. 1993. Annatto seeds. Export opportunities for the Andean region. International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva.
ITC. 1993a. Beeswax. EC overview. Market Brief. International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT.
ITC. 1993b. Essential oils and oleoresins. A market profile. International Trade Centre, UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva.
ITC. 1993c. Medicinal plants. UK. Market Brief. International Trade Centre/UNCTAD/GATT, Geneva.
LaFleur, J. R. 1992. Marketing of Brazil nuts. A case study from Brazil prepared for Forest Products Division. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Maftei, M. 1992. Prospects in European market for culinary herbs. International Trade FORUM; 1/1992.
Peters, C.M., A.H. Gentry and R.O. Mendelsohn. 1989. Valuation of an Amazonian rain forest. Nature, No. 339, June, p. 655.
Richardson, S.D. 1993. Forests and Forestry in China. Changing Patterns of Resource Development. Island Press, Washington D.C.
Shah, R. 1991. Report on Mushrooms production in Pakistan and export potential. Export Promotion Bureau, Government of Pakistan, Regional Office, Lahore.
Smith, A.E. 1986. International trade in cloves, nutmeg, mace, cinnamon, cassia and their derivatives. Tropical Development and Research Institute, London.
Sulthoni, A. 1990. Bamboo: Physical properties, testing methods and means of preservation In: Proceedings of a workshop on design and manufacture of bamboo and rattan furniture held at Jakarta, Indonesia, March 6 ? 17th 1989. Asia Pacific Forest Industries Development Group (APFIDG ? UNDP/FAO Project RAS 86/048).
Varangis, P.N., C.A.P. Barga and K. Takeuchi. 1993. Tropical Timber Trade Policies. What impact will eco-labelling have? International Economics Department, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
<section>9</section>
APPENDIX I
SHARE OF EC, USA AND JAPANESE MARKETS IN
WORLD TRADE OF NWFPs
HS Code
Description
World's import ('000$)
Imports by main markets('000$)
EC
USA
Japan
Total
% of world's total
010600 Other live animals
040900 Natural honey
041000 Edible products of animal origin, nes
051000 Ambergris, castoreum, civet and musk, etc.
050710 Ivory, its powder and waste...
060410 Mosses and lichens for ornamental purposes
070951 Mushrooms
070952 Truffles, fresh or chilled
080120 Brazil nuts, fresh or chilled
080231 Walnuts in shell...
080232 Walnuts, without shells...
080240 Chestnuts..
080290 Other nuts
081090 Other fruits, nes
090610 Cinnamon and cinnamon tree- flowers, neither crushed and ground
090810 Nutmeg
090820 Mace
091099 Other spices, nes
110260 Flour and meal of sago...
120792 Shea nuts
121110 Liquorice roots
121120 Ginseng roots...
121210 Locust beans
121290 Other plants used in pharmacy...
130110 Lac
130120 Gum arabic
130190 Natural gums, resins,... balsams (excluding gum arabic)
130212 Liquorice sap...
130232 Mucilages and thickeners of locust beans...
130239 Mucilages and thickeners, ... nes
140110 Bamboos
140120 Rattans
140190 Vegetable materials for plaiting (excl. bamboos and rattans)
140210 Kapok
140390 Vegetable materials primarily for brooms and brushes
140410 Raw vegetable material primarily for dyeing and tanning
140490 Vegetable products, nes
151540 Tung oil and its fractions
151560 Jojoba oil and its fractions
151590 Other fixed vegetable fats and fractions, nes
152110 Vegetable waxes
152190 Beeswax, other insect wax...
170220 Maple sugar and maple syrup
200320 Truffles, prepared or preserved ....
230810 Acorns and horse-chestnuts, for animal feeding
320110 Quebracho extract
320120 Wattle extract
320130 Oak or chestnut extract
320190 Tanning extracts of vegetable origin...
320300 Colouring matter of vegetable and animal origin...
330126 Essential oils of vetiver...
330129 Essential oils, nes
330130 Resinoids
330190 Concentrates of essential oils in fats ...
380510 Gum, wood or sulphate turpentine oils
400110 Natural rubber latex, in primary forms or in plates...
400121 Smoked sheets of natural rubber
400122 Technically specified natural rubber...
400129 Other natural rubber...
400130 Balata, gutta-percha...
450110 Natural cork, raw or simply spread
450190 Waste cork, crushed, granulated or ground
450200 Natural cork, debacked or roughly squared
450310 Corks and stoppers of natural cork
450390 Articles of natural cork, nes
450410 Blocks..., tiles... of agglomerated cork
450490 Articles of agglomerated cork, nes
460110 Plaits and similar products of plaiting materials
460120 Mats, mattings and screens of vegetable materials
460191 Vegetable plaiting material... in sheet form
460210 Articles of vegetable plaiting materials..
460290 Articles of plaiting materials...
Grand total
($ million)
Source: UNCTAD data base.
<title>Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry - Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry. Trade restrictions affecting international trade in non-wood forest products </title>
APPENDIX II
SUMMARY OF RESTRICTIONS ON NWFP TRADE IN THE EC MARKETS
HS Code (National line)
Product description^/
Tariff^/
Non-tariff measures description
Conventional
GSP
Autonomous
04090000 Natural honey
None
05100000 Ambergris, castoreum, civet and musk; cantharides, etc.
Wildlife protection^/
070951020 Mushrooms, fresh and chilled
None
07095200 Truffles, fresh or chilled
None
071290010 Bamboo shoots, whole, cut, sliced, broken or in powder
Health and safety regulations
08012000 Brazil nuts, fresh or dried
None
08023100 Walnuts in shell, fresh or dried
None
08024000 Chestnuts, fresh or dried
None
09061000 Cinnamon and cinnamon-tree flowers, neither crushed and ground
None
09081090 Other
None
09082010 Mace, neither crushed nor ground
None
09082090 Mace, crushed or ground
None
09109991 Other spices, neither crushed nor ground
None
09109999 Other spices, neither crushed nor ground
None
12112000 Ginseng roots, of a kind used in, pharmacy, perfumery, etc.
None
12119010 Pyrethrum
None
12119030 Tonquin beans
None
12119050 Cinchona bark
None
12121010 Locust beans
None
13011000 Lac
None
13012000 Natural gum arabic
None
13019000 Natural gums, resins, gum-resins and balsams
None
13021200 Liquorice sap and extract
None
14011000 Bamboos
None
15154000 Tung oil and its fractions
None
15156010 Raw jojoba oil
None
17022010 Maple sugar in solid from, containing added flavouring or colouring matter
Non-automatic licence
Agricultural levy
17022090 Maple sugar, other
Non-automatic licence
Agricultural levy
20032000 Truffles, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid
None
32019010 Sumach extract, vallonia extract
None
32019090 Other
None
32030011 Black cutch (Acacia catechu)
None
32030019 Other
None
33012610 Essential oils of vetiver, non-deterpentated
None
33012690 Essential oils of vetiver, deterpentated
None
33012911 Essential oils (not deterpenated)
None
33012931 Essential oils (deterpenated)
None
33012953 Essential oil of eucalyptus
None
33013000 Resinoids
None
33019010 Terpenic by-products of the deterpenation of essential oils
None
33019090 Other
None
38051010 Gum turpentine
None
38051030 Wood turpentine
None
38051090 Sulphate turpentine
None
40011000 Natural rubber latex, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strips
None
40012100 Smoked sheets of natural rubber
None
45011000 Natural cork, raw or simply prepared
None
46019140 Other
None
1/. Various special rates may apply for products from ACP, lesser-developed, Andean, EFTA and other countries.
2/. Add value equivalent, unless otherwise specified.
3/. Washington Convention on International Trade in Species of Wild Flora and Fauna Threatened by Extinction (CITES).
<title>Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry - Non-wood forest products for rural income and sustainable forestry. Trade restrictions affecting international trade in non-wood forest products </title>
<section>1</section>
APPENDIX III
SUMMARY OF RESTRICTIONS ON NWFP TRADE IN THE USA MARKETS
HS Code (National line)
Product description^/
Tariff^/
Non-tariff measures
MFN
GSP
Non-MFN
04090000 Natural honey 0.066^/ 0.0224 None
05100020 Ambergris, castoreum, civet and musk 8.00 20.00 None
06041000 Mosses and lichens for ornamental purposes, fresh, dried, etc. 0.00 0.00 None
070951020 Mushrooms, fresh and chilled 0.00 0.00 None
07095200 Truffles, fresh or chilled 0.00 0.00 None
08012000 Brazil nuts, fresh or dried 0.00 0.099 None
08024000 Chestnuts, fresh or dried 0.00 0.11^3/ None
08109040 Fruit nesi, fresh 3.40 0 35.00^/ Seasonal tariff high rates
09061000 Cinnamon and cinnamon-tree flowers, neither crushed and ground 0.00 0.00 None
09082020 Mace, Bombay or wild, ground 0.165 0 0.490 None
09082040 Mace, other than Bombay or wild mace 0.00 0.00 None
09109940 Origanum, other than crude or not manufactured 7.50 0 25.00 None
09109960 Spices, nesi 3.00 0 25.00 None
11062000 Flour and meal of sago 0.00 0.00 None
12112000 Ginseng roots, of a kind used in, pharmacy, perfumery, etc. 0.00 0.00 None
12119060 Tonka beans, of a kind used in perfumery, in pharmacy, or for insecticidal, fungicidal or similar purposes 0.066^3/ 0 0.550 None
12121000 Locust beans (including locust bean seeds), fresh or dried 0.00 0.00 None
13011000 Lac 0.00 0.00 None
13012000 Natural gum arabic 0.00 0.011 None
14011000 Bamboos
None
14012020 Rattans, in the rough or cut transversely into sections, of a kind used in plaiting
None
14012040 Rattans, other than those in the rough or cut transversely into sections, of a kind used in plaiting
None
14021000 Kapok
None
15154000 Tung oil and its fractions
None
15156000 Jojoba oil and its fractions
None
15211000 Vegetable waxes
None
15219040 Insect waxes, other than bleached beeswax, ... whether or not refined or coloured
None
17022040 Maple sugar and maple syrup, nesi
None
20032000 Truffles, prepared or preserved otherwise than by vinegar or acetic acid
None
32019020 Tanning extracts of canaigre, curupay, eucalyptus, larch, tara, myrobalan, sumac, divi-divi, gambier, hemlock, mangrove, urunday or valonia
None
32019050 Tanning extracts of vegetable origin nesi; tannins and their salts, ethers, esters and other derivatives
None
33013010 Prepared oleoresins consisting essentially of non-volatile components of the natural raw plant
None
33013050 Resinoids, nesi
None
33012600 Essential oils of vetiver
None
33012910 Essential oil of eucalyptus
None
33012920 Essential oils other than those of citrus fruits, nesi
None
38051000 Gum, wood or sulphate turpentine oils
None
40011000 Natural rubber latex, in primary forms or in plates, strips or sheets
None
1/. Various special rates may apply for products from Caribbean or other countries in free-trade areas.
2/. Add value equivalent, unless otherwise specified.
3/. $/Kg.
4/. Plus 0.028 $/kg.
5/. $/Kg.
<section>2</section>
APPENDIX IV
SUMMARY OF RESTRICTIONS ON NWFP TRADE IN THE JAPANESE MARKETS
HS Code (National line)
Product description^/
Tariff^/
Non-tariff measures
General
GSP
GATT bound
040900000 Natural honey
Health and safety regulations
051000200 Ambergris, castoreum, civet, cantharides, etc.
Health and safety regulations
060410000 Moses and lichens for ornamental purposes, fresh, dried, etc.
Health and safety regulations
070951020 Mushrooms, fresh or chilled
Health and safety regulations
070952000 Truffles, fresh or chilled
Health and safety regulations
080120000 Brazil nuts, fresh or dried
Health and safety regulations
080231000 Walnuts in shell, fresh or dried
Health and safety regulations
080240000 Chestnuts, fresh or dried
Health and safety regulations
080290400 Other nuts, fresh or dried
Health and safety regulations
081090020 Other fruits, fresh
Health and safety regulations
090610000 Cinnamon and cinnamon-tree flowers, neither crushed and ground
Health and safety regulations
090820100 Mace, put up in containers for retail sale
Health and safety regulations
090820210 Mace, neither crushed nor ground, not put up in containers for retail sale
Health and safety regulations
091099220 Other spices, crushed or ground, not put up in containers for retail sale
Health and safety regulations
110620110 Flour and meal of sago...
Health and safety regulations
121120010 Red ginseng
Health and safety regulations
121210000 Locust beans (including locust bean seeds), fresh or dried
Health and safety regulations
130110100 Shellac and other refined lacs
Health and safety regulations
130120000 Natural gum arabic
Health and safety regulations
130190091 Gum tragacanth
Health and safety regulations
130190099 Natural gums, resins, gum-resins and balsams, nes
Health and safety regulations
130232010 Locust bean gum
Health and safety regulations
140110000 Bamboos
Health and safety regulations
140120000 Rattans
Health and safety regulations
140210000 Kapok
Health and safety regulations
151540000 Tung oil and its fractions
Health and safety regulations
151560000 Jojoba oil and fractions
Health and safety regulations
152190099 Insect waxes, nes
Health and safety regulations
170220100 Maple sugar
Health and safety regulations; variable levies
170220200 Maple syrup
Health and safety regulations; variable levies
200320010 Truffles, prepared or preserved in air tight containers not more than 10 kg each
Health and safety regulations
200320020 Truffles, prepared or preserved, nes
Health and safety regulations
320190100 Tannins and their derivatives
Health and safety regulations
320190200 Tanning extracts of vegetable origin, nes
Health and safety regulations
320300100 Natural indigo and butter dyes
Health and safety regulations
33126000 Essential oils of vetiver (including concentrates and absolutes)
Health and safety regulations
330129110 Cassia oil
Health and safety regulations
330129120 Cedar oil
Health and safety regulations
330129220 Ho oil
Health and safety regulations
330130000 Resinoids
Health and safety regulations
380510000 Gum, wood or sulphate turpentine oils
None
400110010 Thermosensitive, electropositive and prevulcanised, of natural rubber latex
Health and safety regulations
400110090 Other natural rubber latex
Health and safety regulations
400121000 Smoked sheets of natural rubber
Health and safety regulations
400129000 Other natural rubber, in primary forms or in plates, etc, nes
Health and safety regulations
450110000 Natural cork, raw or simply prepared
Health and safety regulations
1/. Various special rates, or lower temporary rates may apply for many products.A number of products also face a consumption tax of 3% levied on the duty-paid value of the product.
2/. Add value equivalent, unless otherwise specified.
<section>3</section>
APPENDIX V
TARIFFS (IMPORT DUTY) FACING SELECTED NWFPs IN CHINA
HS Code
Description
Tariff^/
Non-tariff measures
MFN
General
Other
04100010 Edible bird's (salanganes') nests
None
04100020 Royal jelly, fresh
None
04100090 Edible products of animal origin, nes
None
05071000 Ivory; powder and waste, unworked
None
05100020 Ambergris, castoreum and civet
None
05100030 Musk
Import license; import inspection
12112010 American ginseng roots
Import license; import inspection
12112020 Wild ginseng roots...
Import inspection
12112090 Other ginseng roots, of a kind used in perfumery, pharmacy ...
Import inspection
13012000 Natural gum arabic
None
14011000 Bamboos
None
14021000 Kapok
None
14041000 Raw vegetable materials for dyeing and tanning
None
14049000 Vegetable products, nes
None
32030011 Natural indigo and products thereof
None
32030019 Colouring matter of vegetable origin, and preparations
None
32030020 Colouring mater of animal origin, and preparations
None
40012100 Smoked sheets of natural rubber
Import license; import inspection
MFN
General
Other
40013000 Balata, gutta-percha... and similar gums
Import inspection
45011000 Natural cork, raw or simply prepared
None
45020000 Natural cork, debacked or roughly squared
None
Source: UNCTAD data base.
1/. Add value equivalent, unless otherwise specified.
2/. Product tax and v.a.t.
3/. Industry and commerce consolidation tax.
<section>4</section>
APPENDIX VI
TARIFFS (IMPORT DUTY) FACING SELECTED NWFPs IN INDIA
HS Code
Description
Tariff^/
Non-tariff measures
Basic duty (MFN)
Basic duty (GEN)
Auxiliary duty of customs
051000 Ambergris, castoreum, civet and musk
Non-automatic license^/
11062100 Shea nuts
None
121110 Liquorice roots
Non-automatic license^2/
121120 Ginseng roots
Non-automatic license^2/
130120 Natural gum arabic
None
130190 Natural gums, resins, gum-resins and balsams
Non-automatic license^/
320120 Wattle extract
None
320190 Tanning extracts of vegetable origin...., nes
Non-automatic license^3/
320126 Essential oils of vetiver....
None
330190 Concentrates of essential oils in fats.....
Non-automatic license^3/
380510 Gum, wood or sulphate turpentine oils
Non-automatic license^3/
450190 Waste cork; crushed, granulated or ground
None
Source: UNCTAD data base.
1/. Add value equivalent, unless otherwise specified.
2/. Negative list.
3/. Negative list ( applied only to a part of tariff line)
