<title>Forests, fuel and the future - Wood energy for sustainable development - Forestry topics report no. 5. Forests, fuels and the future: Wood energy for sustainable development </title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Clarity from crisis
In the 1970s and early 1980s, environment and development specialists repeatedly warned that forest loss through overcutting of wood for fuel threatened to damage soils, deplete water resources and force needy rural people to migrate from the land as their livelihoods collapsed. In some areas, notably Africa's Sahel, Brazil's Northeast and the highlands of Nepal, there were signs that this feared 'fuelwood crisis' might already have arrived.
International efforts were accordingly set in motion to find ways to boost production, to cut back household consumption of wood and wood-based fuels and to find other renewable power sources to guard against future household energy shortfalls. The 1981 UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, convened in Nairobi, Kenya, set an important lead towards these goals.
The resulting Nairobi Programme of Action (NPA) called, among other things, for new monitoring and assessment efforts to gauge the use of 'traditional' energy sources such as fuelwood and charcoal. It also recommended global steps to develop new and renewable sources of energy to replace oil and other fossil fuels, also thought at that time to be under imminent threat of a supply crisis. Although some assumptions on which these efforts were based did not fully reflect reality, the NPA led to a more comprehensive understanding of energy production and use, particularly in relation to wood energy.
Without doubt, fuelwood overcutting can multiply economic, environmental and social ills. But in most cases it tends to be an incidental sign rather than a primary cause of forest loss. Furthermore, it is now clear that woodfuels can be - and often are - produced and harvested along sustainable lines, to the lasting benefit of forests and all who depend on them. A better-informed, more progressive outlook on woodfuels and environment has also been nourished by fresh ideas about wood energy's potential as an environmentally sound power source for industry and, in all its applications, as a key to new sources of income and livelihood.
The global energy picture has changed, too. The 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) pledged to achieve, in Chapter 11:
'... efficient utilization and assessment to recover full valuation of the goods and services provided by forests, forest lands and woodlands'
and in Article 2 of the Framework Convention on Climate Change:
'stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system'.
Many development researchers look to sustainable production of biomass energy, including wood energy, to help tackle this challenge by reducing the use of fossil-based fuels and exploiting the natural carbon cycling function of plant life to the full.
This report discusses these trends by reference to examples from many countries which suggest viable ways to realise the development potential of wood energy without environmental or social drawbacks. It describes a changing role for wood energy in a changing world where fuelwood and wood-based fuels need no longer be associated with poverty or underdevelopment but could rank among viable modern options open to energy users everywhere.
A concluding section outlines development approaches that could, in the view of FAO, help deliver these benefits and overcome prevailing natural resource limitations and technical or institutional constraints.
David Harcharik
Assistant Director General
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1 Key trends and issues
Common property and commodity
After Nairobi
Changing perceptions
Lessons and limitations
The UNCED agenda
The scope of this report
Common property and commodity
Two in five people worldwide rely on fuelwood or charcoal as their main or sole sources of domestic energy for heating or cooking - mostly the latter - and users are expected to number 3000 million by the end of the century. Of today's 2000 million users, some 1000 million face fuel shortages as supplies of woodfuels dwindle, among them 100 million who already experience virtual 'fuelwood famine'.
Alternatives to woodfuels are often scarce in rural areas remote from national power grids or centres of distribution of fossil-based fuels such as kerosene or coal. Yet even where such conventional or 'convenience' fuels are available, many cannot afford them or simply prefer to use woodfuels for specific purposes.
An earlier report in this series, Wood For Energy, detailed the negative consequences of wood energy shortage, the importance of defending forests and forest lands from overcutting for fuel, and a number of precautions and remedies relevant to these problems.
In particular, it pointed out that intensive household use of fuelwood as a 'common property resource' goes largely unregulated and poses a high risk both to trees and to the people who depend on them for their livelihood, accelerating a cycle of forest depletion, stagnating local economies and worsening poverty (see Figure 1).
An important aim of the 1981 UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, held in Nairobi, Kenya, was to seek ways to break free of this seemingly inevitable chain of cause and effect. The resulting Nairobi Programme of Action (NPA) identified the frailest link in the chain as the subsistence user for he, or (far more often) she, was obliged to use woodfuels as a matter of expediency, not out of consumer preference or concern for environmental care.
The architects of the NPA reasoned that regulatory levers could not be expected to change patterns of energy use and production in the neediest communities most vulnerable to fuelwood shortage, unless reinforced by incentives at the point of use. They recommended moves to bring subsistence woodfuel use under control by introducing new forest management measures, intermediate technologies, production methods and material incentives.
FIGURE 1 The 'fuelwood famine' syndrome
In circumstances where forest resources were severely depleted, the NPA called for efforts to avoid fuel shortage and forest loss by:
o adopting alternative fuels such as crop residues or biogas;
o promoting more efficient stoves and kilns to save wood and charcoal;
o planting fast-growing trees in 'energy plantations' and woodlots; or by a combination of all these means.
Many of the activities stemming from the NPA also responded to more general concern over future energy supplies worldwide, at a time when energy futures were still showing the effects of the abrupt rise in oil prices brought about by the pricing policies of the OPEC cartel in the preceding decade.
In 1981, prices appeared set to rise steeply once more, this time in response to predictions (widely publicised in the Global 2000 report and elsewhere) that fossil fuel reserves could run dangerously low by the end of the century. To mitigate this risk, many countries were prepared to invest heavily in research and development into renewable, alternative energy sources and bring them into production on an industrial scale.
For developing countries, the threat of further oil price rises gave maximum cause for concern. Trapped in many cases in circumstances of slow or negative economic growth, foreign indebtedness and current trade deficit, their industrial development prospects were set at a critical disadvantage by any further rise in the cost of fossil fuel imports.
GOALS OF THE NPA
Specific actions called for in the Nairobi Programme of Action in respect of fuelwood and charcoal included:
ASSESSMENT AND PLANNING
o Assess and evaluate forest resources in order to estimate their present and future sustainable yield of fuelwood to identify deficit areas and areas in which reforestation is both urgent and practicable.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND DEMONSTRATION
o Intensify and/or establish basic and applied research on more productive tree species;
o Support and promote work aimed at improving the efficiency of stoves and cooking utensils, develop low-cost stoves and promote their widespread use, taking into account social and cultural acceptability;
o Improve the pre-processing of fuels, including those presently wasted, such as twigs, branches and dry leaves, for use in direct combustion and other processes and improve the conversion efficiency of charcoal making;
o Develop promising fuelwood and charcoal substitutes or supplements utilizing other renewable sources of energy.
TRANSFER, ADOPTION AND APPLICATION OF MATURE TECHNOLOGIES
o Improve and/or establish forest management practices;
o Improve and/or establish reforestation and afforestation programmes with selected and tested species;
o Promote and support programmes, projects and activities to establish large-scale plantations, including afforestation in deficit areas and woodlots;
o Establish distribution, control and pricing policies and improve conversion and utilization technologies, such as charcoal production, gasification, kilns and ovens.
When it came to developing renewable or alternative energy sources, however, many of them possessed substantial natural advantages, not least abundant forests, fertile soils and sunlight. New wood energy applications were regarded by many of the policy makers and researchers involved in shaping national energy plans after Nairobi as an answer not only to localised fuel shortages and deforestation but also to national anxiety over trade and development prospects.
Though not necessarily incompatible, these diverging agendas introduced the risk of creating a confusion of aims, ways and means when the time came to implement the NPA recommendations. Looking back on achievements after Nairobi, it is now evident that this and other structural inconsistencies reduced the Programme's impact.
After Nairobi
Today, more than 13 years on from the summit meeting that gave rise to it, the NPA has led to constructive results around the world. But many of the predictions on which its goals were founded have not been borne out by events and some of its assumptions were based on incomplete knowledge of the true situation 'on the ground'.
The expected local and global energy shortfalls never arrived not, at least, in the crisis proportions foreseen in 1981. Fears of oil shortages and further rapid price increases were dispelled by the discovery of major new oil resources, notably in the North Sea and southeast Asia. Oil prices rose only slightly, then fell in the mid-1980s to decidedly modest levels. In many developed countries, this easing of prices was held to justify postponing development (by which the NPA had set such great store) of renewable or alternative energy options. Later in the decade, world recession also slowed growth in demand for industrial energy.
As for the predicted fuelwood crisis, this threat also receded, though only partly as a result of adoption of alternative energy strategies of the kind urged in the NPA. The main reasons for the turnaround lay elsewhere, in profound changes in the way social issues and environmental factors relating to wood energy use are generally perceived and analysed.
FIGURE 2 Energy consumption by regions in 1988
South Saharan countries consumed the least energy (120Mtoe), whereas Asian countries consumed the most (1350Mtoe). Latin America and the Caribbean consumed 700Mtoe and Emena 650Mtoe. Traditional fuels provided the energy needs of different regions in the following percentages: Africa, 60 per cent; Asia, 40 per cent; Latin America and the Caribbean, 30 per cent; Emena, 10 per cent. It is important to note that in many individual countries, the proportion taken by traditional energy is even higher than these percentages.
Source: Data on conventional energy (excluding woodfuels), World Bank 1990; traditional energy (woodfuel and biomass) data are from various sources.
FIGURE 3 The general world energy situation in 1980 and 1990
In the early eighties, during the second energy crisis, the total energy consumption of developing countries (including China) was 1740Mtoe: about 70 per cent of the world's population was responsible for about 24 per cent of world energy consumption. By the end of the decade energy consumption in developing countries grew to 29 per cent, but consumption per capita remains very low compared to that of people in developed countries.
Source: Data from CEC, 1990
Changing perceptions
This shift in attitude resulted largely from findings elicited under the NPA itself. First and foremost, monitoring returns cast doubt on the premise that large-scale deforestation arose as a primary or typical result of overcutting forests for fuelwood.
The new facts, on the contrary, indicated that overcutting was usually a secondary consequence of a more general failure to care for diminishing forest lands and resources of all kinds, to cope with rising levels of household need. Evidence also emerged that growth in consumer demand for fuelwood and charcoal in many developing countries centred more on urban than on rural areas, though the NPA's provisions focused mainly on the latter.
Supply inventories showed that much of the fuelwood and charcoal in current use was obtained not from forests but from scattered tree populations on farms, at waysides and in wastelands. These stocks did not feature in the forestry data used to predict woodfuel supply and demand prior to the consultations that led to the NPA.
In the wake of the general reappraisal that followed upon these insights, the use of fuelwood and charcoal in domestic situations, industry or commerce began to be spoken of once more in a positive language of development opportunity and challenge rather than in terms of apprehension or implied apology for the subsistence user.
Forestry planners and researchers have long reasoned that if the economic potential of forest products is not fully realised in sustainable ways, forests are liable to be ousted by more lucrative or expedient land uses. Most specialists now agree that wood energy production need be no exception to the range of sustainable forestry outputs and that, moreover, communities enjoying open access to forests and the right to use and manage them, normally adopt careful and protective attitudes towards woodfuel resources.
Perceptions have changed on other fronts, too. New and extended industrial and technological applications for wood energy have attracted growing investment interest in many industrialised and rapidly industrialising countries. In a number of developed countries, where access to electricity and other 'conventional' power sources is taken for granted, wood has gained approval as an alternative domestic heat-source or speciality fuel, offering distinctive environmental and energy-saving advantages.
On all sides, it is now apparent that wood and wood-based fuels merit open-minded consideration as technically mature, environmentally sound, economically viable and culturally acceptable options for modern energy development around the world. The most important lesson that remains to be learned from the NPA experience is the importance of developing these options in a coordinated way, in keeping with the ecological and socioeconomic realities that prevail from place to place.
Lessons and limitations
The diverse activities called for under the NPA varied in their appeal to the state forestry departments, non-governmental community development organizations and industrial development agencies that were chiefly called on to implement them. These efforts formed part of the same programme of action, employed materials from the same source, the forest, and transformed them in the interests of the same intended beneficiary, the citizen. Yet the connection between them was far from obvious.
WOOD ENERGY AND SUSTAINABLE FORESTRY
Wood energy and sustainable forestry
Social (or community) forestry, environmentally sound forest management and multiple-use economic forestry are widely favoured practices and methodologies that are essentially compatible and therefore appear set to evolve into a new sustainable forestry order that amalgamates all three. This shift could affect future patterns of wood energy production and use worldwide. By adding value to the standing forest, sustainable production and use of woodfuels can serve all three interests, while the same triangle of checks and balances should, in turn, keep wood energy production and harvesting within sustainable limits.
Forestry departments concentrated on fuelwood plantations, improved tree varieties and little else. Energy researchers and industrial engineers fixed their sights on new technologies for gasification or pyrolysis, paying little heed to mechanisms of supply or end-use outside the mill or factory gate. NGOs focused their efforts mainly on small-scale community woodlots and improved cooking stoves.
It is not surprising that the overall impact of these activities on the wood energy situation has lacked coherence. Many individual successes have been recorded but there is little evidence of improvements of general note. How can this record be improved on?
An accumulation of FAO research suggests that effective wood energy management requires a coordinated 'systems approach' in which all actions relevant to wood energy production and use support and reinforce one another. Another key point is that there is no standard blueprint for these systems: planning moves should be geared to realities specific to the area in focus.
Among these factors are constraints and limitations always liable to be ranged against wood energy development, including limits on the capacity of the primary resource, the forest, to support intensified energy-related use. In many areas of semi-arid or mountainous regions such use must be ruled out entirely or strictly limited in view of environmental conditions. There are, on the other hand, many more situations where scarcity of forests and trees is not a limiting factor and the bioenergy resource is to a certain extent under-utilized.
Foremost among other common constraints, particularly in developing countries, are lack of the technical capacity, institutional facilities, regulatory mechanisms and educational inputs needed to make the best use of wood energy resources. Lack of political or financial support for wood energy development is another obstacle. It reflects a perception commonly held among policy makers, investors and developers that wood energy is a low-grade or archaic power source by comparison with 'conventional' fuels. This outlook is generally more prevalent in industrialised than in developing countries, but is on the retreat as new factors relating to environment enter the picture.
FIGURE 4 A systems approach to wood energy development
A systems approach to wood energy production and use means giving rein to 'feedback loops' linking forests, trees and people in a mutually supportive and interactive chain of benefits. Development policies and strategies should be aimed at enabling benefits and feedback to flow freely in both directions, to sustainable effect and in measured relation to topical circumstances.
The UNCED agenda
Attitudes began to shift in the mid-1980s with expanding global awareness of the environmental drawbacks of prevailing patterns of energy production, distribution and use around the world.
Disproportionate consumption of fossil-based fuels in the global 'North', coupled with forest loss in the 'South', were identified as major contributory causes of global warming - excess accumulation of carbon dioxide and other 'greenhouse gases' in the atmosphere, leading to raised air temperatures. Climatologists have warned that this 'greenhouse effect' will set the world at risk of potentially catastrophic climate change in the early 21st century.
Besides introducing a new global imperative for 'greening' energy production and use, the UNCED rationale provides a much-needed framework for integrating localised actions relevant to wood energy production and consumption in different sectors, including forestry, local government, commerce and community development programmes managed by voluntary organizations or self-help groups. It also adds point to efforts to upgrade the quality of life and the surroundings of people living under unstable environmental conditions, not least refugee groups and the urban poor.
THE RIO AGREEMENTS
At the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, a Framework Convention on Climate Change was approved by a majority of UN Member States, pledging worldwide stabilization (ideally by the year 2005) of greenhouse gas emissions at levels no higher than those then current. A number of other agreements and guidelines were adopted, including an instrument for the conservation of biodiversity, a general Rio Declaration spelling out links between environment and development, an advisory code of Forestry Principles and an overall summary of sustainable development targets for the 21st Century, Agenda 21.
In setting emission quotas, the Framework Convention on Climate Change allowed countries with less industry but abundant forest vegetation additional credit for the function their forests serve as greenhouse gas 'sinks' or carbon fixation assets. All countries undertook to reduce their use of fossil fuels under self-imposed emission controls assessed in proportion to ongoing production. Among measures contemplated after Rio was greater use of biomass fuels derived from plants. Carbon dioxide emissions from the combustion of such fuels are, in effect, cancelled out at least partly by the carbon fixation function of any energy crop during growth and the further storage or sequestration of carbon as wood.
Since, over time, trees perform these parallel functions in greater measure than field crops, the new imperative towards climate regulation promises to set wood energy production and use to the fore of future energy development scenarios, and strengthens a general case for developing forests sustainably for many uses. Putting land to 'energy farming' use under tree cover can deliver other environmental benefits, such as soil, water and habitat conservation and -in some situations reclamation of wastelands. Moreover, using wood as a fuel usually creates less chemical air pollution than burning, coal. diesel or gasoline.
The scope of this report
This report highlights new opportunities for wood energy use in rural and urban neighbourhoods in developing countries and in industry, commerce and public utility management, without harming the regenerative capacity of trees and forests or reducing their significance as safeguards over soil nutrients, water resources and biodiversity. It places an equal emphasis on situations where forest depletion and fuelwood shortage are not evident constraints, and on those where openings exist to reverse forest loss by enhancing the forest's value as a renewable energy resource.
It offers examples of wood energy development in rural and urban, domestic and industrial, developed and less developed contexts. It surveys the desiderata wood energy can help fulfil and catalogues mature and emerging wood energy technologies. Finally, it sketches the role FAO foresees for wood energy in sustainable development.
Wood energy use and production are no panacea for the world's ills. They are often associated with environmental, economic and human problems. Yet, managed sustainably, they can also offer valuable solutions, benefits and safeguards. That promise is the main topic that this report seeks to explore and affirm.
'Agriculture objectives [include efforts] to, not later than the year 2000... initiate and encourage a process of environmentally sound energy transition in rural communities, from unsustainable energy sources, to structured and diversified energy sources by making available new and renewable sources of energy.'
Agenda 21, Chapter 14
'To achieve sustainable development and a higher quality of life for all people, States should reduce and eliminate unsustainable patterns of production and consumption and promote appropriate demographic policies.'
Rio Declaration, Principle 8
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2 Wood energy and livelihoods
Fuelwood and charcoal
Commercial uses
Woodfuels in the North
Conflicts and constraints
Substitution and energy mix
New applications
Woodfuel flows
Fuelwood and charcoal
Fuelwood and charcoal, the commonest forms of woodfuel, are used widely as household power sources in poor rural neighbourhoods in developing countries. In these areas, wood is sometimes traded informally or in the marketplace but the majority of users harvest it as a 'common property resource' from forests and from scattered pockets or belts of trees at field margins or roadsides and on waste or common ground. Nearly all the world's woodfuel harvest is used for cooking and this use will remain the priority of most wood energy consumers.
Worldwide, around 1.4 billion tonnes of biomass (mainly fuelwood and charcoal) were used to produce domestic energy in 1990. This statistic accounted for just over half of the wood harvested for all uses, including timber, board and pulp. Yet it was still less than 14 per cent of total world primary energy; a frugal outlay compared, for instance, with oil or coal use in generating electricity for household consumption. It is still little compared with fossil fuels but is considered one of the big renewable energy resources of the next century.
Besides directly supporting the livelihoods of subsistence users, fuelwood and charcoal also create income and jobs when traded as market commodities. Charcoal is often more sought-after in trade as it burns more efficiently than fuelwood and is easier to transport and store. Even so, its manufacture would in many cases be wasteful almost to the point of cancelling out this added value if its raw material cost was not low or negligible.
Commercial uses
In developing countries, trade in fuelwood and charcoal occurs mainly in or around urban areas or beside highways and other transportation routes. Urban fuelwood or charcoal use is not confined to domestic cooking or heating but is often essential to small and medium scale trades or industries such as baking, brewing, textile manufacture and brickmaking. Charcoal also has specific uses in heavy industry, notably in steel and alloy production. In Brazil, some 6 million tonnes of charcoal is produced every year for this purpose alone. In rural 'cottage' industries and major agricultural industries, too, fuelwood or charcoal can have viable and valuable economic uses, for instance in drying or curing tobacco, coffee and tea.
Where such businesses exist they create a consistent fuelwood demand that promises regular revenues and employment. These 'commercial' applications of wood energy can thus support new centres of rural settlement and bring beneficial aspects of market forces into play.
Unless systematically geared to woodfuel production by appropriate supply-side management, however, they can also exert a heavy strain on nearby forests, woodlands and plantations - and harm their own economic prospects. Compared with these intensive and sustained requirements, rural consumption of fuelwood and charcoal as subsistence fuels generally has a diffuse and sporadic impact on the natural condition of forests and trees, unless less sustainable land use practices enter the picture.
Reducing fuelwood and charcoal consumption through efficient conversion devices that put available wood energy to more frugal use not only takes pressure off the natural resource. It also means industry and commerce can afford to pay more for less wood and thus organised woodfuel production becomes more profitable.
FIGURE 5 Fuelwood and charcoal: the world picture
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
REGIONS/ COUNTRIES
CONVENTIONAL
FUELWOOD (INCLUDING CHARCOAL) **FAO**
BIOMASS (ALL FORMS)
FUELWOOD + CONVENTIONAL
BIOMASS + CONVENTIONAL
TOTAL AVERAGE PER CAPITA ENERGY CONSUMPTION
BIOMASS % TOTAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION
(I+II)
(I+III)
(IV/POP.)
(IV/POP.)
(II/IV)
(III/V)
(PJ)
(PJ)
(PJ)
(PJ)
(PJ)
(GJ/CAP)
(GJ/CAP)
WORLD
INDUSTRIALISED
N AMERICA
EUROPE
USSR
ASIA
OCEANIA
DEVELOPING
AFRICA
C AMERICA
S AMERICA
ASIA
OCEANIA
FAO fuelwoed + charcoal consumption is compared with a total biomass consumption for each country
Source: Forestry Statictics Today for Tomorrow 1961-1991
FIGURE 6 Woodfuels and forest resources: national examples
Source: WEC Survey of Energy Resources, 1992
Woodfuels in the North
Though more than 70 per cent of woodfuel use is in developing countries, it plays a significant role even in relatively affluent countries of the 'North'. Here, the use of wood to fuel domestic heating boilers and for other small-scale applications is growing fast. Distinctive commercial niches or advantageous social and economic 'trade-offs' have been found which make wood a speciality fuel or energy-saving option. In France, for instance, the amount of wood used for heating in 1992 was 22 million cubic metres, almost 43 per cent of the country's wood harvest. In addition to household stoves or hearths, it was used to power industrial boilers and kilns, district heating plants or central heating boilers in public buildings and leisure facilities such as tourist lodges.
It is important to note, however, that such uses have not emerged against a background of under-development or competition for natural resources. They have evolved in countries where forests and woodlands are generally under-utilized and where people can choose among a range of energy options, especially for cooking, and have the purchasing power to buy them. Rates of population growth are relatively stable and pressure to extend farmlands has eased accordingly.
Conflicts and constraints
In many developing countries, on the other hand, resource conflicts and constraints can spoil or complicate the sustainable production and use of woodfuels.
In particular, demand for these fuels in and around towns and cities can effect rural livelihoods and environmental stability in outlying areas, where the living resource is harvested. In Somalia, for example, the inhabitants of the capital city, Mogadishu, used around 42000 tonnes (about half a tonne each) of woodfuels in 1983, mainly as charcoal. Some 17000 tonnes were consumed for domestic purposes and the rest for industrial uses or in the service sector - hospitals, schools, the armed forces, prisons and the like. The concentrated urban purchasing power of large cities such as Mogadishu makes it worthwhile for traders to transport fuels there from rural areas; thus woodfuel resources are consequently depleted at ever increasing distances from the city.
ATTITUDES IN ADDIS
Recent investigations in Ethiopia commissioned by the International Labour Organization reveal that more than 10000 women and children earn a living as wood gatherers and bearers, walking long distances to supply urban users in the capital, Addis Ababa, with bundles of firewood. Around 30 per cent of the city's regular woodfuel needs are met in this way.
'Attitude studies' showed that the women are conscious of the dangers of overcutting and the need to conserve forest resources. They are also dissatisfied with the poor cash returns from carrying fuelwood, the heavy strain of the physical labour involved and continuous harassment from the authorities, as their activity is technically illegal.
The study concluded that interventions are needed to make fuelwood delivery a legalised part of a sustainable forest management and woodfuel supply system. This should offer adequate rewards to carriers, sufficient fuel supplies to meet the basic energy needs of city dwellers, new labour-saving transport infrastructure, and new forestry measures to ensure a renewable energy harvest from trees in the city's vicinity.
This example reflects growing consciousness, at most levels, of systemic connections between sustainable forest management and the provision of sustainable livelihoods for people who use, produce and supply fuelwood and other forest fuels.
Exploitation of woodlands round Mogadishu is subject to strict official regulations, which allow only trees above a certain size to be cut, a measure designed to aid regeneration. But monitoring and enforcement of these regulations has been lax and people living near the city's main fuel supply areas now complain that the land is becoming devegetated, eroded and infertile. The cost of land restoration will not be met by the charcoal producers: they can simply afford to move away to find new sources of wood.
In this and many similar situations, the worth of fuelwood and charcoal as supports to life and trade is undermined by the adverse effects of excessive woodcutting on the land, on forests, on the sustainability of livelihoods and on rural community interests.
Various measures have been proposed to mitigate this effect but none has proved ideal. Prominent among them is the introduction of improved 'controlled combustion' stoves that cook more efficiently while using less fuel. Designed for simple construction from low-cost local materials, the new stoves have become a regular feature of household life in many areas where they have been promoted. They offer health advantages over smoky open hearths as well as gains in terms of nutrition and food hygiene. Yet they require some capital outlay on their manufacture, operation and maintenance, and cannot always cater to local cooking techniques and dietary preferences, hence their adoption has not been general.
Another noteworthy development is the introduction of schemes and incentives to produce and use more charcoal. Converting wood to charcoal is an inefficient application of woodfuel resources, yet charcoal's high thermal efficiency (around twice that of wood) and market value may justify sacrificing wood to charcoal-making in a ratio of up to 5:1. Low transport costs and ease of storage make further amends. But many experts are unconvinced of the wisdom of further promoting charcoal as an answer to domestic fuel needs.
On the production side, steps have been taken in many countries to enlarge the available stock of wood for energy production by establishing large-scale fuelwood plantations as extensions of existing forestry or agroforestry programmes. Small community woodlots run on a self-help basis to meet the requirements of specific districts or villages have also been encouraged, some in combination with charcoal production facilities. Many larger 'energy plantations' have failed to match their expected production goals, however, while the upkeep of village woodlots has often proved problematic.
Plans have also been introduced to improve the supply and distribution of wood and charcoal, from areas where woodfuel forest resources abound, to users whose energy problems are harder to solve by local means. Forestry residues and sawmill wastes can, for example, be chipped and converted to charcoal for mass sale to urban households or for general distribution. In practice, however, such outputs rarely reach the domestic user and are more often retained for recycling within industry or simply wasted.
Substitution and energy mix
In situations where land or water availability and other limiting factors make expanded production or supply of wood unrealistic, efforts have been made to utilize alternative or substitute energy sources, such as processed crop wastes or biogas from manure.
In regions where historic processes of deforestation have effectively removed fuelwood and charcoal from common use, as in some semi-arid areas of India and China, these substitutes have long since become the household energy staple. But their use as fuel can rob the land of vital soil nutrients. Rather than developing local alternatives, many countries have staked massive central investment in schemes to modernise energy use by distributing coal, kerosene and other fossil-based fuels nationwide at heavily subsidised rates, or by laying on rural electrification schemes that connect even the most isolated of villages to national power grids.
Such schemes incur heavy costs and often create environmental dilemmas. But their chief disadvantage is that they can reduce local self-reliance and fail to benefit the neediest members of society, who cannot pay even for cheap grid power and certainly not for the amount of power required for cooking. In practice, moreover, demand for fuelwood and other biofuels continues to grow even among income-earning groups that enjoy access to a number of commercial energy sources.
Wherever a choice of energy sources and uses exists, households and businesses will usually improvise the energy 'cocktail' that best suits their needs, tastes and circumstances. This variegated energy mix is often a cornerstone of the informal economic sector on which the functioning of many societies depends.
In Bangladesh, for example, though most towns have mains gas supplies and many households are connected, large numbers of urban householders nevertheless prefer to use traditional solid fuels and charcoal for cooking, as gas supply and service costs are high. Biomass in various forms including fuelwood and charcoal still provided some 70 per cent (519 PJ) of the country's entire consumption of energy in 1988, compared with 220 PJ from fossil-based fuels, mainly diesel and gas.
In the quest for sustainable livelihoods, such versatility is more often an asset than a liability. So, too, is a capacity to mix available fuels in a more literal sense. Wood or charcoal can be key ingredients in fuel mixtures or 'interfuels' which, even in rural areas, extend the range of energy choices significantly.
In parts of Sudan, for instance, fuel briquettes or pellets made from compressed sugarcane waste (bagasse) and briquettes from cotton stalks became widely available as woodfuel substitutes in the 1980s. Such products often fail to gain wide popularity but substitution can take some pressure off forest resources by catering to the needs of commercial users. The substitutes allow woodfuel use to be retained or resumed in places either wholly or as part of interfuels, incorporating tree litter, cattle dung, bagasse and charcoal in various permutations.
Substitution of fuelwood and charcoal by any means must be carefully evaluated before policy decisions are made, in view of the impact such changes could have on communities that lack the purchasing power to take advantage of alternative commodities.
One principal feature that stands out from the experiences of the past decade is the continuing viability of fuelwood and charcoal as convenient, appropriate and popular energy 'carriers' for various modern uses, commercial or non-commercial, in many parts of the world.
Far from treating them as anachronisms, to be replaced in due course by more sophisticated energy sources, it makes sense to factor them into energy planning at all levels of technical and economic development and to take proper steps now to safeguard future wood energy resources in the form of living forests and trees.
New applications
In addition to fuelwood, charcoal and solid fuel mixtures that include wood in one form or another, new wood energy technologies of outstanding potential for sustainable development are now emerging in developed and developing countries alike.
They include wood-fired combined heat and power (CHP) systems and decentralised power plants that provide competitive and reliable electricity for household and other uses on a village scale, at a cost broadly comparable with that of unsubsidised grid power.
These and other new forms of decentralised energy production from wood are described in greater detail later in this report. Modern applications of woodfuels in industry will also be outlined and evaluated. All have some bearing, directly or indirectly, on the creation and maintenance of livelihoods for individuals and families, as well as on economic growth and environmental care. The essence of sustainable development thinking is that these factors are not separate but mutually inclusive. Planners, decision makers and achievers now face the challenge of rebuilding policies and practices to take heed of all three.
PARAMETERS AND DEFINITIONS
In 1993, the international committee appointed to follow up the NPA recommended that the main objectives of any new programme should be to:
o promote concerted action by the international community to assist developing countries in their energy transition, in which their forest biomass plays a key role in fostering their economic development and improving the welfare of their populations;
o and develop sustainable wood energy systems for developed and developing countries to meet the energy needs of their communities as a way to reduce the unbalanced emission of carbon dioxide and so combat global warming and acid rain effects.
'Sustainable' is a term to which many diverging definitions have been attached: 'sustainable wood energy systems' are defined in the context of this report as:
systems for producing, extracting and using wood or wood-based products for non-commercial or commercial purposes as energy sources in households, businesses or industries, in quantities and ways that do not harm forest and woodland ecosystems or reduce their reproductive and regenerative capacity over time.
FAO regards it as axiomatic that the needs and wishes of all communities and social groups already involved in wood energy production and use, including the poorest and least empowered among them, should be consulted and their participation in shaping and implementing development measures actively encouraged.
In some cases, where crop and agro-industrial residues are available, such as rice husks, groundnut shells, sugarcane bagasse or cotton stalks, these can be substituted for woodfuels as feedstock for generating electricity, or formed into solid fuel briquettes for industrial and household use.
FIGURE 7 Pattern of fuelwood flow
Source: Woodfuel Flows. RWEDP. 1994
FIGURE 8 Pattern of charcoal flow
Source: Woodfuel Flows, RWEDP, 1994
<section>4</section>
Woodfuel flows
To identify policy gaps that affect the supply of woodfuels in the forestry sector, more information is needed about where woodfuels originate, where and how they are processed and used, how they get there and what they are worth at each stage. In an attempt to clarify such woodfuel flows, studies have been conducted by and for the World Bank, UNDP, ESCAP and FAO in Pakistan, Indonesia, the Philippines and other countries in the RWEDP (Regional Wood Energy Development Programme) network, as well as those involved in ESMAP and RPTES (see overleaf).
The studies discriminate between forest and non-forest woodfuel sources, commercial and non-commercial uses, different harvesting approaches, policies and regulations affecting woodfuel flows and the trading and transport channels by which they are delivered to the consumer (see Figures 7 and 8).
These variables also differ emphatically from place to place. For example, fuelwood harvesting from state-owned forests (the dominant form of forest ownership in RWEDP countries) is subject to a chequered variety of regulations and customs.
In Myanmar, trees from government-controlled forests destined for fuelwood or charcoal production are marked by Forest Department personnel and permits are issued to allow woodcutters to harvest the marked trees. In Pakistan, the Forest Department harvests and sells woodfuels through open auctions of lots sorted into species and sizes, each with different prices. Argentina and Brazil's Forest Departments issue permits to trading organizations to remove woodfuels in certain areas, often in conjunction with timber permits or concessions.
In all cases, an unknown amount of unauthorized woodfuel extraction takes place. In some countries, local people are allowed to collect dead wood and litter from the forest for their own use, although much of it is then sold.
ESMAP
The Joint UNDP/World Bank Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme (ESMAP) was launched in 1983 to implement energy reforms and ensure that proposed investments in the energy sector represented efficient use of resources. Following extensive reorganization of the Programme in 1990, today's ESMAP aims to assist governments, donors and potential investors in identifying, funding and implementing economically and environmentally sound energy strategies.
ESMAP is governed by a consultative group chaired by the World Bank's Vice President for Finance and Private Sector Development, and advised by a Technical Advisory Group (TAG) of independent energy experts who review the Programme's strategic agenda, work programme and other concerns. ESMAP is staffed by engineers, energy planners and economists from the Industry and Energy Department of the World Bank. The Director of this department is also responsible for administering ESMAP.
ESMAP is a cooperative effort supported by the United Nations, the European Union, Organization of American States, Latin American Energy Organization, and around 20 independently contributing donor countries.
REVIEW OF POLICIES IN THE TRADITIONAL ENERGY SECTOR (RPTES)
Since May 1993, the World Bank and the Government of the Netherlands Cooperative Programme, launched a project to assist five African countries, Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger, Senegal and the Gambia, with a view to improving understanding of the dynamic forces that characterise their Traditional Energy Sector. Reviews of existing policies, programmes and on-going projects reveal that data regarding woodfuel collection, cutting and conversion, transport and trading and end use, are inconsistent and fragmentary These processes need to be better charted before the value, supply, demand and uses of woodfuels can be justly determined and trends monitored so that policies more responsive to sustainable economic use can be designed and implemented in a coordinated or planned manner.
FIGURE 9 Thinking globally, acting locally
'Classical forestry and social forestry can co-exist: if not, classical forestry should give way to social forestry... This should be done by putting equity before economy... The issue of 'favouring many before one' should come first before the issue of economy of scale or financial capability.'
R. Laitalainen and M. Boita, Royal Forest Department, Thailand
Although fuelwood supplies from the official forestry sector are the least difficult to quantify, their real extent, value and end-use remains uncertain. Greater uncertainty can be expected in the case of supplies from farms, waysides and other sources outside major forest preserves.
Overall, the RWEDP studies suggest that demand for woodfuels is likely to increase with rising population levels. This prospect may well be advantageous to ordinary households and small businesses in developing countries - and to national exchequers.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL WOOD ENERGY IN CEBU CITY
The Philippines' second largest city, Cebu, was selected as an appropriate site for the study of commercial woodfuel markets under the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme (RWEDP) for several reasons:
o the market is well developed and employs a significant number of rural and urban dwellers who move a large volume of woodfuels, as well as other biofuels, which serve the energy needs of not only urban households and small-scale businesses, but also those of a number of medium to large-scale industries;
o Cebu is probably the most deforested province in the country, with less than one-half of I per cent of its land forested. However, a significant trade in woodfuel has been maintained since 1876;
o fuelwood plantations are apparently maintained on private land, which contradicts the usual reports that 'open access' extraction of woodfuels keeps prices too low to encourage private planting of fuelwood species.
An area-based woodfuel assessment was carried out with the financial assistance of the RWEDP and the FAO's Wood Energy Programme in three phases:
o survey of household users and institutional, commercial and industrial users;
o gathering data on woodfuel marketing in metropolitan Cebu;
o woodfuel supply sources and mechanisms.
Findings to date contradict the perception that fuelwood and charcoal are main causes of deforestation. Although there are no large areas planted with fast-growing trees, if appropriately managed the many scattered woodlots and trees can fulfil market demand for fuelwood. Policies now need to be reviewed in the light of these findings.
'Human beings are at the centre of concerns for sustainable development. They are entitled to a healthy and productive life in harmony with nature.'
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, Principle 1
As an indigenous resource woodfuels do not have to be imported using foreign currency; they are also renewable and accessible and so represent a relatively secure energy supply. Trade in woodfuels also provides employment and income for many landless and jobless people who would otherwise have few or no means of livelihood.
The ORWEDP findings show with some certainty that the use and availability of woodfuel resources is closely and intricately interwoven with local economic and employment conditions and, by extension, with national prosperity and growth.
Over time (though less obviously) they can also be expected to affect global market trends and environmental security. Judging by evidence from various studies, including the RWEDP study (see left) in Cebu City, it makes sense to 'think globally - act focally' by putting into action decentralised area based plans for fuelwood and charcoal production, trade and use wherever local circumstances of supply and demand merit it.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 3 Wood energy and economic development
Bioenergy context
Wood energy and forest industries
The forest itself
Land use and access
Policy in perspective
Market forces
Fossil-based fuels and hydro-power are predominant sources of energy for economic development in today's world, but abundant and relatively cheap supplies of energy from these sources cannot be expected to grow or last forever. The environmental risks of fossil-based or nuclear fuels also cast doubt on their future viability as staple energy sources.
Alternative, renewable sources of energy will in the long run have to be developed, even in relatively wealthy parts of the world. Policies, financial mechanisms and regulations that serve this need already apply in many countries, overturning the conventional economics of commodity supply and demand.
Wood energy can make a worthwhile contribution to economic growth at all levels of development, in environmentally sound ways that also improve living conditions and standards in rural areas. This section explores cases where forest fuels already boost productivity or profitability in industry or trade, and highlights new applications of wood energy that promise to bridge the gap between industrial, household and other modes of energy use. It also sets wood energy and its economic applications in the context of sustainable, multiple-use forestry, alongside the management of timber or non-wood forest product extraction and the service functions of forests and forest lands.
Bioenergy context
The giant potential for world energy from biomass has captured much recent research and development interest. The definition fits traditional fuels such as firewood or animal dung, but in most cases these have not been the main focus of developers' attention. Biomass fuels such as wood can also be converted into modern energy 'carriers', such as fuel alcohol or electricity. These can be substituted and mixed in a flexible way for fossil-based fuels, often at a relatively low investment cost.
Biofuels cannot only serve traditional domestic needs such as cooking, heating or lighting but also cater to new energy applications in industry, at a cost competitive with equivalent fossil-based technologies. Because bioenergy production operations are decentralised and labour-intensive, rural employment can be another economic benefit.
FIGURE 10 Wood energy in multiple-use forestry
Sustainable, multiple-use forestry is a management model for combined production harvesting of timber, fuel and non-wood forest products (NWFP) such as medicines, fruits and oils, within the same forest ecosystem, while enabling it to fulfil a range of service functions, including watershed protection, carbon sequestration and the conservation of biodiversity.
The point of this orchestrated approach is to add optimum value to the forest as a continual source of benefits, to the point where incentives to destroy or abuse it are outweighed. After lumber, woodfuels are popularly regarded as the most valuable products derived from forests but the model requires equal significance to be attached to all four kinds of forest asset if each is to remain available and sustainable.
Production facilities can be developed step-by-step and do not call for the heavy capital investment required by 'hi-tech' energy sources such as hydro-power or nuclear power. Moreover, while 'energy crops' are growing, they fix carbon through photosynthesis and so help mitigate risks of global warming and climate change.
The use of trees and forests as bioenergy resources takes on added significance in this respect, in view of the key carbon sequestration role of woody plant materials. In conjunction with other forms of forest production and the natural service functions forests provide, such as watershed protection, it also helps optimise the perceived value of forests and trees. This meets the Agenda 21 objective (Chapter 11), urging:
'... efficient utilization and assessment to recover full valuation of the goods and services provided by forests, forest lands and woodlands.'
Bioenergy can have drawbacks, too. Unsustainable exploitation of finite biomass sources can deplete natural forests and woodlands as production of annual crops for energy is often undertaken at the expense of forest clearance. Turning over agricultural land from other uses to 'energy farms' or plantations can also have unwanted social and economic impacts. Even so, with sound planning, consultation, monitoring and implementation, wood energy production and use can avoid these pitfalls.
NATURAL FOREST MANAGEMENT AND WOODFUELS IN BURKINA FASO
Burkina Faso's unplanned use of forest resources has led to the deterioration of all forest areas around Ouagadougou, prompting a Government decision to develop effective management techniques. The project, financed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and executed by FAO, aims to develop a national programme for the sustainable and integrated production of wood and non-wood forests products, particularly fuelwood and charcoal.
In an area 150km around Ouagadougou, 80000ha are being managed with the active participation of local people using simple techniques to implement silvicultural operations. Supported by FAO, the Government of Burkina Faso has introduced a planned and more rational approach to forest resources. This has resulted in resource conservation and protection, as well as a 50 per cent income increase for local people, who are now able to fulfil urban demand for fuelwood and charcoal.
Plans are underway for the management of a further 570000ha in Burkina Faso. Other Sahelian countries, as well as those involved in RPTES (see page 29), have expressed interest in adopting a similar programme.
In developed countries, the further challenge of industrial and market restructuring lies ahead, while in developing countries gaps in technical and institutional capacity frequently obstruct or delay transition towards greater production and use of bioenergy in all its forms.
In either case, solutions may hinge not on treating household and industrial or trade applications as separate worlds but on devising bioenergy production approaches that cater to both. In this fusion the wealth of nations, the sustainability of natural resources and the well-being of neighbourhoods and families become interlinked concerns. Wood energy lends itself particularly well to bioenergy development on this composite model, for forests have always served plural functions in all these contexts.
Wood energy and forest industries
Activities that combine wood energy production with other forestry industry operations form a high-priority development objective in many countries. Commercial harvesting of trees for timber, pulp and board products casts aside large amounts of wood residues and litter at the point of extraction.
Further residues and wastes, mainly bark and sawdust, are created when forest products are processed. The timber and pulp processing industries have many options for putting these wastes and residues to economic use and have shown particular interest in converting them to wood energy.
WOOD ENERGY POTENTIAL IN CANADA
Forestry wastes and residues could, it has been calculated, deliver about 25 per cent of Canada's entire energy demands if converted to biomass energy: at present their use accounts for some 4 per cent only Though costs of switching from fossil to biomass fuels are generally high, in specific industries, such as the pulp and paper industry, the switch can be made at little or no cost. Canada produces about 15 per cent of the world's pulp and 31 per cent of its newsprint. The pulp and paper industry is a huge energy user: operations such as drying, steam-heating and milling make it the source of 10 per cent of the entire country's carbon dioxide emissions.
Since the 1970s, the industry has raised the use of forest biomass as a fuel source to 75 per cent of total needs and reduced fossil-based fuel use by half at minimal capital cost and with the effect of substantially reducing its net output of greenhouse gases.
Woodfuel production and use commonly occur as adjuncts to regular harvesting and processing activities. They usually form part of a waste recovery cycle aimed at reducing energy costs and carbon emissions within industry itself. Energy products for resale on the open market are also created in many cases. In the 1970s and 1980s, integrated processes and installations taking advantage of these opportunities became commonplace in Brazil, Uruguay, North America and various Scandinavian countries. As such schemes emerged, other countries were attracted by their multiple benefits and took steps to adopt similar systems as part of their own forest industry development plans.
Some successful innovations resulted but others foundered because the novel multi-track production systems were not matched by forestry improvements, market development and other forms of system support outside the mill gate. Where marketable supplies of energy were achieved, the benefits were rarely felt by the ordinary energy consumer.
Often, power supply monopolies bar open sale of electrical or other power generated in private industry. Even where such marketing is allowed, industry may be deterred from making the extra effort to sell power to the national grid or set up a customer base in areas where no grid exists. In Thailand, for instance, private power supplies are allowed to supply base-load electricity. Small producers may also generate 24 hours a day, but there are certain penalties for unscheduled stops.
Flexible policies that are supportive to woodfuel utilization and decentralised power production within industry are a rarity, while state subsidies for fossil-based fuels or grid power frequently tend to undermine the economics of freelance approaches to energy production and use.
More to the point in a rural development context is the need to focus attention and investment on improving the viability of decentralised wood energy applications at local or intermediate levels. Also to introduce appropriate technologies, distribution facilities and economic incentives to stimulate wider use of these resources within sustainable woodfuel production systems.
Intermediate and appropriate technologies, including various schemes for more systematic production of charcoal, have been notably successful in places. Production and use of charcoal burning stoves have increased proportionally, in response to concerted marketing and promotion campaigns. Similar programmes to bring charcoal production under formal management, regulate its use and spur market demand have since begun in several other countries.
FIGURE 12 Woodfuels in agro-processing
The inefficiency of converting wood to charcoal, especially on a small scale, can mean that up to 5kg of wood may be required to make 1kg of charcoal. Larger-scale, more technically competent operations can improve this ratio to almost 4kg to 1kg but against this advantage must be set the cost of additional capital costs, skills and management inputs.
In favour of small-scale charcoal production is its role in employment generation. An FAO/UNDP household energy strategy study in the Philippines in 1992, showed that household use of wood yields one TJ of energy from about 62 tonnes of fuelwood and 100-170 person-days of labour, whereas just 33 tonnes of charcoal provides the same energy yield but creates a labour requirement of 200-350 person-days.
Charcoal processing and combustion contribute more to carbon dioxide emissions and the global warming effect. The same Philippines' study measured carbon dioxide emissions from fuelwood at 450 grams per kilogram of wood, while charcoal processing and combustion emitted more than 2000 grams per kilogram. This drawback would matter little if the system of production were sustainable, as the growing trees would absorb commensurate amounts of carbon dioxide. But this is usually far from the case.
The forest itself
In practice, less attention is paid to the limits of biological growth, tree production and the forest itself, than to maximising energy yield and economic reward from processing technologies and the energy product. Other supply-side constraints that can hamper efficient and sustainable wood energy production include technical or logistical shortcomings such as lack of suitable harvesting equipment, transportation or roads. The biological productivity of trees grown for any economic use depends on factors that vary widely from place to place, including temperature, sunlight, soil, water and other physical circumstances that affect plant growth. Also important are the types of tree species or species mixtures grown and their vulnerability to pests and diseases. The extraction and storage of the forest product matters, too, in view of harvest and postharvest losses.
These are concerns of productive forestry anywhere, whether in natural or man-made forests, whether managed commercially or for communal use, whether on a large or small scale and whether directed towards energy production, timber extraction, life support or any other goal.
Even so, adding industrial biomass energy production to the repertoire of forest use can introduce new opportunities for forestry operations.
Exceptionally reliable wood harvests are needed to keep advanced systems of wood energy production flowing, so it becomes critically important to match rates of production to industrial and market demand for the product. Greater use of wood for energy also further underlines the essential need to produce and harvest trees sustainably, in ways that do not harm the forest's capacity to support new generations of trees. This priority is universal: it is nowadays expected to govern the actions not just of large commercial forestry enterprises, but of all who rely on trees and forests for products or services of any kind.
Land use and access
In many countries, moves to reform the tenure of forests and forest lands, whether through nationalization, privatization, regulation or deregulation, have tended to restrict or penalise access by local people to woodfuels which they have long regarded and treated as common property.
ENERGY PLANTATION PROSPECTS
In the USA, it has been estimated that advanced wood-fired gasifiers could produce electricity at rates commercially competitive with coalfired power stations, using wood harvested in short-rotation coppice plantations on the more than 139 million hectares of US forest lands that are classified as environmentally sensitive or under-stocked.
Such opportunities are not confined to highly industrialised countries. In Brazil, for example, researchers have estimated that electricity generation based on plantation forestry could, if all available land were planted, produce more than 150 per cent of the country's total 1990 energy consumption, at less than half the cost of equivalent oil inputs.
In Europe, improved tree varieties selected for woodfuel production have been planted extensively in recent years. In Sweden, fast-growing varieties of willow form the main stock for trials underway since the 1970s, situated mainly on ill-drained lands unsuited to arable farming. In Britain and elsewhere, clones of poplar developed in Belgium have also been planted for trial on marginal agricultural land.
The wood energy yield from these trials compares well with that of other biomass fuels. Poplar coppice can, for example, provide about 6TOE (tonnes of oil equivalent) per hectare, compared with only 1TOE per hectare for oilseed rape, a crop widely grown for conversion into 'biodiesel' in Germany and Austria. If all suitable farmland in Britain were planted with oilseed rape, it would provide only a diesel substitute equivalent to about 2 per cent of national liquid fuel requirements, whereas just one million hectares of woodfuel plantation could meet 10 per cent of UK solid fuel needs.
The tree varieties developed as energy plantation crops do not, however, always match specified growth rates to the consistent degree expected of agricultural crops. In some parts of Europe, environmental groups have been critical of the uniform appearance of energy plantations and their impact on wildlife in riverbank and wetland habitats. US Federal and European Union regulations discourage farmers from using 'set-aside' farm subsidy mechanisms to finance the establishment of short-rotation coppice woodfuel lots. Once such obstacles have been removed, this form of land use is likely to grow apace in Europe and North America.
Outlawing such access or branding local people as 'exploiters' of forest resources makes poor sense. Given guaranteed access to the forest and stewardship over it, they usually prove effective resource guardians. Where exclusion is inevitable, agroforestry or social forestry projects enabling wood to be grown for energy use in conjunction with farming operations or on purpose-grown community woodlots, can foster constructive alternatives.
Investment in other land uses, particularly farming, tends to take precedence over forestry in many developing countries, even where productive surplus land is available for energy farming. Furthermore, annual crops or their residues are still liable to be preferred over wood as staple biomass energy sources, particularly for fuel alcohol production. High-yielding agricultural crops such as sugarcane or sweet sorghum yield most kinds of liquid biofuel more amply than equivalent areas of forest or energy plantation.
Waste or surplus materials generated by run-of-the-mill sugar or edible oil production can provide energy feedstock as a byproduct. This dual-purpose application doubly commends such crops for biomass fuel production. However, research continues into processes that combine forest biomass with field crops to produce transportation fuels.
Unlike sugarcane and other field crops, wood energy plantations can be grown on lands that are only marginally productive or have been abandoned after unsustainable farming practices have reduced their arable worth. An estimated 700 to 1000 million hectares - about half - of the world's farmland now belongs in these categories.
Another potential new area for wood energy production is 'set-aside' farmland in the USA and European Union, designated under policy and financial mechanisms aimed at avoiding food surpluses by issuing pro rata compensation payments to farmers for land left fallow or put to uses other than food production.
Whatever the short-term advantages of turning to annual crops as standard sources of biomass for fuel, the use of trees and forests as an energy crop can have a more benign impact on soil and water resources in the long run, besides sequestering more carbon and requiring fewer costly agrochemical inputs.
Policy in perspective
Wood energy development is recognised in the Tropical Forestry Action Programme (TFAP), and other international policy perspectives on forestry development, as one of the most open fields for new thinking on national strategic planning and the setting of priorities for further development investment in forests. Nonetheless, restrictive policies that stifle initiatives for renewable sources of energy development still abound.
Some countries have introduced tax 'breaks' or disincentives, price policies and subsidies as levers to encourage such innovations. But unless accompanied by steps to consult users, modernise conversion systems, optimise forest resources, improve skills and infrastructure and modify consumer perceptions, these mechanisms rarely suffice to alter established patterns of wood energy production and use.
Links between forestry and energy policies are still urgently needed, along with mechanisms for joint implementation of activities to introduce and improve the performance of wood energy systems.
Popular participation in shaping and managing development schemes is also vital to their success. Measures for increased wood energy production and utilization planned and implemented from the 'top down' will only have a fraction of their intended effect if they do not command the approval and support of local people, on whose stewardship the fate of the primary forest resource almost always depends.
Mature technologies are available for commercial wood energy development, but many of them can also be geared to the requirements of subsistence woodfuel users. More research and development efforts are needed to put technology to work on behalf of such users. In general, there is an abiding need to incorporate sustainable wood energy development provisions into national energy policies, in combination with other energy sources and applications, including the use of fossil-based fuels.
Market forces
A key principle tabled and approved at UNCED was: sustainability, reduction of poverty and improvements in nutrition through the development of sound, sustainable, profitable and efficient trade.
As pressure on forest resources increases, plantation forestry grows in importance as a source of woodfuels, likely to be increasingly destined for commercial sale as management becomes more organized and overheads multiply.
More information is needed about the value of particular forests as sources of industrial energy and of woodfuels and other forest products that can be traded for household and other small-scale uses at local or district levels. Such information can be used to attract investment to areas where potential for both kinds of use is high and the benefits - in jobs and incomes - of one can enable people to afford to pay for the other. Both make funds available for expansion and better management of the primary resource.
'States should cooperate to promote a supportive and open international economic system that would lead to economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, to better address the problems of environmental degradation...'
Rio Declaration, Principle 12
'Combating poverty: the long-term objective [is that] of enabling all people to achieve sustainable livelihoods... [and] to provide all persons urgently with the opportunity to earn a sustainable livelihood.'
Agenda 21, Chapter 3
Even at a global trade level, movements of wood for energy applications are proliferating, reversing the general North-South flow of trade in energy commodities: for instance, Brazil exports substantial quantities of wood chips to Germany and Scandinavia, mainly for use in metallurgical processing. No matter how large or small the marketplace, it is important that all movements of wood energy commodities result in reciprocal benefits or reinvestment dividends for local economies and communities at the product's point of origin.
Unless this circle is closed, the living standards and prospects of local people will not gain by increased trade. Fair trade can help ensure that the flow of local benefits is maintained, but nothing will ultimately come of this process unless the forests and trees that support it are cared for sustainably.
WOOD ENERGY AND THE TROPICAL FOREST ACTION PLAN
Wood energy is one of the five priority concerns of the Tropical Forest Action Plan (TFAP), launched in 1985 to address the most urgent aspects of tropical deforestation. The bioenergy programme outlined in the TFAP addresses a wide range of related social, agricultural and cultural issues as well as basic energy and forestry concerns, including land use, employment generation and environmental care.
Within this multi-disciplinary framework, technologies such as biofuel production and electricity from wood and agricultural residues are explored as potential supports to more efficient energy conversion, conservation and substitution procedures.
To further the bioenergy programme, national TFAP strategies are being prepared, with a view to reviewing, assessing and monitoring wood energy activities under all the headings mentioned above. Also to develop coordinated plans of action involving all public and independent sector stakeholders in wood energy development.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 4 Wood energy and environmental security
Health aspects
Climate and atmosphere
Wood energy and land reclamation
Biodiversity dividends
The UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held in June 1992 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, was the largest international conference ever convened. It gave rise to a range of agreements, declarations and guidelines which represent an extremely broad intergovernmental consensus on ways to reconcile poverty relief and economic growth with environmental security in the near and more distant future.
UNCED's conclusions on this score were summed up in Agenda 21, a digest of agreed sustainable development targets for the twenty-first century. Several chapters relate to wood energy in a general way and more specific mentions appear in the texts of the Rio agreements on Climate Change and Biodiversity and in Forest Principles, a set of guidelines for sustainable forestry practice worldwide.
What do these texts signal in terms of specific objectives and mandates for wood energy development in relation to pressing environmental issues and concerns?
Chapter 14 of Agenda 21 recommends that rural people should start a process of 'environmentally sound energy transition' away from 'unsustainable energy technologies', which deplete the natural resource base. Chapter 4 of the Agenda calls on nations to develop policies and strategies to spur change away from 'unsustainable consumption patterns', including energy consumption patterns.
These recommendations form an explicit response to global forest loss, which FAO figures show accelerated from about 11 million hectares a year in the early 1980s to almost one and a half fumes that rate by 1990, the worst losses occurring in developing countries in the tropics. The Agenda's references to 'energy transition' and changes in consumer behaviour specify a progressive change from unsustainable patterns of energy supply and demand to sustainable approaches incorporating environmental safeguards.
These objectives apply as much to woodfuel and charcoal use on a village scale as to the most technologically advanced industrial energy production systems. They do not imply that traditional woodfuel use is inherently less sustainable than industrial use or that other energy sources should be preferred over wood.
The Forest Principles call for 'full economic valuation' of benefits from forests, including the value of 'non-economic' goods and services and environmental benefits of all kinds, and 'fuel and industrial wood requirements'. They also recommend wider establishment of energy plantations to meet those requirements in greater measure, where circumstances restrict further utilization of established forests.
When wood energy production and use are subjected to such valuation, the benefits to consider include: stabilising effects on climate and atmosphere; conservation of soil and water resources; the reclamation of degraded land; and the maintenance of natural biodiversity in the form of genes, species and ecosystems.
These benefits persist only if they positively reinforce or enhance living standards enjoyed by people living in the vicinity of forests and use forest resources to meet important needs. Local people are otherwise deprived of rational incentives to act as stewards and managers of their own surroundings and heritage.
SENEGAL
In Senegal annual woodfuels consumption for household energy is estimated at 3500000 tons (approximately 1450000 toe/year), which represents 67 per cent of the country's total energy consumption.
A rapid appraisal of economic benefits obtained for forests and trees gives the following results:
Woodfuels
34000000 US$/year;
Non-wood forest products
2500000 US$/year;
Timber
160000 US$/year^1.
^1Woodfuel production, transportation, trade distribution and use generate about 100000 jobs per year of which 60000 are connected to charcoal making.
This simple analysis shows the crucial importance played by forests as an income source for Senegal.
For instance, the substitution of fuelwood and charcoal by imported kerosene for the 1450000 toe/year required to meet the needs of poor households would imply an investment of about US$200000000 per year.
Health aspects
The household use of simple woodfuels has been associated in the past with 'indoor air pollution' and high incidence of respiratory disease and throat or lung cancers among regular users. Consultations sponsored by the World Health Organization in 1992 suggest that in areas where fuel-saving stoves and cleaner-burning woodfuels such as charcoal have been widely promoted, the incidence appears to decline.
Health problems are on the increase, on the other hand, in some countries where fossil-based fuels have been introduced as alternatives to woodfuels. For instance, WHO figures suggest that the growing use of low-grade coal as household fuel in China has led to a marked increase in lung cancers.
Not all fossil-based fuels have this disadvantage, but the deciding factor is usually the type of cooking or heating equipment used rather than the choice of fuel. The poor standards of ventilation often found in low-cost housing also multiply health risks, and not through smoke pollution alone.
Upgrading household cooking or heating facilities, improving fuel quality and raising housing standards are general aims included in the majority of comprehensive rural development and aid schemes. These measures need not be viewed as specific to energy planning. They can also be amply justified in terms of better nutrition, food hygiene and general healthcare.
A special environmental health plea can, however, be made for favouring the use of wood and wood-based fuels in commercial or large-scale industrial applications, such as power stations or metals processing based on coal or coke. These otherwise entail burning fossil-based fuels on a scale liable to cause widespread atmospheric pollution.
Using wood as an industrial energy source is not without pollution hazards: burning woodfuels can emit significant quantities of soot and oxides of nitrogen into the wider environment, together with trace amounts of carcinogenic chemicals. But these emissions are minor compared with those of burning fossil-based fuels on an industrial scale. In Germany, the environmental effects of fossil-based energy systems have cost an estimated DM10 billion (US$6.25 billion). Almost 65 per cent of the country's trees have been damaged through atmospheric pollution in the form of 'acid rain', soot and airborne emissions of oxides of nitrogen (NOx), originating mainly in fossil-based fuel combustion by industry and motor vehicles.
'Unsustainable patterns of production and consumption, particularly in industrialized countries... [are] a matter of grave concern, aggravating poverty imbalances. [Measures must] take fully into account the current imbalances in the global pattern of consumption and production.'
Agenda 21, Chapter 4
This is the type of environmental cost now being included in the equation when assessing the environmental disadvantages and benefits of forests and forest industries versus other land uses or technologies. Such 'lateral thinking' is now being applied to the universal problem of controlling emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases implicated in the global warming effect.
Climate and atmosphere
While alive and growing, forests and other plant biomass absorb the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide in quantities broadly equivalent to the amounts emitted when plant materials decay or are burned. They thus represent 'carbon-neutral' fuel sources or, under certain growth conditions, carbon 'sinks'. Conversely, the outright removal of forest vegetation through land clearing or degradation means that less carbon is sequestered in the foliage and woody tissues of trees. Any land use change which results in net increase in forest cover, such as establishing energy plantations, can be regarded as a potential antidote to the global warming and climate change syndrome.
Carbon taxes
Carbon taxes are surcharges levied on commercial fuels in proportion to the amount of carbon dioxide they emit in use, per standard unit of energy produced. In principle, carbon taxation should force up the price of oil, gasoline and other fossil-based fuels, so making indigenous production of renewable - including biomass - energy increasingly attractive. The cost of the tax to manufacturing industries should, in principle, be balanced by benefits to agricultural industry and lower fuel import bills, so national economic growth need not suffer overall.
The Netherlands, Sweden and Finland already impose such taxes and controversial plans are being shaped to introduce a carbon tax throughout the European Union. Some European Union states strongly oppose this move on the grounds that it might weaken the competitiveness of their industries in the world marketplace. They argue for modest carbon taxes whose revenues can be ploughed back into developing renewable energy technologies that will compete with fossil-based fuels on their own merits, without penalising industry or meddling with market forces.
In problem situations where woodfuel use is among the factors leading to permanent vegetation loss, substituting alternative fuels - even fossil-based fuels - for wood may have a net balancing effect on the global carbon dioxide 'budget'. Substitution need not, however, be considered a permanent solution. If land and vegetation can be restored to sustainable use, substitute energy sources may no longer be needed.
Forests are preferable in terms of their beneficial effects on soil conservation, land reclamation and the safeguarding of watersheds and biodiversity. In relation to climate and atmosphere, therefore, once demand for biofuels is established, it makes sense for biomass energy production to evolve towards wood energy use.
Transition towards wood energy and other renewable energy sources can be speeded up by introducing tax, tariff and subsidy mechanisms. Many governments faced with meeting the reduced greenhouse gas emission targets agreed at UNCED, including most of the Scandinavian nations, have begun to experiment with financial measures such as carbon taxes that discourage fossil-based energy applications and reward RSE use.
An alternative to carbon taxes, proposed in the USA and elsewhere, is the notion of 'traceable permits' to emit carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. These proposals foresee that industries or concerns which emit larger-than-average quantities of greenhouse gases, such as power utilities, would pay credits to other industries or concerns whose impact on global warming was neutral or beneficial (such as bioenergy producers), in return for a permit allowing them to continue to emit at the existing rate.
An international variation on the idea of 'traceable emission rights' has also been promoted. Such a scheme might allow, for example, a highly industrialised country to meet its national greenhouse gas emission targets and obligations by investing heavily in reforestation or forest conservation projects in developing countries with significant tropical forest assets. The global environmental gain would - in principle - cancel out the permit-holder's continuing over-production of emissions.
However, there are many who disapprove of traceable emission permits as 'licences to pollute'. Such systems would, moreover, prove complicated to administer, monitor and enforce. Straightforward regulation of energy production and use is another option which offers the advantage of simplicity.
FIGURE 14 Global warming and the carbon cycle
Major reservoirs (in Gtc) in bold Fluxes (in Gtc/yr) shown by arrows.
Source: UNIDO, 1990
Although not motivated by global warming fears but by concern over the fate of natural forests, strict regulations were introduced in Brazil in 1965. These require that by 1995 all charcoal produced for industrial use should come only from sustainable sources such as managed wood energy plantations. These regulations, combined with tax incentives to establish commercial tree farms, have led to the establishment of some five million hectares of plantations, which currently supply 35 per cent of the country's total charcoal production.
Wood energy and land reclamation
Past mismanagement of land has overstrained local ecosystems and led in many places to the spread of desert or semi-decertified conditions. Over-irrigation and soil erosion have degraded millions of hectares of once fertile land in South Asia, Africa and the dry tropics as a whole. Many areas have simply been abandoned. Others are farmed intermittently, yielding minimal returns. Reforesting these wastelands on a grand scale would, some conservationists argue, have the effect of reversing global warming entirely by sequestering carbon (removing it from atmospheric circulation for a time) in the form of massive increments of forest vegetation.
Other conservationists question whether such a programme would decisively counteract the global warming hazard, though it could make a tangible difference. The proposal has not, in any case, carried sufficient force to persuade development planners and investors to undertake the massive replanting programmes necessary to achieve so comprehensive a scheme, even if tree varieties could be developed that would tolerate the adverse growing conditions of degraded land.
It has been suggested that if land rehabilitation schemes could be coupled with bioenergy production programmes, such initiatives might prove significantly easier to justify. The effort would be rewarded by worthwhile economic and social dividends in the medium term, as well as many other long-term environmental benefits in addition to carbon sequestration. Chapter 12 of Agenda 21 recommends that preventive measures against desertification and drought should be adopted with a view to increasing the vegetation cover of land in danger of degradation. Soil conservation, afforestation and reforestation are mentioned as the chief means towards this end. Community-based agroforestry, incentives for forestry investment and activities that reduce pressure on fuelwood resources are specified as desirable measures.
DEFYING THE DESERT
On the shores of Lake Baringo, Kenya, a novel approach to using woodfuel and fodder production as a means to restore land severely denuded through overgrazing has been under test for more than 10 years. Solar powered electric fences exclude grazing animals from formerly fertile areas that have become eroded and face the threat of desertification.
As the protected vegetation regenerates, it supplies local farmers with a generous quota of firewood, hay for dry season fodder and long grasses for thatching. The scheme has won the support of local people, who donate land to the scheme and repossess it once the vegetation cover is restored.
Even on a relatively modest scale, afforestation, reforestation and soil conservation schemes connected to wood energy development can deliver palpable benefits, in view of the valuable environmental functions forests serve by safeguarding watersheds, soil nutrients and biodiversity. In this context of primary environmental care, establishing and maintaining woodlots, shelterbelts, agroforestry plots and any other form of tree cover is often the most advantageous step any community can take towards a greater degree of environmental security and economic self-sufficiency.
Biodiversity dividends
Relating wood energy development to the conservation of biodiversity (naturally occurring genes, species and ecosystems) is not a simple equation. Replacing species-rich natural forests or wetlands with energy plantations dominated by a single tree species or a limited mix of species will obviously be a retrograde step under most circumstances. If, however, energy plantations replace crop monocultures or are introduced as a reclamation measure on abandoned lands where biodiversity stands virtually at zero, the result will be an equally self-evident boost to the variety of plant and animal life through the proliferation of mixed habitat, especially as plantation systems mature and evolve.
Between these extremes, assessing the value and potential of wood energy production in the light of biodiversity is more complex. The Convention on Biological Diversity mooted at UNCED offers little help in this respect, concentrating as it does on ecosystems that show little evidence of human modification and are hence most likely to contain a large variety of plant and animal species.
Nevertheless, forestry practices [including woodfuel extraction] need not be incompatible with the conservation of biodiversity in natural ecosystems. Even man-made or man-modified forest ecosystems can encourage biodiversity to a noteworthy degree. Wildlife legislation and other legal or regulatory devices restrict access to many natural forest areas, mainly in the interest of preserving biodiversity. Yet the majority of natural forests, and the plants and animals they harbour, exist outside protected area boundaries.
WOODFUELS, JOBS AND BIODIVERSITY
The High Weald is an upland area of south-east England, an extensive mosaic of farms and woodlands unchanged in overall pattern since the thirteenth century. The 'ancient woodlands' of the area originated as natural forests but were modified and expanded in the past to supply charcoal for bygone use in iron smelting. Traditional management persists, based on coppices harvested in eight-year rotations and composed of a mix of indigenous oak or ash and introduced chestnut or hornbeam.
Local woodcutters are licensed by farmers or landowners to harvest poles and firewood in return for maintaining the coppice system. Larger poles cropped from the coppices have been put to a variety of modern craft uses, including the production of fence palings used in the building trade to screen off construction sites. Thinnings and harvest residues were till recently sent to paper mills for pulping. Lately, however, the recycling of waste paper has sharply reduced demand for harvest residues, while recession in the construction trades has diminished the fencing market. Only rising local demand for firewood for domestic heating enables some craftworkers to secure a living and continue to maintain coppice systems in economic shape.
Many High Weald woodlands that lack such maintenance have reverted to a wild condition. Paradoxically, they harbour less biodiversity in this state than as coppices. Coppicing intermittently opens up the woodland canopy to extra light and moisture, creating microclimates at random that would normally only be found at the woodland's edge or in clearings. A rich wildlife fauna, including several unique butterfly species, takes advantage of this effect, while trees with a spreading habit that might shade out other species are kept in check.
Social stability is also affected. As the economic uses of coppice woodlands decline, young people no longer feel motivated to learn the skills of traditional woodcraft and move away from the area to seek a living in urban centres. Within a generation, 'vernacular' skills built up over more than 400 years may become unavailable, even though the demand for them may recover in due course.
Such experiences illustrate the mutually supportive connections that exist around the world between wood energy, biodiversity and rural development, regardless of the degree of industrialization that forms their background.
To secure the regenerative capacity and biodiversity of these forests, self-evident value must be added to their maintenance and use and a balance struck between social and biological need.
Many experienced forest societies achieve this balance by a variety of means, including traditional woodfuel use. Others have learned to adopt innovative multiple-use practices to equally valuable effect. In either case, local knowledge and participation is as important as the technical expertise of outsiders when it comes to reconciling biological, social and economic imperatives.
STRIKING A BALANCE
Near the south coast port of Tumaco, in Colombia, local urban demand is supplied by charcoal produced on a small scale from natural mangrove (Rhizophora species) forests growing along creeks and inlets near the main road leading to the port.
Charcoal production absorbs the labours of a cooperative group of families, numbering about 30 adults and 20 children, whose entire income is earned from charcoal trading. A 1981 FAO report showed that their livelihood was in serious jeopardy from falling revenues following over-supply of cheap imported kerosene on the local market.
Striking a balance between such rival energy sources is no simple matter. If charcoal were to hold a monopoly over trade in cheap cooking fuels, wood extraction for this purpose might soon grow to become a serious threat to the mangrove ecosystems, where fish breed and feed, so jeopardising the fisheries on which many townspeople depend for a living.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 5 Technology transfer and energy transition
Direct combustion
Thermochemical conversion
Biochemical energy conversion
A new energy order
Wood energy transition
Many new and more advanced technologies employing renewable source of energy (RSE) have emerged in recent years, particularly in industrialised or rapidly industrializing countries. During the 1970s and early 1980s these technologies benefited from a surge of investment in indigenous energy sources, a consequence of world fuel-oil price rises.
Such investment slumped in the 1980s as trade in oil settled into a more stable pattern but it has revived more recently, partly in response to the high priority set by the international community on energy systems with fewer adverse environmental consequences than fossil-based fuels.
Developing countries have not, on the whole, gained as much from these innovations as the industrialised countries where most of the research and development effort to find renewable sources of energy has tended to originate.
Technology transfer could prove a vital link in sustainable energy development in countries or areas where 'energy famine' is already a fact of life or a likelihood, yet these are often the countries least able to afford to invest heavily in 'hi-tech' RSE development. Steps are needed both to speed up the transfer of RSE technologies and to find ways to scale them up or down to fit specific circumstances.
For example the JOULE programme, a major joint energy research initiative under way in several countries within the European Union, has paid specific attention to renewable energy technologies suitable for decentralised operation in areas isolated from mains power supplies, such as mountain regions or small offshore islands. Many of the results of this research could be adapted for use in rural areas of developing countries.
Technically advanced commercial or industrial conversion processes involving wood energy are currently in use or under active development in industry in many parts of the world. They can be divided into three main categories: direct combustion, thermochemical and biochemical processes. Many are suitable for use only on a large industrial scale but others lend themselves to scaled-down use at village level and some are themselves scaled-up versions of traditional, small-scale practices.
Direct combustion
Direct combustion processes can be used to convert various raw fuel materials besides wood, including municipal garbage and crop wastes. If they burn woody materials, these commonly take the form of woodchips, bark or sawdust that originate as waste by-products of forest industries.
Direct combustion furnaces take various forms. Some involve a two-stage process, the first stage for drying the raw material, the second for complete combustion. Others use jets of turbulent hot air to suspend crushed fuel particles in mid-air as they burn, or a bed of superheated sand into which the fuel is dropped or injected.
Like many other biomass-to-energy conversion processes, direct combustion installations are often adapted to combine or alternate biomass and fossil-based fuels to provide basic energy feedstock. 'Co-firing' woody materials or crop biomass with coal - the usual combination in direct combustion furnaces - can have several advantages. Typically, direct conversion facilities are situated close to a large and convenient source of cheap biomass, such as wastes from a sawmill or sugar refinery.
In many cases their output includes electricity for sale to power distribution utilities or combined heat and power (CHP) outputs for district heating as well as electricity supplies. If there are seasonal or temporary shortfalls in the supply of plant materials, co-firing allows energy production to be switched entirely or partly over to coal.
In this way, energy output continues without interruption and equipment and labour need not fall idle or be laid off. The utility and its customers can rest assured that power supplies will be maintained and the producer often gains a higher premium or bonus in return for greater reliability. Co-firing also creates less air pollution than power generation using fossil-based fuels alone and so does less incidental harm to its surroundings and the wider environment.
Thermochemical conversion
The most familiar thermochemical conversion process is carbonization, the time-honoured process of producing charcoal from wood and other solid plant materials. In traditional charcoal-making, wood is piled in earth mounds or covered pits and slowly fired till most of the hydrogen, oxygen and volatile components have been driven out. The conversion efficiency of traditional methods is normally low but more advanced industrial charcoal production processes can convert over 30 per cent by weight of raw wood to useful energy. They achieve this transformation by 'cooking' the wood within special reactors (pyrolysers) under controlled temperature and atmospheric conditions that exclude oxygen from the process.
POWER PREMIUM
Electricity is the ultimate 'convenience' energy source. It can be put to practically any standard use, either for household heating, cooking and lighting or for larger-scale industrial, municipal and commercial applications. A high investment premium has therefore been set in many countries on novel renewable energy systems that yield electricity. Systems based on photoelectric 'solar cells', solar-thermal energy collectors, wind turbines or wave power converters have been developed to a point where their operation on a commercial scale can prove feasible. As noted earlier, liquid and gaseous fuels derived from biomass have also developed as effective alternatives and these, too, can be employed to generate electricity.
In this latter context, the EC-ASEAN COGEN programme aims to accelerate the implementation of proven technologies to generate heat and/or power from wood and agroindustrial residues, through partnership between ASEAN and European countries.
The programme provides for economic cooperation between the European Commission and the Association of South East Asian Nations, through its Sub-Committee on Non-Conventional Energy Research. The programme is coordinated by the Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok. COGEN's managers give credence to the view that options to use woody biomass, particularly residues and wastes, have not been implemented in the region simply because they have not been tested under conditions specific to ASEAN countries.
To remedy this omission, the Programme provides financial and technical assistance to implement Full Scale Demonstration Projects in existing industrial enterprises. This involves demonstrating the technical and economic viability of woodfuel energy in real situations and provides a shop window for ASEAN end-users interested in turning biomass into a key energy source for their companies. The results should provide cost-savings, as well as environmental gains.
COMBINED HEAT AND POWER
In parts of Scandinavia and Central Europe, combined heat and power (CHP) systems are now an established feature of energy production and use. CHP systems generate electricity from steam or gas turbines, fuelled by wood or biogas, while using waste heat from this process to heat water which is then piped to households for space heating.
In Sweden, biomass provided 15 per cent of the country's primary energy consumption in 1991, much of it through CHP systems. Over 8000km of pipes were laid for heat distribution and 2.4GW (24 trillion watts) of installed CHP capacity were generated. Sweden continues to invest heavily in methods to increase its energy production from renewable sources, both through research into new woodchip and wood energy conversion processes and through resource management research to optimise production of wood from fast-growing willow, poplar and other hardwood tree species in energy plantations.
In Austria, almost 100 district heating schemes are now in place, fuelled by the country's plentiful conifer forests. They produce 1200MW (thousand watts) of total capacity, representing 10 per cent of the country's entire energy consumption in 1991. District heating alone, as distinct from CHP, is still an economic output where trees abound, as in mountain areas of countries such as Austria or Switzerland where forests have been conserved for centuries, partly to preserve their function as avalanche barriers.
Biochemical energy conversion
Biochemical energy conversion processes currently in wide use entail fermenting or distilling biomass to form biogas or alcohol. Wood is not normally a standard source of feedstock for these processes, though such use is technically feasible.
Field crops with a high sugar or carbohydrate content such as sugarcane, sweet sorghum, sweetcorn or cassava are generally used as feedstock for the fermentation and distillation processes that produce fuel alcohols.
Wood cellulose can be converted to simpler carbohydrates for such processes but requires more preparation in return for a somewhat lower energy yield so is generally regarded as uneconomic. Current research and development efforts on wood alcohol production could alter this situation in due course (see box, Biofuels for transportation).
Converting vegetable oils into fuel oil is another bioenergy process with forestry implications, as raw oil suitable for processing can be obtained from several tree crops, including the fruits of the oil and coconut palms. Diesel engines were originally designed by their German inventor, Rudolf Diesel, to run on vegetable oils. Now the use of modern biodiesel fuels - which can run existing diesel engines without major modification - is promoted in Germany and elsewhere as an environmentally sound alternative to fossil-based diesel. In many tropical countries, new sources of plant-based diesel are under rapid development (see box, Biodiesel energy).
All these commercial biofuel technologies are likely to affect the pattern of energy production and forest management around the world, and not only in industrialised situations.
Hi-tech renewable wood energy applications are not necessarily the ideal means of transition from unsustainable towards more sustainable forms of energy use. Any wood energy technology (however basic) that functions in a steady balance with the growth and regeneration of the forests and trees that provide the energy feedstock, is compatible with a sustainable approach to woodfuel production and use. Conversely, any system that places more demand on the biological resource base than the latter can regularly adjust to, is (by definition) unsustainable.
BIOFUELS FOR TRANSPORTATION
A number of transportation fuels can be produced from biomass. The major fraction of woody biomass, cellulose and hemicellulose, can be broken down into sugars that can be fermented into ethanol. This bioethanol can, with isobutene and catalysers, be converted into ETBE (ethyl tertiary butyl ether) which can be used as an octane enhancer for reformulated 'unleaded' gasolines.
Use of these additives can reduce the net release of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere from transportation gasolines, and moreover can contribute to the diversification of agricultural and forestry activities and promote the use of marginal lands for specific crops for energy purposes. It can also create new jobs and income for rural areas.
New technologies are being developed in several research and development institutes in Malaysia and elsewhere, which are expected to be released on the market in the next three or four years and could have the effect of altering the traditional role of forest and agricultural activities. In the meantime, Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay are initiating studies to determine the feasibility of transforming existing 'gasohol' or 'alconafta' programmes into ETBE-based processes.
Such novel technologies and their future commercial application will much depend on international oil prices and, more particularly, on national energy policies.
BIODIESEL ENERGY FROM OILSEED TREES
Use of plant oils in the energy sector is growing, particularly in industrialized countries. Four main technical solutions are being studied, some of which are being piloted commercially:
o plant oil mixed with diesel for heating systems;
o purified plant oil for special diesel engines;
o transterified plant oils for normal diesel engines;
o transterified plant oil mixed with diesel for normal diesel engines.
These solutions have been widely tested in different countries with excellent results and different field crop species (rapeseed, soya, groundnut, sunflower and others) are being intensively evaluated. Although the technical, environmental and socioeconomic advantages are quite well established, economic viability has to be proven and subsidy is necessary in most cases.
However, many developing countries with plentiful available land and low-cost labour do not face this obstacle. In addition to field crops, established oilseed plantation trees such as oil palms can lend themselves to use as non-wood forest products for energy applications. Novel oilseed tree crops are also being put to this purpose in several tropical countries. For example, Curcas Oil extraction from Jathropa seeds is a simple process which can be undertaken in small, local presses. The cost of extraction equipment varies from as low as a few hundred dollars for simple, hand-operated equipment to $15000 for more sophisticated diesel engine powered systems.
Jathropa is a fast-growing shrubby tree that thrives in poor quality soil (including semi-arid wasteland soils) and starts to produce within the first or second year. As a fuel or fuel extender for engine use, Curcas Oil needs to be further processed but can be used for lighting and heating in its crude state.
Pilot units for Curcas Oil production have been successfully launched in Mali, Thailand and elsewhere.
A new energy order
Modern sustainable development thinking has given rise to an ambitious vision of a 'New Economic World Order' based on a comprehensive reassessment of natural assets and the wealth of
nations with a view to more equitable, productive and environmentally responsible management of global resources.
Energy is central to this challenging vision of a sustainable future for all. In the first place, the new scenario requires social and environmental costs and benefits of energy production, delivery and use to be factored into decision making along with market and investment factors. Following this reckoning, progress towards matching regular energy supply and demand will then have to be integrated at all levels if it is to do lasting good in terms of economic growth, better living standards and environmental security.
The emerging formula for a 'New Energy Order' has won tacit general acceptance in the international arena but transition from current practices and circumstances to this ideal state of affairs will not be easy or straightforward. Pragmatic guidelines for change are called for, that can be applied and flexibly adapted to real situations that confront the resource planner, manager or user under everyday circumstances.
As to the future financing of developments in the wood energy sector, it is evident that major new investment will be called for. Though the amount of investment finance that the sector attracts will continue to be decided largely according to conventional cost-benefit criteria, social and environmental measure. How capital funds are allocated then becomes a key consideration in human terms. If investors favour industrial applications of wood energy over fossil-fuel based applications, the resulting redistribution of benefits may create 'loser' communities and environments as well as winners, so such changes should not be undertaken lightly.
'Forests should be sustainably managed to meet social, economic, ecological, cultural and spiritual needs [in such forms as]... wood and wood products, water, food, fodder, medicine, fuel, shelter, employment, recreation, habitats for wildlife, landscape diversity, carbon sinks and reservoirs and... other forest goods, products and services.'
UNCED Forestry Principles, Section 2b
Wood energy transition
The term 'wood energy transition' denotes a shift away from unsustainable wood energy practices, regardless of their scale or relative complexity, towards a new energy order. In this perspective, traditional, small-scale or local wood energy applications can play a crucial stabilising role within a larger dynamic of sustainable resource management. Making wise use of this dynamic requires astute assessment, accurate monitoring and the informed participation of people engaged in energy production and use at all levels of development planning and practice, including members or representatives of communities and social groups that rely on wood to meet practically all energy needs.
At the national planning level, developing renewable sources of energy (RSE) is almost certain to assume added priority in years to come, despite apparently plentiful oil reserves and stable oil prices on the world market at present. The world economy is gradually recovering from two recent recessions, thanks largely to growth and processes of transformation occurring in many rapidly industrialising economies, such as those of China, Brazil, Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia.
Despite widespread adoption of energy conservation measures, production in these economies is bound to grow increasingly energy-intensive, which could force demand for oil (and with it the price of oil) sharply upwards in the medium term. According to World Bank projections, electricity demand in the developing world is likely to grow at 7 per cent a year over the next 20 years, compared with a growth rate of just 2 to 3 per cent in industrialized countries. The cost of importing supplies of oil sufficient to fuel this high growth rate is estimated at over $3 trillion for the coming decade, or $100 million a year. Yet the current spending power of even the most rapidly developing economies falls far short of this level.
Developing power generation systems based on wood energy and other renewable energy sources is an alternative energy supply strategy that could help bridge this gap. Moreover, RSE development does not require the high investment cost and long lead-time associated with projects for energy generation using oil, coal or hydro-power. RSE systems can be scaled to meet user needs and expanded piecemeal to keep in step with rising demand. They also happen to avoid many of the environmental drawbacks associated with conventional energy production systems.
Even without enlisting environmental arguments in its favour, RSE development makes sense solely in energy planning and economic terms. Achieving full integration of wood energy and other RSE use into national plans and policies is, however, a course limited by many obstacles.
Institutional barriers include a crucial lack of appropriate skills and attitudes in the planning units of energy agencies, which are often dominated by engineers and economists unused to dealing with the dynamics of energy flow between living production systems and the energy consumer. Even renewable energy units within natural resources planning departments, whose experience is likely to be limited to research and pilot projects, are liable to balk at the sheer size and complexity of the planning task.
Wood energy systems, like most other RSE applications, are typically small and decentralised, requiring a similarly decentralised, energy planning approach that accounts for the modular character of the technologies in question, the site-specific factors that determine productivity (such as availability of the natural resource and local capabilities) and interaction with centralised or grid-based power supply systems.
Such planning requirements are completely different from those that govern current oil industry and power systems planning methodologies. Ways to counter these and other limitations on systematic planning and investment for wood energy development at senior levels will be suggested in the section that follows.
In the context of energy transition, the other major shift liable to come about at more local levels is that consumers of wood-based and other RSE-based energy systems will increasingly become the operators as well as the users of these systems.
Farmers, for instance, may have to get used to operating small-scale wood-based power plants for electricity generation and/or steam production (see box, Combined heat and power, page 56) on a compact scale, as well as setting aside and tending woodlots to supply adequate woodfuel feedstock on a sustained-yield basis at district and community levels.
In view of this prospect, the need arises for intensive research and development to make both mechanical and wood husbandry systems as 'user-friendly' and efficient as possible, and to ensure that technical backup, such as the provision of fast-growing nursery tree stock and spare parts for essential machinery, is not lacking.
These provisions and innovations require a combination of initiatives from the 'top-down' and the 'bottom-up', orchestrated by means of frank dialogue between people responsible for the planning and administrative superstructure of entire states or districts, and local community and user groups (see Fig. 9 p27 and Fig. 10 p31). Only if information, knowledge and skills are shared in this open manner will the conviction grow at both extremes that energy planning and sustainable development is a shared responsibility.
At the very least, planners and administrators should avoid policies that might stand in the way of such developments or betray a bias in favour of technologies they regard as more familiar and less testing than sustainable wood energy and other RSE systems.
<section>8</section>
Chapter 6 Wood energy for the future: FAO's perspective
Wood energy policy and institutions
Wood energy resources development
Wood energy conservation and substitution
Opportunities in industry and commerce
Mature and emerging bioenergy technologies
Woodfuels trading and marketing
The future
The lessons of recent decades provide valuable signposts for new strategies, policies and tactics to steer wood energy development into the twenty-first century. There are now more institutions around the world capable of carrying such an agenda forward than at any time in history.
New factors and actors are constantly modifying wood energy scenarios, such as an increased emphasis on the growing importance of pro-environment regulations or financial mechanisms, and the many new industrial concerns that have sprung up around bioenergy development. Allowance must be made for these emerging trends. Skill and capacity levels in institutions and agencies need to be upgraded so that change can be managed with flexibility and confidence.
All who hold a stake in wood energy development should be in a position to define a common vision of future needs and goals, to identify practical ways and means to measure and achieve them, and to blend their efforts with those of other relevant stakeholders. These steps rely as much on attitude as on technical, financial or structural strengths.
A more balanced and orchestrated approach is required to take a long-term view of wood energy development and its economic, social and environmental connections, an attitude best summed up as wood energy for sustainable development, as distinct from notions of wood energy for survival.
If people hold woodfuels and other forest products or service benefits in high esteem and gain sustainable livelihoods by using, processing or marketing them, they are less likely to abuse or destroy the primary living source of those benefits and more likely to take on the task of establishing and managing their own forest resources in a self-reliant way.
Unsustainable use of forests occurs only when it is of some use or profit to somebody, as witness the many poor neighbourhoods where people sell fuelwood to earn money despite their own desperate shortage of fuel. Unsustainable practices can only be halted by replacement with sustainable practices, worth more both in cash and in quality of life gains. This axiom applies to large-scale industrial, agricultural and commercial operations as much as to localised domestic or artisanal applications.
The use of fuels derived from forests and other biomass has tremendous potential as an environmentally friendly. technically mature, economically feasible and socially acceptable energy practice. It could contribute significantly to a more rational and equitable 'New Energy Order' that is less reliant on fossil fuels and the costly infrastructure associated with them.
Assisting governments, specialised agencies, NGOs and the private sector towards a more sustainable approach to production and use of forests, woodlands and trees is a major concern of FAO. Its Wood Energy Programme aims to assist all those interested in any aspect of wood energy, from fuelwood production, charcoal conversion, trade, markets and wood energy to conversion and conservation. It encourages efforts to modernise traditional wood energy use and promote new wood energy initiatives as a modern source of energy.
To achieve these goals, the initial focus must be on improved wood energy systems that are cost effective and sustainable capable of both improving existing systems and facilitating the introduction of new ones. Examples of such improvements are:
o new and more efficient wood energy conversion technologies to produce more energy using less wood;
o a better flow of woodfuels between producers and users;
o increased fuelwood production, at lower prices.
The tools and instruments to develop, plan and undertake the necessary interventions for improved wood energy systems exist today. However, a more holistic approach shared in common by specialist governmental organizations, NGOs and the private sector must replace scattered field activities undertaken by different agencies without strategic coordination.
The FAO's Wood Energy for the Future Programme is designed to assist and guide the decision makers and energy policy designers of Member Countries. The Programme is structured into five clusters that may be implemented individually, or in various permutations.
Wood energy policy and institutions
It is vital that governments and specialised governmental agencies create an environment in which realistic, coherent and flexible wood energy policies can be established. Policies need to include adequate legislation and regulations to ensure sustainable production, marketing and use of wood as fuel. They should also abolish incentives and legislation that promote energy alternatives which inhibit the competitiveness of locally available energy sources, such as woodfuels and other biomass.
Once integrated wood energy strategies, programmes and projects have been shaped, activities can be implemented by assigning specific responsibilities to different agencies such as forestry services, energy units, rural development and financial agencies, NGOs, the private sector, research and development organizations and community groups.
THE REGIONAL WOOD ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME IN ASIA (RWEDP)
RWEDP is a project executed by FAO and funded by the Government of the Netherlands with a planned duration of five years and a budget of US$8,84 million. Fifteen countries participate: Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Vietnam.
Asian countries face an increasing need for energy services to support their economic and social development. Currently, 30 to 80 per cent of their overall energy needs are met by woodfuels. Biomass for cooking and heating dominate household energy use in the majority of the participant countries. Woodfuels are also used in many types of rural industry (sugar palm or cassava processing, brick and lime burning and so on), for commercial applications (street food vending, restaurants, hospitals, military camps and the like) and at social or ceremonial events such as cremations or festivals.
Previous versions of RWEDP have contributed to a better understanding of the complex dynamic of woodfuel flows and their interplay with supplies of alternative fuels to meet the energy needs of millions of urban and rural households, rural industries, village applications and commercial sectors. In response to predictions of a 'fuelwood crisis', several countries have initiated actions aimed at improved and more competitive wood energy systems. Unfortunately, many of the poorest people of the region live in mountainous, arid and semiarid areas and refugee camps, so have insufficient access to fuelwood, charcoal and other energy sources to meet daily energy needs.
The current project aims to promote improved wood energy systems that are more sustainable and could become competitive with alternative energy sources. Actions are focused on strengthening policy analysis, energy strategy formulation and wood energy assessment in these technical areas: woodfuel production, woodfuel processing and marketing and woodfuel use
Executives and beneficiaries of the project include, among others, more than 2000 government staff, NGOs, private voluntary organizations and regional organizations such as UNDP, ADB and ESCAP.
Governments and financial institutions have a key role to play in using fiscal levers to allocate investment funding to woodbased energy developments, not only on the demand side but also in support of those who supply wood for fuel. They should seek to promote improved and cost-effective wood energy systems, for both traditional and modern uses. Feasibility studies need to be undertaken and examples of best practice identified, evaluated and selected for further development. Structural funds can then be mobilised and investment opportunities identified and nurtured.
The effectiveness of any programme or project has to be monitored and continuously assessed so that policy and planning inputs to new programmes and projects can be modified in the light of experience.
Recipes for healthy institutional arrangements and sound policies to implement effective wood energy programmes require three essential ingredients:
o energy assessment and planning;
o information flow and market intelligence;
o research, education and training.
In respect of energy assessment and planning, there is a persistent need for better auditing of energy consumption and area-based woodfuel flows as a basis for more realistic demand forecasts, as well as more accurate cross-checks on existing data.
Progress towards integrated planning and the introduction of RSE into national energy plans has on the whole been slow. Many developing countries now give greater prominence to charcoal and other traditional wood energy resources in national energy budgets or development plans. In general, national planners still pay inordinate heed to electricity and fossil-based fuels on account of their more pronounced short-term impact on the balance of payments.
There have been moves to evaluate promising new technologies based on wood energy that might serve general commercial energy needs on an industrial scale. However, these initiatives are too often limited to the industrial research and development sector and energy planners show little interest in fostering them, despite their evident promise.
More emphasis is required on regular resource assessment aimed at incorporating wood energy development into planning processes at national, regional and local levels alike. If available skills and institutions are unequal to this task, authorities should award high priority to upgrading infrastructure and human resource development to correct such deficiencies.
Commonly, where development interventions and projects have been launched to boost wood energy production and use, little effort is made to probe their suitability or acceptability before they are started up, or to monitor their economic, social and environmental impact after completion. Appraisal and auditing methodologies must undergo radical improvements before safer and surer ways forward can be mapped.
Moves to increase wood energy supplies through more efficient management of existing forests are often burdened by institutional shortcomings and conflicting legislative provisions. A sound institutional and regulatory infrastructure for all forest activities, not merely for wood energy harvesting, is therefore of paramount importance.
Why, despite their attractions, is the transfer and adoption of new and mature wood energy technologies not multiplying at a faster rate, even in developed countries? Part of the answer to this question is simply a lack of up-to-date technical information flow and market intelligence in forms that technologists, planners and policy makers can put to practical use, such as patent or standards information and cost-benefit analysis of new technologies.
Various international networks were set up to create a flow of information between governments, researchers, economists and other interested parties, during the oil crisis years when interest in renewable energy soared. Yet many have since failed to attract continuing support and several have been discontinued despite a current resurgence of investor interest in RSE.
Experience shows that networks organised on a larger scale with multiple financial backing and qualified personnel (such as the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme for Asia and the Pacific or the Latin America Dendroenergy Network) survive better than smaller networks, whose scope and financial base are narrow.
Industrial and commercial interest groups could do more, out of enlightened self-interest, to nourish more and better technical information flow. They could also help supply another information 'missing link', market intelligence and promotional skills.
INFORMATION FLOWS
The Latin America Technical Cooperation Network on Dendroenergy was created in 1984 as a joint activity of the FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean (RLAC) and the Wood Energy Programme of the FAO Forestry Department.
The network is a voluntary cooperative arrangement that aims to promote the horizontal exchange of information and experience among the experts and technicians of technical institutions involved in wood energy matters. The following countries are present members of the network: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Dominican Republic and Uruguay.
Regular meetings are held to discuss strategic topics of specific interest for the member countries and participants, assess the wood energy situation and strengthen regional/national capabilities to deal with wood energy matters. Several technical publications and case studies have been prepared and a newsletter is regularly prepared as a cost-effective channel to communicate information and promote strategies.
More recently, it has also promoted the creation of national groups to expand, transmit and share regional experiences with other colleagues and partners within the country. Argentina, Brazil and Honduras are among the most active national groups.
Another cooperative network on wood energy has been developed within the framework of the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP).
Harvesting feedback from the consumer to be passed back, via the supplier, to the producer is just as important as the harvesting of woodfuels from forests, converting them to energy and delivering it to the customer. Demand for energy and consumer choice increasingly dictate supply side developments as liberal trade policies gain higher status around the world. Demand might be influenced by proactive marketing to present, for example, the environmental benefits of wood energy as significant selling points.
Research, education and training are indispensable allies of better energy policies and moves towards energy transition. They are necessary to build the national skills base and infrastructure required to put sound wood energy policies and programmes into practice.
Since the early 1980s, some international courses and scholarships relevant to wood energy development have become available. These training opportunities have, however, diminished in recent years. More must be done to reverse this trend if wood energy development is not to be starved of skills needed to programme and implement change. National curriculum bodies have mustered scant growth in education and training programmes and courses.
Those few that exist do little to emphasise the interdisciplinary nature of RSE development, which in the case of wood energy might be expected to give rise to a 'new breed' of intermediary, schooled in forestry, technology and community development.
Public education programmes promoting specific activities, such as improved stoves or tree planting programmes, have been launched in many places but more are needed and ways should be found to incorporate the information they convey in the regular curricula of basic schooling or literacy training.
Wood energy resources development
Adequate and good-quality supplies of woodfuels need to be readily available all through the year at reasonable market prices to compete with alternative fuels. For this purpose, attention must be paid to:
o the establishment and management of forests, woodlands and trees;
o fuelwood harvesting, preparation and transportation;
o distribution, marketing and sale of woodfuels.
Fuelwood can be grown and harvested alongside all other forest products (timber and non-wood forests products) and in harmony with forest functions such as watershed or wildlife conservation (see Fig. 10 p31) and agricultural production. But the rights, limitations and quotas governing each type of use should be integrated and all should be matched to the natural carrying capacity of forest ecosystems.
Changes in the tenure and use of forests should be introduced with the willing participation and support of local people, in ways that acknowledge their needs, take advantage of their special knowledge and respect their established rights.
In many countries, population growth has upset the management traditions and tenure conventions of farming lands, creating widespread land hunger. This pressure usually leads to efforts either to raise the productivity of ever smaller units of land to support ever larger numbers of people, or to bring more land into production and out of common ownership. Forest lands and other sources of woodfuel are subject to related trends and pressures.
Unless this relationship is taken into account, the effects of management changes can prove counter-productive. For instance, when rights to forest lands pass into state or commercial hands and out of common ownership, even if for the specific purpose of increasing wood energy production, the management vacuum means traditional restrictions on overcutting woodfuel become defunct or are ignored. Traditional structures should be maintained wherever possible or replaced by agreed arrangements for conserving the resource. Fast and forced landuse changes are generally destined to fail.
Intensive 'energy farming' of trees for woodfuel production (as in mechanised energy plantations) has not lived up to expectations. Despite the introduction of fast-growing and high-yielding new tree species in many large-scale plantations during the 1980s, prices of wood in relation to energy costs have not proved competitive with fossil-based fuels and many introduced tree varieties have failed to match expected growth rates outside the plant-breeder's nursery. However, production costs are progressively decreasing and the use of new and modern technology together with new market opportunities can help to reduce prices more rapidly in the near future.
Another drawback of large-scale energy plantation programmes has been their tendency to conflict with the wishes of experienced local communities and their traditional resource needs, rights and habits. These limitations are not necessarily prohibitive but smaller-scale wood plantations and agroforestry projects, sensitively integrated into customary practice, appear more likely to succeed in the future. Their yield may still not make wood energy competitive in price with fossil-based commercial fuels, but fringe benefits such as livelihood creation, landscaping, amenity and utile by-products such as fodder or thatch, can reasonably be expected to tip the balance in their favour.
Basic research on biomass production has expanded significantly during the past 12 years, resulting in surer knowledge of the attributes of different plantation species, higher standards of harvesting, transportation and storage and a shrewder understanding of relative costs. The mass introduction of improved tree species has, however, failed in many cases because programmes are not based on sufficient consultation and cooperation with local communities to match the choice and management of plantation species to their needs, knowledge and customs. Participatory appraisal techniques which make the most of local knowledge and capacity should be more widely and routinely applied to energy planning and development.
TREES AND NEEDS
In Thailand, plantations of eucalyptus species (chiefly Eucalyptus camaldumensis) have been established over more than 100000 hectares, to provide pulp and woodchips for commerce. The tree is fast-growing but is unsuitable for growing in close combination with field crops (intercropping) or animal husbandry (silvipasture). It places a heavy strain on local water supplies and soil nutrients and does not yield a generous by-product supply of firewood. Many local people feel the programme has put commercial interests above legitimate common property resource needs. Adequate consultation at the outset might well have resulted in a more apt choice of species, to the greater benefit and satisfaction of all concerned.
Wood energy conservation and substitution
Outstanding among the factors crucial to low-cost wood energy production are:
o energy conservation and substitution;
o opportunities in industry and commerce;
o mature and emerging bioenergy technologies.
Among energy conservation and substitution measures, the greatest energy gain for most categories of woodfuel users is still the adoption of improved cooking devices and more energy-efficient fuels or interfuels based on biomass sources, including wood to ensure and improve food quality and health for poor people.
If the woodfuel supply is short or threatened, biomass-based substitute fuels (if these are available) are preferable on environmental grounds to coal, kerosene or other fossil-based fuels but in urban areas the luxury of choice is often absent.
In heavy industry, local heating programmes, electricity generating industries, large agro-processing industries and the commercial energy sector in general, opportunities exist to extend and expand the role of wood in modern energy applications. New laws and policy structures aimed at curbing air pollution and reducing greenhouse gas emissions will probably speed up this process.
Wood energy can play a crucial role in the decentralisation and deregulation of public electricity services, allowing even small and isolated communities to gain access to electricity in a self-reliant way. Such intermediate technologies promise to serve the interests of the household energy consumer no less than those of major commercial operators. They must therefore be given adequate support and a fair trial, for their successful development will be of benefit to people and forests everywhere.
Opportunities in industry and commerce
Research and development activities have already resulted in a wide range of mature energy technologies which could, in theory at least, greatly extend the range and efficiency of wood energy production and use in commerce and industry while helping to conserve natural resources and maintain energy supplies.
Industrial energy technologies, including those applied in rural industries, present another key area of opportunity for more strategic wood energy development approaches, harnessed to sustainable forestry and the creation of livelihoods.
Commercial and industrial biomass conversion technologies such as pyrolysis and gasification systems have undergone marked technical improvements, while fuel processing techniques, such as the production of fuel briquettes from plant wastes, have also been brought to an advanced stage of development. Further research is needed into more versatile techniques that can use several different types of plant feedstock to fuel the same conversion process.
An overall problem is an apparent 'missing link' between successful bioenergy research or trials, and the mass production or application of results. Many convincing pilot projects backed by donor governments or development banks are never followed up by commercial developers. Part of the reason for this gap is the difficulty of proving the beneficial returns on capital investment these advances represent, in comparison with more familiar commercial technologies. Establishing comprehensive economic and technical criteria would make such comparisons easier. Extension activities can play a vital role in the dissemination of appropriate technologies among rural peoples.
In Asia, rural industries such as tea and coffee processing, brick manufacture, lime burning and fish-smoking account for some 20 per cent of the region's wood energy consumption. Total consumption by all industries is sure to be much higher, but data are hard to obtain, especially from the private sector.
There is undoubted potential in all industrial sectors that consume wood energy, to improve efficiency by means of energy conservation measures linked to forest conservation and afforestation programmes. Further benefits to local economies are likely to include job and income generation.
In addition, there is abundant scope for industries that produce biomass or process it in large quantities, such as the agro-processing or timber industries, to serve an enhanced role as energy producers. Improved and advanced technologies could enable them to convert waste or surplus biomass into energy, not only for their own purposes but also for resale to national energy grids or commercial energy distributors. Moreover, the use of woody wastes from forest industries and activities can become excellent raw material for big-ethanol production through hydrolysis and the production of ETBE (see page 55).
Mature and emerging bioenergy technologies
Technologies for optimising the energy yield of raw plant materials include efforts to modernise or upgrade traditional energy applications, for example by introducing improved burning stoves and furnaces for artisanal use. New and more innovative approaches can be designed to improve the use of fuelwood and charcoal for cooking and heating at household level matched with new cooking practices to gather the full nutritional value of foods. Much knowledge and experience have been gained from efforts to adapt new types of stoves to local cooking habits, dietary preferences and kitchen designs. But these intermediate technologies need continuous, methodical research and development, aimed particularly at increasing their appeal in terms of health and nutrition benefits and promoting their use in more organized and studied ways akin to market research or promotion following participatory, 'two-way' consultative processes.
The targeting of such processes is important, too. In strategic terms, much of the past development of wood energy applications in harness with forest conservation measures has not been applied in the communities that need it most. Improved stoves programmes, for instance, have been largely concentrated in rural areas, where their potential as a conservation measure was thought to be at its peak.
It has since become apparent, however, that fuelwood scarcity is often most urgent in or near urban areas, and that it makes better sense to introduce improved stoves there in any case. Urban people are generally more open to new technologies, earn higher average incomes and are more used to regarding fuel and energy as commercial goods than many rural people. Thus they are more amenable to energy conservation options such as fuel-efficient stoves or more regular use of charcoal. They are also better able to afford either woodfuels or alternative fuels such as kerosene, gas and electricity, or substitute fuels such as briquettes, formed from crop and forestry wastes, or a versatile mixture of all three.
Sustaining wood energy supplies around urban areas requires systematic management of existing forests and often calls for the creation of new forest areas. Where there is a ready commercial market for woodfuels and other products from these sources, it is clearly easier to finance and justify forest conservation or replanting programmes from the outset.
A higher capacity to implement and diffuse novel wood energy technologies - whatever their scale or scope - should be built into institutional development of all kinds. Such outreach should promote a variety of options, including biomass energy conversion systems, energy-saving techniques and fuel substitution approaches.
Emerging technologies for wood energy conversion include processes for mechanised fuel preparation. One such is densification - the physical reduction of plant matter to small particles of even consistency, for rapid conversion to energy products without prolonged drying or other preparation. Private sector investment in joint ventures between industry and forestry interests should be actively encouraged in the future. Such linkages hold a vital key to unlocking the unrealised potential of wood energy technologies.
Multiple hybrid bioenergy systems could be implemented where a combination of biomass, photovoltaic, wind, and other sources of energy can be easily complemented with fossil fuels as required to maximise economic, financial and environmental resources.
Insofar as there has been transfer of these technologies in the past, those intended for domestic application tended to follow different pathways than those which relate to industry. Yet all wood energy users rely, in the end, on the same forest resources and hold an equal stake in their future. Integrated wood energy development that takes all-round account of domestic and industrial needs and uses is liable to result in far more comprehensive accounting of what the term 'sustainable' actually means and requires.
Woodfuels trading and marketing
Many variants determine the source and origin of woodfuels used in rural and urban areas to meet the energy needs of households, industry and commerce. Systems of moving wood from production sources to end-users vary from simple to sophisticated. In the case of fuelwood collected for personal use, only the collector is involved; in cases where woodfuels are gathered from forests and private woodlots for sale to end-users located in urban areas, many intermediaries can be involved, such as tree owners, woodfuel cutters, woodfuel assemblers, charcoal makers, transporters, commission agents, wholesalers, retailers, buyers and users. It is not easy to trace the flow of woodfuels where so many actors are involved in the system.
Interventions can be designed to make the system more effective and competitive, for example:
o large lots may be split up in smaller bundles;
o transportation can be better organized, to reduce distribution costs;
o large wood and charcoal pieces can be reduced to decrease losses;
o layout of stock yards can be improved to reduce the handling costs;
o repacking of products for different users can take place.
In almost all cases, these activities are regulated by different government agencies, particularly forestry services. However, there are many exceptions and if controls are in place, they are not always properly executed and followed up.
Although in rural areas most fuelwood is freely collected for the use of people living in and around forests lands, a considerable amount of fuelwood and charcoal is commercialised in informal markets which are difficult to quantify and control.
The operation these wood energy systems involve many people in rural as well as urban areas. In the Philippines, for example, it is estimated that over 830000 households (530000 gatherers, 158000 charcoal makers and sellers, 40000 rural traders, and 100000 urban traders) are engaged in the woodfuel trade, from gathering to retailing, covering around 10 per cent of all rural households and about 40 per cent of their cash income.
Area-based woodfuel flow studies at district or provincial level could yield valuable data about production sources, traders, end-users, their locations and the different economic and socioeconomic conditions affecting these decentralised, systems, showing how and under what conditions woodfuels are moved from production sources to the end-user.
<section>9</section>
The future
The world is presently undergoing a seizure of change as a result of a new political and economic order that is leading society towards a radical redefinition of relationships between government, the marketplace and the individual. Accelerating economic and industrial growth in many parts of the globe will require ever-increasing energy supplies to sustain the momentum of production activides.
The effects of this changing economic climate on the energy sector include a trend towards diversified and decentralised, energy scenarios. With these new scenarios, 'new breeds' and partnerships of achievers and entrepreneurs are emerging, hungry for opportunities to invest in gainful energy ventures.
Biomass (including forest biomass) is an increasingly attractive energy source from an investment point of view. It offers the prospect of devising novel energy mixes which cannot only be put to orthodox household uses but can also provide feedstock for electricity generation, district heating and transportation fuels on a large or small scale and in developed or developing countries alike.
Wood-based and other biomass fuels can be produced and made available locally wherever suitable growing conditions exist and combined with other local energy sources available (see page 71, Multiple hybrid bioenergy systems). Their cultivation can have many positive environmental effects as well as contributing to rural development by creating new jobs, generating income and attracting social funds and infrastructural improvements to neighbourhoods that have not so far benefited from the new economic world order.
Bioenergy projects, especially if based on wood energy, promise to deliver a form of energy development that puts local people in the centre of the picture, enabling them to fulfil the injunction to 'think globally - act locally' and other key axioms of modern sustainable development practice (see Fig. 9 page 27). Decentralised, area-based bioenergy production using combinations of biomass materials best suited to prevailing environmental and production conditions, has the potential to set a worldwide pattern of innovative land use and crop diversification. Putting bioenergy prospects into practice will, even so, require thoroughly orchestrated and well-planned methodologies if the environmental and social impacts of these innovations are to be kept within safe limits. Intending developers should take full advantage of professional expertise and guidance from within the official and private sectors to establish benchmark standards of best practice and to tune progress to
relevant environmental and social concerns in order to ensure its sustainability. Accordingly, FAO's Wood Energy Programme will be geared to:
o setting guidelines for environmentally responsible use of wood and other biomass for energy purposes;
o advising national governments on better ways to use their available biomass and, where feasible, create new stocks for energy applications;
o building productive and creative partnerships with other intergovernmental bodies, with private sector interest groups and with independent non-government organizations;
o mobilising human, financial and technical resources so as to apply them to sustainable development of bioenergy initiatives, programmes, projects and experiments;
o ensuring a free flow of information and technical data to enable progress on the ground to be constantly measured;
o providing assistance, information and support to CSD through the relevant channels, as and when required;
o building capacity at international, regional and national levels, to boost the performance of traditional biomass energy practices and devise innovative modern uses, promoting both as environmentally responsible, technologically mature, economically feasible and socially acceptable energy uses for today and tomorrow.
FAO AND RENEWABLE SOURCES OF ENERGY
The range of FAO renewable energy programmes includes:
o activities on integrated energy sources that focus on developing a blend of energy sources and applications built into rural and agricultural planning, with a view to assisting countries to establish a range of energy-related development actions to meet specific requirements, so that enhanced/improved food security and fuel for people;
o broad-based energy assessment and planning consultations and collaborations with regional interests, such as the Latin American Working Group on Energy Planning for Sustainable Rural Development; the Latin American Energy Organization, ECLAC; the African Development Bank, ESCWA; the Economic Commission for Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Carribbean; the Inter-American Development Bank and many others. These consultations lay emphasis on promoting the development and application of mature and emerging renewable energy technologies;
o activities under the Tropical Forest Action Plan, including projects to test technologies such as biogas generation, organic recycling and gasification of wood and agricultural residues, as well more general scenarios for national planning approaches that integrate energy, forestry and agriculture concerns with social and cultural factors at every step;
o activities specific to wood energy development, including production of charcoal and wood-based commercial energy for industrial and community needs. Studies on woodfuel flows have been carried out in several countries in the RWEDP network and case-studies of electricity generation from woodfuels are underway in Argentina, Peru, Uruguay, Honduras and other countries in the Latin American Dendroenergy Network;
o FAO sponsors regional consultations in Latin America and Asia on wood energy and other RSE applications and develops partnerships with other government, non-government and private organizations.
Within FAO, activities relating to wood energy production and use are co-ordinated within the Forest Products Division (FOP) by the Non-Wood Products and Energy Branch, which determines overall strategic and policy requirements for sustainable wood energy development and relates this work to other renewable energy sources such as geothermal or hydro power and to conventional (including fossil-based) energy development.
<section>a</section>
Further information
Ahmed K. 1993
Renewable Energy Technologies. A Review of Status and Costs. World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Arnold J.E.M. 1991
Community forestry, ten years in review. FAO, Rome.
CNRE 1988
Heat and power from forestry biomass. Report and Proceedings of Workshop, Ormea, Germany. CNRE Bulletin 25.
FAO 1983
Wood for Energy. Forestry Topics Report No. 1
FAO 1985
Producer-gas technology for rural applications. FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin 61.
FAO 1990
Energy conservation in the mechanical forest industries. FAO Forestry Paper No. 93.
FAO 1990
A new approach to energy planning for sustainable rural development. Environment and Energy Paper 12.
FAO 1992
Tree and Land Tenure - rapid appraisal tools. Community Forestry Field Manual No. 4.
FAO 1993
Forestry Statistics Today for Tomorrow 1961-1991 to 2010
FAO 1993
A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi Programme of Action. FAO Forestry Paper 108.
Foley G. 1990
Electricity for Rural People. Panos Institute.
Foley G. 1992
Energy Farming. Earthscan, London.
Grubb M. 1993
The Earth Summit Agreements. Earthscan, London.
Hall D.O. et al. 1990
Carbon sequestration vs. Fossil Fuel Substitution. CEES Report No. 255, Princeton University, NJ, USA.
Koopmans A. 1994
Woodfuel flows. RWEDP Report, July 1994.
Gerald Leach and R. Mearns 1988
Beyond the woodfuel crisis: people, land and trees in Africa. Earthscan, London.
Myers N. 1989
The Greenhouse Effect. A Tropical Forestry Response. Biomass 18 (1): 72-78.
Pearce D. 1991
Blueprint 2: Greening the World Economy. Earthscan, London.
REUR 1989
Charcoal production and pyrolysis technologies. Proceedings of Workshop, Roeros, Norway. REUR Technical Series No. 20.
UNDP/ESMAP/FAO 1989
A comprehensive approach to energy assessment and planning for rural and agricultural development. Regional Energy Development Programme, Beijing, China. RAS/86/136.
WHO 1992
Indoor Air Pollution from Biomass Fuel. Working papers from a
WHO consultation, Geneva, 1992
Woods J. and D.O Hall 1994
Bioenergy for Development. FAO Environment and Energy Paper No. 13.
World Energy Council 1992
WEC Survey of Energy Resources. 16th edition.
World Resources Institute 1992
World Resources 1992-1993. Oxford University Press.
<section>b</section>
Acronyms, units and abbreviations
ADB
African Development Bank
ASEAN
Association of South East Asian Nations
CHP
Combined heat and power
CIRDAP
Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific
CSD
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development
ECLAC
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
EMENA
Europe, Middle East and North Africa
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
ESMAP
Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme
ESCWA
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
ETBE
Ethyl tertiary butyl ether
EU
European Union
GTOE
Giga tonnes oil equivalent
GW
Giga watt (IGW = 10 trillion watts)
IOS
International Organization for Standardization
Joule
Unit of energy worth 1 watt-second or 4.187 calories
MTOE
million tonnes oil equivalent
MW
Unit of 1000 watts
NGOs
Non-governmental organizations
NPA
Nairobi Programme of Action
NWFP
Non-wood forest products
OPEC
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
PJ
Petajoules (joules x 10/15)
REUR
FAO Reciprocal Office for Europe
RLAC
Latin America and the Caribbean Region
RPTES
Review of Policies in the Traditional Energy Sector
RSE
Renewable sources of energy
RWEDP
Regional Wood Energy Development Programme
TFAP
Tropical Forestry Action Programme
TJ
Terajoules (joules x 10/12)
TOE
Tonnes oil equivalent
WEC
World Energy Council
WHO
UN World Health Organization
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNIDO
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
