<section>a</section>
Chapter 6. General findings and specific recommendations
6.1 General findings
6.2 Specific Recommendations
Although this study is not comprehensive in either thematic or geographical terms, the following general findings and specific recommendations have been recognised from an assessment of the regional material and the case studied presented. Other findings and recommendations, more implicit than explicit in the text, and which surfaced from the discussions among the authors and, in particular, from the "AfDB/FAO Seminar on Energy and Agriculture" convened by the AfDB in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, from 30 November to 2 December, 1994, have also been identified.
6.1 General findings
6.1.1 Policies
6.1.2 Sustainable agriculture and food security
6.1.3 Methodological Issues
6.1.4 Data requirements and availability
6.1.5. Technological issues
6.1.6 Awareness and capacity building
6.1.1 Policies
1. Energy and agricultural linkages
Agricultural productivity is closely associated to direct and indirect energy inputs, and policies are required to consolidate this relationship to the benefit of farmers. Agricultural development plans in most African countries are designed and implemented with little or no regard to this association, loosing opportunities to enhance production in both quantitative and qualitative terms. Energy development plans rarely take into consideration the present and future energy needs of agriculture, and most rural electrification programmes are mainly directed to households.
2. Energy prices
Energy price policies seldom regard the special economic conditions of rural populations. If rural development is to be achieved, energy inputs must be made available, and this might require special efforts from the society as a whole, such as subsidizing energy inputs in order to maintain the expected low costs and high quality of agricultural produce, as generally demanded by urban populations.
3. Social equity
Policies promoting social equity between rural and urban populations and between men and women, particularly in rural areas, are generally missing, leading to migration, injustice and social instability. In energy terms, this means reduction of human drudgery in water and fuel collection activities and better services. Facilitating energy and other inputs required by agriculture represents a higher recognition, in both economic and social terms, of the vital role played by the rural people in feeding society.
4. Land tenure
Policies on property of land and regulations to control its use are fields obviously out of the scope of this study, but a reference to this issue is considered important in the context of biomass conversion to energy. Legislation regarding property rights, both of land and of produce, such as biomass from forests is generally weak in Africa and is considered an important barrier to the healthy development of sustainable bioenergy production and use.
6.1.2 Sustainable agriculture and food security
1. Energy requirements for specific objectives
Methods should be capable of linking energy requirements with specific objectives of agricultural and rural development, such as food security, agro-industry development, and sustainable farming practices. This requires data indicating the energy intensiveness of different farming techniques for important food and other crops. A limited amount of such data is available in Zimbabwe, Sudan, and Tanzania, but is generally poor. Locally determined targets for agricultural production, along with specification of how these will be achieved, should be developed and used to the extent possible.
2. Considering the full "Food Chain" in assessing energy requirements
In order to benefit Food Security strategies with the necessary energy inputs in both qualitative and quantitative terms, policies and methodologies should consider the critical linkages between agricultural production, agricultural-based industries (food, beverage, tobacco, and textiles), distribution, commercialization, etc, as well as the rest of the economy. Agricultural growth is the most important contributor to manufacturing and service activity in Sub-Saharan Africa, not only stimulating agro-industries, but the rest of the economy as well. In this context, energy from biomass is an added benefit.
3. Energy availability to match Food Security targets
The goal of regional food security could require a 2-3 fold increase in agricultural energy requirements by 2010 relative to 1990/1 levels, particularly if emphasis is made on improving yield through conventional high-input techniques. (This reflects results for Zimbabwe). Agro-industry could become the fastest growing sector, in terms of energy requirements, with the agricultural sector the next fastest growth sector.
4. Energy implications of environmental and low-input fanning techniques
Low-input farming techniques, such as integrated pest management, low-tillage cultivation, use of residues, green manures, and other organic fertilizers, may play an important role in sustainable agricultural development. There are several local success stories and new initiatives in low-input, high-yield agriculture, however, the energy implications of these techniques have yet to be systematically documented. More research is needed to enable clear comparisons with well-established high-input methods.
5. Planning of energy inputs for specific SARD interventions
The design and implementation of almost all SARD field operations will require some form and amount of energy input. In many cases, this energy input is not considered from the start, leading to unsatisfactory solutions from both the environmental and energy efficiency standpoints. It is necessary to "energize" agricultural practices with the same sustainability and environmental criteria as the practice itself.
6.1.3 Methodological Issues
1. Coordinate agriculture, energy, electrification and rural development plans
Most sectoral plans are carried out in isolation from other sectors. This is particularly grave when developing policies and plans for energy in agriculture, due to the close interlinkages. To a great extent, this problem arises as a result of the lack of priority given by the energy sector to rural areas in general, to the lack of any "lobbying" capacity of farmers in the energy sector, and to the lack of mandate and of technical expertise on energy in the agricultural sector.
2. Institutional links and responsibilities
One of the striking features that was unearthed by this study is the very limited linkages between the various sectors which are to be involved in the definition of energy policies for agriculture, in the actual implementation of energy projects for agricultural activities and in the development of technologies related to the double role of agriculture as an energy consumer and producer. Therefore, intersectoral cooperation is necessary, and should include government, NGOs and the private sector. It would appear that there is a strong case for the design of institutional mechanisms for encouraging closer cooperation and collaboration between institutions, in particular between the agricultural and energy sectors. A national group or task force could be considered as a way of guiding an overall Energy for Agriculture programme. A national framework for action could be designed and adopted, to serve as reference for all involved.
3. Keeping methodologies flexible, simple and adaptable
Given the wide variation in both agriculture/energy relationships and data availability among African countries, methods of energy analysis should be flexible and adaptable. Models, spreadsheets, and other adaptable tools can offer a suitable framework for evaluating future energy requirements. Sophisticated models will generally be inappropriate, because of fixed and substantial data requirements.
4. Coordinating planning at local, regional and national levels
Methods for agricultural/rural energy planning should ideally be carried out at the local, regional, and national levels. Local needs are best addressed with knowledge of specific local conditions and with effective people's participation. At the same time, local areas are interdependent, and national planners must ensure that total national energy needs are met, often with large scale projects that cannot be planned at the local level (e.g. power plants, refineries, or pipelines). It is thus necessary to make converge local priorities with national interests, and area-based planning can be an effective tool.
5. Consider end-use analysis as the basis for planning and projections
Demand-driven, end-use analysis offers several advantages. It is generally based on significant desegregation among farm types, crops, regions and energy uses, to enable better understanding and projection of energy requirements. It also enables projections to be based on projected needs at a more local level. Not requiring consistent and reliable time-series or cross-sectional data like econometric analyses, end-use analyses can generally be adapted to available data. However, in-depth end-use analysis can be rather data intensive.
6.1.4 Data requirements and availability
1. Economic potential of energy interventions in agriculture
Greater efforts need to be directed towards understanding the economic impact of energy shortages and shortfalls in the agricultural sector of Africa. Information and data generated by this exercise would provide important and vital guidance for determining the optimum level of resources that should be channelled towards the study and assessment of energy use in the agricultural sector of Africa as well as the design and implementation of appropriate interventions. At the moment, the resources provided appear to be woefully inadequate. This is particularly striking in a region where agriculture is the dominant economic activity.
2. Collection, generation and collation of energy data
The general scarcity of available data on energy use patterns, combined with the importance of meeting agricultural energy needs, suggests that greater effort should be directed towards compilation of agricultural energy statistics. In addition, in the many countries where agriculture remains the predominant source of employment and income, and little is known about agricultural energy use patters, systematic surveys should be considered.
3. Normalized regional data base on energy and agriculture
Regional cooperation in the energy and agriculture field would strongly benefit from a data base built from normalized country information. The questionnaire prepared and utilized for the present study could be used as a guide in the first instance. This questionnaire could gradually be expanded to include other environmental sustainability parameters, which could assist in assessing the interlinkages between energy and SARD and energy and Food Security.
6.1.5. Technological issues
1. Efficient energy utilization
There is significant potential for cost-effective energy efficiency improvements in irrigation, crop curing and drying, and agro-industrial motor drive and process heating. Investing in these technological improvements would help to reduce the overall costs of meeting agricultural production goals, and minimize the environmental impacts of woodfuel use and the foreign exchange and capital requirements of expanding commercial energy supply. Key areas include tobacco curing, agricultural pumpsets, and food, beverage, and textile industries, where up to 50%, 20%, and 30% reductions in energy use, respectively, could be economic and achievable.
2. Biomass energy conversion
The potential role of agriculture as a major energy producer will only be tapped if technologies to convert biomass (wood; residues; purposely grown) are developed, tested and economically assessed. Among those technologies which seem to offer good possibilities are: gasification, pyrolysis, fermentation (alcohol and biogas) and modern combustion.
3. Renewable energy, sources
Although efforts have been pursued in many African countries to develop and utilize energy sources such as solar and wind energies, their potential is far from reached. Among the solar and wind technologies useful in agriculture are water lifting and pumping with solar thermal and photovoltaic systems and with wind mills and heat and cold production for drying and other processes with solar dryers and thermodynamic systems.
6.1.6 Awareness and capacity building
1. Political awareness
There is a general lack of recognition on the part of policy makers of the need to urgently increase the energy inputs for agriculture. Rural poverty alleviation is normally high in the policy agenda of most countries, and it would consolidate these efforts if energy issues were included as a major consideration in rural development plans and programmes.
2. Expertise in the study and analysis of energy for agriculture
The dearth of information and documentation on energy use in Africa's agriculture is an indication that expertise in this area is very limited. Most of the available literature is from either Asia or Latin America. The need for human resource development and capacity building to develop a critical mass of African expertise that can study and analyze the nexus between energy and agriculture cannot be over-emphasized. The African region has developed considerable expertise in many energy fields, as demonstrated by the efforts of the African Energy Programme of the African Development Bank, which have mobilized more than 140 energy experts. There is an urgent need to develop a training module on energy and agriculture in order to tap and mobilize that expertise towards this field.
6.2 Specific Recommendations
6.2.1 Studies and development of knowledge
6.2.1 Studies and development of knowledge
6.2.1.1 Data and methodologies
1. Prepare guidelines related to the use of data for assessment, planning, forecasting, and identifying technological options. The guidelines should:
a. identify the minimum and maximum needs for data generation, collection and analysis in energy and agriculture;
b. review the major tools and technical models available for data analysis such as LEAP, MEDE-A, MEDEE, APENPLAN;
c. use the perspective of "chain analysis" (filiere) to link agriculture with energy use in other sectors such as industry and transport.
2. Analyze energy requirements related to different growth and development scenarios in different agroecological zones of Africa
3. Prepare a database on energy in agriculture that can be desegregated at national and sub-regional levels. The SADC database is an example to consider.
Based on the guidelines (above), the database should contain information on energy sources, use, use patterns, availability, distribution, requirements and other relevant parameters.
An effort should be made to address aspects related to energy "access" and "supply".
4. Develop a methodology and estimate cost factors related to sustainable farming practices and food security in Africa to use in estimating energy costs and comparing conventional vs. sustainable production systems.
5. Document the nature and amount of animate power (human labour, draught animals, etc.) used in African agriculture. Recommend alternatives for improving its effectiveness.
6.2.1.2 Policy analysis and development
1. Formulate integrated rural energy plans and policies in selected, representative countries taming into account national efforts on poverty alleviation and activities such as Agenda 21, National Environmental Action Plans, National Conservation Strategies.
The plans should address production, processing, marketing, transport and institutional linkages between agriculture and other sectors.
Organize a regional workshop to assist in preparing the plans and policies.
2. Undertake a regional study on energy management methods used in agriculture. Prepare case examples such as from the five country studies and other countries in and outside the region.
The study should identify opportunities and present approaches for improving energy management in African agriculture.
3. Analyze the costs created by energy shortages in African agriculture. Prepare selected case examples to demonstrate the impacts.
6.2.1.3 Regional technological prospects
1. Assess, throughout the region, the potential for replicating co-generation systems based on agricultural wastes. The experience in Mauritius and other countries related to the sugar industry could be used as examples. Investment opportunities should be identified.
Organize a regional workshop to assist in preparing the review.
2. Prepare a comparative evaluation of ethanol programmes in Kenya, Malawi, Mali and Zimbabwe to identify opportunities for replication and expansion in the region.
3. Evaluate and compare briquetting programmes for coconut, coffee, groundnuts and palm oil industries in selected, representative countries. Identify opportunities for replication and expansion in the region.
4. Undertake a regional study to identify the energy potential and technological options for using livestock wastes from large-scale production systems.
5. Prepare detailed studies in one or two countries (Cameroon is one good example) on the energy requirements and related investment costs to increase mechanization in agriculture and fisheries.
The studies should use national agricultural and energy plans as reference points, and take into account national food security and sustainability objectives
6. In selected countries, study the prospects for increasing energy use efficiency related to agro-processing, water and irrigation, land preparation, transport.
Organize a regional workshop to assist in preparing the study.
6.2.1.4 National Studies on Energy and Agriculture
1. National case studies
a. Finalize the preliminary case studies in the present report for Cameroon, Mali, Sudan, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe.
· broaden the existing case studies in order to facilitate the comparison and contrasting of the energy-agriculture relationships among the five countries.
b. Prepare more complete and in-depth, national studies for Cameroon, Mali, Sudan, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe. Multi-disciplinary national teams could be supported to carry out the following activities within each country:
· deepen the analysis and understanding of the state of agriculture and associated energy requirements.
· identify opportunities for, and constraints to, increasing agricultural production in a sustainable manner.
· assess the impacts of national policies (e.g. related to pricing of energy and other inputs, development of transport and other infrastructure, gender issues, credit and land tenure), that have influenced and will continue to influence the use and supply of energy and the prospects for increased agricultural output.
· conduct surveys, as needed, to fill in data gaps. Emphasis may need to be given to West and Central Africa, where the current information base on energy use in agriculture is particularly weak.
· explore alternative agricultural and energy development scenarios in which conventional and renewable energy development, as well as energy efficiency measures are considered.
· assess manpower development requirements and promote education and training programmes to meet them.
· Based on the findings of the in-depth national studies, projects will be identified that can help to increase agricultural output through improved energy services.
c. Expand case studies to other countries
· carry out similar case studies for other countries, with initial emphasis on countries where conditions differ significantly from those in the original five case studies.
2. National consultations
Organize national consultations, upon completion of national case studies, on integrated energy and sustainable agricultural development with the objective of developing a National Framework of Action.
6.2.1.5 Capacity Building
1. Political awareness
It is urgent to mobilize political and policy actions to accelerate rural development through energy inputs. All tools available need to be tapped to this end. Among these tools are the above mentioned National Consultations, which can be effective in identifying priorities and institutional cooperation mechanisms. Other political awareness tools are conferences, discussions at the time of political elections and campaigns through the mass media.
2. Human resource development
a. Develop and implement training modules on energy and agriculture. This module can be designed for inclusion in existing formal agriculture courses, as well as the few specialized energy courses that are currently available in the region. (In addition, this module can be incorporated into the programmes of new institutions at the regional and sub-regional levels that may be created through the African Energy Programme.)
b. Establish Regional and Subregional Technical Expert Services for:
· specific energy technologies, including energy efficiency, equipment design and selection, maintenance.
· surveys and other energy data collection activities in the agricultural sector.
· agricultural energy planning and policy analysis.
6.2.1.6 Projects
The energy situation in the rural areas of Africa, as described in both qualitative, and to some extent, quantitative terms throughout this study, makes it clear that an enormous effort needs to be made. It would therefore be impossible to present in this document a comprehensive list of projects. Besides the regional projects discussed in the above sections, an effort has been made in this section to identify a sample of projects which represent only a small fraction of those which need to be urgently implemented. Many of the projects here presented were identified by the experts attending the "AfDB/FAO Seminar on Energy and Agriculture" convened by the AfDB in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, from 30 November to 2 December, 1994.
6.2.1.7 Criteria for selection of projects
The selected projects adhere mainly to the following criteria:
· Have significant regional impact and encourage regional integration.
· Meet work energy requirement of agriculture; contribute to energy and agricultural sustainability and enhance agricultural productivity and cost-effectiveness.
· Use proven technology and approach that is well beyond the pilot phase.
· Are able to attract significant private sector co-financing in the long-term.
· Prove environmentally-sound as well as enhance social equity, technological and cultural development.
· Adhere to national development priorities and aspirations.
The above six criteria could assist the AfDB/AEP and FAO to develop a more comprehensive set of factors and pre-requisites for projects aimed at energy supply, transformation and use in agriculture.
6.2.1.8 Sample Projects
1. Kenya: Co-generation from the sugar industry
Kenya has a large sugar industry as well as a looming power shortage. The country has an import-agreement with Uganda to import up to 30 MW. Electricity capacity shortages are expected in the near future. The country sugar industry could assist in closing the expected gap between growing demand for electricity and national power generation capacity. Most of the sugar mills already possess co-generation facilities and the main hurdle to the sale of surplus power from the mills to the national grid largely revolves around tariff agreements. In addition, conversion of current co-generation units to dual fuel units such as those operating in Mauritius and Reunion would allow regular provision of power and eliminate one of the main reasons for the reluctance of the national power utility (Kenya Power and Lighting Company) to purchase power from the sugar industry. Having been a major financier of the sugar industries, the AfDB is well-placed to provide the necessary financial and
policy support to initiate the above activities as well as further expansion to other African countries.
2. Mali: Production of vegetable oil from the Baga Ni plant
The technology for the production of vegetable oil from the "Baga Ni" plant as a liquid fuel is relatively mature. The farming of the required grains is well-established and the use of small motorized presses to produce the vegetable oil are already functional. In addition the residues of "Baga Ni" plant constitute an excellent pesticide and laxative. The husks of the "Baga Ni" also constitute an environmentally-sound organic fertilizer. This is a national project with attractive opportunities for expansion at the regional level. In this respect, it would be advisable to first undertake a pre-feasibility study that examines the Mali experience and assesses the possibility of replication of this experience to other sub-Saharan African countries.
3. Kenya: Windpumping industry
Kenya has two well-established manufacturers of windpumps. Most of the installed windpumps are used for irrigation especially in the rapidly growing non-traditional agricultural products sub-sector (flowers, vegetables and fruits). In addition to providing low-cost and nutritious food products to the country, this sub-sector is one of the fastest growing export sub-sectors in the country. Similar growth has been experienced in Eastern, Southern and Northern African countries. Additional windpumps would increase the availability of water and allow the expansion of agricultural land dedicated to horticultural thus accelerating the growth of this important industry as well as increasing the sub-sector's output. It is estimated that over 90% of the value added of a typical windpump is now undertaken in the country which demonstrates significant technological capability and high potential for further replication. One of the key barriers facing further replication of this
successful technology to the farming sector of Kenya and region is financing. With its long-term expertise in provision of financial assistance to the African agricultural sector, the AfDB with the assistance of the AEP could assist local Kenyan commercial banks and agricultural development banks to establish a financing package for windpumps which could be accessed by both producers and end-users of windpumps.
4. Zimbabwe: Irrigation projects to support baseload development and expanded rural electrification
Rural electrification has alluded most African countries. The main reason being two fold. Delivering electricity is too expensive (more so the extension of the grid). There is limited or virtually no capacity to consume supplied power - there is no base load because there is no economic activity to provide baseload. The project will introduce electrical water pumping and support irrigation schemes to raise baseload and to provide a self-interested economic activity which can sustainably pay for supplied power and therefore, rural electrification. The project can eventually be expanded to other sub-Saharan African countries but this proposal focuses primarily on Zimbabwe where some successes have been achieved in this form of baseload development. AfDB is well-placed to assist in developing credit schemes targeted at users to acquire the required equipment.
5. Regional energy potential of agricultural residues in Africa
Because of the energy potential of agricultural residues a regional project should be undertaken, to include financial assessments and technology demonstration.
6. Regional study - Potential of ethanol in Africa
Comparative review of ethanol programmes in Malawi, Kenya and Zimbabwe and opportunities for further replication in the region.
7. Regional study - Briquetting of coffee husks in Uganda
Coffee processing in Uganda is a centralized activity which generates a large amount of coffee husks that can be partially carbonized and converted into briquettes for consumption in both the industrial and household sectors. Production of coffee husks briquettes is already ongoing in Uganda and in a number of other African countries. It is recommended that the activity be undertaken in the form of a regional study that examines the potential of coffee husks.
8. Expansion of energy efficient tobacco curing methods
Activities of the Tobacco Research Board in Zimbabwe has improved energy efficiency in tobacco curing from 4.6 kg/kg to 1.6 kg/kg. This research achievement is being slowly diffused in the industry thereby saving wood and coal as well as costs to the farmer. The proposal is to support the critical assessment of this technology and its greater diffusion. The project would be easily commercialised and could be applied in other countries such as Malawi, Tanzania and the Republic of South Africa where tobacco is grown. Support would include verification of the technology, assessment of markets and export or diffusion promotion.
<title>Future energy requirements for Africa's agriculture. FUTURE ENERGY REQUIREMENTS FOR AFRICAâ€™S AGRICULTURE</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgments
Appreciation is expressed to Messrs. Stephen Karekezi and Michael Lazarus for their support and interest in designing and preparing this study.
Acknowledged with thanks is the assistance of the following persons who provided data and information relevant to this study:
Prof. Hassan Osman ABD EL NOUR
Sudan
Dr. J.J. CHITAURO
Zimbabwe
Ismail EL GIZOULI
Sudan
Gaafar Elamin EL FAKI ALI
Sudan
Dr. Yemi KATERERE
Zimbabwe
Dr. Michel Claude LOKOLO
Cameroon
Maxwell C. MAPAKO
Zimbabwe
B.E.A.T. LUHANGA
Tanzania
Dr. R.S. MAYA
Zimbabwe
Patrick RUTABANZIBWA
Tanzania
Mamédy SACKO
Mali
Special appreciation is expressed to Mr. Sail, Coordinator of the African Energy Programme of the African Development Bank for his continued interest and inputs to this study.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1. Introduction
Many countries in Africa continue to be among the lowest per capita energy consumers in the world. In all sectors, industry, agriculture, transport, household and commercial, a lack of minimum energy inputs has lead to continued low productivity and impaired economic growth. It is also clear that in all sectors, energy is but one of the many important inputs for production, conversion, processing and commercialization. However, and especially in the agricultural sector of most African countries, increased yields and production due to energy and other inputs, can lead to important benefits such as improved incomes, new employment opportunities and agro-industrial growth, which will in themselves tend to increase energy requirements. In this context, energy can be viewed as a "motor" for development.
The energy/agriculture relationship is, therefore, more complex than a mere econometric one. It has unique social and political elements, and in the case of Africa, it relates to the great majority of the population, a large proportion of which remains immersed in a vicious cycle of poverty, drudgery and malnutrition, and, in energy terms, outside the development thrust enjoyed by other sectors of the population.
Food security issues, particularly in Africa, have acquired a revived and new emphasis. Thirty countries in sub-Saharan Africa alone, suffered from low or critically low levels of food security in the period between 1991 and 1993. Many other countries in the Region will require emergency assistance due to shortfalls in food production. Achieving the aim that "all people at all times have access to the food they need for a healthy, active life", will necessarily imply increasing the quality and quantity of energy inputs. Particularly where hunger is caused by widespread and persistent poverty, energy can have an impact, both as a direct input, and through the benefits it carries related to rural infrastructure, employment and enhanced level of life.
This study, through a systematic analysis of the historical and present energy scenario in the agricultural sector, aims at identifying the main constraints facing that sector in mobilizing the benefits of a stable, solid and healthy energy situation in rural areas. It focuses specifically on the agricultural sector, and does not discuss forestry and household issues which are the main topics of other studies. The study does not pretend to be comprehensive, either in geographical or topical terms. It identifies and discusses the trends and results of energy development in the Region as a whole. It also develops and applies a methodological approach to five countries of the Region - Cameroon, Mali, Sudan, Tanzania and Zimbabwe - and sets the basis for more detailed national, subregional and regional studies.
The main constraint in preparing this study was the lack of data regarding energy consumption in the agricultural sector, especially by small farms and producers. This reflects the sparse attention this energy sub-sector has normally received from energy and agriculture institutions, which is probably one of the main causes of the problems facing rural energy development. The data available is generally incomplete, frequently unreliable, to be found in different sources and rarely compiled in an organized manner. In order to fill this data gap at least partially, contact was established with a number of national experts, who assisted in the identification and collation of energy and related information useful in the case studies. Of great importance in the process of preparation of this study, was the "AfDB/FAO Seminar on Energy and Agriculture", convened by the African Development Bank in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, from 30 November to 2 December, 1994. Over 25 experts from
more than 20 countries discussed a first draft of the study, and provided invaluable inputs and comments.
Energy inputs are recognized as a key factor in achieving sustainable agriculture and rural development - SARD. Agenda 21, adopted at the United Nations Conference for Environment and Development - UNCED, in 1992, calls for specific efforts in the energy field to promote sustainability and a better environment. This study is also set in the context of FAO's energy activities and overall efforts in promoting an effective implementation of Agenda 21.
The authors of this study are Mr. Michael Lazarus, Mr. Evan Hansen and Mr. David Hill from SEI (Stockholm Environment Institute - Boston), Mr. Stephen Karekezi and Mr. Lugard Majoro from APREPREN (African Energy Policy Research Network), and Mr. Gustavo Best and Mr. Jeff Tschirley from FAO. Members of FAO's Energy Working Group and Officers from the African Energy Programme of AfDB contributed with comments and inputs.
This study represents a contribution from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to the African Energy Programme of the African Development Bank.
FAO thanks the African Development Bank for its support and hopes that this study will assist their efforts to promote socio-economic development in Africa.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2. Energy for Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development and Food Security in Africa
2.1 Sustainable agriculture and rural development - SARD
2.2 Food security in Africa
2.3 An energy transition for SARD and food security
Annex One: Sustainability concerns
Annex Two: Data tables
In June 1992, 41 African nations endorsed the Agenda 21 as a comprehensive international framework and action programme for sustainable development at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED, Rio de Janeiro).^1
[^1 The Agenda 21 addresses energy concerns in a number of its parts. Chapter 4 on "Changing consumption patterns" calls for greater energy efficiency and for the use of environmentally sound technologies, with emphasis on the utilization of renewable energy sources. Chapter 7 on "Promoting sustainable human settlement development" refers to the need to promote alternative energy sources for human settlements as a way of reducing the negative impact of energy production and use on human health and on the environment. Chapter 9 on "Protection of the atmosphere" discusses in detail the effects of energy utilization on the quality of air and on climate, and calls for policies and programmes to increase the contribution of environmentally sound and cost-effective energy systems. Energy for agriculture is specifically addressed as a key area for action in Chapter 14 of the Agenda 21 on Promoting sustainable agriculture and rural development; it includes recommendations for a
programme on "Rural Energy Transition to Enhance Productivity"]
Energy matters are addressed in numerous sections of the Agenda 21 and the following recommendations were made with respect to energy and agriculture:
(a) Not later than the year 2000, to initiate and encourage a process of environmentally sound energy transition in rural communities, from unsustainable energy sources, to structured and diversified energy sources by making available alternative new and renewable sources of energy;
(b) To increase the energy inputs available for rural households and agro-industrial needs through planning and appropriate technology transfer and development;
(c) To implement self-reliant rural programmes favouring sustainable development of renewable energy sources and improved energy efficiency.
Accompanying the need for a transition from subsistence energy use, based predominantly on human labour and fuelwood toward supplies that are balanced with effective demand, is the importance of sustainable agriculture and rural development and food security. Both topics are of paramount concern to the African continent and are discussed in this chapter.
2.1 Sustainable agriculture and rural development - SARD
Specific actions for sustainable agriculture and rural development (SARD) were recommended at the FAO/Netherlands Conference on Agriculture and the Environment held in 's-Hertogenbosch 15 to 19 April 1991 and were subsequently adopted as Chapter 14 of the Agenda 21. However, African agriculture, which is characterised by low levels of productivity relative to population growth, and frequently accompanied by human induced degradation and drought presents special challenges not encountered in other regions.
Sustainable agriculture and rural development has been defined by FAO as:
"......the management and conservation of the natural resource base, and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of the human needs for present and future generations. Such sustainable development (in agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors) conserves land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, is environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable and socially acceptable."
The goals, strategies and tools of SARD were developed in the light of the need to feed an additional 3.2 billion people by the year 2025 and the growing degradation of the natural resource base arising from unsustainable farming and land-use practices. Its goals are to:
· improve food security by ensuring an appropriate and sustainable balance between self-sufficiency and self-reliance;
· promote employment and income generation in rural areas, particularly focusing on poverty alleviation;
· conserve natural resources and protect the environment.
In Africa, these goals are not easily attainable over the short or medium-term. High population densities relative to productive capacity, landlessness, malnutrition and extreme poverty will inevitably lead to degradation of the natural resource base unless special measures are taken to improve levels of training and education, raise incomes, and promote investment.
During the period 1980-90, approximately 4.1 million hectares of land were deforested each year, about 18 per cent of the total major cause of this loss arises from smallholders converting the land to agricultural purposes. Timber production is a relatively minor source of forest loss. However both sources create significant losses of biological diversity which has important economic value. In some cases, changes in microclimate are also observed.
In 1990, of a total of 187 million hectares of agricultural land, nearly 121 million hectares were considered to be affected by human-induced degradation such as wind or water erosion, or chemical or physical degradation.
It has been estimated that about 130 million people in Sub-Saharan Africa live in areas where fuelwood consumption outpaces the natural regenerative capacity of the forest.^2 In such circumstances, the degradation is compounded by greater reliance on energy sources such as dung or unused plant material which would normally play an important role in maintaining soil fertility and structure for future production.
[^2 Concise report on the World: Population situation in 1993. United Nations]
In addition to these, and other problems related to environmental degradation, economic performance in agriculture has generally been dismal. During the period 1965-1980, agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa grew at a rate of 1.8 per cent p.a. against population growth rate of 2.7 per cent.^3 During the 1980s agricultural growth declined further against an increasing population growth rates (1.4 per cent and 3.1 per cent resp.), compounding land degradation, food shortfalls and food insecurity.
[^3 A strategy to develop agriculture in Sub-Saharan African and a focus for the World Bank by Kevin Cleaver. World Bank, 1993. p.23.]
While production gains have been realized in some African countries and the rate of foreign direct investment has increased in recent years, there remains much to be done.
The elements of sustainability, many of which have important information and technology components, are not easily adapted to the constraints faced in Africa, which is starting from a low base. For example, Africa's average annual fertiliser use is only 20 kgs per hectare against a world average of 96; its cropland is only 6 per cent irrigated against a world average of 17 per cent. Similarly the average number of tractors and harvesters is below that of the world and other regions.
To increase production in African agriculture will require, without question, breaking energy bottleneck that currently exists at all levels. For example, at the farm level soil nutrient mining (i.e. extracting nutrients without replacing them) is directly related to energy use and sustainability. Soils without sufficient nutrients to produce good crops lead farmers to search for new lands to cultivate and, often, deforestation. On the other hand, the availability of organic and mineral fertilizers present highly cost effective sources of energy and plant nutrition but often involve costs (either in labour or cash) that exceed the capacity of the farmer to use them effectively.
Similar concerns can be observed in the use of pesticides and processes such as soil salinization, loss of biological diversity, desertification and water pollution.
At the national level, government policies often promote energy availability in urban areas but not rural ones. Thus, due to a lack of access to energy, farmers either cannot prepare and cultivate their land properly or cannot harvest, store and process their yield to maximize return. This leads them to engage in highly inefficient and unsustainable practices such as shortened fallow periods, inadequate cultivation, or excessive use of dung or fuelwood for cooking food or processing output.
Action to address such sustainability concerns must focus on at least four areas:
· Adjusting policies to promote environmentally sound and productive technologies. This involves reducing the role of governments in cases where market mechanisms function effectively, seeking to promote prices that reflect the full sustainability costs of production, and, where appropriate, adopting policies that promote environmentally sound and sustainable production practices;
· Strengthening human resources and institutional capacity to conduct research and extension, to better manage natural resources and to maintain an equilibrium between the productive capacity of the land and the demands that are placed on it;
· Improving the use of cost effective inputs such as pesticides and fertilizers by supporting them with integrated pest management, integrated plant nutrition, and appropriate mixes of improved and local varieties of genetic material;
· Conserving natural resources including the soil, water and vegetation based on holistic management principles.
Putting SARD into practice in Africa requires a number of simultaneous actions by governments, districts and local communities, not the least of which are training, institutional strengthening, and improving the information base.
For rural energy, more than any other factor, is the need to increase the overall quantity of and access to all types of energy supplies in rural areas, within the context of environmentally sound and sustainable development. Success in this will require establishing institutional linkages and coordinating mechanisms between the development of rural and urban energy to avoid intensifying land degradation and pollution.
2.2 Food security in Africa
Africa has more countries with food security problems than any other continent.^4 Two-thirds of all countries with food security problems are in Africa, where gross domestic product has declined for six consecutive years. Of the 44 countries with poor or critical food security, 30 are in Africa. Present trends would mean that the number of chronically undernourished in Sub-Saharan Africa would rise from 180 to 300 million by the year 2010.
[^4 Assessment of the current World Food Security Situation and Recent Policy Development CFS: 94/2, Committee on World Food Security, 22-25 March 1994, FAO.]
The FAO Committee on World Food Security, the FAO Council and the FAO Conference of 1983 defined as ultimate objective or goal:
"to ensure that all people at all times have both physical and economic access to the basic food they need". At the global level, food security has three specific aims: "ensuring production of adequate food supplies; maximizing stability in the flow of supplies; and securing access to available supplies on the part of those who need them".
In many parts of Africa, a limited base of high potential land excludes the option of significantly expanding the area under cultivation. Thus, assuming that an appropriate enabling policy setting is in place, achieving food security in most African communities requires increasing the productivity and sustainability of the farming system. This involves increasing intensification of production, diversification and system resilience.
Intensification involves using land, water and labour more efficiently, increasing the use of technologies such as IPM and IPNS to control pests and maintain soil fertility, intercropping, terracing and other techniques to control erosion.
Diversification involves matching farm production to the prevailing agro-ecological conditions in the area. It does not mean that all production units must be diversified, some may and probably should contain, highly specialized production units or crops that generate greater profits than typical subsistence crops.
Successful intensification and diversification will increase system resilience and the ability of households and community to manage risk and reduce their food insecurity. Resilience also implies greater stability in farm income, reduced crop and livestock loss during drought or flooding, and distributes the demand for labour more evenly throughout the growing season.
FAO has recently incorporated the three elements of its broadened concept of food security - availability, stability of supply and access - into an index of household food security. The Aggregate Household Food Security Index (AHFSI) calculates the food-gap between the undernourished and average national requirements, the instability of the annual food supply and the proportion of undernourished in the total population. The index ranges from 0 to 100, with 100 representing complete, risk-free, food security and 0, total famine.
FAO categorized the food security situation an index rating below 65 as "critical". Between 1991-93 the following African countries were in this category: Botswana, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Ethiopia, Lesotho, Liberia, Mozambique, Rwanda, Somalia and Zambia. African countries with "low" food security, an index reading between 65 and 75, included Angola, Cameroon, Congo, Gambia, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritania, Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zaire and Zimbabwe.
On the global level the 1993 AHFSI ratings of 93 developing countries show nearly 75 per cent of those countries experienced a slight deterioration in food security compared to 1992. In many African countries the index rating fell by more than 2 per cent between 1988-1990 and 1991-93, excluding emergency food aid. These countries were: Botswana, Central African Republic, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Guinea, Mauritania, Mozambique, Rwanda, Senegal, Somalia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo and Zimbabwe. Lesotho, Madagascar, Mauritius and Zambia suffered even greater declines in food security. In contrast, the AHFSI index placement improved by 2 per cent or more during the same survey period in Angola, Burkina Faso, Chad, Ghana, Mali, Niger, Sudan and irrespective of their 1994 AHFSI rating. No Sub-Saharan African country has a high-level food security rating (over 85).
The imperative of increasing food security in Africa calls for important and fundamental changes in the relationships between government institutions and rural communities. Decentralisation, empowerment (i.e. control over planning and allocation of financial resources), and clear and equitable property rights are all essential components. But governments will continue to have an important role in establishing sectoral policy for many areas, especially the energy transition. Special consideration is needed to policies that provide incentives to invest in energy technologies and supplies that are sustainable and cost effective, even if it requires a brief period of financial support.
2.3 An energy transition for SARD and food security
During the last five years a new context for action has emerged in the international community, which calls for an energy transition in both developing and industrialized countries. For the OECD countries this transition takes form in the context of high consumption patterns that involve net resource transfers from South to the North, consume excessive resources and/or generate pollution.
In the African countries, a transition to sustainable energy systems is needed to accelerate the growth of basic food production, harvesting and processing. However, breaking the current energy bottleneck must also be sustainable (viz. environmentally sound, socially acceptable and economically viable). Such a transition involves a commitment to long-term developmental goals and requires innovative policy and technological solutions.
For Africa, an energy transition would be characterized by a move from the present levels of subsistence energy usage based on human labour and fuelwood resources, to a situation where household, services and farming activities use a range of sustainable and diversified energy sources. Obvious benefits are greater resilience in the production system, higher productivity, improved efficiency and higher incomes to farmers. Environmental degradation, driven primarily by poverty, would be minimized.
The investment required to make such a transition would not be significantly different from that required for conventional approaches. However, the process of identifying needs and promoting investment in a range of technological options would be considerably different. The new energy situation would offer opportunities to reinvigorate the situation in many African countries which continue to cope with insufficient rural energy supplies. Among the problems are the following:
· Price policies rarely reflect the energy needs of rural populations;
· Energy plans and agricultural programmes are not linked;
· Energy requirements for agro-activities are seldom quantified;
· Energy policies and plans in most countries do not focus on the agricultural and rural sectors, except occasionally, on an aggregate basis;
Unfortunately, the energy transition in rural areas will not occur under a "business-as-usual" situation. A concerted effort is needed on the part of the many actors influencing energy supply and demand patterns. One challenge is to reduce the barriers facing rural energy development which arise from a lack of policy and programme coordination between the rural and agricultural sectors, and the energy sector institutions.
The rural sector continues to remain outside the energy assessment and planning efforts which are normal practice for industry, commerce, transport. This is due, in part, to the small impact rural energy has on the national energy balance. Because of their meagre energy consumption and poor data, especially in the African context, the important role agriculture plays as a source of food and fibre, for foreign exchange and the relatively large percentage of GDP that is derived from the agricultural and rural sector, is ignored.
The dispersed and often non-monetized nature of rural energy also contributes to its neglect in planning and investment. Energy authorities rarely have an institutional or operational presence in rural areas and only a few agriculture and rural development programmes deal explicitly with rural energy requirements. This is due, in part, to lack of technical capability. However, a change in mindset is also needed among policy makers to recognize the potential economic and social gains to be realized from increasing energy supply in rural areas. These gains will translate into improved use and management of land resources by allowing more efficient use of resources and less degrading land-use practices such as fuelwood use.
National agricultural and rural development authorities, normally without any mandate regarding energy matters, are often incapable of negotiating their energy requirements with electricity utility companies and energy authorities. Thus, a "vacuum" of responsibility and lack of guidance for energy interventions in rural areas seems to exist in most countries. No institution is actually "in charge" of energy for development of the rural and agricultural sector. This leads to low allocation of resources and investment for rural development and agricultural activities vis-à-vis other sectors of the economy. Since no single institution, either governmental, local or private could alone cope with all issues involved, a political interest, coupled with effective inter-institutional cooperation and collaboration is required.
Promoting food security by raising agricultural productivity and sustainable production systems will inevitably involve increases in energy inputs for water supply and management, plant nutrients, and agro-processing, to provide community lighting and drinking water, for cultivation. Consistent with the SARD framework mentioned earlier in this report is the need to shift the emphasis from single issue solutions to more integrated, sustainable approaches to development.
For example, pesticides alone are not sufficient or economically cost-effective in controlling most pest problems. Strategies now exist for many crops which involve understanding the pest life cycle, economic damage thresholds and the effects of cultivation practices which can greatly reduce or even eliminate the need for regular pesticide applications. IPM is an effective way of reducing production costs and avoiding the associated risk of pollution and contamination.
Similar evidence of the benefits from integrated approaches exists for mineral fertilizers. Integrated plant nutrition strategies that use organic materials, leguminous crop rotation, and cultivation practices to maintain the optimal balance of soil structure and plant nutrients for agriculture are more beneficial economically to farmers than solely relying on mineral fertilizers.
In both examples above, environmental protection and cost efficiency can be realized.
The availability of adequate water resources for agriculture is essential for increased production. From 1960-1980, water resources in Africa have declined from 16.5 million cubic metres per caput to 9.4. By the year 2000 this is expected to 5.1. It is projected that by the end of the 1990s six out of seven east African countries and all five north African countries bordering the Mediterranean sea (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia) will face acute water shortages; with six of the countries having less than 1 million cubic metres per person. However, efficient use of this resource in Africa does not imply large scale, energy-intensive irrigation schemes. Small pumps have had an important beneficial effect on irrigation in some African countries of vegetable and even rice production. Where surface water is available this technology represents a well distributed and energy efficient option.
Previous experience in Africa has shown that the way in which the water resource is made available, both its price and mode of delivery, will determine whether the resource is used sustainably. Thus irrigation schemes should follow the principles established by the International Action Programme on Water and Sustainable Agricultural Development which takes into account the planning, development and management of water resources in an integrated manner.
Also important is the potential for biomass energy conversion technologies. Residues from wood and agro-industries, purposely grown biomass and municipal solid wastes may play a major role in many African countries, (n.b. also discussed in other chapters of this study). The economic and social assessment of these options is needed to avoid disrupting employment and resource use. Local and global environmental benefits of biomass energy conversion must also be considered.
As a result of UNCED, efforts are underway to develop national Agenda 21's. These provide valuable entry point for countries to fully integrate rural energy requirements and potentials into their energy and SARD strategies. They involve multidisciplinary and convergent actions at both national and local levels, which draw together energy, agricultural and environmental knowledge, experience and policies.
National and district rural energy strategies are needed to provide a common framework and plan to direct investment and pull together the efforts of various ministries such as Agriculture, Energy, Forestry, Planning and Agrarian Reform. NGOs, local community groups, and the private sector have an important role to play in such initiatives.
There are signs in some African countries such as Ghana, Morocco, Tanzania, Tunisia and Zimbabwe that new institutional and energy planning approaches are gradually emerging to improve the availability of rural energy supply for rural development.
Awareness of the constraints facing national and local authorities when trying to solve energy problems in rural areas is being increasingly converted into actual action. Decentralization of the decision making process and of energy production, enhanced social participation, institutional linkages, and the entry of new technologies are only some of the elements which will directly and indirectly influence a mobilization of efforts towards achieving Food Security and SARD.
Annex One: Sustainability concerns
Energy sources
Sustainability concerns
Environmental
Social
Economic
Biomass fuels
Land use conversion
Adequate supply
Operation and maintenance
Nutrient mining
Declining yields
Erosion
Loss of biodiversity
Conventional fuels
Air pollution
Equitable distribution
Foreign exchange costs
Access
Return on investment
Solar
Selected indirect impacts from panel production
Rate of return
Operation and maintenance
Higher investment cost
Annex Two: Data tables
LAND AREA AND USE, 1979-91
Land Use (000 hectares)
Land Area
(000 hectares)
Population Density, 1993
(per 1,000 hectares)
Cropland
Permanent Pasture
Forest and Woodland
% Change Since 1979-81
% Change Since
% Change Since
WORLD
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA
SOUTH AMERICA
Source: World Resources 1994-95 A Guide to the Global Environment, pages 284-285
FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION, 1980-92
Index of Food Production
Average Yields of Cereals
Average Yields of Roots and Tubers
Percent Change Since
Percent Change Since
Total
Per Capita
WORLD
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA
SOUTH AMERICA
Source: World Resources 1994-95 A Guide to the Global Environment, pages 292-293
NATIONAL PROTECTION OF NATURAL AREAS, 1993
All Protected Areas (IUCN categories I-V)
Number
Area (000 ha)
Percent of Land Area
WORLD
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA
SOUTH AMERICA
Source: World Resources 1994-95 A Guide to the Global Environment, pages 316-317
POPULATION, LABOUR AND LAND
Cropland
Average Annual Population Change (percent)
Average Annual Growth of the Labour Force (percent)
Total Hectares (000)
Hectares Per Capita
WORLD
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA
SOUTH AMERICA
Source: World Resources 1994-95 A Guide to the Global Environment, pages 268-269; 294-295
AGRICULTURAL INPUTS, 1979-91
Irrigated Land as a Percentage of Crop Land
Average Annual Fertilizer Use (kilograms per hectare of crop land)
Pesticide Consumption
(metric tons)
Tractors
Harvesters
Percent Change Since
Percent Change Since
WORLD
X
AFRICA
X
ASIA
X
EUROPE
X
NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA
X
SOUTH AMERICA
X
Source: World Resources 1994-95 A Guide to the Global Environment, pages 268-269; 294-295
CO[2] EMISSIONS FROM INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES, 1991
Carbon Dioxide Emissions
(000 metric tons)
Per Capita Carbon Dioxide Emissions
(metric tons)
Total^1
WORLD
AFRICA
ASIA
EUROPE
NORTH & CENTRAL AMERICA
SOUTH AMERICA
^1 Includes: Solid; Liquid; Gas; Gas Flaring; Cement Manufacture
Source: World Resources 1994-95 A Guide to Global Environment, pages 362-363
Growth rate of irrigated area, 19961-90
Region
(percent/year)
Africa
Latin America
West Asia and North Africa
Far East
China
India
All developing countries
All developed countries
World
Source: P.A. Oram and B. Hojjati, "The Growth Potential of Existing Agricultural Technology", paper presented at the Roundtable Meeting on Population and Food in the Early 21st Century: Meeting Future Food Needs of an Increasing World Population, Washington, D.C. 14-16 February, 1994.
Average fertilizer consumption per hectare, 1961-63 and 1988-90
Region
Fertilizer Consumption
(kilograms of NPK/hectare)
Africa (maize)
Central America (maize)
South America (maize)
Africa (rice)
South America (rice)
South Asia (rice)
East Asia (rice)
West Asia, South Asia, and North Africa
China
India
All developing countries
All developed countries
World
Source: P.A. Oram and B. Hojjati, "The Growth Potential of Existing Agricultural Technology", paper presented at the Roundtable Meeting on Population and Food in the Early 21st Century: Meeting Future Food Needs of an Increasing World Population, Washington, D.C. 14-16 February, 1994.
Note: NPK is nitrogen, phosphate and potassium.
Actual and Potential Irrigation in Africa by Region
Region
Potential '000 ha
Irrigated '000 ha
Irrigated % of arable
Irrigated % of total
Irrigated % of potential
North
Sudano-Sahelian
West
Centre
East
Southern
Total
Based on country-provided information compiled through the FAO database AQUASTAT. May include some double counting of water resources.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 3. Energy demand (supply) and consumption in Africa's agriculture
3.1 International context
3.2 Present Status - Regional and national energy data
3.3 Classification
3.4 Trends of energy demand in agriculture
References
Appendix 1: Sectoral energy consumption for selected countries 1990 (TJ)
Appendix 2: Commercial energy and food production
Appendix 3: Energy consumption in 10 Southern African countries that comprise SADC (1990)
Appendix 4: Energy consumption in Africa
3.1 International context
Africa is endowed with abundant and wide range of energy resources. The region's renewable energy potential include a wealth of biomass, solar and wind resources (Musa, 1993). In addition, the region has over 1.1 million GWh of exploitable hydro capacity (Johansson, et al, 1993); over 9,000 MW of geothermal potential; 59 billion barrels of petroleum; 8 billion cubic meters of natural gas reserves and, over 60 billion tons of coal (Musa, 1993; British Petroleum Company, 1991; World Resources Institute, 1994a). For example, the known exploitable hydroelectric potential in Zaire is equivalent to over 5 times the installed capacity in USA (World Resources Institute, 1994b).
In 1991, per capita consumption of modem energy in Africa was estimated to be 12 GJ which is less than half that of South-America and less than one tenth that of Europe (World Resources Institute, 1994c). In spite of abundant energy resources, available estimates of Africa's energy use indicate limited use of modem energy resources especially in the agricultural sector which accounts for a large proportion of the region's GDP.
For the foreseeable future, heavy dependence on agriculture is likely to continue being the norm rather than the exception for most of sub-Saharan Africa. Exceptions to this rule would include countries that are largely dependent on mining and oil exports such as Botswana, Cameroon, Congo, Nigeria, South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. In 1970, agriculture accounted for 35 percent of sub-Saharan Africa's GDP. In Latin America and the Caribbean, the equivalent figure was 13 percent. By 1991, agriculture still accounted for over a third of sub-Saharan Africa's GDP (World Bank, 1993a).
North African countries, however, registered a gradual shift away from the heavy dependence on agriculture. The contribution of agriculture to Egypt's GDP fell from 29 percent to 18 percent between 1970 and 1991 while that of Tunisia reduced from 20 percent to 18 percent over the same period. It is interesting to note that over the same period both Egypt and Tunisia registered a two-fold increase in per capita consumption of modem energy.
For those countries that will continue to depend on agriculture, the continued low consumption of modem energy is a source of concern. It could be an indication that the agricultural sector is not gaining access to adequate levels of high-grade energy services. In 1989, sub-Saharan Africa consumed an estimated 26 million tons of petroleum fuels which was almost half that consumed by North African countries (World Bank, 1992a).
The availability of modem energy such as petroleum fuels have proven to be essential to increasing the productivity of the agricultural sector in more developed parts of the world. In many other parts of the developing world, increases in agricultural productivity have been accompanied by rapid increases in modem energy particularly oil consumption (Desai et al, 1986a). This is, in part, demonstrated by what appears to be a correlation between high per capita modem energy and food production (Fig 2).
Fig 1: Modern Energy Consumption
Source: World Resources Institute, 1994
As shown in the previous graph, this correlation is especially strong in the South where increased per capita consumption of modem energy appears to be closely linked to higher per capita daily calorie supply. In some respects, this relationship should be expected because of the substantial role of agriculture and food production in the economies of developing countries. Consequently, higher inputs of high grade modem energy is likely to have a positive impact on agricultural output and food production levels.
The link does not appear to hold for developed regions where per capita consumption of modem energy exceeds 2,000 kgoe. For example, per capita modem energy consumption of OECD countries is almost double the average for Europe (which includes economies in transition), but daily calorie supply is actually lower in OECD countries. This could be a demonstration that food production is no longer a major problem in developed countries. Food production levels are near or above required levels and fluctuations in quantity of food production may be attributed to changes in diet (such as preference for more exotic imported food products) rather than increased supply of modem energy.
In developed economies, agriculture generally accounts for a small share of total national energy consumption. Industry, transport and household space conditioning account for the bulk of energy use in developed economies.
Even within the African region, the close link between commercial energy production and daily per capita calorie supply appears to be especially strong at energy consumptions levels below 500 kgoe per capita commercial energy use. For countries with higher per capita consumption of modem energy, the link is tenuous, an indication that there may be other important causal factors such as high use of fossil fuels for countries well endowed with hydrocarbons or abundance of coal resources combined with inequitable distribution of energy resources as in the case of South Africa.
The aforementioned correlation between agricultural productivity and food production should be treated with some caution because of the aggregated nature of the data used in the analysis. This kind of data often fail to discern many of the complexities and characteristics associated with the agricultural sector (Desai et al, 1986a). A more desegregated approach attempted in forthcoming chapters of this report reveal a more differentiated realistic assessment of energy use in the agricultural sector.
The majority of African countries, however, have on average very low per capita consumption of modern energy and low calorie supply levels. This is especially true of sub-Saharan Africa where in 1986, per capita energy consumption was estimated to be 105 kgs of oil equivalent of commercial energy (World Bank, 1989). This was less than half the corresponding figure for all developing countries (301 kgs). In 1990, the situation had not changed significantly. Average per capita consumption of modern energy had reduced to 103 kg which was about half that of South Asia and a fifth of East Asia and the Pacific (World Bank, 1992b). Although per capita consumption of energy increased in 1991 to 135 kgoe, this was still less than half that of South-Asia estimated to be 289 kgoe (World Bank, 1993).
Fig 2: Modern Energy Consumption and Food Production
In 1990, the per capita consumption of modern energy for 21 African countries was less than 100 kgoe (World Bank, 1992b). In many of these countries, daily per capita calorie supply is below 2,000 calories and the average index of food production per capita is below that of 1979-81 (Table 1). In these countries, access to modem energy services is very low and is likely to be contributing to low food production volumes. Food production is unlikely to grow without greater access to modem energy.
With the exception of North Africa and South Africa, the bulk of the energy needs of the region is met by traditional fuels mainly in the form of biomass. Estimates of the World Energy Council (1992), which are based on energy statistics collected by the United Nations, reckon that in 1990, total primary energy demand for sub-Saharan Africa (including the Republic of South Africa) was about 267 Mtoe of which 53 percent was traditional fuels (largely composed of unprocessed biomass) followed by oil (26 %), solid fuels (24 %), hydro (3 %) and gas (2 %).
The share of biomass increases to about 80% if the Republic of South Africa is excluded. Using statistics from the OECD and FAO, Davidson (1992) estimated that in 1988, total energy consumption of the region was about 4,388 PJ of which biomass accounted for 72 percent with the balance composed of oil (22%), hydro (4%) and coal (2%). A significant proportion of the biomass used in both the household and agricultural sectors is collected and consumed outside the market economy which complicates attempts to obtain reliable data (Hall and Mao, 1994).
Table 1: AGRICULTURE PRODUCTION INDICES
YEAR
AFRICA
FAR EAST
L. AMER
N. EAST
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Fig 3: BIOMASS ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA (1990)
3.2 Present Status - Regional and national energy data
One of the difficulties associated with the collection of data on African agriculture is the prevailing categories of energy demand and supply data collection. Much of the available data usually covers only sub-Saharan Africa excluding South Africa and North African countries. Algeria, Morocco, Egypt, Tunisia and Libya are generally lumped together with the Middle East. This can convey an incorrect impression of the continent's energy sector. For example, North African countries accounted for over two-thirds of Africa's consumption of liquid fuels in 1989 (World Bank, 1992a) and in 1991, close to half the continent's total installed electricity generation capacity was in South Africa (United Nations, 1993a and ESKOM, 1993). The omission of these countries from the energy supply and demand figures of Africa would impart a partial perspective. It is, therefore, essential to qualify and closely examine existing regional data to draw more accurate assessments of the continent's
energy sector.
Although accounting for about a sixth of the region's population, the economic and energy characteristics of the 10 member countries of the Southern African Development Community (Angola, Botswana, Malawi, Namibia, Mozambique, Lesotho, Tanzania, Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe) are representative of much of southern Africa with the exception of South Africa. This region is, in some respects, similar to eastern Africa and parts of western Africa. Consequently, the energy consumption of SADC shown in Fig 4 provides, under the circumstances, some useful insights on the major energy demand sectors of Africa (see Appendix III for detailed data).
For the 10 countries of southern Africa, energy used in agriculture accounts for only 5 percent of total energy consumption. This is rather low considering that agriculture dominates the economy of Tanzania which has the largest population in this region (25 million in mid-1991). In 1991, agriculture accounted for 61 percent of Tanzania's GDP (World Bank, 1993).
Biomass (60 %), oil products (17 %) and coal (16 %) are the main sources of energy for the agricultural sector. The bulk of the biomass is used to provide heat for agricultural processing. Petroleum products are used to drive both motive power and stationery processing machinery. Transport is almost entirely fuelled by oil products (Rutabanzibwa, 1989) with small contributions from coal, electricity and ethanol. The SADC region includes two of the three African countries (Kenya, Malawi and Zimbabwe) with ethanol programmes.
Fig 4: Energy Consumption in 10 southern African Countries (1990)
Source: SADC, 1992; Guilherme, 1992
A significant proportion of energy used in the transport sector is linked to the distribution and marketing of agricultural products. This is, however, difficult to discern in existing energy tables that tend to be presented in a highly aggregated format. In contrast to other parts of Africa, the SADC region is well endowed with coal resources. Botswana, South Africa and Zimbabwe possess some of the most developed coal industries in the continent. A more representative sample of eight (8) African countries compiled by the authors provides a somewhat different picture (Appendix I). The sample includes Botswana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Morocco, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania and Zimbabwe. It covers North African, West Africa, Eastern African and Southern African countries. The only region that is not represented in this sample is Central Africa. As with the SADC region, this sample of countries indicate that agriculture accounts for just over 4% of total energy consumption (figure 6).
Available data on agriculture has major shortcomings but it also highlights the complex nature of energy use in agriculture. Regional aggregates, such as those discussed in the preceding sections, tend to underestimate the energy used in agriculture because of several reasons. Firstly, many energy-intensive agro-processing industries such as coffee drying, tobacco curing and sugar manufacture are often grouped together under energy use in industry. Similarly, transport of agricultural produce is sometimes not included as part of energy consumption in the agricultural sector. Using data from Tanzania and Zimbabwe, an attempt was made to estimate the share of energy used in agriculture-related transport activities. The result of this analysis are shown in Table 3 which indicates that agriculture accounts 13% of total energy consumption is three times higher than estimates shown in official figures of energy use in agriculture (see Appendix IV for detailed data).
Another important source of error is the under-estimation of biomass use in agriculture especially in the small-holder sub-sector which is poorly covered in official statistics. Examples include biomass used for coffee drying and tobacco curing.
Fig 5: Main Fuels Used in Agriculture in 10 Selected African Countries (1990)
Source: United Nations, 1992
Fig 6: Energy Consumption in Africa 1990
3.3 Classification
The analysis of the agricultural sector presents energy analysts with major challenges. Energy supply, transformation and use in agriculture are of a very dispersed nature, with numerous sources, end-uses and transformation technologies. In addition, many of these activities are seasonal thus diminishing the reliability of existing energy survey data which rarely covers the entire agricultural seasonal cycle. There are no simple categories that one can use to establish an analytical framework for assessment of energy supply and demand in agriculture. This complicates attempts at analyzing energy use in agriculture as well as constraints attempts to make sound projections.
As mentioned earlier, there are a number of factors that complicates evaluation of energy supply and consumption in agriculture. Key among these factors is the question of whether energy used in agro-processing activities and related industries should be incorporated under the category of agriculture. Another important factor is the extent to which fuels used in the transportation should be included in agricultural energy data. Available energy data and documentation shows no consensus on the extent to which related industrial and transportation activities should be counted as part of energy use in agriculture.
In Africa, the problems of collecting and assessing energy data on agriculture are compounded by the very limited information on the perennial tuber agriculture which predominates in wet Africa and seasonal coarse grain agriculture which is important in arid Africa. Biomass and animate energy are two of the most predominant sources of energy in both these agricultural systems.
Biomass fuels have the added complication of being used in both agriculture and household sectors. For example, in Lesotho, crop residues and animal dung, by-products of agriculture and livestock-related activities, meet a significant proportion of household energy needs (Ministry of Water, Energy and Mining, 1988; SADC, 1992). The link between energy use in the household and agricultural sectors can be very close particularly in the small-holders sub-sector which dominates much of African agriculture. Separation of biomass used in agriculture from that used in households appear to be only possible with respect to large-scale centralized farming sector found in countries with large commercial farming sub-sectors such as Côte d'Ivoire Kenya, South Africa and Zimbabwe.
Mechanized agriculture and modem irrigation techniques are still largely under-developed in the continent. Mechanized include the use of tractors and other equipment for land preparation, planting, cultivation and harvesting. Generally, mechanisation has the following two main objectives:
(i) to increase the productivity of agricultural labour by performing agricultural tasks in the shortest possible time and overcome bottlenecks in critical operations; and,
(ii) to improve the quality of agricultural work and minimize drudgery.
In 1991, the stock of tractors in Africa was estimated to be about 550,000 (World Resources, 1994b). Over half of the tractors were in three countries, Algeria, Egypt and South Africa. Latin America with under half the population of Africa had over 1,125,000 tractors. Africa has a tractor for every 387 agro-workers versus 36 in South America and a tractor for every 333 hectares versus 102 hectares in South America (World Resources, 1994).
A similar picture emerges with respect to harvesters. The total in Africa was estimated to be just under 70,000 in 1991 with South Africa accounting for over half the stock. This translate^1 to about 2,600 hectares of cropland per harvester.
Irrigation is still an embryonic practise in Africa. In 1991, it was estimated that only 6 percent of the continent's cropland is irrigated. In contrast, about a third of Asia's cropland is irrigated. In South-America, irrigation is also not widely practised but the proportion at 8 percent is still higher than Africa (World Resources Institute, 1994).
Limited use of mechanized agricultural practices in Africa means that animate energy (inclusive of human power) continues to be an important source of power for agricultural activities in the continent. Consequently, studies of animate energy and its limitation are critical to gaining an in-depth appreciation of energy supply and use in African agriculture.
Energy studies of agriculture in South America and Asia tend to concentrate on tractor use and irrigation, respectively. Because of limited use of tractors and irrigation, the methodological techniques developed in South America and Asia are unlikely to be relevant to the current situation in the agricultural sector of Africa. These techniques are, however, useful for future projections because increased mechanization and irrigation are expected to occur in Africa. For example, the number of tractors in Africa increased by 21 percent in the last 10 years which compares well with an increase of 23 percent in Latin America over the same period (World Resources Institute, 1994).
Animate energy is crucially important to energy supply and consumption in the agriculture sector of Africa but it is bedeviled by theoretical and empirical constraints. Attempts to overcome this gap have been tried through estimates of employment and use of animals; tune inputs; and, energy value of food intake. All these methods have faced severe conceptual and empirical constraints (Desai et al, 1986b). One of the useful indicators of animate energy use in agriculture is the active fanning population.
Table 2 SELECTED INDICATORS ON AGRICULTURAL MECHANIZATION
AFRICA
S. AMER
EUROPE
WORLD
Pop. millions (1990)
% Pop. 15-65 (av. '75 & '95)
% Labour force in agric '90
Agric. labour force millions
Cropland '000 hect '91
Tractors
Agro-workers per tractor
Hectares per tractor
Harvesters
Agro-workers per harvester
Hectares per harvester
Source: World Resources Institute, 1994
Another important analytical issue that needs to be addressed is the extent to which the energy used in the manufacture of fertilizers and pesticides should be considered. From a purely energy systems view, incorporation of energy used in the manufacture of fertilizers implies a much broader life-cycle approach that would go beyond national boundaries. On the other hand, fertilizers and pesticides are two of the most critical inputs to agriculture which, have in the past, proven crucial to increasing productivity. In recent years, especially in Europe and North America, diminishing returns from increased use of fertilizers and pesticides have raised questions about their role in the transition towards more environmentally-sound agricultural practices.
As with mechanization and irrigation, the very low use of fertilizer and pesticides in Africa would suggest that the sustainability question is not yet a pressing issue in the continent. In 1991, about 20 kgs of fertilizer for every hectare of cropland were used in Africa which was less than half that of South America - 44 kgs per hectare (World Resources Institute, 1994).
Of more critical concern to the continent is the growing unsustainability of traditional farming practices such as shifting agriculture. Rapid population growth and a rapidly evolving land tenure environment have begun to constrain traditional agricultural practices such shifting agriculture. For example, the increased deployment of intensive traditional farming techniques (suitable for high potential areas where they evolved) in marginal land unsuitable for intensive farming is now a major source of concern for agricultural planners.
In analyzing energy use in African agriculture, it is important to appreciate the coexistence of very different agricultural systems. This is particularly true of southern Africa and parts of eastern and western Africa were subsistence small-holding agriculture co-exist with commercial large-scale farming. Similar, there are major differences between farming for domestic markets and for export markets. It is also important to distinguish between multiple-cropping farming systems and mono-culture farming systems and to appreciate the unique characteristics associated with extensive farming which is distinct from intensive farming practice (Girod, 1991). Energy use in each of these farming systems significantly differs. In addition, existing analysis rarely takes into account the critical role of solar energy in agriculture (Desai et al, 1986a).
Another complication is whether one should include fisheries and livestock. Although these sectors could, in strict definitional terms, be excluded from the agricultural sector, in reality, separation of livestock and fisheries from agriculture is fraught with difficulties. For example, agriculture and livestock activities are often undertaken on the same piece of land. Similarly, fishing can be an important additional source of income for farmers. In many African countries, central Government Ministries in charge of agriculture are often given the responsibility of overseeing fisheries and livestock sub-sectors.
Consequently, in this report, energy use in the fisheries and livestock sub-sectors will be addressed but because even less is known about the use of energy in these sub-sectors, discussion will be mainly of a qualitative nature with limited use of empirical analytical tools. At a continental level, useful indicators of the livestock sectors include number of cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, buffaloes, camels and chickens. In addition, there is aggregate continental information on the percentage of total grain production that is fed to livestock. For the fisheries sector, use can be made of the contribution of fish products to daily supply of protein.
An analytical structure of energy use that appears to be equally applicable to agriculture, fisheries and livestock is one that differentiates direct and indirect inputs of energy (Desai et al, 1986a). In agriculture, direct energy inputs can be further subdivided into mobile and stationery energy inputs. Mobile energy inputs in agriculture are required during the following activities:
- Soil preparation.
- Sowing.
- Weeding.
- Application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides.
- Harvesting.
- Threshing.
- Transport of harvested crops.
On the other hand stationery inputs are mainly linked to post-harvest operations such as drying, cooling and milling. Indirect energy inputs in agriculture are used for the following activities:
- Provision of water.
- Manufacture of fertilizer.
- Production of pesticides.
Fig 7: Agric, Fisheries & Livestock Energy supply and demand categories
Fig 8: Agriculture Direct energy inputs and end-uses
The direct and indirect input approach with sub-divisions of mobile and stationery inputs is also applicable to the fisheries sub-sector. Direct inputs in fisheries can be subdivided into mobile and stationery inputs. Mobile energy inputs are used in motorized boats or canoes; fishing; and, transportation. Parameters for assessing mobile energy inputs would include (Girod, 1991):
- Number of boats or canoes.
- Total tonnage or capacity.
- Catch tonnage for deep sea fishing, coastal fishing or river fishing.
- Unit energy consumption by tonne of fish caught.
Direct energy inputs that are of a stationery nature are mainly linked to fish treatment and preservations. Energy-related parameters for assessing these inputs include capacity of fish treatment and preservation facilities; and, unit energy consumption by tonne of treated fish (dried or smoked). Indirect inputs in fisheries include energy used in the provision of water which is particularly important for aqua-culture.
Similarly, energy use in the livestock sub-sector can be subdivided between direct and indirect inputs. Direct inputs include energy used in milking equipment and transportation of milk and livestock. Indirect energy inputs are associated with processing of milk, meat, hides and skins.
Fig 9: Fisheries Energy supply and use
Fig 10: Livestock Energy supply and use
3.4 Trends of energy demand in agriculture
The use of energy in the agricultural sector has not been extensively studied which complicates any attempts to project future energy demand of agriculture in Africa. One of the few studies that involved an extensive energy analysis of the agricultural sector was the Zimbabwe Energy Accounting Project (ZEAP), a joint project of the former Beijer Institute of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (now Stockholm Environment Institute) and the former Ministry of Energy Resources and Development of the Government of Zimbabwe (now Ministry of Transport and Energy). More in-depth information on the findings of the ZEAP initiative is provided in the case study chapter of this study. In conjunction with data from other African countries, projections of future energy demand in the agricultural sector generated by the ZEAP study is partially used to estimate desegregated demand-side data for agriculture in Africa.
To encompass the diversity of energy use in the agricultural sector in Africa, sectoral energy consumption of eight representative countries, whose combined population makes up approximately a third of Africa's population, was analyzed (Appendix I). The bulk of the agriculture energy data in the national energy balances excludes agro-processing and ag-transport which are often lumped together with the industrial and transport sectors, respectively. To overcome this shortfall in the available data, the Tanzanian and Zimbabwean case studies was used to estimate the energy consumption attributed to agro-processing and agriculture-related transport activities. Therefore, Tanzania and Zimbabwe's pattern of energy use was considered representative of Africa's average because their energy consumption provide scenarios of typical traditional agriculture and large-scale commercial agriculture respectively. This is representative of the high energy consumers (mainly South Africa and
North Africa) and the low energy consumers (the rest of sub-Saharan Africa).
The percentage consumption of various sectors in Africa (Table 3) was estimated to be:
Table 3: Demand-side Sectoral
Distribution of Energy Consumption in Africa
Households
Industry
Transport
Agriculture
Mining
Commerce and others
As shown in figure 11 (and Appendix IV), the bulk of the energy-use in agriculture is used in agro-processing (45%) followed by on-farm agricultural activities (32%) and agriculture-related transport accounting for only 23%.
Fig 11: Africa's Sectoral Energy Distribution 1990
Assuming population growth to be the major driving factor to energy consumption, the analysis estimated total energy consumption in Africa to be 13 million TJ. To crosscheck, the same methodology was applied to the 10 southern African countries that used to constitute SADC (excluding the Republic of South Africa) estimates of energy use. The SADC estimate yields a total of 12 million TJ for the whole of Africa which is within the range of the first estimate. The World Energy Council (1992) estimated energy consumption for Africa is 11 million TJ which is again within the range of the above two estimates. An average of the three estimates was, therefore, used.
Partially based on the pattern of agricultural energy use in Tanzania and Zimbabwe, the following three scenarios were used to analyse energy use in Africa's agriculture (additional information on the three scenarios is provided in the case studies chapter):
1. Reference Scenario
This scenario assumes continuation of past trends in energy use in Africa's agriculture with an average growth rate of about 2% per annum. The scenario, therefore, depicts the current minimal utilisation of energy in the agricultural sector which results in relatively stagnant agricultural growth rates, modest increments in yields and thus continued food imports.
2. Moderate Improvement
This scenario depicts a situation of substantial increases in agricultural energy use resulting in moderate growth rates, but lower than the population growth rate. Africa's agricultural growth is estimated at about 3% per year.
3. Accelerated Growth
The scenario reflects agricultural systems that are highly mechanised. The energy intensive nature of the agriculture results in agricultural growth rates of about 4% per year, which are above the population growth rates. Projections for Africa using the three scenarios above are shown in figure 12 (see appendix V for detailed data). It appears from the analysis that Africa will need to double energy use in the agricultural sector in order to achieve self sufficiency in food production. This means that the rate of growth of food production should be equal or more than population growth rate. This is not surprising since it has been noted in other regions that increases in agricultural productive tend to be followed by increases in energy consumption especially oil products which can make the agricultural sector vulnerable to external oil shocks (Desai et al, 1986a).
Fig 12: Projections of Energy Use in Agriculture 1990 - 2010
References
British Petroleum Company p.l.c., 1991. BP Statistical Review of World Energy. Ashdown Press Ltd. London.
Davidson O. 1992. Energy Issues in Sub-Saharan Africa. Annual Review of Energy and Environment. 17:359-403. Palo Alto: Annual Review Inc.
Desai, AV et al. 1986a. Energy Research - Directions and Issues for Developing Countries. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, p. 53-60.
Desai, AV et al. 1986b. Energy Research - Directions and Issues for Developing Countries. Ottawa: International Development Research Centre, p. 131-132.
ESKOM, 1993. Statistical Yearbook, 1993. ESKOM: South Africa, p. 92.
Girod, J. 1991. Energy -Diagnosis of Energy Systems in Developing Countries. Report EUR 13068 of the Directorate-General for Energy. Brussels: Commission of the European Communities. p. 73-85.
Guilherme, Antonio. 1992. Update on the SADCC Energy Situation in SADCC Energy, Jan-Feb-Mar, 1992. Vol. IX No. 24. Luanda: SADC Technical and Administrative Unit, TAU.
Hall, D. and Mao Yushi. eds. 1994. Biomass and Coal in Africa. London: ZED Books.
Johansson, T.B., Kelly, H., Reddy, A.K.N., and Williams, R.H. (Eds) 1993 Renewable Energy: Sources for Fuels and Electricity. Island Press: Washington.
Ministry of Water, Energy and Mining. 1988. Lesotho Energy Masterplan: Final Report. Maseru: GTZ and Department of Energy.
Musa E.S. 1993 'The Role of African Development Bank in Energy Development' In: Energy Options for Africa - Environmentally Sustainable Alternatives. eds S. Karekezi and G. MacKenzie. AFREPREN, FWD, UNEP/UCC and Zed books, London pp 86 - 94.
Rutabanzibwa P. 1989. Tanzania's Response to the Oil Crisis - Impacts and Lessons. Nairobi and Gaborone: AFREPREN.
SADC. 1992. SADC 1990 Energy Statistics Yearbook. Luanda: SADC Technical and Administrative Unit (TAU).
World Bank. 1989. Sub-Saharan Africa - From Crisis to Sustainable Growth, A Long-Term Perspective Study. Washington: The World Bank.
World Bank. 1992a. African Development Indicators. Washington: The World Bank. p. 353.
World Bank. 1992b. Word Development Report 1992. Washington: The World Bank.
World Energy Council. 1992. Energy for Tomorrow's World - the Realities, the Real Options and the Agenda for Achievement: Draft Summary of Global Report. London: World Energy Council.
World Resources Institute. 1994a. World Resources 1994-95: A Guide to the Global Environment - People and the Environment. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 336.
World Resources Institute. 1994b. World Resources 1994-95: A Guide to the Global Environment - People and the Environment. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 337.
World Resources Institute. 1994c. World Resources 1994-95: A Guide to the Global Environment - People and the Environment. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 334.
United Nations. 1992. 1990 - Energy Balances and Electricity Profiles. New York: United Nations
United Nations. 1993a. 1991 - Energy Statistics Yearbook. New York: United Nations. p. 332-338.
Appendix 1: Sectoral energy consumption for selected countries 1990 (TJ)
Country
Sectors
Population
Agriculture
Industry
Transport
Mining
Commercial & Others
Households
TOTAL
Zimbabwe
Kenya
Sudan
South Africa
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Morocco
Botswana
TOTAL
Percentage Share
Appendix 2: Commercial energy and food production
Kgoe per capita 1990
Calories per capita 1989
SSA - Sub-Saharan Africa
EAP - East Asia &. Pacific
SA - South Asia
MENA - Middle East & N. Africa
LAC - Latin America & Car.
EUR - Europe
OECD - OECD members
Appendix 3: Energy consumption in 10 Southern African countries that comprise SADC (1990)
Sector
PJ
Household
Industry
Transport
Agriculture
Mining
Other
Total
Source: SADC, 1992; Guilherme, 1992.
Appendix 4: Energy consumption in Africa
Sector
Agriculture
Ag-Transport
Ag-Industry
Industry
Transport
Mining
Commercial & Others
Households
Total
Appendix 5: Projected Energy Requirements for Africa (TJ)
Sector
Reference
Moderate Improvement
Accelerated Growth
Agriculture
Ag-Transport
Ag-Industry
Industry
Transport
Mining
Commercial & Others
Households
Total
<section>5</section>
Chapter 4. Scenarios of energy and agriculture in Africa
4.1. Introduction
4.2. Methodology
4.3. Description of scenarios
4.4. Looking into the crystal ball: regional and global agricultural scenarios
4.5. Analysis of agriculture-related energy use patterns
4.6. Zimbabwe
4.7. Tanzania
4.8. Sudan
4.9. Mali
4.10. Cameroon
References
Annex A. Energy & agriculture data questionnaire
Annex B. Agricultural area and yield projections
Annex C. Selected case study LEAP results
4.1. Introduction
The reliable supply of energy is one of many important requirements for significant growth in Africa's agricultural productivity. For farmers in most African countries, access to fuels or electricity for farm operations or crop processing is limited and costly. If access can be improved, and energy needs for agriculture anticipated and met, then a potential roadblock to agricultural growth can be avoided. Rapid growth in agricultural production could then stimulate rural and overall economic development. The objective of food security could come closer to reality, and exports of agriculturally-based products could improve the regional trade balance. Simply put, the provision of energy for agriculture is essential to Africa's long-term well being.
This chapter looks at just how fast energy needs might grow under conditions of both limited and rapid growth in Africa's agricultural production. It examines the energy-agriculture nexus in several case study countries: Cameroon, Mali, Sudan, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe. Scenarios are then developed for the last three countries, for which sufficient data have been collected. These scenarios depict possible levels of agricultural activity and their energy use implications through the year 2010.
Situated in the largely arid and drought-prone Sahel region, Mali is unique among study countries for its significant nomadic and pastoral populations and for its extensive use of animal traction. In contrast, Cameroon lies within the humid belt of Central Africa, with large potentially arable area; however, increasing cultivated area could require clearing of tropical forests and working with problem soils. Years of civil strife have hampered efforts to increase production in the Sudan, a country with the potential to be a major food exporter - the potential "bread basket of the Middle East" - with only 10 percent of its potentially arable land under cultivation and the greatest extent of irrigation in the region. Unlike many African countries, Zimbabwe is a major net exporter of food, characterized by a "dualistic" agricultural sector that includes both highly productive large commercial and traditional communal farming systems. With its diverse geography, climate, diet,
and farming systems, Tanzania presents a wide range of characteristics found in many other African countries.
Patterns of consumption and production of agricultural products also vary widely. The staple food of Zimbabwe is maize; in Sudan, the principal staple is sorghum, and in Mali, Tanzania, and Cameroon, the staples are millet, cassava, maize, sorghum, plantain, or rice, depending on the sub-region. Principal agricultural exports range from coffee, tea, and cocoa in Cameroon and Tanzania to oilseeds and cotton in the Sudan, live animals in Mali, and cereals, tobacco, and meat in Zimbabwe. Cotton is the significant export commodity common to all study countries. Thus, in many ways, these five countries are indicative, if not representative, of the range of conditions and possibilities for the region as a whole.
The purpose of the scenario analyses developed in this chapter is to identify where additional energy may be needed for growth in the agricultural sector and rural economy, to suggest the rough magnitude of this demand growth, to estimate how these needs may differ across regions of the continent, and, ultimately, to spur energy planners to address these needs with appropriate actions and policies. Given the limited scope of these scenario exercises, the projections are designed to be initial and illustrative. For detailed evaluation of specific policy options within each country, more detailed and definitive analyses conducted with a more significant level of effort by local country experts would be needed.
The scenario analyses focus on the elements of the agricultural system that affect energy use, namely, the crops and areas cultivated and the agricultural inputs and technologies that farmers can use to increase yields, such as machinery, irrigation, and fertilization. These elements are illustrated by the shaded arrows in Figure 4.1 below.
Figure 4.1 Energy and Other Factors Affecting Agricultural Development
Increased production can be achieved by increasing yields or increasing cultivated area. Large, shaded arrows indicate focus of present analysis. Other shaded areas at bottom list important underlying factors that are critical to the success of efforts to increase production.
The analyses extend beyond on-farm activity to the energy used for transport and processing of agricultural products. Agricultural growth is the most important contributor to manufacturing and service activity in Africa, not only stimulating agro-industries, but the rest of the economy as well. According to at least two studies, each unit increase in agricultural activity leads to approximately 1.5 units of economic growth. (Haggblade, S. et al., 1989 as cited in Cleaver, 1993; Stoneman and Robinson, 1987) Thus, the energy consequences for these sectors of the economy are also considered.^1
[^1 Arguably rapid agricultural growth would affect the entire economy, not simply the closely linked agro-industries and transportation. Increasing rural incomes would affect consumption patterns and migration patterns. Other service and manufacturing activities would also increase. These effects might be estimated using macro-economic tools, such as input-output models. However, this level of analysis is beyond the scope of the limited case studies presented here.]
This chapter begins with an overview of the methodology used for the scenario analyses and a description of the scenarios considered. To set the stage for national scenarios, a few prominent global and regional agriculture scenarios - which provide some of the assumptions used in the case study scenarios - and seminal analyses of energy and agriculture are discussed. The energy end-uses in the agriculture and agro-industry sectors, and key trends in agricultural activity, production methods, and energy use in the case study countries are then examined. A summary of the scenario analyses are presented, highlighting key issues and results. Finally, results from these countries are extrapolated to the region as whole, suggesting the issues that energy specialists and policy makers should consider when looking towards the coming century.
4.2. Methodology
The methodology for preparing the scenario analyses involves several elements. In summary, a bottom-up, end-use approach is applied to develop a set of scenarios for each country where available data were sufficient to warrant the effort. Focal points in each country provided limited, but essential assistance data collection and advice.^2 The energy demand profiles and scenarios were assembled using spreadsheets and a flexible, computerized framework (LEAP) described in Box 4.1, tailored to each national situation.
[^2 Focal points included: Elamin El Faki Ali Gaafar, Energy Research Institute of Sudan (with Hassan Osman Abdel Nour of the Sudan University for Science and Technology); Mamedy Sacko, Mali Ministry of Industry, Water, and Energy; Patrick Rutabanzibwa, Tanzania Ministry of Water, Energy, and Minerals; Shakespeare Maya, Southern Centre for Energy and Environment in Zimbabwe; and Michel Claude Lokolo of Cameroon. Additional useful materials were provided by Maxwell Mapako, Biomass Users Network in Zimbabwe, Nico van der Linden of ECN Netherlands, and B. Luhanga at TANESCO.]
Overall, the process of developing the scenario analyses involved the following eight steps:
a) Selection of case study countries
b) Establishing boundaries of the analysis
c) Selection of time horizon
d) Collection of available data, local studies, and projections
e) Analysis of past trends
f) Development of base year, end-use breakdowns
g) Establishing agriculture-energy relationships and other assumptions
h) Construction of reference and alternative scenarios
Box 4.1 LEAP: The Long-Range Energy Alternatives Planning System
LEAP represents an easy to use and flexible computer software system for energy-environment analysis developed by the Stockholm Environment Institute - Boston Center at the Tellus Institute. (SEI, 1993a; SEI, 1993b). As a "bottom-up", end-use modeling system, LEAP'S principal elements are the energy and technology characteristics of end-use sectors and supply sources. Its flexible, end-use approach enables the incorporation and simulation of several important factors that can have significant effects on agricultural and agriculture-related energy use. Such factors include changes in land use and farming practices, technological improvements and transitions, and structural shifts among formal and informal economic sectors and subsectors.
LEAP was initially developed as part of the Kenya Fuelwood Project, one of the first major integrated energy planning exercises conducted in a developing country.^3 Since that time, LEAP has been used in over 30 developing and industrialized countries for a wide range of tasks. For example, in the Philippines, LEAP has been applied to decentralized rural energy planning, in Brazil, to evaluation of bioenergy use, and in several African countries, to the development of national energy plans. (van der Werf, 1992; Ackerman and Fernandes de Almeida, 1990) Due to its flexible structure and relationships, LEAP can be applied in different local circumstances, even where data and modeling expertise are limited.
[^3 Details of this and other early LEAP studies can be found in volumes 1,2 and 9 of Energy, Environment and Development. (Beijer Institute and Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, 1984-1986)]
Figure
LEAP consists of three blocks of programs: Energy Scenarios, Aggregation, and the Environmental Data Base (EDB). Four of the Energy Scenario programs address the main components of an integrated energy analysis relevant to agricultural development: energy demand analysis (Demand), energy conversion and resource assessment (Transformation), tracking the relationship between land use, biomass energy demands, biomass energy resources (Biomass), and the comparison of scenarios in terms of costs and physical impacts (Evaluation).
Although a general methodology was followed, as a result of wide contrasts in local conditions and data availability, the actual scenario analyses differ significantly among the case study countries. In Sudan and Zimbabwe, for instance, traditional and modem farming systems are distinguished because of data availability and the important, large differences in the use of energy and other inputs. As a result, the Sudan and Zimbabwe scenarios explore the potential consequences of changing farming systems on agricultural output, energy and other input requirements. In Tanzania, the analysis focuses on the considerable energy used for processing of agricultural products, such as tobacco curing, where detailed data enable more in-depth analysis. For Mali and Cameroon, disaggregate energy data, even aggregate totals, for the agricultural sector and related industries were inadequate to enable systematic scenario analysis.
a) Selection of case study countries
The five case study countries were selected by the ADB to reflect the wide variation among African sub-regions in climate, geography, economy, and agricultural systems. Arguably, within each African sub-region, no single country is fully representative of all others, and within each country, large disparities in conditions typically exist from province to province. The case studies are illustrative of how conditions and outcomes might vary, but do not presume to represent the full range of agricultural conditions that exist or energy futures that could develop.
b) Establishing boundaries of the analysis
The scenario analyses focus on energy use for on-farm activities, crop processing and other agro-industries, and on the transport of agricultural goods. As illustrated in Figure 4.2, these items are a subset of the entire agriculture-energy system. The reasons for selecting these items - those of greatest direct relevance to national energy planners - is discussed in section 4.5a below. Animal and human power were not directly included, nor was the embodied energy in agricultural inputs, such as fertilizers, pesticides and farm machinery.
On-farm activities comprise the typical energy-intensive operations, such as irrigation, traction, drying, and curing. The term "agro-industry" refers to the food, beverage, and tobacco and textile and leather manufacturing industries, as captured in International Standard Industrial Codes (ISIC) 31 and 32, as well as other informal agro-processing industries, such as local beer brewing, which are often unrepresented in official economic statistics. Given scant statistics and the nature of transport in the region - a truck will often carry a wide variety of freight as well as passengers - the estimation of energy used in the transport of agricultural goods is particularly difficult. Therefore, the rough estimate that approximately half of all road freight transport energy in the base year is attributable to agricultural products is used throughout the scenario analyses.^4
[^4 In the U.K. in the mid 1960s, food products alone accounted for one-quarter of all road freight transport. (Leach, 1976) Given the greater dominance of agricultural products in African countries (relative to other transported products), and the presence of non-food agricultural products, the assumption that half of road freight transport is attributable to agricultural goods appears reasonable, if not conservative.]
The scenario analyses do not generally consider energy use in animal agriculture, fisheries, or forestry. Animal agriculture is an important source of income and nutrition in many countries and an important potential resource for bioenergy production; however, it is not usually a significant consumer of traditional or commercial energy as it is practiced in most African countries. In some coastal countries, fisheries can consume a significant amount of petroleum products. In Senegal, for instance, pirogues and other fishing boats account for about 9% of total commercial energy, as much as all households, and significantly more than the agriculture sector. (Lazarus, Diallo, and Sokona, 1994) However, fisheries do not appear to consume similarly high levels of energy in the case study countries. The forestry sector might be considered here as well, but is the subject of a separate ADB study.
c) Selection of time horizon
A time horizon of approximately 15 years, through the year 2010, was used for the scenario analyses. This target date is consistent with the ADB's other sectoral studies. The time horizon is long enough to begin to consider food security, sustainability and resource questions, yet short enough to be useful for planning purposes, with knowledge of available technologies and greater certainty with respect to economic and demographic characteristics.
d) Collection of available data, local studies, and projections
The case studies rely on both local and international data sources. In response to the data questionnaire included as Annex A, focal points in each country provided important inputs, including national statistical publications, local research studies, and in some cases, useful syntheses of the national energy-agriculture situation. (Nour, 1994; Republique du Mali, 1994; Lokolo, 1994) Previous energy and other studies in each country were used for projections of energy use in non-agricultural sectors and for key demographic and economic variables, where appropriate. Where data were lacking or particularly weak, local data were supplemented with data from similar countries.
e) Analysis of past trends
Simple regression analyses were used to evaluate past trends and to assist in the projection of cropping and other patterns for the Reference scenario, which assumes a continuation of past trends. Trends in crop area, yields, aggregate energy, irrigated area, farm machinery purchases, and other important energy-related variables were analyzed, as described in section 4.5b and in the case study sections below. Where feasible and reasonable, income elasticities were also estimated.
f) Development of base year, end-use breakdowns
The development of detailed breakdowns of energy use in agriculture and related activities is a critical element of the analysis. Where available, survey data, billing data, and other "bottom-up" data sources were reconciled with national "top-down" control totals (e.g. total diesel supply) to create consistent profiles of energy use patterns. Earlier end-use analyses in Sudan, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe were also used and updated to reflect recent trends. The goal of this step was to maximize the useful disaggregation of data in order to track how changes in cultivated areas, crop types, and farming methods (e.g. traditional vs. commercial) might affect future energy requirements. The specific end-use breakdowns vary considerably among the case studies, and are described in sections 4.6-4.8.
A base year was selected based on two criteria: 1) the most recent year for which reliable data exist, and 2) a year without unusual circumstances such as drought or civil war. In most cases, 1990 was selected as the base year, since more recent years were subject to either drought or incomplete data. Abnormal data, such as unusually high yields for one year, were normalized to reflected longer-term averages.
g) Establishing agriculture-energy relationships and other assumptions
Judgment and findings from other studies were used to generate basic scenario assumptions, such as the 4% agricultural growth target used in the Accelerated Growth scenario. (see below) These assumptions are discussed in the sections below.
The following four general relationships were used to project future energy use as agricultural patterns change over the next two decades:
1. Changing farming patterns (crops, traditional vs. mechanized vs. irrigated) alters per-hectare energy use characteristics. (Land use and farming pattern projections are discussed for each case study below.)
2. Increasing yield comes with an increase in energy and chemical use per hectare. These changes are based on yield-energy and yield-fertilizer elasticities derived from the Global Technology Matrix (GTM), as described in section 4.5c below. Yield improvement assumptions are discussed under each case study.
3. Energy use for crop curing, drying and processing increases directly with total crop production (yield x area).
4. Energy use in agro-industries increases as function of the tonnage of material processed or total value added, depending on the nature of the industry.
h) Construction of reference and alternative scenarios
Based on the above relationships and assumptions, scenarios were constructed in keeping with the general parameters of each scenario described in section 4.3 below. The reference scenario was first evaluated to ensure reasonableness with respect to past experience and other studies, and subsequently other scenarios developed as modifications to the baseline.
i) Additional steps
Several extensions to the present approach should be contemplated for further national studies of energy and agriculture. In particular, these include:
· the use of local expert teams to conduct more detailed local analyses, including field assessments, expert interviews, and surveys to overcome existing data limitations.
· the use of local expert teams to evaluate how past agricultural and energy policies (fuel subsidies, infrastructure investments, rural electrification, etc.) have affected agricultural practices and energy use. This analysis would in turn enable evaluation of specific policy options for the future.
· integrated analysis of supply-demand relationships, including consideration of fuel switching and renewable energy potentials, analysis of land use and biomass energy production, and evaluation of environmental and economic consequences. In particular, economic and financial analysis could be used examine the merits of alternative demand and supply technological and policy options.
· linked local-national area analysis, wherein supply-demand analyses are conducted at the regional level and integrated into a national analysis, as described in Box 4.2.
Box 4.2 Integrated National-Local Energy Planning
In 1989, FAO organized a workshop to develop an approach to rural and agricultural energy planning and analysis. (UNDP/ESCAP/FAO, 1990) Although grounded in Asian experience, many of the findings have universal relevance. The linkage between energy ministries, planners, and providers and the rural, agricultural sector is generally weaker than with other sectors; as a result, energy needs for rural and agricultural development are often inadequately assessed and emphasized. Methodologies for agricultural/rural energy planning should ideally be carried out at the local, regional, and national levels. Local needs are best addressed with knowledge of specific local conditions and with the involvement of local residents. At the same time, local areas are interdependent, and national planners must ensure that total national energy needs, often with large scale projects that cannot be planned at the local level (e.g. power plants, refineries, or pipelines). The situation thus calls
for coordination between local and national levels. (Raskin and Lazarus, 1989) An integrated national-local planning approach can be implemented where resources are available to do so, and tailored to each national situation, as it has been in several countries.^5 While this remains the ultimate objective, the present case studies focus principally on the national level and rely on existing data to generate initial, indicative scenarios.
[^5 Countries where linked national-regional-local energy planning approaches have been pursued include China, Costa Rica, Kenya, India, Indonesia, and the Philippines. In the Philippines, for example, the Non-Conventional Resources Division of the Department of Energy has set up 17 affiliated regional planning centers at local universities; these centers are responsible for constructing rural energy plans. (see Van der Werf, 1992)]
4.3. Description of scenarios
Scenarios are stories about possible futures, built from assumptions, best guesses, and a model of interrelationships, either simple or complex. Obviously, many different stories about the future of African agriculture could be told, based on desired outcomes, such as rapid economic growth, or based on other possible economic, demographic, or social developments.
For this study, three scenarios are developed to describe a range of possible outcomes over the next two decades:
1. Reference/continuation of past trends. This scenario reflects continued increases in food import requirements, relatively stagnant agricultural growth, modest improvement in yields, and little increase in the use of agricultural inputs. This scenario is consistent with a continuation of the regional agricultural growth rate of about 2%/year. Energy use is projected to change as a function of cultivated area, crop type, yield, and farming practice, as described below.
2. Moderate Improvement. This scenario assumes moderate increases in agricultural inputs and yields. Moderate growth, however, is unlikely to keep pace with population growth and to stem Africa's rising food supply gap. This scenario is based on a combination of national goals, where available, and recent FAO scenario results, which project regional agricultural production growing at about 3% per year. (FAO, 1993a)
3. Accelerated Growth. The ultimate goal of this scenario is not only improved nutrition and food security, but the associated rural and overall economic development that would be stimulated by increased agricultural production. A regional target of 4% annual growth in agricultural production is based upon two studies that estimated growth levels required to gradually eliminate net food imports for the African region. (World Bank, 1989a; Cleaver, 1993)^6 These studies are discussed further below. For this scenario, the growth objective is met principally by the increasing use of high-yield, high-input production methods by farmers presently using more traditional practices. Patterns of crop production and energy use for modern, large-scale commercial farms in African countries provide the along the modem high-input path, through the increasing adoption of mechanized agriculture by traditional farmers.
[^6 If national, rather than regional, food security were the objective, required growth rates would differ dramatically among countries. Food secure countries, such as Zimbabwe, would require only the growth needed to keep pace with population, while others that are heavily dependent on import would need to increase production at infeasible rates to achieve food security by 2010. A regional food security goal is more realistic and economically efficient.]
Conventional high-input farming methods require significant use of mechanization and agricultural chemicals that can increase soil erosion, reduce soil fertility, and contaminate ground and surface waters. To address these concerns, a fourth, Sustainable Agriculture scenario was initially pursued, in order to quantify the energy needed to meet the Accelerated Growth targets using more sustainable agricultural practices. Such methods include integrated pest management (IPM), agroforestry, increased use of organic fertilization, low-tillage, and overall improved farm management practices that tend to reduce the need for capital- and energy-intensive inputs without sacrificing yields. In addition, potential energy efficiency improvements in irrigation, traction, and agricultural processing were explored, in order to minimize the financing needs, foreign exchange requirements, and environmental impacts of energy supply. Due the lack of well-documented African cases where these
methods have been applied and energy use characteristics measured, this scenario proved difficult to quantify. Nonetheless, some elements, particularly energy saving potentials, of a Sustainable Agriculture scenario are discussed later in this chapter.
Box 4.3 Key Elements of Case Study Scenarios
Reference Scenario
· continuation of past trends, no surprises or major shifts
· ~ 2%/year growth in agricultural production, on average
· growth in non-agricultural sectors drawn from other analyses
Moderate Improvement
· changes in cropping patterns guided by FAO AT2010 study and available national projections
· ~ 3%/year growth in agricultural production
Accelerated Growth
· rapid growth in both food and non-food crop production
· ~ 4%/year growth in agricultural production, most crops
· emphasis on high-input, conventional farming techniques
Sustainable Agriculture (not quantified)
· same targets as Accelerated Growth scenario
· utilization of more sustainable farming practices to minimize environmental impacts, external inputs, and farmer risk (e.g. integrated pest management, reduced or no tillage, agroforestry, recycling of agricultural residues, biological nitrogen fixation)
· investment in cost-effective energy-efficiency improvements
4.4. Looking into the crystal ball: regional and global agricultural scenarios
Looking into the future is always a rather subjective undertaking, since it involves choices among projection methods, critical assumptions, and scenario characteristics. It is thus useful to look at available agriculture scenarios at the regional and global levels. Some of these scenario exercises embody important global trends and interrelationships, such as the effect of changing trade patterns and consumption patterns in importing countries, that may affect the African agriculture and energy situation in ways that are hard to predict when looking at the national level alone. Since no independent analysis was undertaken to estimate agricultural production requirements needed to achieve food security and improved nutrition, the two sets of studies described below are used to provide these estimates and targets.
Agriculture: Towards 2010, "AT2010" (FAO, 1993a); World Agriculture: Towards 2000, "AT2000" (Alexandratos, ed. 1987)
These studies comprise two of the most widely read and reviewed studies of prospective agricultural development, and provide an important source of data and assumptions for the case studies. AT2000, and its update AT2010, assembled the broad expertise of FAO to assess the likely developments over a 15-20 year time horizon, and to help identify and motivate efforts needed to achieve food security and better nutrition, while improving the sustainability of agricultural and rural development. These studies are extremely detailed, looking at demand and production characteristics in each of over 90 developing countries, accounting for international trends in commodity production and trade. The analyses rely heavily on expert judgment, particularly with respect to land use and production patterns.
While prospects are brighter in other regions, for Africa, AT2010 projects the persistence of chronic undernutrition and continued rapid rise in food imports. Almost half of the world's undernourished population, numbering nearly 300 million, are projected to reside in Africa by 2010. The need for food imports will increase almost two and half times from 1990 to 2010. Although overall agricultural production (3.0% per year) and cereal production (3.4% per year) grow faster than in any other region over the 1990-2010 period, per capita food production grows only slightly, due to rapid population expansion (3.2% per year).
Almost half of the projected production growth in Africa is expected to come from expanding cultivated area by either bringing new land under the plow or by multiple cropping. Very little expansion of irrigation, globally or in the region, is expected; most of the better sites have been exploited, and major irrigation projects have often proven too costly to justify the returns for governments and donor agencies. The use of fertilizer is expected to increase at 3.3% per year, the same rate as overall production, and an increase from the 2.8% growth witnessed in the 1980s.
Table 4.1 AT2010 Projected Growth Rates for Africa
Crop
Annual Growth in Production, 1990-2010
Maize
Wheat
Rice
Sorghum
Millet
Cassava
Tobacco
Sugar Cane
Cotton
The regional results of the AT2010 study are more optimistic than recent national trends for Africa and most case study countries. In the Moderate Improvement scenarios, these results, including the growth rates in crop production shown in Table 4.1 above, together with national "targets" where available, to project growth in yields and cultivated area.^7
[^7 Growth rates for all crops except tobacco are averages for all developing countries except China. Tobacco is based on the average growth in total agricultural production in Sub-Saharan Africa.]
Sub-Saharan Africa, From Crisis to Sustainable Growth: A Long-Term Perspective Study (World Bank, 1989a); A Strategy to Develop Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa and a Focus for the World Bank (Cleaver, 1993)
These two World Bank studies provide a vision for increasing food security and nutrition in the region, and a strategy for Bank investments. Each study includes a series of scenarios to estimate the regional food security achieved under a range of production and population assumptions through the year 2020. Although methods and results differ somewhat between the two studies, both suggest a target of 4% annual growth in food and agricultural production.
Table 4.2 presents the key assumptions and results for the more recent analysis. (Cleaver, 1993) Five scenarios considered variants in population, food production, and average caloric intake. Shown here are the resulting regional food gaps (consumption at projected caloric intake minus projected production) for 2000 and 2020. For reference, the current food gap in 1990 was approximately 10 million tonnes (100 million tonnes consumed minus 90 million produced). The average caloric intake of 2027 assumed in Cases I-IV is the present average, a level insufficient to substantially reduce undernutrition. A continuation of the long-term growth of 2% in agricultural production in leads to food gaps in Cases I and III that substantially exceed those projected in AT2010 above. The 4% production target assumed in Cases II, II, and V, is capable of closing the food gap over the next 10-30 years, thereby achieving the food security objective. But only in Case V is the other major
objective, improved nutrition also achieved, with average intake rising to 2400 calories by 2030. A reduction in fertility of 50% by 2030, while not substantially affecting results shown through 2020, is critical to maintaining food security and adequate nutrition in the longer-term.
Table 4.2 World Bank Food Scenarios for Sub-Saharan Africa (Cleaver, 1993)
Case I
Case II
Case III
Case IV
Case V
Population
- projected levels -
- decline in fertility of 50% by 2030 -
Food Production Growth
2%/yr
4%/yr
2%/yr
4%/yr
4%/yr
Avg. Caloric Intake
2400 by 2030
Food Gap Million T (2000)
Food Gap Million T (2020)
As noted by Cleaver, achievement of these objectives will require liberalization of intra-African food trade and improved food distribution capability. This trade could become even more important in light of the projection that world demand for the agricultural commodities produced in Africa are expected to increase more slowly at 1-3% per year.
The 4% production growth target is used in the Accelerated Growth scenarios for all case study countries, with the implicit assumption that improved intra-Africa trade will enable the countries more poorly endowed in agricultural resources to benefit from the improved regional picture. As noted by Cleaver, the 4% growth target is ambitious, yet recent experience in several African countries suggests that this level of growth is achievable.^8
[^8 Cleaver (1993) cites growth rates in excess of 4 percent from 1986-89 in Chad, Cape Verde, Nigeria, Botswana, Guinea-Bissau, Uganda, Benin, Kenya, Tanzania, and Comoros.]
Box 4.4 A Pessimistic View of Long-Run Food Prospects (Kendall and Pimentel, 1994)
Kendall and Pimentel examine global food prospects through the year 2050 under three scenarios: business-as-usual (BAU), pessimistic, and optimistic. As in most other projections, increases in irrigated area are expected to be modest. Irrigated area rises from the 16% of cultivated area to 18% by 2050 in the BAU scenario, and to 17% and 19% in the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios, respectively. In other respects, their BAU scenario is itself rather pessimistic. Land degradation is expected to depress productivity in developing countries by 15-30%, Grain production increases only 50% by 2050, while global population doubles, thus the projected food situation is rather grim. Grimmer, still, is their pessimistic scenario, where they factor in potential crop losses of 10-20% due to global climate change and stratospheric ozone loss, continued decline in fertilizer use, cropland, and degradation of irrigated land. Per capita grain production drops to almost half of current
levels.
To alleviate widespread hunger among a doubled of world population by 2050, they argue that a tripling, or more, of current food supply would be required. They estimate that the energy-intensiveness of developing country agriculture would need to increase 50- to 100-fold, including major increases in irrigation, to achieve this 3-fold increase in food production. Such an increase in input use, they suggest, might be unrealistic, and would imply uncontrollable environmental degradation that could undermine increasing production.^9
[^9 Kendall and Pimentel point out that, at present, irrigation consumes 70% of global fresh water use, that 430 million ha of cropland, equivalent to one-third of presently cultivated area has been abandoned due to soil erosion; and that nutrient depletion, overcultivation, waterlogging, urbanization, soil compaction, acidification, and other forms of land degradation, taken together with soil erosion, reduce annual crop yields and long-term productivity.]
Thus, the essential element of their Optimistic Scenario is rapid stabilization of population growth, lowering world population in 2050 from 13 to 7.8 billion, and thereby reducing grain production requirements to achievable levels. Grain production increases 70% by 2050, boosted by a 20% increase in planted area, and a 450% increase in fertilizer use. Improved food distribution, environmental protection, fuel substitution for agricultural residues (to enable nutrient recycling), technology transfer and assistance, and clear government priorities on food production are essential to achieving this goal.
While none of their assumptions or results are used here, the Kendall and Pimentel long-term, global analysis provides a useful backdrop for shorter-term, regional analysis. Their results indicate the potential importance of controlling population growth and environmental degradation, elements not directly addressed here.
4.5. Analysis of agriculture-related energy use patterns
In the 1970s, two developments combined to bring the energy-agriculture connection to the academic and policy-makers' agenda. Widely-read global studies, such as "Limits to Growth" (Club of Rome, 1972), questioned the earth's carrying capacity, particularly the ability to feed its burgeoning human population. Second, the energy crisis, with rising energy prices and the prospect of dwindling fossil fuel supplies, forced a critical examination of the dependence of agriculture and food supply on energy availability. Together, these developments led to a common question: Would the rising costs of energy-intensive inputs (fertilizers, mechanization and irrigation) hinder efforts to modernize agriculture and improve yields in developing countries, and consequently impede the ability to grow enough food? If so, what alternative agricultural practices, consumption patterns, or energy resources might be needed?
a) Energy-agriculture studies and full energetic analysis
These and other concerns helped to spur several seminal studies of energy, food, and agriculture during this period. (Makhijani and Poole, 1975; Leach, 1976; Lockeretz, 1977; Pimentel and Pimentel, 1979; Stout et al., 1979) These studies elaborated methods of energetic analysis, which consider not only the commercial energy used for agricultural production, but the energy embodied in agricultural inputs (e.g. in the manufacture and transport of fertilizers and tractors), the human and animal energy expended, particularly in traditional agricultural production, and the "energy value" of the crops produced. These elements were often combined in detailed energy output/input balances, as illustrated in Table 4.c below.
When all inputs are considered in terms of their energy value, the energy requirements of agriculture and food production increase dramatically when compared to the relatively small amount of commercial energy typically used for agriculture in most countries. In some developing countries, food production and delivery accounts for 60-80% of the total energy - human plus animal plus fuel - used. (Pimentel, 1979) Under the conventional path of agricultural development and intensification, land and labor constraints and other factors lead to increased mechanization and use of energy-intensive inputs, and the use of commercial energy increases rapidly, while human and animal labor decrease. Ironically, while the amount of commercial energy is far higher in most countries using modern high-input farming methods, the share of total energy used in the agriculture and food systems is typically lower, due to heavier energy use in industrial, service, and transportation sectors.
Under modern, high-input practices, the manufacture and delivery chemical fertilizers dominates energetic analyses for many crops and conditions. This finding holds true in both developing and industrialized countries, as illustrated in Table 4.3 for both barley in the UK and maize in large scale commercial farms in Zimbabwe, where fertilizers account for 57% and 50%, respectively, of total energy-valued inputs. The energy embodied in agricultural equipment and improved seed varieties (their cultivation and delivery) can also be significant. Combined with the energy required to process and deliver products once they leave the farm, modern food production is, as Leach (1976) notes, "an astonishingly energy-intensive process." (p.2) As shown in Table 4.3 (at the end of this chapter), energy output/input ratios for modern agriculture are far lower than for traditional practices. In essence, modern, high-input agriculture substitutes energy in the form of fuels, fertilizer and
other inputs for land and labor, resulting in increases in yield and energy intensity.
This tendency is vividly demonstrated by Zimbabwe's "dual" agricultural sector. Large-scale commercial farms employing modern, high-input practices account for 99% of the agricultural use of commercial energy that shows up in the national energy statistics. However, these farms comprise only 21% of farmed area. Most of Zimbabwe's rural population resides on communal or smallholder farms, which produce the bulk of country's cereal output. They rely on human labor and animal draught as energy sources, and yields are typically 2-4 times lower than on large commercial farms.
The findings of energetic analyses provide some important insights. If one were to rely on the low energy consumption figure for agriculture on most national energy balance sheets (commercial energy only), typically in the range of 1-3% in industrialized countries and 5-10% in developing countries, one might underestimate the importance of the agricultural sector's linkage to overall energy requirements. Similarly, one might understate the relevance of energy prices and availability to the agricultural production and competitiveness. When the indirect or embodied energy requirements are considered, the energy requirements of the food and agricultural production are often several times what their direct fuel consumption levels might suggest. Table 4.4 below shows that, energy consumed for on-farm operations (machinery and irrigation; post-harvest uses excluded) ranges from 24% to 42% of total, commercial energy requirements.
Table 4.4 Commercial Energy Used for Agricultural Inputs and Operations
Inputs
Industrialized Countries (1972/73)
Developing Countries (1972/73)
Africa (1972/73)
Fertilizer
Machinery (Operation/Fuel)
Machinery (Equipment Man)
Irrigation (Operation/Fuel)
Irrigation (Equipment Man.)
Pesticides
Total (EJ)
Bold face indicates fuel use categories tracked here (energy that is used during operation in the region). Sources: Stout et al., 1979; Weiner et al., 1988
While energetic analysis can provide interesting insights, the case study scenarios focus primarily on the consumption of fuels and electricity in agricultural and agriculture-related activities, as indicated by the shaded areas in Figure 4.2 and bold face lines in Table 4.4. To the extent possible, traditional fuels - fuelwood and agricultural residues - are included along with more commonly reported commercial fuel uses. For several reasons, limited consideration is given to the two unshaded areas of Figure 4.2 - the embodied energy in agricultural inputs and human and animal power - that are typically included in energetic analyses. First, there are inherent limits to valuing inputs and outputs on energy terms. Farmers make production decisions and prosper based on the economic, rather than the energy value, of inputs and outputs. Second, the primarily combined interest of the energy and agricultural sectors is typically how the provision of fuels and electricity relates
to agricultural and rural well-being. Agricultural chemicals and machinery are typically imported in most African countries, therefore the energy required to produce them may have little effect on the national energy balance.
Figure 4.2 Levels of Agricultural Energy Analysis
Shaded areas are the focus of the present analysis
Human and animal labor requirements fall outside the traditional boundaries of energy sector planning, and their dynamics are far more complex than those of fuel and electricity supply and are not considered here. However, since human labor remains the predominant source of energy for agricultural production in much of Africa, and transitions to animal traction and fuel-using machinery are important for the social and economic effects, human and animal labor requirements and trade-offs remains an important area for research.
In the scenarios, fertilizer use is projected in both physical and energy terms, according to the typical equivalents found in the literature as illustrated in Table 4.5 above. However, the points noted above should be kept in mind; in most cases, the reported energy value of fertilizer will have little or no bearing on the national energy balance. Given limited data and usefulness, the energy equivalent values for pesticide use and farm machinery are not tracked.
Table 4.5 Energy Equivalents for Agricultural Inputs
Input
kgOE/kg
Nitrogen (N)
Phosphorus (P)
Potassium (K)
Pesticides
Farm and Irrigation Machinery
Source: FAO, 1985; Similar values found in Leach (1976).
b) Energy, agricultural, and economic development: trends and relationships
A few key trends have and may continue to affect agricultural energy use, and play an important role in defining the Reference scenarios:^10
[^10 Several international data sources, including AGROSTAT (FAO, 1990 and FAO, 1993b), World Resources Institute (1994), World Data Tables (World Bank, 1993a), and IEA Energy Statistics (IEA, 1993), were used to supplement local data.]
· Africa's disappointing agricultural performance over the past two decades is well documented: regional average annual growth in agricultural production, value added, and export value have averaged 2% per year or less, failing to keep pace with population expansion of over 3%. Per capita food production declined at a rate of about 2% per year, and imports grew at over 6% per year. (Jaffee in Barghouti et al, 1992; World Bank, 1992). Each of the case study countries witnessed similar declines in per capita food production as shown in Figure 4.3.
· Most developing countries rely heavily on agriculture as a source of value added and export earnings; this reliance tends to decrease as countries industrialize. As shown in Figure 4.4, declining agriculture GDP share strongly correlates with rising income. This tendency, however, does not mean that the agricultural sector should be ignored in favor of industry as a focus for economic growth; indeed, most Western development economists in the 1950s did not consider the agricultural sector instrumental to economic development. Fortunately, this view has been largely abandoned; now agriculture is typically recognized as an important stimulus for industrialization. (Cleaver, 1993; OTA, 1992) As shown in Table 4.6, the agricultural share of GDP ranges from 12% in Zimbabwe (the most industrialized of the study countries) to 59% in Tanzania, averaging 32% for the region.
· Agriculture typically accounts for a small fraction of total energy use, a fraction that tends to decrease with increasing average income, largely for the reasons described above. In the study countries, this fraction ranges from 6% in Tanzania to 11% in Zimbabwe and Sudan. Much of the energy used in traditional agriculture - human and animal labor and biomass fuels - is generally not accounted for in these statistics.
· High-input, mechanized agriculture generally increases commercial energy use per hectare by one or two orders of magnitude, compared with more traditional methods. (Kendall and Pimentel, 1994) More intensely mechanized farming in Zimbabwe, combined with government policies that ensure reliable energy supply to farmers, accounts for its higher agricultural energy intensity (per hectare) than other countries, as shown in Table 4.6.
Table 4.6 Basic Indicators for Case Study Countries_____________
Cameroon
Mali
Sudan
Tanzania
Zimbabwe
Sub-Saharan Africa
World
Demographics and Economics
Total Population
(millions, mid-1990)
Labor Force in Agriculture (1980)
GDP per Capita
(1987 US$, 1990)
Agriculture Share of GDP (1990)
Daily Calorie Supply per Capita (kcal, 1989)
Prevalence of Malnutrition Under 5 (%, 1990)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Average Annual Growth Rates
Population (1980-90)
Projected Population
GDP (1970-1990)
n/a
n/a
GDP/Capita (1970-1990)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Agricultural GDP (1970-1990)
n/a
n/a
Geography and Agricultural Land Use
Arable Land ('000 Ha, 1989)
n/a
n/a
Arable Land and Permanent Crops ('000 Ha, 1989)
n/a
n/a
Irrigated Land (% of Arable & Perm Crops, 1989)
n/a
n/a
Agricultural Production
Cereal Production per Capita (kg, 1990)
n/a
n/a
Roots and Tubers Production per Capita (kg, 1990)
n/a
n/a
Average Cereal Yields (kg/Ha)
n/a
n/a
Manufactured Fertilizer Consumption (kg/Ha, 1989)
n/a
n/a
Pesticide Consumption
(kg/Ha, 1989)
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Tractors in Use (#/'000 Ha, 1989)
n/a
n/a
Energy Use
Commercial Energy Intensity (MJ/$GDP, 1990)
n/a
n/a
Commercial Energy Use per Capita (GJ, 1990)
n/a
n/a
Traditional Energy Use per Capita (GJ, 1991)
Agriculture Share of Commercial Energy Use (1990)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Agricultural Energy Intensity (GJ/'000 Ha, 1990)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Agricultural Energy Intensity (GJ/$GDP, 1990)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Notes: Sudan and World agriculture share of total GDP is for 1970. Sub-Saharan Africa includes all of Africa for 1970-90 projected population growth rate and traditional energy use per capita. For Sub-Saharan Africa and World, GDP per capita is GNP per capita in 1990 US$. Fertilizer, pesticide and tractors in use figures are per hectare arable land and permanent crops. Cameroon, Sub-Saharan Africa and World historical GDP growth is from 1980-91. Data for Mali GDP/cap growth are for the 1980s. Mali energy data is for 1992. n/a = not available.
Sources: Republique du Mali, 1994; Lokolo, 1994; Central Statistical Office of Zimbabwe; Nour, 1994; FAO, 1990; FAO, 1993b; World Resources Institute 1994-World Bank, 1993a; IEA, 1993.
Figure 4.3 Food Production per Capita 1970-1991
Figure 4.4 Agricultural Share of GDP vs. Income: 108 Countries
Figure 4.5 Commercial Energy Intensity, 1971-1990
Figure 4.6 Agricultural Energy Intensity, 1971-1991
Figure 4.7 Agricultural Energy Use per Unit Composite Agricultural Production Index, 1971-1991
Figure 4.8 Tractors In Use, 1970-1989
Figure 4.9 Harvester/Thresher Imports, 1970-1989
Figure 4.10 Average Fertilizer Application Rates, 1970-
· Overall commercial energy use in most African countries has tended to increase directly with value added. As shown in Figure 4.5, overall energy intensities are highest in Zimbabwe, followed by Sudan and Tanzania. Trends over the past two decades implied income-energy elasticities of 0.7 for Zimbabwe and 1.2 for Sudan, while for other countries the data and/or correlations were too poor to estimate elasticities. An elasticity values of 0.7 is used for Zimbabwe, with its more diversified economy and access to more energy-efficient technologies, and 1 for other countries. The estimated value for Sudan, reflects a very turbulent period where energy use could not always be translated into increased production due to civil strife.
· For the agricultural sector, as shown in Figure 4.6, agricultural energy intensities tend to be lower than for the economy as a whole. Furthermore, the large fluctuations in annual values suggests a weak relationship between agricultural energy use and value added.^11 Therefore, the use of income elasticities to project agricultural value added is problematic.
[^11 This may be a reflection of differing exchange rates and agricultural commodity prices and their influence on agricultural value added, as reported in common monetary units.]
· Agricultural energy use appears to correlate more strongly with a composite index of agricultural production index than with agricultural GDP, as illustrated by comparing Figure 4.6 with Figure 4.7. Greater disaggregation to farming system (commercial vs. traditional, irrigated vs. rainfed, etc.), region, and crop type would enable more accurate tracking of energy use; this approach is at the core of the methodology used here.
· Estimating and using price response as an explanatory variable is desirable in principle, but problematic in practice. Price effects are clearest where markets function well, and consumers are can respond to price changes by use of substitutes. In many African countries, however, this is not the case; reliability of energy supply often the key concern. Government interventions in the form of subsidies and price controls also further complicate the analysis.^12
[^12 In the most detailed econometric analysis reviewed from among the five countries, all estimates of price elasticities for Zimbabwe were considered statistically insignificant, unreliable, and "too low based on experience in other countries", (p. 154, World Bank/UNDP, 1992)]
· In the region, the predominant fuels used by the agricultural sector are diesel for farm machinery and irrigation pumps, wood and coal for crop drying and curing, and electricity for irrigation and miscellaneous uses. Electricity use tends to be more cost-effective and efficient than diesel for irrigation pumping, but its use is limited due to in part to the lack of available low-cost electricity and grid connections. Among the case study countries, electricity is used to irrigate sugar cane in the Sudan and several other crops in Zimbabwe; expansion of electricity use will depend on the success of rural electrification efforts, which generally need to be justified in the broader context of rural development.
· Fuel switching and alternative fuels could help to meet increased agricultural energy requirements. As noted in Chapter 5, the agriculture sector has the potential to become a major source of bioenergy supply, providing liquid fuel substitutes, diesel and feedstocks for electricity production, and solid fuels for crop curing and drying. In addition, improvements in wind and solar technologies have made them cost-competitive for power generation in many remote areas, offering the means to increase small-scale irrigation. These potentials are not considered here, but the reader should bear in mind that future energy requirements for the agricultural sector could, and probably should, be met from a broader array of energy resources than shown here.
· Average fertilizer application rates are very low in most African countries. Application rates in Zimbabwe, as shown in Figure 4.10, have remained at 5-10 times the levels found in other case study countries over the past two decades. This is in part a function of Zimbabwe's unique capability to produce sufficient nitrogenous fertilizer to roughly meet demands; most other African countries import most or all of their chemical fertilizers.
In the next section and in the country case study sections below, national and sub-national trends in yield, energy, and fertilizer use are analyzed in greater detail.
c) Energy use in agriculture and related industries; prospects for increasing energy services and efficiencies
Commercial and traditional energy forms are used to manufacture and deliver agricultural inputs, to operate agricultural machinery, to irrigate, dry, and cure crops, to transport agricultural products, and to transform them into consumer goods, such as foodstuffs, clothing, and beverages. Energy-efficiency measures might enable these activities to increase rapidly without proportional increases in energy use. Indicate estimates of achievable efficiency improvement potentials, as might be used in a Sustainable Agriculture scenario, are developed below.
Table 4.7 indicates the relative importance of various end-uses in Sudan and Zimbabwe. Crop drying and curing, generally applied to tobacco, maize, and wheat, is the most energy-intensive process, requiring up to 480 GJ per hectare for tobacco at present yields using traditional methods in Zimbabwe, and possibly requiring even more in Tanzania. (see World Bank, 1989a) As a result, tobacco curing is the single largest energy end-use in Zimbabwe, accounting for over half of all on-farm energy use. Irrigation is also relatively energy-intensive process; depending on the crop, climate, and farm type, energy requirements range from less than 1 GJ per hectare for sorghum, groundnuts and other crops in Sudan to around 20 GJ per hectare for sugar and wheat in semi-arid areas. Operation of farm machinery is somewhat less intensive on a per hectare basis, except for tobacco and sugar cane for which commercial methods are very mechanized.
Table 4.7 Energy Use in Agriculture and Agro-Industry: Zimbabwe and Sudan
Zimbabwe (1990.est.)
Sudan (1990.est.)
Comm. Energy (PJ)
Trad. Energy (PJ)
Energy Intensity (GJ/ha)
Comm. Energy
Energy Intensity (GJ/ha) (PJ)
On-Farm Uses
Irrigation
6 (maize) - 21 (wheat)
0.5 (sorg.) -18 (sugar)
Mechanization
0.3 (communal) -11 (tobacco)
0.2 (gr'nut) -19 (sugar)
Tobacco Curing
203 (com'l) - 480 (trad'l)
Grain Drying
10(com'l) - 233(trad'l)
Food, Bev., & Tob. Industry
Boilers
Motor Drive
Other
Textile Industry
Boilers
Motor Drive
Other
Data unavailable for industrial subsectors and traditional fuels for Sudan.
Tractors and other farm machinery
Modern farm machinery can enable the rapid performance of routine and heavy operations such as planting, deep plowing, and land clearing. As a result, it can increase yields and production through more timely and effective tillage and planting, and can more readily enable multiple-cropping. (Stout et al., 1979) Its most basic purpose is to substitute for human labor; it thus becomes particularly attractive where farm labor is scarce or costly. Labor productivity can also be improved through effective use of draught animals and better farm tools; efforts which have been the emphasis of many recent development programs.
In most African countries, mechanization tends to be concentrated among large-scale commercial farms. Almost by definition, traditional farmers tend to make minimal use of farm machinery, and when they do, it is usually on a hired basis. Reliance on hand tools is still the norm throughout Africa, and the use of draught animals is generally low compared with other developing regions, particularly South Asia.
Despite generally increasing commercial energy use for agriculture, the number of tractors in use in Mali, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe has grown only slightly since 1970, as shown in Figure 4.8. Mechanization, on an aggregate level, would not appear to be a factor in the significant gains in smallholder maize yields witnessed in Tanzania and Zimbabwe in the 1980s. In the Sudan, as suggested in Figures 4.8 and 4.9, and as discussed in section 4.7 below, mechanized and semi-mechanized agriculture has been on the increase in recent years, owing to its competitive advantage over traditional methods. However, the greater availability of farm equipment has not translated into significant improvements in agricultural productivity, further underscoring the point the energy-intensive inputs alone, cannot guarantee improved performance.
While the number of tractors has increased over 7-fold in Cameroon, the overall level of mechanization remains very low. Measured in terms of tractors in use per hectare of arable land, Zimbabwe's agriculture system was almost 50 times more intensely mechanized than Cameroon's in 1989 and remains 2-4 times more mechanized than in Sudan and Tanzania. (see Table 4.6.)
Table 4.8 Major Mechanized Operations at Sudan's Gezira Irrigation Scheme
Operation
Typical Diesel Use (MJ/ha)
Relevant Crops
Deep Plowing
Cotton (most)
Disc Harrowing
Cotton (some), Wheat (some)
Ridging
All
Split Ridging
All
Cross Ridging
All
Leveling
Wheat
Drill Sowing
Wheat
Harvesting
Wheat
Transportation
Wheat
All includes cotton, sorghum, groundnuts, and wheat. Based on Nour (1994). Original source: Annual Report 1993/94, Mechanical Field Operations, Agricultural Engineering Department, Sudan Gezira, Barakat
Crops can differ substantially in mechanization operations and consequent energy use. Cotton cultivation in Sudan, for example, typically requires deep plowing, which as shown in Table 4.8 above is among the most energy-intensive operations. Not shown in Table 4.8 are all operations required for sugar cane cultivation; it requires 10 times more diesel per hectare for mechanized operations than cotton and 25 times more than wheat.
In the Reference and Moderate Improvement scenarios, mechanization is assumed to continue increasing in Sudan and Cameroon, while remaining relatively constant in other countries. Significant increases in mechanization, however, are implied in the Accelerated Growth scenario. In the Low Input scenario, alternative operations such as low-tillage agriculture are considered, which can simultaneously reduce soil erosion, land degradation, and energy use without significant yield losses for several crops. (Pieri in Srivastava and Alderman, 1993)
Irrigation
Despite theoretical estimates that potentially irrigable land is five times present levels in Africa, many observers do not expect major growth in irrigated area either globally or within the region, because the most favorable sites have largely already been exploited and the generally low success rate of large irrigation projects in Africa, particularly in the sub-Saharan region. (Crosson and Anderson, 1992) There is nonetheless potential for cost-effective irrigation expansion in several countries, including Sudan, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Somalia, and Niger, and notable successes with privately-operated, smaller-scale irrigation projects suggests that revised approaches might enable more of this potential to be realized. (Brown and Nooter, 1992)
Irrigation water is typically delivered using electric or diesel-powered pumps. Where grid electricity is available it is usually the most reliable and least expensive option. (OTA, 1992) Solar, wind, and producer gas are also options for water pumping. Inefficient agricultural pumpsets can be upgraded to reduce energy consumption by up to 30-50%, with as short as a 4 month payback to farmers. (OTA, 1992; Miller et al., 1994) Improved water delivery, using drip irrigation, better scheduling and other methods can provide additional benefits in terms of both reduced energy and water use. In the Sustainable Agriculture scenario, half of all irrigated farms might be assumed to adopt improved pumpsets by 2010, lowering irrigation energy requirements per hectare by 20%.
On-farm processing: crop curing and drying
Curing and drying, principally for tobacco and maize, are the predominant on-farm uses of energy in both Tanzania and Zimbabwe. Firewood, and in Zimbabwe, coal, are the principal fuels used for this purpose. In the case of Tanzania, curing and drying accounts for 4% of total national firewood use, and has been suggested as major contributor to localized fuelwood problems.
Tobacco curing alone accounts for over half of Zimbabwean on-farm energy use in 1982, and over one-fifth in Tanzania. In many cases, current tobacco curing practices are highly inefficient both in terms of energy use and crop damage and losses. In Tanzania, efforts have been made to address this problem by designing improved curing practices, which could reduce firewood use by 50%, improve the profitability for tobacco farmers, and thereby provide multiple benefits in terms of rural development and environment. (World Bank/UNDP, 1989b) In the Low Input scenario, half of these estimated savings are assumed to be achievable by 2010. For other crops, a more modest 10% reduction in energy intensity, due improved technologies and practice, is assumed.
Agro-industry
Agro-industry can be defined as comprising: a) the food, beverage, and tobacco manufacturing sector (ISIC 31); b) the textile, wearing apparel, and leather industries (ISIC 32); and c) any informal industries that process agricultural commodities and are not reported in formal statistics. Coal and oil use for boilers and process heat are commonly the predominant energy uses in agro-industry, as typified by the estimated 63% of total energy use shown in Table 4.7 for Zimbabwe food and textile industries. Electricity use for motors is also usually significant, as well, accounting for an estimated 24% of Zimbabwe agro-industry demand.
The energy efficiency of boilers and electric motors can often be improved at low-cost, with rapid payback time. (OTA, 1992) The potential for substantial, cost-effective energy savings in food and textile industries has in fact been a focus for the SADC Energy Efficiency Program. Initial estimates for energy savings in Zimbabwean agro-industries, as shown in Table 4.9, show that a greater potential exists for coal and oil savings, as compared to electricity. Based on a weighted average of these audits, scenarios savings of 30% and 4% in fuel and electricity in agro-industries might be achievable throughout Africa by 2010.
Table 4.9: Energy Savings Potential in Zimbabwe Agro-Industries
Plant Type
Potential Savings
Fuels
Electricity
Textiles
Leather Tanning
Brewery
Distillery
Cigarette Manufacturing
Bakery
Edible Oils
Sugar Refinery
Source: Shawmont, 1990
Agro-industry activity is tightly linked with agricultural production. (Cleaver, 1993) For the scenarios here, agro-industries are assumed to grow at about 1.5 times the rate of agricultural growth, based roughly on the 1.5 multiplier noted above. This is similar to Cleaver (1993) who suggests that 4% growth in agricultural production is necessary to achieve a target growth of 5-7% for agro-industries.
d) Prospects for increasing yields: the low vs. high input debate
When looking in detail at energy-agriculture relationships, it bears repeating that energy is but one of many important inputs for agricultural production. Increasing energy availability and use does not guarantee increased yields and production, and likewise, increased yields will not necessary require increased energy use. However, increased yields and production do lead to other important outputs: improving incomes, providing agriculture-related rural employment, freeing labor for other productive enterprises, and supplying the raw materials for increased agro-industry activity - all of which will tend to increase energy requirements.
While few would disagree that increasing agricultural productivity is a central goal for rural and national development, there is wide diversity of opinion on the soundest and most sustainable means to do so. The debate between advocates of so-called "low-input" and "high-input" agricultural techniques may have lessened with the growing recognition of that methods can be effectively integrated, taking advantage of the merits of each (FAO, 1993a), sharp contrasts remain between the levels of chemical use and mechanization suggested by each. The more conventional high-input view typically holds that increasing mechanization, irrigation, and energy-intensive inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides are required for increasing yields.
The low-input advocates commonly point to examples of high-yield agriculture where few if any manufactured chemicals are required, and the best elements of traditional practices are maintained. Green manures and agricultural residues are used in place of mineral fertilizers, integrated pest management (IPM) substitutes for pesticides, and animal draught or low-tillage techniques are used instead of heavy machinery. Not surprisingly, energy use, foreign exchange requirements, and farmers' cash outlays can be significantly reduced. Both traditional and modern, alternative agriculture techniques can have distinct benefits, often achieving comparable yields with lower external requirements and more positive ecological interactions. New low-input, high-yield farming techniques are under development at research centers in Africa, such as the French Agricultural Research Center (CIRAD) in Côte D'Ivoire, International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA) in Nigeria, and the
International Center for Research in Agro-Forestry (ICRAF) in Kenya.
Despite the wide variation among farming practices and conditions, projecting agricultural energy use requires simplified assumptions regarding the relationship between yields and energy use. The overwhelming majority of well-documented yield-energy use data describes the high-input agricultural path. The Global Technology Matrix (GTM), for example, is a detailed cross-sectional database that provides estimates of input requirements (fertilizer, power, seed, and plant protection) for a range of crops at 4 increasing levels of inputs and yields. (Bruinsma et al., 1983) From GTM data, yield-energy use and yield-fertilizer use elasticities were derived for the crops and yield levels found in each of the countries studied. By using these numbers, the first three scenarios implicitly assume that yields grow as the result of increasing inputs, thus adopting the conventional view. Typical values for yield-energy elasticities and yield-fertilizer elasticities range from 0.3 to 0.6,
and 1.6 to 4.3, respectively.^13
[^13 The GTM reports total power requirements in man-day equivalents, including both commercial, animate, and human energy. We assume, over the yield increases considered here, that commercial energy use increases in the same proportion as the total. This may underestimate commercial energy requirements, since as yields rise, proportionately greater reliance on mechanization might be expected.]
4.6. Zimbabwe
Zimbabwe's generally high yields and production levels, high degree of self-sufficiency, and abundance of cash crops for export all contribute towards the country's reputation as an African agricultural success story. Commercial farmers utilizing high-input techniques grow tobacco, maize and wheat with yields comparable to, or higher than, many industrialized countries. Since independence in 1980, maize yields have also increased substantially for communal farmers, contributing towards an improved standard of living for a large fraction of the population. Except in drought years, tobacco, sugar, beef and maize, Zimbabwe's staple crop, have been exported each year since independence.
Large-scale commercial farms (LSCFs) account for 21% of Zimbabwe's cultivated area and roughly 75% of total production. These farms, almost exclusively settler-owned and located on the most fertile soil, employ modern, high-input methods. In 1990, 30% of LSCF cultivated area was devoted to maize production, while tobacco, wheat and cotton accounted for 12%, 10% and 9%, respectively (CSO, 1994a). While all wheat is irrigated, maize, tobacco and cotton are grown on both rainfed and irrigated land. LSCFs contribute significantly to Zimbabwe's foreign exchange earnings, since they produce tobacco, sugar cane and maize for export. In the early 1990s, Zimbabwe's flue-cured tobacco accounted for 15% of world trade (NNU, 1992). Because of their intensive use of mechanization, irrigation, and on-farm processing of tobacco and maize, LSCFs account for 98% of agricultural energy use in Zimbabwe^14.
[^14 The 98% does not account for energy embodied in fertilizer production. This percentage declines to 92% when fertilizer is included.]
During colonial times, the local population was displaced onto more marginal, low rainfall land for communal farms. It is not surprising that traditional farmers have encountered lower yields, topsoil loss, firewood depletion and a range of other linked economic and environmental problems. In 1990, communal farms accounted for 70% of total cultivated area (CSO, 1994a-e), and 65% of Zimbabwean farmers (Chaguma, 1994). One-half of communal cultivated area was devoted to maize, while 12% and 6% were devoted to cotton and sorghum, respectively. Since communal farmers typically practice traditional low-input agriculture, non-human and non-animate energy use accounts for less than 1% of the national total. Although food-secure in normal rainfall years, a lack of irrigation leaves communal land dwellers vulnerable to seasonal food shortages, particularly during the winter months of June-September (NNU, 1992).
Other farm types include small-scale commercial farms, resettlement schemes and state-run farms. Small-scale commercial farms, founded before independence in an attempt to create an elite class of black freeholder farmers, grow mostly maize, and make up a small portion of agricultural land area, production and energy use. Since independence, the government has instituted several resettlement schemes to provide good-quality land and mechanized equipment for families and cooperatives. These farms also predominantly grow maize. Though more mechanized than communal farms, as a result of their small total area, these farms still do not contribute significantly towards national totals. State-run farms comprise less than 1% of total cultivated area, but with irrigation and other high-input techniques obtain yields comparable with large-scale commercial farms.
Since 1980, the government has promoted a two-pronged agricultural policy, designed to maintain a strong commercial farming sector while improving smallholder yields. Large-scale farms, important for their production of cash crops, also help ensure a reliable food surplus. Between 1980 and 1986, smallholder maize production in communal areas doubled, due largely to increased yields, but also to expanded cultivated area. Expanded access to credit enabled smallholders, for the first time, to take advantage of indigenously-developed hybrid seeds, a small degree of mechanization and nitrogen fertilizer (Eicher, 1994). Between 1979 and 1986, smallholder fertilizer purchases increased by 400% (World Bank, 1989a).
Because of government policies that favor agricultural production, agricultural energy use is considerably higher than in most other African countries. Preferential tariffs, diesel subsidies, and priority access to fuel supplies provide farmers with reliable and low-cost access to energy resources, particularly during periods of peak demand, such as planting and harvesting. For instance, the government ensures that coal is available for curing tobacco after harvest.^15
[^15 Personal communication, R.S. Maya.]
Compared to most African countries, Zimbabwe possesses a diversified, robust industrial sector, largely as a result of the international trade embargo against the Rhodesian government in the 1970s. Now, roughly 30% of GDP comes from external trade, with gold and tobacco contributing the largest fractions of exports (World Bank/UNDP, 1992). In 1984, 47% of manufacturing industry value added originated from subsectors directly reliant on agricultural production: foodstuffs, drink and tobacco, and textiles (CSO, 1989).
Zimbabwe is unique among the countries studied, because it produces most of its nitrogenous fertilizer needs^16. Sable Chemical Company, which produces this fertilizer with an electrolytic plant, consumes roughly 10% of national electricity production. However, Sable has been described as an anachronism, built to provide a domestic source of fertilizer when Rhodesia was isolated from the international community. As originally conceived, the Sable facility was to be mothballed when excess capacity from the Kariba hydropower plant was no longer available. However, since the coal-fired Hwange plant began generation in 1984, Sable has played an important role in purchasing Hwange power, and thus helping to pay off Hwange's large construction debt. Consideration has been given to retrofitting the plant to use natural gas from Mozambique or domestic coal as feedstocks. Ammonia and urea imports have also been explored as options, but due to Sable's now-important role in the
Zimbabwean industrial and overall economy, the plant has continued to operate despite its questionable economic status.
[^16 On average, indigenous production accounted for 88% of consumption from 1987-89 (FAO, 1992).]
a) Case study method and analysis
Because of the extensive analysis of the agricultural sector conducted as part of ZEAP Project^17, a rather detailed model for Zimbabwe was possible. The five farm types introduced above - large-scale commercial, small-scale commercial, communal, resettlement and state-run - were considered separately. Within each farm type, the area under cultivation, yield, energy use, and production for several major crops were analyzed.
[^17 ZEAP, the Zimbabwe Energy Accounting Project, was a joint project between the Beijer Institute of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the Ministry of Water and Energy Resources and Development of the Government of Zimbabwe (now the Ministry of Transport and Energy), and was conducted from 1982-85.]
Earlier detailed survey results were reconciled with more recent data on total agricultural energy use and land use patterns (CSO, 1994a-e) to develop a base year energy use profile for 1990. Irrigation, tractors, trucks (on-farm transport), curers, dryers and fans were considered, with separate per-hectare energy intensities for each crop and farm type. Per-hectare application rates for N, P, and K fertilizer for each crop and farm type were also developed, based on recent government statistics (CSO, 1994a-e).
In the Reference Scenario, future area under cultivation is based on a continuation of recent trends. During the last two decades, cultivated area has increased gradually for tobacco, wheat, cotton and sugar cane. By extrapolating these trends, as illustrated in Figure 4.11, cultivated areas were projected to 2010, shown in Figure 4.14. The area under wheat cultivation increases from 60,000 hectares in 1990 to 70,000 hectares in 2010. Since total cultivated area by farm type has stayed roughly constant over this time period, except for some shift to resettlement areas, there is no assumed change in total cultivated area. Thus, instead of clearing new land, land is shifted to tobacco, wheat, cotton and sugar cane from other, presumably less profitable crops.
Figure 4.11 Cultivated Area, Wheat
Figure 4.12 Wheat Yield
Future yield increases are calculated in a similar manner to areas, as illustrated in Figure 4.12. Based on historical yield increases from 1971-90, linear trend lines are used to project 2010 values. According to the trend line, wheat yields grow to 8.4 tonnes per hectare in 2010, an increase of 2.2% per year from 1990. This method leads to similar estimated growth for tobacco yields, slower average growth for sugar cane (1.6% per year), and no growth for cotton.
For on-farm product processing end-uses, such as curing, drying and fans, energy use is assumed to grow directly with the tonnage of crops produced. Future fertilizer application rates and energy intensities for irrigation, tractors and trucks grow with yield and energy-yield elasticities derived from the GTM, as described above.
In the Reference Scenario, agriculture-related industries are assumed to grow at 4% per year, near the average of growth projections for 1990-95 and actual performance from 1980-90 (Republic of Zimbabwe, 1991). For off-farm transport related to agriculture, the movement of primary agricultural and finished products within the country is assumed to account for half of road freight transport. Transport of agricultural products increases proportionally with total tonnage produced.
For the remainder of the economy, a previous projection was adopted for comparative purposes (Talbot and Hansen, 1993). Value added in other sectors grows at 4% per year, with the exception of the mining sector, which grows more slowly, at 3% per year. An income elasticity of 0.73 is applied to the industry, mining, and commercial sectors, based on national historic growth in energy consumption and GDP. Projections of domestic energy consumption are based on a more detailed end-use analysis, with assumptions of increasing rural electrification and shifts towards electricity and other commercial fuels.
b) Reference Scenario Results
As shown in Table 4.10, total energy requirements in the Reference Scenario, including commercial and traditional fuels, increase to 429 PJ in 2010. Energy use in agriculture, agro-industry, and the transport of agricultural goods, combined, maintain an approximate 15-20% share of national energy consumption through 2010. Due to the healthy growth assumed for other modem sectors, commercial energy use in agriculture-related activities declines from 25% to 23% of commercial energy consumption in 2010, as shown in Figure 4.13.
Table 4.10 Zimbabwe Total Energy Requirements (PJ)
Sector
Reference
Moderate Improvement
Accelerated Growth
Agriculture
Agro-Industry
Ag-Transport
Other Industry
Other Transport
Mining
Commercial
Households
Total
Figure 4.13 Zimbabwe Commercial Energy Use by Sector
Coal and firewood, used for drying and curing, account for over 80% of total on-farm agricultural energy use throughout the study horizon, as illustrated in Table 4.11. The remaining electricity and diesel are consumed for irrigation and mechanization. Agro-industries rely heavily on electricity, coal and coke, while diesel is used almost exclusively for the transport of agricultural goods.
Table 4.11 Energy Requirements by Fuel (PJ)
Reference
Moderate Improvement
Accelerated Growth
Agriculture
Electricity
Diesel
Coal
Firewood
Subtotal
Agro-Industry
Electricity
Diesel
Gas/Ethanol Blend
Coal and Coke
Subtotal
Ag-Transport
Diesel
Gas/Ethanol Blend
Subtotal
National Total
Electricity
Diesel
Gas/Ethanol Blend
Other Petro Prods
Coal and Coke
Firewood
Total
Note: Totals may not match due to rounding.
In this scenario, the story of on-farm energy use remains the story of large-scale commercial farms, since they are the only mechanized farm type with land areas large enough to significantly affect national totals. In 2010, LSCFs still account for over 98% of on-farm commercial and traditional energy use, and three-quarters of embodied energy in applied fertilizer. Tobacco remains the most energy-intensive crop, accounting for over half of LSCF energy consumption in 2010. Increases in maize yields continue for smallholders on communal farms, as fertilizer application and mechanization increase. By 2010, one-quarter of all fertilizer is applied in communal areas. Overall, total agricultural production grows by 2.5% per year while population grows by 2.7% per year, thus, per capita production declines slightly.
c) Moderate Improvement Scenario
The Moderate Improvement Scenario is based on recent FAO projections of achievable production increases (FAO, 1993b). Based on the average for Sub-Saharan Africa, increases in cultivated area and yield are assumed to contribute equally to gains in production. Production growth rates vary by crop, and range from 2% to 3% per year. Production grows faster than the Reference Scenario for all crops, with the exception of wheat and sugar cane.
Table 4.12 Fertilizer Requirements, thousand tonnes (PJ embodied energy)
Fertilizer Type
Reference
Moderate Improvement
Accelerated Growth
N
P
K
11.7 (0.I)
Total
Total fertilizer applied in the Moderate Improvement Scenario more than doubles from its 1990 value, reaching 382 tonnes (27 PJ embodied energy) in 2010, as shown in Table 4.12. As illustrated in Figure 4.14, cultivated area grows steadily, from 2.4 to 3.2 million hectares in 2010. The additional cultivated area comes from both land clearing and an increased cropping intensity.
Figure 4.14 Zimbabwe Cultivated Area
Note: LSCF = large-scale commercial farms. SSCF = small-scale commercial farms. In the Accelerated Growth Scenario, large-scale commercial farming area includes area shifted to high-input methods.
d) Accelerated Growth Scenario
As noted above, a 4% per year growth in agricultural production has been estimated as a target for achieving regional food security. In the Accelerated Growth Scenario, the overall area. and yield improvements in the Moderate Improvement Scenario are used as a starting point. To achieve the target of 4% growth in production for each crop, a shift towards agricultural practices used in large-scale commercial farms is assumed.
With these assumptions, approximately 25% of communal farming area, or 440,000 hectares, adopt commercial high-input methods. This shift represents a doubling of high-input farming area during the study horizon. Since some of this land is of poorer quality than existing LSCF land, substantial increases in inputs will be required to match LSCF yields. To facilitate this transition, fertilizer requirements jump over 300% between 1990 and 2010. With Sable already operating near capacity to satisfy current fertilizer needs, a major expansion of indigenous manufacturing or an increased reliance on imports will be required - both costly propositions. Large quantities of other inputs, such as improved seeds and pesticides, would also be required. Additional credit would need to be made available to smallholders to allow for the purchase of required inputs, as well as for the initial capital investment in machinery.
In addition to increased fertilizer, pesticide, and improved seed use, energy requirements will more than double by 2010. Coal and firewood requirements for on-farm curing and drying grow fastest; in 2010, almost 30% of coal and 12% of firewood consumed in Zimbabwe would be used on farms. As shown in Table 4.13, tobacco production will continue to account for the largest share of on-farm agricultural energy use, reaching 36 PJ in 2010.
Table 4.13 Energy Requirements by Crop and Farm Type (PJ)
Reference
Moderate Improvement
Accelerated Growth
Large-Scale Comm'l
Maize
Wheat
Cotton
Tobacco
Sugar Cane
Other
Communal
Small-Scale Comm'l
State-Run
Resettlement
Other
Total
Note: Requirements do not include energy embodied in fertilizer production. Totals may not match due to rounding.
4.7. Tanzania
Tanzanian agriculture relies heavily on smallholders, with less than 10% of cultivated area located on large-scale estates (Bureau of Statistics, 1994). Smallholders provide the foundation for Tanzania's economy; in 1990, agriculture contributed roughly half of total GDP, and agro-industries made up half of all manufacturing establishments (Bureau of Statistics, 1994). In many recent years, Tanzania has produced a food surplus, but, as witnessed in 1988 and 1990, droughts and floods can wreak havoc on the fragile smallholder production systems, and force the reliance on international food aid. Tanzania's staple crops - maize, rice, sorghum, and cassava - are produced almost exclusively by smallholders. Coffee, Tanzania's most important export crop, accounted for 39% of total merchandise export value in 1987, while cotton and tobacco accounted for 12% and 5%, respectively (World Bank, 1989). Thus, these three crops, together, represent more than half of the country's exports.
Other crops, including cassava and maize, are exported in surplus years.
Tanzanian agriculture has undergone three broad periods of development. From 1961-71, favorable weather, market prices, and an availability of inputs led to high production levels. In the next decade, production declined due to the creation of inefficient national estates, villagization, and increased government price controls (Bureau of Statistics, 1993). From 1981-92, the government implemented a variety of economic reforms aimed at increasing production, including exchange rate adjustments, price decontrols, grain marketing reforms, and the encouragement of private sector participation. Since 1981, agricultural GDP has grown consistently, averaging over 4% per year (Bureau of Statistics, 1993).
Of the 3 million hectares cultivated by smallholders, 50% is devoted to maize, and over 10% is devoted each to paddy and sorghum. Coffee, millet, cassava, and groundnuts are also important smallholder crops. (Bureau of Statistics, 1994). Smallholder field sizes average 0.4 hectares, while half occupy less than 0.25 hectares (Bureau of Statistics, 1988). During the Masika season of long rains, roughly 85% of cultivated area is harvested, with the remainder harvested during the Vuli season of short rains (Bureau of Statistics, 1988). Smallholders, using traditional hand and hoe or oxen and plow techniques, consume an insignificant amount of commercial fuels. Large amounts of firewood, however, are utilized for on-farm tobacco curing. Although largely unmechanized and unirrigated, a small amount of fertilizers and pesticides are applied.
Smallholders, largely subsistence farmers, do not always rely on crops sales to provide a cash income. In 1986, one-third of smallholders relied on non-agricultural activities for their main source of income, and over one-quarter did not sell any produce. During that year, only 12% earned considerable profits from crop sales (Bureau of Statistics, 1988).
The Tanzania Fertilizer Company (TFC), commissioned in 1972, is located in Tanga. Recent production levels, less than 10,000 tonnes per year, are well below the attainable capacity of 100,000 tonnes. On average, indigenous production accounted for 9% of consumption from 1987-89 (FAO, 1992).
a) Case Study Method and Analysis
Since smallholders, who consume very small quantities of energy, make up the majority of Tanzania's agricultural system, on-farm energy consumption for mechanization or irrigation is not emphasized in this analysis. Instead, the significant amount of energy consumed in agricultural processing, agro-industry, and the transport of agricultural goods is considered in detail. Agro-processing and agro-industry are considered together, since data limitations prevent a full differentiation between on-farm processing (e.g., tobacco curing and tea drying) and agro-industry (e.g., sugar milling). Processing energy intensities are derived from a previous energy analysis of Tanzania (Mrindoko and Lazarus, 1990).
To track on-farm energy use, the country is split into small-scale and large-scale farms, with crops, yields and energy use assigned to both farm types (Bureau of Statistics, 1994, FAO, 1992, and FAO, 1992). In the Reference Scenario, future area under cultivation is based on a continuation of recent trends, using the method described for Zimbabwe. During the last two decades, total cultivated area has grown steadily, with maize and paddy increasing most significantly. By extrapolating these trends through 2010, maize area is projected to grow by 3.1% per year, paddy area by 2.6%, and total area by 1.7%. Maize yield is also projected to increase by 2.3% per year through 2010, while areas and yields for other crops stay constant.
As in Zimbabwe, processing energy use is assumed to grow directly with the tonnage of crops produced. Fertilizer application rates and energy intensities for irrigation, tractors and trucks grow with yield and energy-yield elasticities. For the off-farm transport of agriculture-related products, we assume that the movement of primary agricultural and finished products within the country accounts for half of total diesel and gasoline consumed in freight transport. We assume that transport of agricultural products increases proportionally with total tonnage produced.
For the remainder of the economy, we have adapted a previous projection for comparative purposes (Mrindoko and Lazarus, 1990). Value added in other sectors grow at 4.7% per year. Domestic energy consumption grows at 2.9% per year for rural households, and 2.2% per year for urban households.
Figure 4.15 Tanzania Total Energy Use by Sector
b) Reference Scenario Results
As illustrated in Figure 4.15, energy use in agriculture, processing, and the transport of agriculture-related products, combined, increases slightly from 34 to 42 PJ between 1990 and 2010. Due to the large increase in firewood consumption in rural households and the healthy growth assumed for other sectors, total energy use in the three agriculture-related sectors declines to 3% of the total consumption in 2010.
As illustrated in Figure 4.16, energy use in on-farm operations, including mechanization and irrigation in traditional and high input farms, grows from 2.7 to 3.8 PJ in 2010. These additional energy inputs are required to increase both yields and cultivated areas. Roughly 1.5 million hectares are brought under cultivation in the Reference Scenario, with most of the new harvested area under smallholder maize cultivation, as shown in Figure 4.17. A modest increase in high-input large-scale farms also occurs.
Figure 4.16 Tanzania On-Farm Operations Energy Use
Figure 4.17 Tanzania Total Cultivated Area
c) Moderate Improvement Scenario
In the Moderate Improvement Scenario, areas and yields grow roughly in accordance with FAO projections (FAO, 1993). Yields for tobacco, tea, coffee, and some other crops increase faster than in the Reference Scenario, while areas for sugar cane and tea also grow more rapidly. Total energy use in agriculture, processing, agro-industry, and transport of agricultural products increases only slightly compared to the Reference Scenario, reaching 59 PJ in 2010. Most of this growth is due to a doubling of energy use in sugar milling due to increased sugar cane production, as seen in Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18 Tanzania Agricultural Processing Energy Use
d) Accelerated Growth Scenario
In the Accelerated Growth Scenario, yields increase at the same rate as in the Moderate Improvement Scenario. New area is also placed under cultivation in order to increase production for each crop by 4% per year. Half of the new maize area is assigned to smallholders using traditional methods, and half is assigned to new high-input farms. New area for other crops is fully assigned to high-input farms, which are assumed to consist largely of smallholders utilizing new, intensive techniques.
In this scenario, total energy use in agriculture-related sectors increases 250% from 1990 through 2010, with significant increases in sugar milling and tobacco curing. As shown in Figure 4.19, biomass fuels continue to predominate in agricultural processing, with demand for bagasse (sugar milling) and firewood (tobacco curing) surpassing all commercial fuels. Coffee husks are also an important biomass fuel, used for coffee processing. In 2010, energy used for mechanization and irrigation is more than double that in the Moderate Improvement Scenario, with most of the increase seen in high-input farms (see Figure 4.16).
Figure 4.19 Tanzania Fuel Use in Agricultural Processing, 2010: Accelerated Growth Scenario
Ironically, in the Accelerated Growth scenario, the largest increases in energy use are for non-staple and non-food crops - tobacco, sisal, sugar cane, and coffee - which account for over 90% of agricultural processing energy use in 2010, as they do presently and in other scenarios. This is partly due to data availability and the case study methodology, which accounts for crop processing energy, and to the traditional, smallholder nature of most food production in the country. The results would seem to suggest that commercial energy is not a critical input for increasing food production in Tanzania, however, this finding depends on two assumptions: a) that there is no missing data on energy use for other food production-related activities and b) that a more pronounced shift to high-input or irrigated agricultural does not occur. With respect to the former, it could be that the energy used by farm machinery and irrigation is simply "hidden" among the national statistics, and
if included would alter the scenario results. Furthermore, if sugar milling were included in the industrial sector, as is often the case, reported agricultural energy use would drop by approximately one-half. (The sugar production can, and often is, a net supplier of energy.)
4.8. Sudan
Sudan is Africa's largest country, with a total area of over 237 million hectares. More than one half of the country is classified as arid, with 75 days or less per year when precipitation exceeds evapotranspiration. (World Resources, 1992) Because 80% of the cropland is not irrigated,. the quantities and distribution of rainfall play a dominant role in the success of the agricultural harvest. (Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Animal Wealth, 1993) In addition to rainfall, agricultural prices, wages, exchange rates, and energy availability are important determinants of food production patterns in the country. In 1983 energy shortages led to agricultural losses with a value of approximately $120 million, while the cost of the unsupplied energy would have been only about $17 million. (National Energy Planning Commission, 1985) Civil unrest and large refugee movements have also contributed to a lack of food security and an agricultural sector characterized by a
high degree of production variability.
The agricultural sector is responsible for more than 40% of Sudan's GNP and employs more than 70% of the country's labor force. (Nour, 1994) Agricultural production systems in Sudan are commonly classified into three types: irrigated, rainfed mechanized, and traditional. Irrigation represents Sudan's most significant development investment. Close to 1.5 million hectares of land are irrigated in the Sudan. Approximately 63% of the irrigated land is fed by gravity schemes, with the remainder depending on diesel and electric pumps. With an area of more than 900,000 hectares, the Gezira, located on a triangular flood plain between the confluence of the Blue and White Niles, is the world's largest irrigation scheme under single management. The area of the Gezira alone is equivalent to one-half or more of the arable land in 25 individual African countries. (Jaffee, 1992)
The historical production focus of much of Sudan's irrigated land has been cotton, the country's main export commodity. Other important export crops for Sudan are gum arabic (Sudan is the world's largest producer), livestock and oil seeds. (Nour, 1994) However, due to declining net returns for cotton production, the area and total production of cotton have shown marked declines. Over the period of 1970 to 1980 the average net return to Gezira farmers for cotton was significantly lower than for both groundnuts and sorghum. (Jaffee, 1992) While farmers perceive greater benefits from alternative crops, the management of the Gezira scheme has continued to promote the growth of cotton. The emphasis on cotton comes at the expense of providing more water, land, and technical inputs for food crops, both in the irrigated and non-irrigated sectors.
With the exception of wheat, which is grown on irrigated land, grain yields in Sudan have been declining for decades. (FAO, 1990) To compensate for declining yields, the traditional and rainfed mechanized farming in Sudan has become more extensive (i.e. expanding the area under cultivation). The resulting stagnant to slightly positive growth in total food production has not been able to keep pace with population growth, which has averaged 2.9% per year since 1970. (World Resources Institute, 1992) As a result, per capita food production has declined 20% to 30% since the early 1970s.
a) Case Study Scenarios
As noted earlier, increased commercial energy use, by itself, does not guarantee successful agricultural development, nor does an increase in agricultural production necessarily require increased commercial energy inputs. Preliminary results from the Sudan case study, as shown in Table 4.14 and Figures 4.20 through 4.23, illustrate this point. With assumed continuation of recent trends in the Reference Scenario, cultivated area continues to expand rapidly while yields continue to deteriorate; as a result, energy use increases faster than agricultural production. In the Moderate Improvement Scenario, the decline in yields are reversed and agricultural production increases by 50% relative to the Reference Scenario. Agriculture becomes more intensive rather than extensive, and more resource efficient and productive from the farmer and national perspective, and as a result, the 17% drop in cultivated area leads to a 15% drop in energy use. The Accelerated Growth Scenario nearly
doubles projected total agricultural output by 2010 in comparison to the Reference Scenario, and yet it requires less total land, and only slightly higher energy use.
The Reference Scenario was developed by examining past trends in farm type, crop areas, yields and total production. Per-hectare agricultural energy intensities were drawn primarily from a 1992 national energy planning study. (NEA, 1992) In the Moderate Improvement Scenario yields and land areas for farm and crop types were derived from AT 2010. (FAO, 1993a) Per-hectare energy intensities rise as yields improve, but because less land is under cultivation, the mix of farm types and crops differs from the Reference Scenario, and overall energy use is lower. The increase in energy intensity is attributable to greater use of mechanization and a somewhat higher fraction of irrigated land. The Accelerated Growth Scenario combines the yield improvements projected under Moderate Improvements with additional changes in crop mix by farm type. These changes are designed to bring all crops up to a 4.0% average annual production growth rate. Figure 4.20 displays the annual average growth
rates (1990-2010) for area, production, yield, and energy use for the Reference, Moderate Improvement, and Accelerated Growth Scenarios.
Figure 4.20 Average Annual Growth Rates for Sudan Scenarios
Note that aggregate figures for yield and production can be difficult to interpret, since changing cultivation patterns to crops that yield more tonnage (though not necessarily more food or economic value) per hectare can inflate apparent aggregate yields and production.
Table 4.14 Summary of Sudan Scenario Results
Reference
Moderate Improvement
Accelerated Growth
Area (Million Ha)
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
Total
Agricultural Production by Farm Type (Million Tonnes)
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
Total
Production by Crop (Million Tonnes)
Sorghum
Wheat
Groundnuts
Sugar Cane
Cotton
Millet
Energy Use (PJ)
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Total
The projected yields in the Moderate Improvement and Accelerated Growth Scenarios are not high in comparison to average African yields. However, they are significant improvements over the declining or stagnant yields projected in the Reference Scenario. The yield differences have an obvious impact on total production and future food security in Sudan. Average annual growth rates of total production are 3.4% for the Moderate Improvement Scenario, and 4.2% for the Accelerated Growth Scenario. In comparison, the same figure for the Reference Scenario is 1.4%. If population growth remains within expected bounds, the Moderate Improvement and Accelerated Growth Scenarios offer the prospect of increasing per capita food output, reversing past declines and moving towards a potential role for the country as a "bread-basket" of the region.
The results of each scenario by farm type are presented in Figure 4.21 through 4.23. The patterns evident in these charts helps to further clarify the driving forces behind the scenario results, and suggest general directions for policy response. As Figure 4.21 illustrates, in the Reference Scenario agricultural production from rainfed mechanized and traditional farming systems is stagnant. The projected expansion of lands under traditional agriculture is offset by declining yields, resulting in no net growth for traditional production. While traditional farms currently use little or no commercial energy, they support most of the rural population, who are most at risk for crop failure due to drought, or other natural and social factors.
Rainfed mechanized farms, which rely to a greater extent on commercial energy inputs, also perform poorly in the Reference Scenario. Land area and energy use increase, but production, again due to declining yields, is stagnant. In effect greater inputs to rainfed mechanized lands provide no return to the agricultural economy.
Figure 4.21 Average Growth Rates by Farm Type, Reference Scenario
Figure 4.22 displays the estimated average annual growth rates for the Moderate Improvement Scenario. As noted above, this scenario requires less total energy and results in less marginal land under cultivation than the Reference Scenario. Both of these impacts bode well for the national economy and the environment. A major contributing factor to the observed reduction in commercial energy use between the Reference and Moderate Improvement Scenarios is a reduction in land area under sugar cultivation which is highly energy-intensive. Nonetheless, due to higher projected sugar yields, total sugar production is greater in the Moderate Improvement Scenario.
Figure 4.22 Average Growth Rates by Farm Type, Moderate Scenario
The results of the Moderate Improvement Scenario suggest that, in the special case of Sudan, significant gains in overall food security may be possible without a significant increase in sectoral energy consumption.^18
[^18 Note that commercial energy is likely to be required to build and support the agricultural research, extension, and supply and distribution networks that can lead to the improved yields projected in this scenario, and these indirect energy requirements may not be fully captured by the increasing energy intensity of higher yielding crops in this analysis.]
The results of the Accelerated Growth Scenario (Figure 4.23) indicate that large production gains (4.1% per year) may be possible with relatively moderate expansion of total agricultural land area, (1.0% per year) and commercial energy use (1.8% per year). Note that the estimated total commercial energy requirements for the Accelerated Growth Scenario in 2010 are less than 3% higher than the projected total energy requirements for the Reference Scenario. Again, as with the Moderate Improvement Scenario, the results suggest that increasing agricultural production and overall food security does not have to be tied directly to large increases in energy consumption.
Figure 4.23 Average Annual Growth Rates by Farm Type, Accelerated Growth Scenario
While intriguing, this result must be placed in the context of the Sudanese situation, data availability, and the analytical approach. First, the deterioration of Sudanese rural infrastructure is linked with civil and political disturbances which have hindered the ability of farmers to use available resources more efficiently. The findings are thus most relevant to other countries which have experienced instability in the 1970s and 1980s. Second, the Sudan scenario analysis is based on published data for per hectare energy use in land preparation and cultivation by farm type. As a result, energy use is most closely tied to changing cultivation patterns (e.g. irrigated vs. rainfed, cotton vs. wheat, etc.) as measured by area. In contrast, in Tanzania, the available data point to energy used for crop processing, with little data to indicate how much energy is used to operate machinery or irrigation systems. As a result, agricultural energy use in Tanzania appears to depend
largely on the tonnage of crops produced, which in turn are cured, dried, and milled.
Are these data and approaches accurate? In other words, is agricultural energy use in Tanzania largely confined to post-harvest processing and in Sudan to on farm machinery and irrigation? Or is this an artifact of data collection inadequacies? Based on the much higher area under mechanized farming practice in Sudan, and given the high energy intensity of tobacco and sugar processing in Tanzania, there may be some truth to the findings. However, better data are needed to fully answer this question.
4.9. Mali
Mali remains a country dominated by subsistence agriculture, which accounts for half of the national GDP and occupies 80% of the population. Furthermore, Mali's industrial sector is comprised largely of agro-industries, which account for about 75% of industrial GDP.^19 As a result, its people and economy are highly dependent on the fluctuating climate of the Sahelian region. Since the drought of 1982-85, favorable climatic conditions have enabled the achievement of substantial improvements in agricultural and economic production. Since 1985, per capita GDP has risen an average of 1.2%/year and agricultural GDP has grown over 5% per year.^20
[^19 In 1982, food and beverage industries accounted for 33% of industrial GDP, while textiles and leather accounted for 42%. (Republique du Mali, 1994)
^20 These figures are based on constant CFA values from 1985 through 1994 estimates. (Republique du Mali, 1994)]
Farming methods in Mali remain largely traditional; many efforts to intensify agricultural production have fared poorly. Animal agriculture is very important to the Malian economy; livestock account for half of the value added in the primary sector, exceeding the 29% contribution of subsistence crops (millet, sorghum, rice, and maize) and the 8% contribution of market crops (principally cotton and peanuts) as shown in Figure 4.24.
Figure 4.24 Shares of Primary Sector GDP in Mali, 1990
Since 1980, the government has adopted a medium-term objective of food security, and several policies to achieve it (market restructuring, augmenting food stocks and storage, improved distribution, etc.). Its longer-term objective of food self-sufficiency is more ambitious; during recent climatically favorable years, it appears that such an objective might be feasible for basic cereals, at least at present population levels. Ambitious efforts along four directions would be needed to protect against recurring droughts: irrigation development, agricultural intensification, crop diversification, and security measures in drought-prone regions. (Republique du Mali, 1994) To date, such efforts have met with limited success.
The low rate of agricultural mechanization and intensification likely means that commercial energy use in Malian agriculture is quite low. It is principally confined to rice cultivation and peri-urban farms. On the other hand, the use of animal traction is unusually well-developed, relative to most African countries.
Commercial energy is no doubt consumed to pump and deliver water at irrigation sites in Mail, although no specific figures were obtained. Large-scale irrigation schemes in the Niger River basin, managed by the Office du Niger, and smaller-scale perimeter and peri-urban irrigation projects are an important part of Malian agriculture, providing water to about 10% of arable land in the country. Private small-scale irrigation has fared much better than large-scale irrigation schemes. (Brown and Nooter, 1992) Peri-urban irrigation is increasing rapidly, and small diesel pumps are often used.
Unfortunately, the absence of reliable data on energy use in Malian agriculture precludes meaningful quantitative scenario analysis at present. For example, the energy balance for Mali shows an energy demand under agriculture of "0"" tonnes oil equivalent. (Republique du Mali, 1994) The zero entry under agriculture is not unique to Mali. Most African countries, in fact, do not officially measure or report energy use for the agricultural sector.^21 In addition, many countries do not measure or report energy use among industrial sub-sectors, making it difficult to estimate the energy used by agro-industries. The availability of detailed data on agricultural use appears to be confined to larger countries and those where major demand-side energy studies and surveys have been undertaken.
[^21 Based on their reports submitted to the International Energy Agency. (e.g. IEA, 1993)]
Further analysis of the energy-agriculture nexus in Mali will inevitably require better data on energy use patterns. This in turn might enable a better assessment of efforts to seek food security and the levels of energy input - for small-scale irrigation, large-scale irrigation, and other more intensive production methods - that might be required.
4.10. Cameroon
Agriculture remains an important part of Cameroon's economy. As in other higher-income African countries, such as Zimbabwe, its percentage share of total GDP is relatively low (around 24-27%), but this reflecting the strength of other sectors of the economy. Since the late 1970s, the petroleum sector has maintained Cameroon's relatively high per capita GDP (around US $1000). Nonetheless, agriculture is still the main occupation of three-quarters of its population, and is the basis of the rural economy.
Agriculture in Cameroon remains largely traditional. Traditional agriculture produces over 90% of national food demand. As shown in Table 4.6, the reported intensity of commercial energy use in agriculture is very low (6 GJ/1000 ha), and the use of tractors is the lowest among countries studied. For the past decade, national food production has grown at 2.2%, slower than population (3.2% per year), leading to a worsening of food security. Most of the increase in production has come from expanding land area under traditional cultivation; traditional farming area grew at a rate of 2.2% per year from 1972-84. (Njiti and Sharpe, 1994)
Inadequate access to technology, credit, and markets are important constraints to improving yields and production. With soil erosion and land degradation rapidly become major concerns in Northern Cameroon, the potential exists for severe problems in the agricultural sector and national food supply. (Njiti and Sharpe, 1994)
As in many developing countries, much of the existing high-input agriculture is oriented toward export crop production. The value added from export crops - principally bananas, coconuts, coffee, and cotton - grew at 4.7% per year in the 1980s. (FAO, 1993) The major irrigation projects, Semry I and II, have been notable technical and institutional successes compared with other large-scale irrigation projects in sub-Saharan Africa, and have resulted in high-yield rice production.^22
[^22 The social aspects of these projects, particularly, Semry I, have been questioned, however. Semry I essentially stripped local farmers of their rights to the land, and vested it in larger agro-business management. (Brown and Nooter, 1992)]
Data on energy use in agriculture is relatively sparse; as in Mali, agriculture does not appear as a consumer of energy in Cameroon national energy balances, except for a very minimal amount of electricity.^23 Other data available for Cameroon show a small amount of diesel, gasoline, and electricity used for water pumping and somewhat larger amount of wood used for agro-industrial drying. (Lokolo, 1994) The energy used for other mechanized end-uses is not reported, but given the very low level of tractorization - approximately 1000 reported for the whole country - this may not be surprising.
[^23 Some additional data are shown on a 1987/8 balance under "Secteur Primaire". However, the subtotals appear to be inconsistent, making interpretion and use problematic.]
Sectoral energy consumption statistics from the 1987/88 energy balance are illustrated in Figure 4.25. This figure demonstrates the very small reported contribution of the agricultural and other primary sectors to national energy demand. This is likely the result of a lower policy emphasis given to promotion of the agriculture sector and agricultural intensification, in comparison particularly with Zimbabwe, as well as the presence of other energy-intensive industries, such aluminum production. As shown, agro-industries, including breweries, accounted for almost a third of industrial energy use in 1987/88, and about 10% of total commercial energy in the country. Thus there is a significant connection between agricultural activity and national energy use.
The level of agricultural energy use in Cameroon needs to be clarified through further data collection or surveys, to determine whether the very low reported energy use levels are accurate or an artifact of limited data availability. As in Mali, the absence of data precludes any detailed scenario analyses of energy use in the agriculture sector at present.
Figure 4.25 Energy Use by Sector in Cameroon, 1987/8
References
GENERAL
Ackerman, F.; Fernandes de Almeida, P.E. 1990. Iron and Charcoal: The Industrial Fuelwood Crisis in Minas Gerais, Energy Policy, September 1990, pp. 661-668, Butterworth-Heinemann, London.
Alam, M. 1991. "Problems and Potential of Irrigated Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa," Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, Vol. 117, No. 2.
Alexandratos, Nikos, ed. 1987. World Agriculture: Toward 2000, Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome. New York University Press, NY.
Barghouti, S., Garbus, L., Umali, D., eds. 1992. Trends in Agricultural Diversification: Regional Perspectives. World Bank Technical Paper Number 180, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Brown, E., Nooter, R. 1992. Successful Small-Scale Irrigation in the Sahel, World Bank Technical Paper Number 171, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Bruinsma, J., Hrabovsky, J., Alexandratos, N., Petri, P. 1983. Crop production and input requirements in developing countries. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Cleaver, K. M. 1993. A Strategy to Develop Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa and a Focus for the World Bank, World Bank Technical Paper Number 203, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Crosson, P., Anderson, J. 1992. Resources and Global Food Prospects: Supply and Demand for Cereals to 2030. World Bank Technical Paper Number 184, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 1986. The State of Food and Agriculture 1985: Mid-decade review of food and agriculture. FAO Agriculture Series No. 19, Rome, Italy.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 1990. AGROSTAT PC Version 1.1, Rome, Italy.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 1993a. Agriculture: Towards 2010, Proceedings of the Twenty-seventh Session, Rome. 6-25 November.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 1993b. The State of Food and Agriculture 1993, Rome, Italy.
Geller, H. 1991b. Efficient Electricity Use: A Development Strategy For Brazil, ACEEE, Washington, DC.
Gnaegy, S.; Anderson, J. R., eds. 1991. With contributions by Brossier, J., et al. Agricultural Technology in Sub-Saharan Africa, a Workshop on Research Issues, The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Haggblade, S., Hazell, P., Brown, J. 1989. "Farm-Non-Farm Linkages in Rural Sub-Saharan Africa", World Development, Vol. 17,. No. 8, as cited in Cleaver, 1993.
International Energy Agency (IEA). 1993. Energy Statistics and Balances. International Energy Agency, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Paris, France. (Published annually in both printed and electronic formats).
Jaffee, S. 1992. "Enhancing Agricultural Growth Through Diversification in Sub-Saharan Africa", in Barghouti, S. Garbus, L. and Umali, D., eds.. Trends in Agricultural Diversification: Regional Perspectives, World Bank Technical Paper Number 180, The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Kendall, H. W., Pimentel, D. 1994. "Constraints on the Expansion of the Global Food Supply," Ambio, Vol. 23, No. 3.
Kiss, A., Meerman, F. 1991. Integrated Pest Management and African Agriculture, World Bank Technical Paper Number 142, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Lazarus, M., Diallo, S., Sokona, Y. 1994. "Energy-Environment Scenarios for Senegal", Natural Resources Forum, February.
Leach, G. 1976. Energy and Food Production. IPC Science and Technology Press Limited, Surrey, UK.
Lockeretz, William, ed. 1977. "Agriculture and Energy," Proceedings of a Conference Held at Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri. June 17-19, 1976.
Makhijani, Arjun; with collaboration of Poole, Alan. 1975. Energy and Agriculture in the Third World, a report to the Energy Policy Project of the Ford Foundation. Ballinger Publishing Company, Cambridge, MA.
Miller, P., Bernow, S., Biewald, B., Chen, C. Lazarus, M., and Wulfsberg, K. 1994. Creating an Energy-Efficient Future for a Developing World. Forthcoming, Natural Resources Defense Council, San Francisco.
Moulik, T.K.; Dholakia, B.H.; Shukla, P.R. 1991. Energy Demand for Agriculture in India in the Year 2000, sponsored by Advisory Board on Energy, Government of India.
O'Keefe, P.; Raskin, P.; Bernow, S. 1984. Energy and Development in Kenya. Vol. 1 of Energy, Environment and Development in Africa. The Beijer Institute and Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, Sweden.
Pimentel, D., Pimentel, M. 1979. Food, Energy and Society. Halsted Press, John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.
Raskin, P., Lazarus, M. 1990. Methodological Aspects of Rural Energy Planning: A Computer-Based Approach, in UNDP/ESCAP/FAO, 1990.
Sachs, Ignacy; Silk, Dana. 1990. Food and Energy - Strategies for Sustainable Development, United Nations University Press.
Shawmont Newfoundland Limited. 1990. An Energy Conservation Project: A Review and Summary of the SADCC Industrial Energy Conservation Pilot Project.
Srivastava, J.P., Alderman, H., eds. 1993. Agriculture and Environmental Challenges, Proceedings of the Thirteenth Agricultural Sector Symposium, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Stockholm Environment Institute - Boston. 1993b. The Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning System, Overview for LEAP Version 94.0.
Stockholm Environment Institute - Boston. 1993b. The Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning System, User Guide for LEAP Version 94.0.
Stout, B.A.; in collaboration with Myers, C.A.; Hurand, A.; Faidley, L.W. 1979. Energy for World Agriculture, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
UNDP/ESCAP/FAO, 1990. Regional Training Workshop on in a Comprehensive Approach to Energy Assessment and Planning for Rural and Agricultural Development, Beijing, September, 1989.
U.S. Office of Technology Assessment (OTA). 1992. Fueling Development: Energy Technologies for Developing Countries, OTA-E-516, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Van der Werf, N. 1992. Biomass and Energy Planning: Information Management and Support. Workshop Report, Regional Wood Energy Development Programme of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Bangkok, Thailand.
Wolf, Edward C. 1986. "Beyond the Green Revolution: New Approaches for Third World Agriculture," World-watch Paper 73, Worldwatch Institute, Washington, DC. October.
World Bank. 1989a. Sub-Saharan Africa From Crisis to Sustainable Growth, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
World Bank. 1992. World Development Report 1992: Development and the Environment, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
World Bank. 1993a. World Data Tables (Electronic Version). The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
World Bank. 1993b. World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
World Resources Institute. 1992. World Resources 1992-1993: A Guide to the Global Environment. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
World Resources Institute. 1994. World Resources 1994-95: A Guide to the Global Environment. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
CAMEROON
Bisengo, K., Dutkiewicz. 1992. Energy Profile: Cameroon, Energy Branch, Department of Mineral and Energy Affairs, South Africa.
Nitji, C. F., Sharpe, D. M. 1994. "A Goal-Programming Approach to the Management of Competition and Conflict among Land Uses in the Tropics: The Cameroon Example", Ambio, Vol. 23, No. 2.
Lokolo, C. M. 1994. "Donnees Sur L'Energie et L'Agriculture au Cameroon". Unpublished data collection provided to FAO.
MALI
Republique du Mali, 1994. Besoins en energie de l'Agriculture africaine: Le Cas du Mali, Bamako, September. Unpublished data collection provided to FAO.
World Bank/UNDP, 1991. Mali: Problèmes et Choix Energétiques, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program.
World Bank/UNDP, 1991. Republic of Mali: Household Energy Strategy, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program.
SUDAN
Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Animal Wealth. 1993. Agricultural Situation and Outlook. Khartoum, Sudan.
National Energy Administration (NEA). 1991. Sudan Energy Handbook. Sudan Ministry of Energy and Mining. Khartoum, Sudan.
National Energy Administration (NEA). 1992. Sudan Power IV Project: Technical Assistance to NEA. Project Report, Sudan Ministry of Energy and Mining, Haskoning Royal Dutch Consulting Engineers and Architects, Netherlands Energy Research Foundation, The Netherlands.
National Energy Planning Commission. 1985. The National Energy Plan 1985-2000. Ministry of Energy and Mining. National Energy Administration. Khartoum.
Nour, H. 0. A., 1994. Future Energy Requirements for Africa's Agriculture: Energy & Agriculture Data Questionnaire for the Republic of the Sudan. Forests National Corporation, Khartoum, Sudan.
World Bank. 1990. Sudan: Toward an Action Plan for Food Security. Report No. 8167-SU, Washington, D.C.
TANZANIA
Bureau of Statistics. 1988. Agricultural Sample Survey of Tanzania Mainland 1986/87 Volume II: Preliminary Report. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Affairs, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Bureau of Statistics. 1993. National Accounts of Tanzania. National Accounts Section, President's Office, Planning Commission, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Bureau of Statistics. 1994. Environment Statistics in Tanzania Mainland. President's Office, Planning Commission, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Matzdorf, M.E. 1988. Present and Future Energy Requirements of Tanzanian Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development Sectoral Planning/Agriculture, Dar es Salaam. August.
Mrindoko, B., Lazarus, M. 1990. The Application of Computerized Energy Planning in Tanzania Using the LEAP Model, Ministry of Energy Minerals and Water, Tanzania.
Nkonoko, Simon R. and Elias Lushiku. 1988. "Energy Planning in Tanzania: Emerging Trends in Planning and Research," Energy Policy, June 1988.
Tanzania Food and Nutrition Centre, World Health Organization. 1992. The Food and Nutrition Situation in Tanzania. Country Paper for the International Conference on Nutrition, Rome, December 1992. TFNC Report No. 1445.
Tanzania Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock Development and Cooperatives. 1990. Fertilizer Statistics.
Tanzania Ministry of Water, Energy, and Minerals, 1994. Unpublished data collection provided to FAO by P. Rutabanzibwa and B. Mrindoko.
World Bank/UNDP, 1989b. Tanzania: Smallholder Tobacco Curing Efficiency Study, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program.
World Bank/UNDP. 1984. Tanzania: Issues and Options in the Energy Sector, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program, Report No. 4969-TA. November.
ZIMBABWE
Central Statistical Office. 1989. Statistical Yearbook 1989. Harare, Zimbabwe.
Central Statistical Office. 1994a. Crop Production on Large Scale Commercial Farms - 1993, Harare, Zimbabwe. July.
Central Statistical Office. 1994b. Agricultural Development Authority Estates (ADA) (Excluding Middle Sabi Operating Division and Nijo Produce), 1988-1993, Harare, Zimbabwe. June.
Central Statistical Office. 1994c. Agricultural Production on Communal Land Irrigation Schemes - 1992, Harare, Zimbabwe. April.
Central Statistical Office. 1994d. Agricultural Production on Resettlement Schemes, Harare, Zimbabwe. February.
Central Statistical Office. 1994e. Agricultural Production on Small Scale Commercial Farms, Harare, Zimbabwe. February.
Chaguma, A. 1994. "Farmers Lead the Way in Zimbabwe," Landmark, No. 2, March/April 1994.
Eicher, C. K. 1994. Zimbabwe's Green Revolution: Preconditions for Replication in Africa, Staff Paper No. 94-1, Department of Agricultural Economics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.
Hosier, R. H. 1986. Zimbabwe: Energy Planning for National Development. Vol. 9 of Energy, Environment and Development in Africa. The Beijer Institute and Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, Sweden.
Hosier, R. H., ed. 1988. Energy Environment and Development in Africa - Energy For Rural Development in Zimbabwe, the Beijer Institute and the Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, Sweden,.
Republic of Zimbabwe. 1991. Second Five-Year National Development Plan: 1991-1995.
Southern Centre for Energy and Environment, 1994. Unpublished data collection provided to FAO by R. S. May a and N. Nziramasanga.
Stoneman, C., and Robinson, P., "Economic Modeling for LEAP: Background and Methodology", in Hosier, 1988.
Talbot, N., Hansen, E. 1993. Energy Planning in Southern Africa: Two Case Studies. Zimbabwe: Energy End Uses and End Use Efficiency. Stockholm Environment Institute-Boston, Boston, MA.
National Nutrition Unit (NNU). 1992. Towards Improved Nutrition for the People of Zimbabwe. Ministry of Health and Child Welfare, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Weiner, D., Moyo, S, Chidiya, C. 1988. "Energy Use in Zimbabwe's Agricultural Sector," in Hosier, R. H., ed., 1988, Energy Environment and Development in Africa - Energy For Rural Development in Zimbabwe.
World Bank/UNDP. 1992. Zimbabwe - Integrated Energy Strategy Evaluation, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program, Washington, DC.
<section>6</section>
Annex A. Energy & agriculture data questionnaire
ENERGY AND END-USE DATA (General)
Attached you will find a copy of the IEA's Energy Balance data for your country as a starting point. Generally, we find that local data sources will indicate significant differences and additional detail. In terms of overall energy use, please provide:
· overall national energy balance for most recent year available
· available energy scenarios or demand projections for the country, including any details on agriculture demand
· input data from available energy statistics databases or energy models that include the agricultural sector
If they exist in your country, general historical or current energy statistics publications (along with energy plan documents) should be capable of providing most of this data without requiring considerable research effort.
ENERGY AND END-USE DATA (Agriculture and Related Activities)
- these data are the most essential requirement for our study and thus the first priority for data collection activities -
We are interested in annual energy use in agriculture by fuel, including both traditional (firewood, agricultural residues, etc.) and modern fuels (electricity, coal, diesel, gasoline, etc.). Again, we are looking for whatever historical data, current data and projections (or national goals) might be available. Ideally, the data would also be broken down into the following end-use/activity categories (total energy use and/or energy intensity and overall activity for each, by fuel):
· tractors and other on-farm machinery (land preparation and maintenance)
· irrigation and water pumping (e.g. number of boreholes, etc.)
· crop drying, curing, and/or threshing
· processing of agricultural products. This would include energy used by the ISIC code 31 industries: Manufacture of food, beverages, and tobacco. Also include any available data on energy use (and electricity and bagasse production) by sugar mills.
· transport of agricultural products (may be suggested by total freight transport energy and haulage of agricultural goods as a fraction of total)
· small-scale rural agricultural-related enterprises (e.g. beer making, crop drying)
· forestry and fisheries (e.g. gasoline use for boat engines)
Any data that distinguishes energy use by crop and farm type would also be useful. Please include copies of any reports on energy use and the agriculture in your country.
NATIONAL ECONOMIC AND DEMOGRAPHIC DATA
We are interested in economic and demographic indicators, including historical data, current data and projections (or national goals) for:
· overall national GDP
· GDP of the agriculture sector (ISIC Division 1; report fisheries and forestry separately if possible)
· GDP of agriculture-related activities (e.g., ISIC Division 31: Manufacture of food, beverages, and tobacco products. It is important to realize that in many cases these activities are considered in the industrial sector)
· major recent, current, or near-future policies or events that might affect the agriculture sector (e.g., economic restructuring, land redistribution, drought, etc.)
· population, focusing on splits between rural/urban, farm/non-farm, and high/low income
To give an indication of some of the data we are seeking we have attached some data tables published by the World Resources Institute; local data on these and other reported variables would obviously be preferable.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY DATA
We are interested in historical data, current data and projections (or national goals) for:
· land area under cultivation by crop (plus livestock and pasture) by farm type (large commercial, small subsistence, etc.) and region (if appropriate)
· production by crop and farm type
· agricultural product processing, particularly sugar milling data (annual milling capacity and operation)
· irrigated vs. rainfed agriculture (% of farmed area by crop); for irrigation specify whether ground or surface water used.
· numbers of tractors
As an indication of some of the international data sources we can use in the absence of local data, we have attached data based on FAO's AGROSTAT database for your country.
AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL USE DATA
· total fertilizer, herbicide, and pesticide use by type
· use by crop and farm type (if available)
· source of fertilizer (indigenous production or imported)
ANIMAL POWER DATA
· animal power data (if available, number of draught animals)
· human energy (probably derivable from demographic data: number of farmer-hours. Perhaps there are case studies available)
ILLUSTRATIVE CASE STUDIES OF ENERGY AND AGRICULTURE
We would like to include in the document examples of cases studies which illustrate the strong energy-agriculture linkages. Both descriptive and data material would be appreciated, and a one page summary would be sufficient. We would suggest the following as possible case studies for your country:
Zimbabwe
history and results of the ethanol programme
Sudan
history and scope of briquetting of cotton stalks
Mali
problems and opportunities for regional institutions-the CRES example
Cameroon
extent of use and potential for energy self-sufficiency of coffee\cocoa\or palm oil industries
Tanzania
impact of the national policy on independent power generation (agroindustry)
<section>7</section>
Annex B. Agricultural area and yield projections
Zimbabwe
Scenario: Reference
Crop
Farm Type
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield (T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield (T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Maize
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
n/a
n/a
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Cotton
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Tobacco
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Large Scale Commercial
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sorghum
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Other
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Zimbabwe
Scenario: Moderate Improvement
Crop
Farm Type
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Maize
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
n/a
n/a
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Cotton
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Tobacco
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Large Scale Commercial
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sorghum Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Other
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
TOTAL
Zimbabwe
Scenario: Accelerated Growth
Crop
Farm Type
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Maize
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
Shift from Comm-Maize to High-Input
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
n/a
n/a
Shift from Comm-Other to High-Input
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Cotton
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
Shift from Comm-Cotton to High-Input
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Tobacco
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
Shift from Comm-Other to High-Input
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Large Scale Commercial
Shift from Comm-Other to High-Input
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sorghum
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
Shift from Comm-Sorghum to High-Input
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Other
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
State-Run
Resettlement
Communal: Irrigated
Communal: Total
Shift from Comm-Other to High-Input
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Large Scale Commercial
Small Scale Commercial
Tanzania
Scenario: Reference
Crop
Farm Type
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Tobacco
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Maize
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Tea
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sisal
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Coffee
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Pyrethrum
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Paddy
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Other
Small Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Large Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
TOTAL
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Small Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Large Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
TOTAL
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Tanzania
Scenario: Moderate Improvement
Crop
Farm Type
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Tobacco
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Maize
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Tea
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sisal
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Coffee
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Pyrethrum
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Paddy
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Other
Small Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Large Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
TOTAL
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Small Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Large Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
TOTAL
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Tanzania
Scenario: Accelerated Growth
Crop
Farm Type
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Tobacco
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Maize
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Tea
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sisal
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Coffee
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Pyrethrum
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Paddy
Small Scale
Large Scale
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Other
Small Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Large Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
TOTAL
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Small Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Large Scale
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
TOTAL
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sudan
Scenario: Reference
Crop
Farm Type
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Sorghum
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Groundnuts
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sesame
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sunflower
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Irrigated
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Cotton
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Millet
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sudan
Scenario: Moderate Improvement
Crop
Farm Type
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Sorghum
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Groundnuts
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sesame
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sunflower
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Irrigated
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Cotton
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Millet
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sudan
Scenario: Accelerated Growth
Crop
Farm Type ('C
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Area
('000 Ha)
Yield
(T/Ha)
Production
('000 T)
Sorghum
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Wheat
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Groundnuts
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sesame
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sunflower
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Sugar Cane
Irrigated
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Cotton
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Millet
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
Total
Irrigated
Rainfed Mechanized
Traditional
TOTAL
Average Annual Growth Rates From 1990
<section>8</section>
Annex C. Selected case study LEAP results
Zimbabwe: Base Case
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUEL (PJ)
AGRICULTURE
LARGE COMMERCIAL
SMALL COMMERCIAL
STATE-RUN FARMS
COMMUNAL
RESETTLEMENT A
COOP-RESETTLE B
S.S. IRRIGATION
AGRIC TRANSPORT
AG FREIGHT ROAD
AG INDUSTRY
FOODSTUFFS
DRINK & TOBACCO
TEXTILES
OTHER TRANSPORT
PASSENGER ROAD
NON-AG FRT ROAD
RAIL
AIR
OTHER INDUSTRY
ALL
MINING
ALL
URBAN HOUSEHOLDS
ELECTRIFIED
NONELECTRIFIED
RURAL HOUSEHOLDS
NONELECTRIFIED
COMMERC & OTHERS
ALL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR AGRICULTURE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
AV-GAS
JET A1
DIESEL
WCC COAL
FIREWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUEL (PJ)
AGRICULTURE
LARGE COMMERCIAL
MAIZE
WHEAT
COTTON
TOBACCO
SUGAR CAME
OTHER
CROP SPRAYING
SMALL COMMERCIAL
ALL CROPS
STATE-RUN FARMS
MAIZE
COTTON
WHEAT
OTHER CROPS
COMMUNAL
ALL CROPS
RESETTLEMENT A
ALL CROPS
COOP-RESETTLE B
MAIZE
TOBACCO
COTTON
OTHER
S.S. IRRIGATION
ALL CROPS
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR MAIZE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR TOBACCO (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
FIREWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR WHEAT (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR COTTON (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SUGAR CANE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
TOTAL
Zimbabwe: Moderate Improvement
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUEL (PJ)
AGRICULTURE
LARGE COMMERCIAL
SMALL COMMERCIAL
STATE-RUN FARMS
COMMUNAL
RESETTLEMENT A
COOP-RESETTLE B
S.S. IRRIGATION
AGRIC TRANSPORT
AG FREIGHT ROAD
AG INDUSTRY
FOODSTUFFS
DRINK & TOBACCO
TEXTILES
OTHER TRANSPORT
PASSENGER ROAD
NON-AG FRT ROAD
RAIL
AIR
OTHER INDUSTRY
ALL
MINING
ALL
URBAN HOUSEHOLDS
ELECTRIFIED
NONELECTRIFIED
RURAL HOUSEHOLDS
NONELECTRIFIED
COMMERC & OTHERS
ALL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR AGRICULTURE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
AV-GAS
JET A1
DIESEL
WCC COAL
FIREWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUEL (PJ)
AGRICULTURE
LARGE COMMERCIAL
MAIZE
WHEAT
COTTON
TOBACCO
SUGAR CANE
OTHER
CROP SPRAYING
SMALL COMMERCIAL
ALL CROPS
STATE-RUN FARMS
MAIZE
COTTON
WHEAT
OTHER CROPS
COMMUNAL
ALL CROPS
RESETTLEMENT A
ALL CROPS
COOP-RESETTLE B
MAIZE
TOBACCO
COTTON
OTHER
S.S. IRRIGATION
ALL CROPS
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR MAIZE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR TOBACCO (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
FIREWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR WHEAT (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR COTTON (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SUGAR CANE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
TOTAL
Zimbabwe: Accelerated Growth
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUEL (PJ)
AGRICULTURE
LARGE COMMERCIAL
SMALL COMMERCIAL
STATE-RUN FARMS
COMMUNAL
RESETTLEMENT A
COOP-RESETTLE B
S.S. IRRIGATION
AGRIC TRANSPORT
AG FREIGHT ROAD
AG INDUSTRY
FOODSTUFFS
DRINK & TOBACCO
TEXTILES
OTHER TRANSPORT
PASSENGER ROAD
NON-AG FRT ROAD
RAIL
AIR
OTHER INDUSTRY
ALL
MINING
ALL
URBAN HOUSEHOLDS
ELECTRIFIED
NONELECTRIFIED
RURAL HOUSEHOLDS
NONELECTRIFIED
COMMERC & OTHERS
ALL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR AGRICULTURE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
AV-GAS
JET A1
DIESEL
WCC COAL
FIREWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUEL (PJ)
AGRICULTURE
LARGE COMMERCIAL
MAIZE
WHEAT
COTTON
TOBACCO
SUGAR CANE
OTHER
CROP SPRAYING
SMALL COMMERCIAL
ALL CROPS
STATE-RUN FARMS
MAIZE
COTTON
WHEAT
OTHER CROPS
COMMUNAL
ALL CROPS
RESETTLEMENT A
ALL CROPS
COOP-RESETTLE B
MAIZE
TOBACCO
COTTON
OTHER
S.S. IRRIGATION
ALL CROPS
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR MAIZE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR TOBACCO (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
FIREWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR WHEAT (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
WCC COAL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR COTTON (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SUGAR CANE (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL
TOTAL
Tanzania: Base Case
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS (PJ)
AGRICULT/AG-PROC
AG-TRANSPORT
OTHER TRANSPORT
OTHER INDUSTRY
RURAL INDUSTRY
COMM./OTHER
RURAL HOUSEHOLDS
URBAN HOUSEHOLDS
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR AGRICULT/AG-PROC (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
GASOLINE
KEROSENE/JETFUEL
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
OTHER PETR.
PETROCHEMICALS
COAL
FUELWOOD
CROP RESIDUE
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS (PJ)
AGRICULT/AG - PROC
TOBACCO
TEA
SISAL
SUGAR-CAME
COFFEE
PYRETHRUM
MAIZE
WHEAT
PADDY
SMALL-SCALE OPS
LARGE-SCALE OPS
SMALL-SCALE FISH
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR TOBACCO (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
FUELOIL
FUELWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SISAL (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SUGAR CANE (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
FUELWOOD
CROP RESIDUE
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SMALL-SCALE OPS (PJ)
GASOLINE
KEROSENE/JETFUEL
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
OTHER PETR.
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR LARGE-SCALE OPS (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
Tanzania: Moderate Improvement
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS (PJ)
AGRICULT/AG-PROC
AG-TRANSPORT
OTHER TRANSPORT
OTHER INDUSTRY
RURAL INDUSTRY
COMM./OTHER
RURAL HOUSEHOLDS
URBAN HOUSEHOLDS
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR AGRICULT/AG-PROC (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
GASOLINE
KEROSENE/JETFUEL
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
OTHER PETR.
PETROCHEMICALS
COAL
FUELWOOD
CROP RESIDUE
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS (PJ)
AGRICULT/AG-PROC
TOBACCO
TEA
SISAL
SUGAR-CANE
COFFEE
PYRETHRUM
MAIZE
WHEAT
PADDY
SMALL-SCALE OPS
LARGE-SCALE OPS
SMALL-SCALE FISH
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR TOBACCO (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
FUELOIL
FUELWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SISAL (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SUGAR CANE (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
FUELWOOD
CROP RESIDUE
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SMALL-SCALE OPS (PJ)
GASOLINE
KEROSENE/JETFUEL
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
OTHER PETR.
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR LARGE-SCALE OPS (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
Tanzania: Accelerated Growth
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS
AGRICULT/AG-PROC
AG-TRANSPORT
OTHER TRANSPORT
OTHER INDUSTRY
RURAL INDUSTRY
COMM./OTHER
RURAL HOUSEHOLDS
URBAN HOUSEHOLDS
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR AGRICULT/AG-PROC (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
GASOLINE
KEROSENE/JETFUEL
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
OTHER PETR.
PETROCHEMICALS
COAL
FUELWOOD
CROP RESIDUE
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS (PJ)
AGRICULT/AG-PROC
TOBACCO
TEA
SISAL
SUGAR-CANE
COFFEE
PYRETHRUM
MAIZE
WHEAT
PADDY
SMALL-SCALE OPS
LARGE-SCALE OPS
SMALL-SCALE FISH
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR TOBACCO (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
FUELOIL
FUELWOOD
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SISAL (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SUGAR CANE (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
FUELWOOD
CROP RESIDUE
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR SMALL-SCALE OPS (PJ)
GASOLINE
KEROSENE/JETFUEL
DIESEL/GAS OIL
FUELOIL
OTHER PETR.
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR LARGE-SCALE OPS (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
Sudan: Base Case
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS (PJ)
Agriculture
Irrigated
Sorghum
Wheat
Groundnut
Millet
Sunflower
Cotton
Sugar
Rainfed Mech.
Sorghum
Millet
Sesame
Sunflower
Cotton
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sorghum (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sugar (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Cotton (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sesame (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
Sudan: Moderate Improvement
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS. (PJ)
Agriculture
Irrigated
Sorghum
Wheat
Groundnut
Millet
Sunflower
Cotton
Sugar
Rainfed Mech.
Sorghum
Millet
Sesame
Sunflower
Cotton
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sorghum (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sugar (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Cotton (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sesame (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
Sudan: Accelerated Growth
ENERGY DEMAND: SECTOR BY YEAR, ALL FUELS (PJ)
Agriculture
Irrigated
Sorghum
Wheat
Groundnut
Millet
Sunflower
Cotton
Sugar
Rainfed Mech.
Sorghum
Millet
Sesame
Sunflower
Cotton
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sorghum (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sugar (PJ)
ELECTRICITY
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Cotton (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
ENERGY DEMAND: FUEL BY YEAR Sesame (PJ)
DIESEL/GAS OIL
TOTAL
<section>9</section>
Chapter 5. Agriculture's potential as an energy producer
5.1 The context
5.2 The Resource base
5.3 Potential impacts of biomass-derived energy
5.4 Conversion technologies
5.5 Management Issues
5.1 The context
In most African countries, biomass continues to be the main energy source for subsistence activities such as cooking, heating and lighting. Fuelwood, charcoal and, to some extent wood and crop residues, are traditional fuels, and it has been generally accepted that substitution to other energy sources of easier use and more concentrated energy content takes place at a certain point of the economic development ladder. A new perception is arising in both developing and industrialized countries, which views biomass as a modern energy carrier, ready to participate as a main input to accelerated growth in rural areas. Bioenergy, together with other renewable forms of energy such as solar, wind and hydropower, is considered by many a key element in the "transition to enhance development and productivity".
This Chapter discusses this new role of agriculture, and draws from several studies carried out by FAO and others, and from the results of the present study regarding the availability of land and of agricultural residues for energy production in Africa. Information is in no way sufficient for conclusive recommendations for action to be reached. However, but it was considered important to open the discussion in this field, in order to help promote a more detailed assessment in the future.
The production and use of biomass as an energy source touches upon a number of issues related to the actual availability of the biomass resources, their alternative uses, the impacts on society and on the environment, price policies and technologies. The following sections discuss these issues. ^1
[^1 Extract from: Bioenergy for Development - technical and environmental dimensions. FAO Environment and Energy Series No. 13, 1994.]
5.2 The Resource base
The following is a list of the type of biomass available for conversion to energy:
· Wood Energy
- residues from cleared-felled areas
- small trees and residues from thinning
- residues from wood industry
· Forest Biomass
- fast growing trees
· Energy Crops
- residues from agriculture
- crops grown for energy
- natural vegetation
· Other Sources
- city waste
- farm waste (animal manure)
- slaughterhouse waste
Even though data points to the availability of biomass resources for energy production, it is of paramount importance to respect the ethics of growing and converting food into energy, removing too much crop residues which may affect soil fertility and using good cropland for energy plantations. To this effect, long term intersectoral policy planning will be essential in order not to affect the population-food supply balance.
5.3 Potential impacts of biomass-derived energy
5.3.1 Development and economics
5.3.2 Environment
5.3.1 Development and economics
Bioenergy systems are important employment and income generators. The production system of biomass is labour-demanding, mainly in its operation and maintenance. Such employment-enhancing development opportunities could come to play an important role in the present search of sustainable and economic means to raise the level of development in rural areas. Biomass-fuelled energy utilities are also more labour intensive than fossil fuels, with few economies of scale either in terms of size or modularity.
The other important economic facet of biomass systems are the much lower investment cost per job created compared to industrial projects, petrochemical industries or hydropower plants. It also concentrates more on resource allocation related to rural infrastructure and services such as rural settlement schemes, communications, input distribution, extension, transportation and marketing networks. Their link with regional agricultural growth is well established. The decentralised and modular nature of bioenergy systems provides a unique opportunity for phased-in investment to allow a more regional distribution of wealth and equity in development between rural and urban areas. It also offers new frontiers to facilitate the process of reducing the present large rural-urban energy gap.
Several low cost by-products are generated in the production and conversion of biomass which can be successfully utilised to enhance rural economies. These include livestock fodder from trees and grassland strips, branches and twigs for use as fuelwood and conversion waste products to ameliorate rural resources. Carefully planned utilisation of these low cost byproducts can become central to sustained growth of the farm sector. These concept are illustrated with some examples: ten percent of palatable fodder foliage can be extracted from plantations annually without affecting yield; mix species strategy with nitrogen fixing trees and shrubs help restore soil fertility, substitute the need for expensive chemical fertiliser and create opportunities to extract significant amount of branches, twigs and dry foliage to meet fuelwood needs; local dedicated premixes of sugar cane byproducts can become an important component of animal feeds; effluent from biogas plants can be used a
feed source to promote small scale aquaculture. These represent important byproduct credits that need to be measured, quantified and incorporated in economic and technical appraisal of bioenergy systems.
Attempts to modernise the traditional agro-food sector of African countries will benefit from the availability of high quality energy carriers. Low-input extensive, as opposed to intensive, farming systems is one of the most important reasons for lower and erratic crop yields in developing countries and, hence, of food insecurity. A modest combination of energy and energy-related services can bring about significant rural transformation in future in terms of reducing pressure on land for food production and in augmenting net food supplies through improved post-harvest treatment of food commodities, their distribution and marketing.
Decentralised biomass fuel production, conversion and marketing can act a powerful economic drive providing both subsistence and developmental energy services. At the initial stage, readily available cheap and under utilised biomass energy feedstock such as agricultural and agro-industrial residues and livestock wastes can be immediately optimised utilising as far as possible existing technological and agro-industrial complexes to reduce investment costs. Such a developmental approach could benefit significant number of people in the rural areas, improve technical expertise and stimulate important indirect effects on employment and income opportunities. Labour demand of a more intensive agriculture would be higher than traditional farming systems. This applies equally to the harvesting and marketing of a bigger harvest.
5.3.2 Environment
Bioenergy production and use has important impacts on the local environment, and therefore with human health and with quality of life. The present patterns of biomass use prevailing in many households in Africa are the cause of human drudgery in the process of collection of wood, and of a large incidence of lung illnesses due to the smoke, especially in children and women. Therefore the "upgrading" of the forms of production and use of these resources is an urgent matter. Fuel saving stoves, biogas digesters and other decentralized systems offer excellent opportunities in this respect.
At the global level, the production of biomass-derived energy has the potential to have both positive and negative effects on all three major environmental issues today, namely, land degradation, climate change and loss of biodiversity. The extensive and increasing areas of degraded lands provide an opportunity for woody biomass species to be used economically for their rehabilitation. Whilst some of this land may have initially been degraded through the mining of indigenous wood resources often to supply urban charcoal markets, the establishment of multi-purpose bioenergy plantations can be a sustainable means of returning this land to productive use. Management strategies and policies required to provide the incentives for rehabilitation require resources to ensure future modes of land use are sustainable. The sustainable production of biomass fuels and the use of present agricultural and forestry derived residues can play an important role in reducing the need for GHG and
acid rain emitting fossil fuels. Sustainably grown biomass fuels are CO[2]-neutral and low in sulphur and the recycling of the ashes arising from combustion reduces the need for fertilisers. Wider revegetation programmes aimed at reabsorbing atmospheric CO[2] may result in large quantities of low cost biomass being available which should be used as a substitute for fossil fuels or to produce long lived products.
5.4 Conversion technologies
5.4.1 Direct combustion processes
5.4.2 Thermochemical processes
5.4.3 Biochemical processes
There are five fundamental forms of biomass energy use.
1. The "traditional domestic" use in developing countries (fuelwood, charcoal and agricultural residues) for household cooking (eg. the "three stone fire"), lighting and space-heating. In this role the efficiency of conversion of the biomass to useful energy generally lies between 5% and 15%.
2. the "traditional industrial" use of biomass for the processing of tobacco, tea, pig iron, bricks & tiles, etc, where the biomass feedstock is often regarded as a "free" energy source. There is generally little incentive to use the biomass efficiently so conversion of the feedstock to useful energy commonly occurs at an efficiency of 15% or less.
3. "Modern industrial." Industries are experimenting with technologically advanced thermal conversion technologies which are itemised below. Expected conversion efficiencies are between 30 and 55%.
4. newer "chemical conversion" technologies ("fuel cell") which are capable of by-passing the entropy-dictated Carnot limit which describes the maximum theoretical conversion efficiencies of thermal units.
5. "biological conversion" techniques, including anaerobic digestion for biogas production and fermentation for alcohol.
In general, biomass-to-energy conversion technologies have to deal with a feedstock which can be highly variable in mass and energy density, size, moisture content, and intermittent supply. Therefore, modern industrial technologies are often hybrid fossil-fuel/biomass technologies which use the fossil fuel for drying, preheating and maintaining fuel supply when the biomass supply is interrupted.
5.4.1 Direct combustion processes.
Feedstocks used are often residues such as woodchips, sawdust, bark, hogfuel, black liquor, bagasse, straw, municipal solid waste (MSW), and wastes from the food industry.
Direct combustion furnaces can be divided into two broad categories and are used for producing either direct heat or steam. Dutch ovens, spreader-stoker and fuel cell furnaces employ two-stages. The first stage is for drying and possible partial gasification, and the second for complete combustion. More advanced versions of these systems use rotating or vibrating grates to facilitate ash removal, with some requiring water cooling.
The second group, include suspension and fluidised bed furnaces which are generally used with fine particle biomass feedstocks and liquids. In suspension furnaces the particles are burnt whilst being kept in suspension by the injection of turbulent preheated air which may already have the biomass particles mixed in it. In fluidised bed combustors, a boiling bed of pre-heated sand (at temperatures of 500 to 900°C) provides the combustion medium, into which the biomass fuel is either dropped (if it is dense enough to sink into the boiling sand) or injected if particulate or fluid. These systems obviate the need for grates, but require methods of preheating the air or sand, and may require water cooled injection systems for less bulky biomass feedstocks and liquids.
5.4.1.1 Co-firing
A modern practice which has allowed biomass feedstocks an early and cheap entry point into the energy market is the practice of co-firing a fossil-fuel (usually coal) with a biomass feedstock. Co-firing has a number of advantages, especially where electricity production is an output.
Firstly, where the conversion facility is situated near an agro-industrial or forestry product processing plant, large quantities of low cost biomass residues are available. These residues can represent a low cost fuel feedstock although there may be other opportunity costs. Secondly, it is now widely accepted that fossil-fuel power plants are usually highly polluting in terms of sulphur, CO[2] and other GHGs. Using the existing equipment, perhaps with some modifications, and co-firing with biomass may represent a cost-effective means for meeting more stringent emissions targets. Biomass fuel's low sulphur and nitrogen (relative to coal) content and nearly zero net CO[2] emission levels allows biomass to offset the higher sulphur and carbon contents of the fossil fuel. Thirdly, if an agro-industrial or forestry processing plant wishes to make more efficient use of the residues generated by co-producing electricity, but has a highly seasonal component to its operating
schedule, co-firing with a fossil fuel may allow the economic generation of electricity all year round. Agro-industrial processors such as the sugarcane sugar industry can produce large amounts of electricity during the harvesting and processing season, however, during the off-season the plant will remain idle. This has two drawbacks, firstly, it is an inefficient use of equipment which has a limited life-time, and secondly, electrical distribution utilities will not pay the full premium for electrical supplies which can't be relied on for year round production. In other words the distribution utility needs to guarantee year round supply and may therefore, have to invest in its own production capacity to cover the off-season gap in supply with associated costs in equipment and fuel. If however, the agro-processor can guarantee electrical supply year-round through the burning of alternative fuel supplies (ie. coal and bagasse in Mauritius) then it will make efficient use of
its equipment and will receive premium payments for its electricity by the distribution facility.
5.4.2 Thermochemical processes
These processes do not necessarily produce useful energy directly, but under controlled temperature and oxygen conditions are used to convert the original biomass feedstock into more convenient forms of energy carriers, such as producer gas, oils or methanol. These carriers are either more energy dense and therefore reduce transport costs, or have more predictable and convenient combustion characteristics allowing them to be used in internal combustion engines and gas turbines.
5.4.2.1 Pyrolysis
The biomass feedstock is subjected to high temperatures at low oxygen levels, thus inhibiting complete combustion, and may be carried out under pressure. Biomass is degraded to single carbon molecules (CH[4] and CO) and H[2] producing a gaseous mixture called "producer gas." Carbon dioxide may be produced as well, but under the pyrolytic conditions of the reactor it is reduced back to CO and H[2]O; this water further aids the reaction. Liquid phase products result from temperatures which are too low to crack all the long chain carbon molecules so resulting in the production of tars, oils, methanol, acetone, etc. Once all the volatiles have been driven off, the residual biomass is in the form of char which is virtually pure carbon.
Pyrolysis has received attention recently for the production of liquid fuels from cellulosic feedstocks by "fast" and "flash" pyrolysis in which the biomass has a short residence time in the reactor. A more detailed understanding of the physical and chemical properties governing the pyrolytic reactions has allowed the optimisation of reactor conditions necessary for these types of pyrolysis. Further work is now concentrating on the use of high pressure reactor conditions to produce hydrogen and on low pressure catalytic techniques (requiring zeolites) for alcohol production from the pyrolytic oil.
5.4.2.2 Carbonization
This is an age old pyrolytic process optimised for the production of charcoal. Traditional methods of charcoal production have centred on the use of earth mounds or covered pits into which the wood is piled. Control of the reaction conditions is often crude and relies heavily on experience. The conversion efficiency using these traditional techniques is believed to be very low; on a weight basis Openshaw estimates that the wood to charcoal conversion rate for such techniques ranges from 6 to 12 tonnes of wood per tonne of charcoal.
During carbonization most of the volatile components of the wood are eliminated; this process is also called "dry wood distillation". Carbon accumulates mainly due to a reduction in the levels of hydrogen and oxygen in the wood.
The wood undergoes a number of physico-chemical changes as the temperature rises. Between 100 and 170°C most of the water is evaporated; between 170°C and 270°C gases develop containing condensible vapours, CO and CO[2]. These condensible vapours (long chain carbon molecules) form pyrolysis oil, which can then be used for the production of chemicals or as a fuel after cooling and scrubbing. Between 270°C and 280°C an exothermic reaction develops which can be detected by the spontaneous generation of heat.
The modernisation of charcoal production has lead to large increases in production efficiencies with large-scale industrial production in Brazil now achieving efficiencies of over 30% (by weight).
There are three basic types of charcoal-making: a) internally heated (by controlled combustion of the raw material), b) externally heated (using fuelwood or fossil fuels), and c) hot circulating gas (retort or converter gas, used for the production of chemicals).
Internally heated charcoal kilns are the most common form of charcoal kiln. It is estimated that 10 to 20% of the wood (by weight) is sacrificed, a further 60% (by weight) is lost through the conversion to, and release of, gases to the atmosphere from these kilns. Externally heated reactors allow oxygen to be completely excluded, and thus provide better quality charcoal on a larger scale. They do, however, require the use of an external fuel source, which may be provided from the "producer gas" once pyrolysis is initiated.
Recirculating heated gas systems offer the potential to generate large quantities of charcoal and associated by-products, but are presently limited by high investment costs for large scale plant.
5.4.2.3 Gasification
High temperatures and a controlled environment leads to virtually all the raw material being converted to gas. This takes place in two stages. In the first stage, the biomass is partially combusted to form producer gas and charcoal. In the second stage, the CO[2] and H[2]O produced in the first stage is chemically reduced by the charcoal, forming CO and H[2]. The composition of the gas is 18 to 20% H[2], an equal portion of CO, 2 to 3% CH[4], 8 to 10% CO[2], and the rest nitrogen. These stages are spatially separated in the gasifier, with gasifier design very much dependant on the feedstock characteristics.
Gasification requires temperatures of about 800°C and is carried out in closed top or open top gasifiers. These gasifiers can be operated at atmospheric pressure or higher. The energy density of the gas is generally less than 5.6 MJ/m^3, which is low in comparison to natural gas at 38 MJ/m^3, providing only 60% the power rating of diesel when used in a modified diesel engine.
Gasification technology has existed since the turn of the century when coal was extensively gasified in the UK and elsewhere for use in power generation and in houses for cooking and lighting. Gasifiers were used extensively for transport in Europe during World War II due to shortages of oil, with a closed top design predominating.
A major future role is envisaged for electricity production from biomass plantations and agricultural residues using large scale gasifiers with direct coupling to gas turbines. The potential gains in efficiency using such hybrid gasifier/gas turbine systems make them extremely attractive for electricity generation once commercial viability has been demonstrated. Such systems take advantage of low grade and cheap feedstocks (residues and wood produced using short rotation techniques) and the high efficiencies of modern gas turbines to produce electricity at comparable or less cost than fossil-fuel derived electricity. Net atmospheric CO[2] emissions are avoided if growth of the biomass is managed to match consumption. The use of BIG/STIG (Biomass Integrated Gasifier Steam Injected Gas turbine) initially and BIG/GTCC (Biomass InteGrated Gasifier Gas Turbine Combined Cycle) as the technology matures, is predicted to allow energy conversion efficiencies of 40% to 55%. Modern
coal electrical plants have efficiencies of about 35% or less. Combined Heat and Power systems could eventually provide energy at efficiencies of between 50% to 80%. The use of low-grade feedstocks combined with high conversion efficiencies makes these systems economically competitive with cheap coal-based plants and energetically competitive with natural gas-based plants.
Studies are continuing in the use of such technologies for the cost effective treatment of MSW eg. in the Netherlands a study by Faaij et al. considers that "gasification can become a strong competitor to anaerobic digestion, composting and incineration for biomass waste treatment." This is based on the use of BIG/STIG technology with the system gasification using Atmospheric Circulating Fluidized Bed (ACFB) technology. They expect the potential to be "realised within 4 to 7 years".
5.4.2.4 Catalytic liquefaction
This technology has the potential to produce higher quality products of greater energy density. These products should also require less processing to produce marketable products.
Catalytic liquefaction is a low temperature, high pressure thermochemical conversion process carried out in the liquid phase. It requires either a catalyst or a high hydrogen partial pressure. Technical problems have so far limited the opportunities of this technology.
5.4.3 Biochemical processes
The use of micro-organisms for the production of ethanol is an ancient art. However, in more recent times such organisms have become regarded as biochemical "factories" for the treatment and conversion of most forms of human generated organic waste. Microbial engineering has encouraged the use of fermentation technologies (aerobic and anaerobic) for use in the production of energy (biogas) and fertiliser, and for the use in the removal of unwanted products from water and waste streams.
5.4.3.1 Anaerobic fermentation
Anaerobic reactors are generally used for the production of methane rich biogas from manure (human and animal) and crop residues. They utilise mixed methanogenic bacterial cultures which are characterised by defined optimal temperature ranges for growth. These mixed cultures allow digesters to be operated over a wide temperature range ie. above 0°C up to 60°C.
When functioning well, the bacteria convert about 90% of the feedstock energy content into biogas (containing about 55% methane), which is a readily useable energy source for cooking and lighting. The sludge produced after the manure has passed through the digester is non-toxic and odourless. Also, it has lost relatively little of its nitrogen or other nutrients during the digestion process thus, making a good fertiliser. In fact, compared to cattle manure left to dry in the field the digester sludge has a higher nitrogen content; many of the nitrogen compounds in fresh manure become volatised whilst drying in the sun. On the other hand, in the digested sludge little of the nitrogen is volatised, and some of the nitrogen is converted into urea. Urea is more readily accessible by plants than many of the nitrogen compounds found in dung, and thus the fertiliser value of the sludge may actually be higher than that of fresh dung.
Anaerobic digesters of various types were widely distributed throughout India and China. Extension programmes promote biogas plants as ideal candidates for rural village use due to their energy and fertiliser production potential along with their improved health benefits. Health benefits primarily arise from the cleaner combustion products of biogas as opposed to other biomass or fossil fuels which may be used in the domestic environment. These two countries now have an estimated 5 to 6 million units in use.
Reliability problems have arisen from a number of problems ie. construction defects, the mixed nature of the bacterial population, the digesters requirements for water and the maintenance of the optimum nitrogen ratio of the medium. Another problem is the digester's demand for dung, which may have alternative uses.
Modern designs have answered many of these problems and digesters are again becoming useful, especially with regard to the potential of digesters to remove toxic nutrients such as nitrates from water supplies; levels of which are now much more stringently controlled in many industrialised countries. The combination of energy production with the ability to enhance crop yields make biogas technology a good candidate for more widespread use now that reliable operation can be demonstrated. Recent Danish commercial experience with large scale digesters provides a useful example.
5.4.3.2 Methane production in landfills
Anaerobic digestion in landfills is brought about by the microbial decomposition of the organic matter in refuse. The levels of organic matter produced per capita vary considerably from developed to developing countries eg. the percentage of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) which is putrescible in Sierra Leone is about 90%, compared to about 60% for US MSW. The reduced levels of putrescibles in US MSW are a result of the increased proportions of plastics, metals and glass, mostly from packaging. Landfill-generated gas is on average half methane and half carbon dioxide with an energy content of 18 to 19 MJ/m^3. Its production does not occur under pressure, and thus recovery processes must be active.
Commercial production of land-gas can also aid with the leaching problems now increasingly associated with landfill sites. Local communities neighbouring land fill sites are becoming more aware of the potential for heavy metals and nutrients to leach into aquifers. Landfill processing reduces the volume of sludge to be disposed of, and the nutrient content, thus facilitating proper disposal.
Methane is a powerful greenhouse gas, with substantial amounts being derived from unutilized methane production from landfill sites. Its recovery therefore, not only results in the stabilisation of the landfill site, allowing faster reuse of the land, but also serves to lessen the impact of biospheric methane emissions on global warming.
5.4.3.3 Ethanol fermentation
Ethanol is mainly used as a substitute for imported oil in order to reduce their dependence on imported energy supplies. The substantial gains made in fermentation technologies now make the production of ethanol for use as a petroleum substitute and fuel enhancer, both economically competitive (given certain assumptions) and environmentally beneficial. For example, subsidies for alcohol production in Brazil are now becoming regarded as detrimental to the stability of the ethanol market, and thus obsolete. In Zimbabwe, foreign exchange savings are seen as a major bonus, which along with the employment and environmental benefits have made the long term future and expansion of the this programme a priority for the Zimbabwean government.
The most commonly used feedstock in developing countries is sugarcane, due to its high productivity when supplied with sufficient water. Where water availability is limited, sweet sorghum or cassava may become the preferred feedstocks. Other advantages of sugarcane feedstock include the high residue energy potential and modern management practices which make sustainable and environmentally benign production possible whilst at the same time allowing continued production of sugar. Other feedstocks include saccharide-rich sugarbeet, and carbohydrate rich potatoes, wheat and maize.
One of the most promising fermentation technologies to be identified recently is the "Biostil" process which uses centrifugal yeast reclamation, and continuous evaporative removal of the ethanol. This allows the fermentation medium to be continuously sterilised and minimises water use. The Biostil process markedly lowers the production of stillage, whilst the non-stop nature of the fermentation process allows substrate concentrations to be constantly kept at optimal levels and therefore fermentation efficiency is maximised. Improved varieties of yeast, produced through clonal selection techniques have also raised the tolerance levels of the yeast to alcohol concentrations, again improving efficiency.
Recent advances in the use of cellulosic feedstock, may allow the competitive production of alcohol from woody agricultural residues and trees to become economically competitive in the medium term. Since 1982, prices have fallen from about US$ 45 per GJ (95 c/1) to about US$ 13 per GJ (28 c/1) for ethanol, and for methanol, projected prices have been reduced from US$ 16 per GJ (27 c/1) to $15 per GJ (25 c/1) and could fall to prices competitive with gasoline produced from oil priced at US$ 25 per barrel.
5.4.3.4 Biodiesel
The use of vegetable oils for combustion in diesel engines has occurred for over 100 years. In fact, Rudolf Diesel tested his first prototype on vegetable oils, which can be used, "raw", in an emergency. Whilst it is feasible to run diesel engines on raw vegetable oils, in general the oils must first be chemically transformed to resemble petroleum-based diesel more closely.
The raw oil can be obtained from a variety of annual and perennial plant species. Perennials include, oil palms, coconut palms, physica nut and Chinese Tallow Tree. Annuals include, sunflower, groundnut, soybean and rapeseed. Many of these plants can produce high yields of oil, with positive energy and carbon balances.
Transformation of the raw oil is necessary to avoid problems associated with variations in feedstock. The oil can undergo thermal or catalytic cracking, Kolbe electrolysis, or transesterification processes in order to obtain better characteristics. Untreated oil causes problems through incomplete combustion, resulting in the build up of sooty residues, waxes, gums etc. Also, incorrect viscosities can result in poor atomization of the oil also resulting in poor combustion. Oil polymerisation can lead to deposition on the cylinder walls.
Generally, the chemical processing required to avoid these problems is simple, and in the case of soybean oil may be carried out in existing petroleum refineries. The use of diesel powered vehicles is widespread throughout agriculture, and biodiesel provides an environmentally friendly, CO[2]-neutral alternative. It is now being widely promoted in the EU and elsewhere, as its use does not require major modification to existing diesel engines.
5.5 Management Issues
The potential in Africa to use biomass as a modern energy carrier is very substantial, but to mobilize it will require not only technological knowledge, but the creation of social, policy and financial conditions. Biomass resources exist or can be produced, the need for sustainably available solid, liquid and gaseous fuels is obvious, and the benefits which arise from the use of bioenergy in employment, energy, environment and agricultural terms are very significant. It is therefore necessary for African countries, in accordance with natural resource endowment, social development goals and level of economic growth, to promote that biomass energy resources start playing their role in the rural development scene.
A first and urgent matter is to enhance awareness of policy makers on this potential. An accelerated rural growth scenario will necessitate new energy forms, and the fact that bioenergy is produced in those areas needs political recognition. This awareness needs to be backed with data, statistics and assessment studies geared to quantifying and qualifying the role of bioenergy. Since biomass sources for energy conversion can be derived from ongoing agricultural or forestry operations, or can be purposely produced on new agricultural, marginal or degraded lands, awareness enhancement must touch a large variety of institutions, both public and private, covering rural development, land, water, agriculture, forestry, environment and overall planning issues.
There are probably two issues which need particular emphasis when considering bioenergy promotion. The first is that of land and product tenure. Just like in other rural productive activities, bioenergy requires clearly established legislation and property rights. Since the "product", energy, is related to different markets and thus different marketing routes, it is very probable that its commercialization from the field to the final user crosses different paths than that of conventional agricultural or forestry produce. The second issue of high importance, closely linked to the first one is the creation of a market for bioenergy and of the financial conditions to sustain it. The present relatively low international prices of hydrocarbons, which are anyway still above the purchasing power of most rural communities, is a complex scenario for many bioenergy applications, which in many cases result more expensive than oil or gas resources. Therefore, a broader and longer term
perspective needs to be applied when considering biomass for energy. The benefits in social, developmental and environmental terms need to be integrated into bioenergy assessment studies, just as the full-cycle costs of petroleum, and its environmental costs need to internalized when economically considering these fuels. The long and difficult path to achieve these two conditions with "business-as-usual" policies must be shortened and simplified through policy and financial tools. Poverty in rural areas requires urgent actions, and bioenergy's role in this respect needs to be "unleashed". Countries have their own institutional and policy structures. These need to assessed in the light of bioenergy opportunities. Rural development banks, extension services, local organizations, the private sector and NGOs need to be made aware of bioenergy opportunities. Training of their personnel and designing new loan and small grant schemes need to be put in place. Monopolistic barriers
limiting the possibility of decentralized power generation or the distribution of liquid fuels must be cancelled. Finally, it must be stressed that institutional cooperation on bioenergy is essential, since many technical, social, legal and economic fields need to converge to common goals.
