<title>Sustainable dryland cropping in relation to soil productivity - FAO soils bulletin 72</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This Bulletin is the joint effort of three authors: Professor C.J. Pearson of The University of Queensland, Gatton College, who wrote the first five chapters and Professor D.W. Norman of the Department of Agricultural Economics, Kansas State University, and Dr J. Dixon of FAO, Bangkok, Thailand, who wrote the final chapter 6. Professor Pearson wrote his contribution in 1992 during a short stay at FAO, Rome. It reflects his personal views and experience acquired over the years. His conclusions on which issues need urgent consideration, however, largely emerged during writing. While there are sections which he would now phrase or emphasize differently, the editor has restricted changes to some references to recent work.
The main themes of the Bulletin are that management of soil productivity is central to sustainable dryland cropping and that successful management depends on understanding the mechanisms underlying soil productivity and on the recognition of non- technical factors such as human goals. It follows that its conclusions are not prescriptive. Rather it aims to encourage researchers and policy-makers to work jointly with farmers to develop better cropping systems and devise locally acceptable indicators of sustainability.
The text is illustrated by numerous figures and tables and is supported by a substantial list of recent references. It does not, however, pretend to be a comprehensive review of sustainability, soil processes and cropping systems.
Readers will note that soil characteristics are described in Chapters 2 and 3 in an unconventional sequence. This emphasizes the characteristics we think are important for crop growth, and should encourage scrutiny of some of the present trends in soil research. Our knowledge of quantitative relationships between soils and crops is sparse, and that of soil biology and weed ecology is rudimentary. In contrast, we no longer emphasise work on mineral nutrition and crop fertilizer responses. We are concerned that resources continue to be spent on fertilizer experiments that are economically irrelevant and, in the absence of soil data may not be transferable to other situations.
It is significant that many of the key issues identified are social, policy and economic, rather than technical. Chapter 5 also recommends that care should be given to the process of identifying key indicators of sustainability. It follows, since involvement of farmers is essential, that urgent consideration be given to surrogate measures of soil sustainability, and to the balance between farmer-participatory and more detached research. The Bulletin questions the conventional view of the benefits from fallow in crop rotations. It may be rewarding also to look at management of soil, weeds, livestock etc. during the fallow as critically as we look at the crop phase.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Dr. B. Jacobs for discussions in the planning phase, to B. Schurle for his comments on an early draft of Chapter 6 and to Dr. C.S. Ofori for discussions arising from the manuscript. The text was edited substantially for publication by J.M. Hodgson. Cover photograph (J.C. Griesbach): soil saving dams and fish-scale terracing on slopes, Loess Plateau, China.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 1 - Properties of dryland cropping systems
What is a cropping system?
Evolution of field crop ecosystems
Drylands
Soils
Five premises underlie the text of the first five chapters of this Bulletin. They are:
1. Cropping systems are designed and managed to achieve human goals so they are purposeful systems.
2. Like all purposeful systems, a cropping system has generic properties that are useful to assess how it functions and how effective it is. The most relevant properties here are sustainability and productivity (efficiency). Effectiveness, stability, equitability and other properties may be equally important in other contexts.
3. Soil is the major resource upon which sustainable cropping depends. Soil management is thus a key element in the management of cropping systems, both for sustainability and productivity.
4. When discussing sustainability it is helpful to define the local soil resources and to identify measurable indicators of soil productivity that are meaningful to local farmers.
5. Interpretation of local indicators of soil productivity requires some understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying soil and crop behaviour. It is better to tailor the understanding of generic mechanisms to local situations than to apply prescriptions for one cropping system to another.
The next two sections expand the first two premises. They discuss the nature of cropping systems and how best to estimate their function and effectiveness. They also describe types of cropping systems and how one type may evolve into another.
What is a cropping system?
A cropping system may be defined as a community of plants which is managed by a farm unit to achieve various human goals. The latter include food, fibre and other raw materials, wealth and satisfaction. Conway (1985) encompassed these multiple goals in the phrase 'increased social value'. Farmers are part of the system. They are able to set, or modify, their own goals, so two farms with identical climates and soils may be managed with different aims to achieve a different mix of outputs.
FIGURE 1 - A farming system or farm-household system within which a cropping system can be seen as one of three overlapping sub-systems (Source: Pearson and Ison (1987) with modifications suggested by J. Dixon)
TABLE 1
Properties of agro-ecosystems and their assessment
Property
Measure
Effectiveness
Opinion, or econometric measure of satisfaction
Production
Output of system (e.g., yield of grain per household)
Productivity
Output per unit land (e.g., yield of grain per hectare) or per unit of labour, capital or any technological input
Stability
Coefficient of variation, across region or time
Sustainability
* Resource change: rate of decrease or increase in key indicators or resources,e.g., soil pH
* Forcing: level of inputs (e.g., fertilizer) necessary to maintain characteristic resource and production levels
* Inertia: level of perturbation (e.g., rainfall event) that can be accommodated without system change
* Elasticity: recovery time to return to trend line after perturbation (e.g., number of years after drought)
* Amplitude: maximum displaced attribute level (e.g., productivity, say in tonnes per hectare per annum) from which recovery is possible
Equitability
Income ranking of population
IRRI (1978) gives a more detailed definition of a cropping system: "....the crop production activity of a farm. It comprises all cropping patterns grown on the farm and their interaction with farm resources, other household enterprises and the physical, biological, technological and sociological factors or environments". This is illustrated in Figure 1 in which the cropping system is one of three sub-systems likely to be present within a broader farming system.
Food security is the most basic output from a cropping system. For a subsistence household, all other outputs are secondary. For corporate agriculture, under a sophisticated cash economy, food security is established and other goals, such as profit, predominate. Thus, the first property of a cropping system is its effectiveness; that is its ability to meet the needs of the goal-setter (the farmer or corporate manager, etc.). The effectiveness of a system is a subjective attribute which should be assessed by the goal-setters and their society. It can be estimated or quantified through surveys using ranking techniques or by econometrical devices such as shadow pricing and opportunity costing (Table 1). To illustrate the importance of assessing the effectiveness of a cropping system, consider Figure 2. Here, in a survey, 270 Indonesian households were classed into six types (e.g., aiming to be self-sufficient in food, wage-earning or in commercial agriculture) and, depending on
their diet and the possibility of their diet being inadequate at some times of year, they were assigned to four classes of 'food insecurity'. Households managing cropping systems for self-sufficiency occur in all categories of food insecurity. A successful household whose cropping system supports them in a 'food secure' state, will have different opinions on the effectiveness of their cropping system from a neighbouring 'food insecure' household that also aims at self sufficiency. Furthermore, it is likely that their attitudes to risk-taking and change are likely to be quite different. This is in part because of the difference in effectiveness of the two systems. One family may be open to innovation and the other perhaps caught in a spiral of conservative thinking and poverty.
Production is a most obvious output and measure of the activity of a cropping system. It can be measured as the biological or economic output from the system, for example as the grain or cash generated. It is implicitly an output from the activity of one or more management units (e.g., families). It is also a measure of the efficiency of the management of the cropping system and can be related to productivity - measured as output per unit of input (land, labour, capital, energy) (Table 1).
Conway (1985) defines other ecosystem properties as sustainability, stability and equitability (Figure 3). Of these, sustainability, the subject of this Bulletin, is the most difficult to define and estimate. FAO (1989b) states that the goal of sustainable agriculture is to 'maintain production at levels necessary to meet the increasing aspirations of an expanding world population without degrading the environment', and that sustainability 'implies concern for the generation of income, the promotion of appropriate policies, and the conservation of natural resources'. Similarly, sustainable agriculture and rural development are defined as 'the management and conservation of the natural resource base, and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for present and future generations'.
FIGURE 2 - Four classes of food insecurity, based on diet and possible seasonal food shortage among Indonesian households (Source: Phillips, personal communication, 1989) - Notice, as expected, households which classify themselves as growing their own food have more security while landless and support-receiving households have least security. - Food Secure
FIGURE 2 - Four classes of food insecurity, based on diet and possible seasonal food shortage among Indonesian households (Source: Phillips, personal communication, 1989) - Notice, as expected, households which classify themselves as growing their own food have more security while landless and support-receiving households have least security. -Low Food Insecurity
FIGURE 2 - Four classes of food insecurity, based on diet and possible seasonal food shortage among Indonesian households (Source: Phillips, personal communication, 1989) - Notice, as expected, households which classify themselves as growing their own food have more security while landless and support-receiving households have least security. - Moderate Food Insecurity
FIGURE 2 - Four classes of food insecurity, based on diet and possible seasonal food shortage among Indonesian households (Source: Phillips, personal communication, 1989) - Notice, as expected, households which classify themselves as growing their own food have more security while landless and support-receiving households have least security. - High Food Insecurity
FIGURE 3 Properties of agro-ecosystems (Source: Conway and Barbier, 1990) - Productivity measures valued production, stability (how it varies), sustainability (how durable it is) and equitability (how it is shared). - Productivity
FIGURE 3 Properties of agro-ecosystems (Source: Conway and Barbier, 1990) - Productivity measures valued production, stability (how it varies), sustainability (how durable it is) and equitability (how it is shared). - Stability
FIGURE 3 Properties of agro-ecosystems (Source: Conway and Barbier, 1990) - Productivity measures valued production, stability (how it varies), sustainability (how durable it is) and equitability (how it is shared). - Sustainability
FIGURE 3 Properties of agro-ecosystems (Source: Conway and Barbier, 1990) - Productivity measures valued production, stability (how it varies), sustainability (how durable it is) and equitability (how it is shared). - Equitability
Conway (1985; personal communication 1991) defines sustainability as the ability of an ecosystem to maintain productivity when subjected to a major disturbing force. He is thus forced to draw a continuum between stability (in the face of minor, expected forces) and sustainability (in response to major forces). He also indicates that to assess sustainability, one needs a measure 'of the effectiveness of internal adjustments that agro-ecosystems make in response to stresses and shocks'. A more pragmatic definition of sustainability, with which most agronomists would agree, is that 'a sustainable cropping system... is one which maintains resources, such as soil and water, while providing an adequate and economic level of production, both now and for generations to come' (Hoare 1992). Similarly, a sustainable system is one in which: (i) resources are kept in balance with their use through conservation, recycling or renewal; (ii) practices preserve agricultural resources and
prevent environmental damage to the farm and off-site land, water and air; (iii) production, profits and incentives retain their importance, because not only agriculture needs to be sustained, but so do farmers and society (Poincelot 1990).
FIGURE 4 - Measuring sustainability: a group process of identification of generic and local indicators of resources
Conway's definition allows for levels, or degrees, of sustainability but constrains assessment of sustainability to measurements after shock. Hoare (1992) and others (e.g., Senanayake 1991) define a sustainable system in terms easy to relate to, but often do not accommodate degrees of sustainability, which is unhelpful for management and policy development. Here, Conway's concept is accepted that it is useful to consider the possibility of various degrees of sustainability, and the widespread, but rarely developed, implication that sustainability should be measurable in either biological or economic terms (just as in measuring productivity). It follows that a biologically sustainable system may not be economically sustainable. This is witnessed by land in various parts of Europe and elsewhere that has gone in and out of cropping on several occasions during historic times depending on economic conditions.
Here, sustainability is defined consistent with FAO (1989b), as the ability of a cropping system to maintain productivity over a long term. Since this definition implies also maintenance of resources such as soil, it requires that all participants (farmers, researchers, extension specialists and policy-makers) agree upon appropriate measures by which the sustainability of particular cropping systems are assessed.
An operational schema is given in Figure 4. Generic measures of sustainability were proposed by Conway (personal communication 1991) and others, Here, forcing, inertia, elasticity and amplitude are offered as functional measures (Table 1).
TABLE 2
Indicators of key natural resources in rainfed cropping and animal production systems (Source: Hamblin 1991a)
Nutrient balance
Organic matter - rate of change
Nitrogen cycling - especially when using grain legumes in rotation with cereals
Monitoring phosphorus, sulphur and potassium
Micro-nutrients
Erosion
Vegetation cover - includes trees as well as stubble
Soil surface cover - stubble retained (30% sufficient to prevent wind and water erosion)
Stream bank
Sheet and gully erosion
Productivity, yield and quality
Water use/efficiency - i.e. actual versus potential (in some areas the potential is much less than the actual) (biomass/grain yield/US dollars), recharge (dryland salinity and nutrient leaching)
Pasture composition - legume and perennial content
Matched animal versus pasture production - appropriate enterprise selection/capability
Maintenance of genetic base/improvement
Soil structure
Infiltration
Permeability/water storage
Stability
Waterlogging
Compaction
pH
Change
Toxicity - deficiency
Indicator plants
Energy efficiency
Input versus output of the whole agricultural system
Biological factors
Soil macro/micro flora and fauna
Animal health
Plant health (root growth and other)
Pests (animals and plants)
Farm management skills
Understanding - a good indicator would be the understanding the farmers have of their own technical system
TABLE 3
Key measurements of sustainability in rainfed cropping and animal production systems (Source: Hamblin 1991a)
Indicator
Why
Process/measurement
Water use efficiency
Easy to relate production to rainfall; usable for both crops and pastures
Yield (kg/mm/ha); at scales of farm, shire and region to detect trends in time and between areas
Soil health
A direct expression of sustainability of system
Soil analysis of pH (trends), nutrient balance, direct measurement of worm counts, surveys of microflora
Farm management skills
Understanding is needed before change occurs; good level required for financial survival
Farm records and farm surveys; units of cash flow, debt equity, whole-farm planning
It is important that everyone involved in an assessment of the sustainability of a cropping system should agree on an inventory of resources which encapsulates its essential features. From this, the most critical attributes and, in some cases, those most easy to estimate, can be identified (Figure 4). Table 2 illustrates the type of resource inventory that might be agreed necessary to define the sustainability of a semi-arid cropping system. Defined critical resources will differ for other systems. After defining the critical resources, it is necessary to identify those indices of sustainability that are easily and relatively-cheaply measured. Some measurements emerging from consideration of Table 2 are listed in Table 3.
FIGURE 5 - Crop yield declines with continuing soil degradation and erosion. - In this study, farmers' perceptions of the rate of decline in crop yield related well to soil loss through simulated erosion (scalping or soil removal). Source: Rickson et al. 1987.
If a system is not sustainable, remedial action depends on agreement on the extent of non-sustainability and the changes in inputs to make it sustainable. Some research is encouraging here: for example, Rickson et al. (1987) find reasonable agreement between farmers' perceptions of the impact of continued soil loss on sustainability, as estimated by the extent of decline in wheat yields (Figure 5).
Stability (or variability) is the constancy of productivity in the face of small disturbances such as seasonal or year-to-year fluctuations in weather. It is a measure of the spatial- or year-to-year robustness of a farming practice and reflects not only variations in crop response to weather and soil type, but also variations in prices of inputs (such as labour and pesticides) and of the product. Last, but not least, equitability is the property that reflects how the resources and outcomes of the cropping systems are shared among the population (Table 1).
Evolution of field crop ecosystems
Extensification
Intensification
Various terms used in the sections that follow are defined in Appendix 1. Most of the definitions are taken from IRRI (1984) and ICRAF (e.g., Rocheleau et al. 1988). Cropping systems have evolved over historical time along a catena of increasing energy inputs (including mechanization), reduced biological diversity and increased risk or instability.
Boserup (1965) developed the thesis, forwarded and embellished by others, that population growth is a precondition for agricultural change. Subsistence communities in semi-arid regions depend on herding livestock (most common in semi-arid grasslands and woodlands) or shifting cultivation. In the latter, the cultivated plot is moved to new land when fertility is depleted or the plot becomes too weedy.
Boserup's thesis, backed by worldwide experience, is that increasing population, in places partly caused by immigration (e.g., settlers moving into sub-Sahelian Africa), either: (i) reduces community mobility until the villages become static and maintain permanent fields, or (ii) already semi-permanent villages are so deprived of hunting/foraging grounds that they too need to develop permanent cropping systems. As the fallow period between crops is shortened and the fields become more permanent, two strategies are available:
· Extensification and/or increased mechanization. For example, use of draught animals or tractors.
· Intensification including use of shorter fallows, perhaps coupled with use of unused poorer land. This is accompanied by increased complexity of cropping, e.g., household gardens, and environmental modification, e.g., irrigation.
Okigbo (1984) comprehensively described these changes in cropping systems, and their implications for sustainability.
Extensification
Extensification of cropping requires livestock for draught, or mechanization. Extensification may encourage supplementary pasture systems outside, as well as part of, the cropping systems themselves. It is also possible to develop extensive cropping without livestock. Agriculture in northeast Argentina and parts of Brazil, for example, has shifted directly from uncultivated grazing land or unused bush to extensive, mechanized cropping. Where cropping and livestock farming develop together, there are options as to their integration. In semi-arid Australia, mechanized extensification of 60 million ha of arable land has seen little (long term) change in the ratio of crop to pasture. Pasture land has increased in area since about 1930 to stabilize at about 28 million ha in 1970. Though livestock are not used for draught, this extensification has maintained a close link between crops and pasture in an integrated ley farming system. In contrast, in the semi-arid Near East,
extensive cropping has been developed by private landholders without livestock. Here pasturage remains largely in the public domain with nomadic herds and common grazing land. Thus, though Australia and the Near East both have crop and livestock subsystems, in Australia they are integrated and managed by one family or corporation but in the Near East they may be separate and owned by distinct social groups.
Intensification
Intensification involves biological or environmental modification. Biological modification occurs by increasing the complexity of a local cropping system by the development of multi-storied household gardens, relay cropping or mixed cropping. It is done by individual households. It increases labour inputs, diversifies crop management (though not necessarily crop diversity which may be greatest in hunter-gatherer systems), and usually increases the range of livestock (chickens, ducks, goats, fish and sometimes cattle are common in Javanese household gardens). It may reduce insect herbivores. Importantly, it creates food and income stability. Biological intensification can also be carried out on a larger, usually corporate scale. Multi-story plantation crops, such as beans under coffee, alley cropping and agroforestry, seek high outputs per unit area and stability in ways analogous to complex household gardens. Such intensification appreciably modifies the micro-environment as
a secondary outcome. For example, tree legumes were planted along fence-lines in semi-arid Ethiopia in the late 1980s to provide quality forage for cattle and income from the sale of seeds. The trees provided shade and habitats for birds, which became more prized by villagers than the forage.
FIGURE 6 - An agro-climatic classification of world climates into 10 regions (listed in figure) and 34 classes. (Source: Hutchinson et al. 1992)
TABLE 4
System properties of the home garden when compared with a rice field (Source: Conway personal communication 1991)
Home garden
Rice field
Productivity
Higher standing biomass
Higher net income (low inputs)
Greater variety of production (food, medicines, fuelwood)
Higher gross income
Stability
Year-round production ('living granary')
More stable from year to year
Seasonal production
Vulnerable to climatic and disease variation
Sustainability
Maintenance of soil fertility
Protection from soil erosion
Heavy pest and disease attack
Equitability
Home gardens in most households
Barter of products
Product to land owners
Intensification can also be carried out by deliberate modification of the environment, most obviously through irrigation. Intensification, whether by biological or environmental modification, generally gives: (i) greater diversity of land use; (ii) some intensively-used cropping land, usually in areas with favourable hydrology, fertility or social attributes (e.g., prior settlement, easy transport); and (iii) some under-used or unused land. Cropping systems in Mediterranean lands often show these features, though there under-used land sometimes reflects lack of population pressure.
It is notable that extensification of cropping systems can create relative uniformity but intensification creates diversity. Neither, however, has a predictable social or environmental outcome. Extensification, often using monocultures, can be inherently stable and sustainable, or not. The social distribution of its benefits may be egalitarian (giving either uniform prosperity, or uneconomic, socially-deprived family farms), or it may be hierarchical with economically-strong landowners and a landless class of labourers and farmhands. Intensification at the household level benefits the family directly; intensification through village cooperatives or corporations may be advantageous or create negative social and environmental outcomes. Table 4 illustrates this for a home garden and a rice field.
Drylands
FAO (1987) uses the term 'drylands' to describe climates with fewer than 120 days growing season. These are divided into 'arid drylands' with less than 75 days growing season, and 'semi-arid' areas which have from 75 to 119 days growing season (Table 5).
- Seasonal changes in indices of crop growth in tropical drylands, classed by Hutchinson et al, as having climate types I (hot, seasonally wet/dry: uppermost row) or E (warm, seasonally wet/dry: middle row), and in temperate drylands (lowermost row). Growth index ( ) is a dimensionless index from zero (no growth) to 1 (maximum growth). It is the product of a temperature index (- - - -), water index ( ) and radiation or light index (.....) calculated each week of the year from standard meteorological data and using a simple soil water balance model. The temperature index is calculated for a tropical plant having an optimum temperature for growth of 28°C (shown as T = 28 in diagram) or a temperate plant with an optimum of 19 (T = 19). (Source: Hutchinson et al. 1992)
FIGURE 7 - 1.
FIGURE 7 - 2.
FIGURE 7 - 3.
FIGURE 7 - 4.
FIGURE 7 - 5.
FIGURE 7 - 6.
TABLE 5
Drylands in developing countries by region (million ha) (Source: FAO 1987)
Growth days
Total drylands
Total area
Africa
Southwest Asia
Southeast Asia
Central America
South America
East Asia
Total
^1 Excludes South Africa.
Parenthesis show percent of total land areas for each region, e.g. Africa.
Though most semi-arid lands border the arid or desert climates of the world (Figure 6), they support a diversity of cropping (mostly with annual crops). Because of this diversity their climate should be quantified and any variations within them delineated. Such drylands have either one or two wet seasons. Bimodal rainfall regimes are characteristically found in latitudes between the wet tropics and the unimodal more temperate, semi-arid zones. Their distribution, however, is governed more by pressure systems and land masses. For example, bimodal patterns are rarely found in east Asia. In the tropics, the wet season(s) coincide with a high solar angle except for a relatively small area in east Brazil. The tropical drylands are commonly called monsoon (in Asia) or savannah (in Africa) although there is confusion over these terms. Koppen (1900) uses 'monsoon' in a restricted sense, as a climate with a dry season but able to support rainforest. In temperate areas, there is
usually a single wet season that coincides with a low solar angle (winter). These wet-and-dry climates are generally called Mediterranean and, on the drier margins, semi-arid.
The tropical drylands (to use FAO's term) are categorized I and E by Hutchinson et al. (1992); and the temperate drylands as E, D and C on the basis of seasonably of available water and temperature (Figure 6 and Table 6). This delineation of climates is based on calculations of the relative constraints of soil water, temperature and solar radiation on growth of temperate and tropical crops. Each of the indices ranges from zero (no growth) to 1 (climate optimal for growth). The water, temperature and radiation indices are multiplied together to calculate a growth index, which is an estimate of the overall suitability of the location for crop growth in a particular week or month of the year.
Hutchinson's climate classification (Figure 6), unlike more traditional, geographically-oriented classifications, reflects seasonal fluctuations of environmental factors related quantitatively to crop growth. Examples relevant to the tropical drylands and climatically-similar wet-and-dry temperate areas, are shown in Figure 7.
Tropical drylands that support cropping have mean annual water indices as low as 0.29, but have a growth index (the product of the water, temperature and radiation indices) during the highest quarter (three-month period) greater than 0.3 (commonly 0.3-0.8). This is sufficient to support good growth of a single crop. Zone I coincides with parts of the Aw, Bsh and Cwa types of Koppen (1900) and Trewartha (1968) and corresponds with the 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.7 and 1.9 zones of Papadakis (1975). Hutchinson's E zone, which is not as hot (Table 6) coincides with parts of Koppen's Cfa, Cwa and Bsh types and Papadakis' (1975) zones 1.7, 2, 4.2 and 5 in the tropics.
TABLE 6
Classification of climates: critical characteristics which Hutchinson et al. (1992) use to define 34 agro-climatic zones. TI[19] and TI[28] are the thermal indices for temperate crops (having an optimum temperature for growth of 19°C) and tropical crops (28°C), MI is water index and GI is the growth index derived from multiplying the monthly water, temperature and radiation indices
Group
Annual mean TI[19]
Highest quarter GI[19]
Annual mean TI[28]
Highest quarter GI[28]
Annual mean Ml
Very cold
A
Cold
B1
B2
Cool, dry
C1
C2
C3
C4
Cool, wet
D1
D2
Warm, seasonally wet/dry
E1
E2
E3
E4
E5
E6
E7
E8
Warm, wet
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
Warm to hot, very dry
G
Hot, dry
H
Hot, seasonally wet/dry
Hot, wet
J1
J2
J3
FIGURE 8 - Probability of occurrence of a given rainfall intensity for three soil types at Hyderabad, India (mm/week) (Source: Norman et al. 1984, adapted from Virmani 1975)
FIGURE 8 - Probability of occurrence of a given length of growing season (weeks) for three soil types at Hyderabad, India (Source: Norman et al. 1984, adapted from Virmani 1975)
The tropical drylands have close affinities with temperate semi-arid climates where annual cropping is practised. In the latter areas, the growing season exceeds the FAO limit of 119 days, and is often as much as 150-190 days because the cropping period coincides with the season of low temperature and evaporation. The C climates of Hutchinson et al. (1992) are cool and dry while their cropping systems overlap with the dry margin of their D climates, which are cool but wetter (Table 6).
Within these environments, the length of growing season and the kind of cropping system are determined not only by rainfall distribution but by soil water-holding characteristics and topographic position. The latter affects runoff to and runon from neighbouring land. The wetter regimes within the 119-day growing season allow some relay cropping on soils with favourable water-holding characteristics, but single cropping is more typical unless runon water is available. The time available for a cropping sequence at Hyderabad, India (average annual rainfall 760 mm), as affected by soil water-holding characteristics, is shown in Figure 8.
Because the drylands occupy a spectrum of water availability and cropping patterns, they are subdivided into two or more zones by Hutchinson et al. (1992) and others. For example, in the Bolivian lowlands (below 1000 m), Cochrane (1975) distinguishes four subclasses of rainfed cropping: very humid, humid, semi-humid and dry. Within these zones soil moisture is adequate for crop growth (at a 75% rainfall probability) for 8, 7, 5 and less than 5 months per year respectively. Only the dry category fits within the FAO (1987) definition of dryland. In West Africa, Kowal and Kassam (1978) distinguish seven bioclimatic regions within the savanna. The driest of these, which supports arable cropping, fits within the FAO definition of dryland. One (the southern Saharan fringe), which has no distinct wet season and no permanent cropping, is classed within the dry tropics so is outside the scope of this Bulletin. Kowal and Kassam (1978) provide climatic boundaries which, though strictly
applicable only to West Africa, illustrate the gradation in wet-and-dry climates. It includes South Guinea, with a 190-240 day rainy period; North Guinea, 140-190 days; Sudan, 90-140 days; and Southern Sahel, 70-95 days.
FIGURE 9 - Broad features of soils in the tropics (Source: FAO, World Soil Resources, 1993)
Semi-arid environments do not include those dry climates in which rainfall infiltration exceeds evapotranspiration and direct evaporation for so short a period that even the most rapidly maturing crops cannot be grown without irrigation. Hutchinson et al. (1992) consider their hot dry climate (H) too dry or very marginal for rainfed crops and their very dry climate (G) unquestionably cannot support cropping. This latter category supports dry savannah (tallgrass) vegetation in the tropics, dry temperate shortgrass steppe in temperate areas, and also includes hot deserts. Dryland cropping requires a rainy season of about 55 days, which corresponds to an average annual rainfall of less than 250 mm in temperate regions and 300-350 mm in the tropics. This, depending on soil water holding capacity, will support crop growth for 65-75 days.
Soils
Figure 9 shows the global distribution of the main soil patterns. The predominant soils of the semi-arid croplands are Luvisols and Calcisols in Africa and Australia, Mollisols and Luvisols in temperate areas of the Americas, Ferralsols in wet-and-dry tropical America, Luvisols and Chernozems in temperate Eurasia and Calcisols and some Acrisols in wet-and-dry tropical Eurasia.
The climatic distribution, area and chief limitations of the main major soil orders are shown in Figure 10. All these soils occur in seasonally wet-and-dry climates, although the Acrisols are not extensive in drylands (Figure 10). Lixisols, most widespread in potential cropping areas within seasonally wet-and-dry climates, have poor water-holding capacity, hard-setting surface horizons with a risk of crusting, runoff and erosion. The topsoil texture varies from loamy sand to loam and clay, but the hard-setting properties and relatively poor infiltration and drainage (compared with, say, Acrisols) mean that crop growth is frequently limited by water availability. Figure 8 shows a delay in sowing of about two weeks on Luvisols compared with adjacent Vertisols. Lixisols often have low levels of organic matter and generally low effective cation exchange capacity (ECEC). They are commonly deficient in phosphorus.
Calcisols are extensive, particularly in north and west Africa but, lying on the dry margin of cropland, they contribute less than Luvisols to crop production in semi-arid regions. They are high in bases, in places saline, and low in organic matter. Chemozems are relatively well structured and fertile with high levels of base saturation. Their topsoil does not harden on drying, as is common in Luvisols and Lixisols. Ferralsols and Acrisols are acid, highly weathered and more common on the wetter margins than in strictly semi-arid regions. Being highly weathered, they have low fertility and ECEC though they often have high levels of exchangeable aluminium. Applied fertilizer may be leached, because of the low ECEC, or made unavailable. They have high water infiltration capacity but a relatively low water-holding capacity and are susceptible to compaction.
FIGURE 10 - Approximate climatic distribution, area and chief constraints of selected soil orders
Vertisols, dark-coloured cracking clays, though not extensive in all continents, are important in some seasonally wet-and-dry cropping systems. They have a high ECEC and base status and are often naturally fertile, though sometimes low in nitrogen, phosphorus and zinc. They have a large water-holding capacity. Their surface does not crust; they self-mulch as surface clods break down naturally on drying to small aggregates forming a good tilth. The soil cracks deeply on drying, but as it re-wets the cracks close reducing infiltration and lateral movement of water. When wet the soils are so plastic and sticky that, in Australia, Vertisols were not cropped until tractors replaced horses thus enabling them to be ploughed quickly during the short period when soil moisture is optimum.
It is useful to draw attention to the major soil types and broad climate and soil groupings, as above. For example, the extensive cereal-fallow-pasture system, covering 60 million ha of temperate semi-arid Australia, is found on four broad types of soil and differences in crop rotations largely reflect regional soil differences. However, the more common situation is that soils are linked through topography and moisture regime to landscape, as illustrated in West Africa (Figure 11).
FIGURE 11 - Schematic presentation of soil conditions, soil water movement and cropping along a toposequence at Kamboinse, Burkina Faso (Source: Staveren and Stoop 1985, in Fussell 1992)
By settling the land, cultivating and fertilizing it, humans impose other factors upon climate, soils and toposequences. Human activities, particularly clearing, inappropriate cropping and grazing, have contributed substantially to soil degradation, which is acute in much of the world's drylands (e.g. Middleton and Thomas 1992). These factors result in a large variety of cropping systems in dryland regions, which are beyond meaningful categorization. Accordingly, subsequent chapters deal with aspects of the soil resources and the mechanisms underlying cropping, so that the sustainability of various systems can be discussed in a descriptive, non-prescriptive, manner in Chapter 4.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 2 - Physical aspects of crop productivity
Interrelationships of soil resources and cropping systems
Soil pores and water characteristics
Soil fabric, density and strength
Soil structure and crop growth
How management directly affects soil structure
Field indicators of physical problems
Management for maintenance of soil physical properties
The key resources for sustainable dryland cropping are listed in Table 2. The soil resources in this table fall into three broad groups, reflecting their underlying interrelationships: those related to soil structure (water use, structure, erosion) are dealt with in this Chapter, those related to nutrition or biological factors are discussed later.
As this Bulletin deals with dryland crops, water availability is the major constraint on crop performance. Table 3 suggests that water use efficiency (WUE) is a key measurement of performance. WUE reflects water availability (seasonably of rainfall) but also, importantly for management, it integrates the influences of factors such as the volume of soil exploitable by roots. Long-term trends with time in WUE and trends between areas provide estimates of the relative sustainability of specific cropping systems. This is illustrated in Figure 12: crops below the theoretical WUE line are less efficient or effective than they should be. One reason for such ineffectiveness is poor management during the growing season, for example weediness and nutrient deficiency. This is correctable, as shown by the vertical lines on Figure 12, where WUE was increased during experimental treatments. Other reasons for poor WUE are related more to fundamental issues associated with soils.
Interrelationships of soil resources and cropping systems
A traditional view of the influence of soil is that it provides an opportunity, or a constraint on the type of cropping system that can be implemented and its productivity. A more responsible view is that 'the soil' combines various properties which interrelate and are directly influenced by the procedures of cropping. Figure 13 attempts to illustrate this for a non-sustainable cropping system, in which soil resources are declining through changes in surface properties, subsoil compaction, loss of organic matter and reduced biological activity. It shows that each of these properties may affect the others and that all can directly and indirectly reduce plant performance, as well as affecting other aspects including erosion, salinization and acidification. Some of the mechanisms underlying these interconnections are described below.
Soil pores and water characteristics
Soils are made up of three parts: mineral materials, organic matter and space (called pore-or void-volume). The relative importance of these varies with soil type but pore space can occupy about half the volume of a medium-textured soil. At optimum water content for plant growth, approximately half the pore space is filled with water and half with air. The proportions of water and air can change rapidly depending on weather, evapotranspiration and other factors.
FIGURE 12 - Relationship between grain yield of wheat and April-October rainfall for experimental sites and farmers' paddocks in southern Australia (Source: French and Schultz 1984) - The sloping line indicates the potential yield relationship (Part I). The responses to different treatments are shown by lettered lines linking points. Yield increases were obtained by the application of nitrogen (points linked by a B line), phosphorus (C line), copper (D line), control of eelworms (F line) and multi-factor research (J line). Yield reductions occurred because of delayed time of sowing (A line), effects of weeds (E line) and waterlogging (G line). Variations in yields in districts are shown by the H lines.
The dimensions (size, shape and arrangement) and number of pore spaces are most important in determining soil water and soil structure.
Porosity is the volume of soil voids (pore space). It is expressed in relation to the bulk volume of the soil. The water holding capacity of a soil depends on its porosity, and the size distribution of its pores. Small pores retain water at greater suctions than larger pores (Table 7). The moisture (or water) potential is the amount of energy required to remove water from a soil; field capacity is the water-holding capacity after a free-draining soil has been allowed to drain. The suction corresponding to this state has variously been defined as 0.33, 0.1 and 0.05 bar and so the convention used should always be checked. Wilting point, beyond which plants cannot exert sufficient suction to remove water from a soil, is generally considered to correspond to a suction of 15 bar.
FIGURE 13 - Interrelationships between management and soil as they impact on crop productivity
TABLE 7
Generalized view of pore size groups and functions
Pore diameter (mm)
Function
Equivalent particle or aggregate size^1
Biological cause (if not due to natural particle arrangement)
Equivalent soil water^2 tension (kPa)
Aeration and water transmission
>1.6 (mostly gravel size, some coarse sand size)
ants, worms
Water transmission (infiltration, permeability)
0.16-1.6 (mostly coarse sand size, some fine sand size)
roots
Water storage
0.0016-0.16 (mostly silt and fine sand size, some clay size)
lateral roots, root hairs
Residual (bound) water, unavailable to plants
<0.0016 (mostly clay size)
fungal hyphae and bacteria
^1 Equivalent particle size = 3.2 x pore size (assuming spherical, uniform size particles).
^2 Based on equation: Pore diameter (mm) = 0.30/soil water tension (kPa).
TABLE 8
Typical values of water-holding capacity of soils (adapted from Salter and Williams 1967)
International textural class
Field capacity (10 kPa) (gravimetric) %
Wilting point (gravimetric) %
Available mm water/m soil
Coarse sand
Sand
Loamy sand
Sandy loam
Loam
Silty loam
Sandy clay loam
Clay loam
Silty clay loam
Sandy clay
Clay
TABLE 9
Typical values of saturated hydraulic conductivity based on texture and degree of structure
Texture
Structure
Infiltration
Permeability (mm/h)
Sand
Apedal
Very rapid
>120 can be measured >250
Sandy loam
Weakly pedal
Very rapid
Apedal
Rapid
Loam
Peds evident
Rapid
Weakly pedal
Mod. rapid
Apedal
Mod. rapid
Clay loam
Peds evident
Mod. rapid
Weakly pedal
Moderate
Apedal
Slow
Light clay
Highly pedal
Moderate
Peds evident
Slow
Weakly pedal
Very slow
Medium to heavy clay
Highly pedal
Slow
Peds evident
Very slow
Weakly pedal
Very slow
Clay
Sodic and saline
Moderate
Sodic
Very slow
Highly sodic
Extreme
^1 Strongly structured polyhedral subsoils, e.g. Krasnozem.
Available soil water (ASW) is the amount of water which is available for uptake by plants, namely that held at suctions between wilting point and field capacity. It varies with soil type and can be correlated with the clay content and structural arrangement of the soil. It varies also with soil treatment because the size and distribution of pores in the topsoil reflects surface exposure, normal seasonal wetting and drying, and management. Williams et al. (1983), studying the water content of 244 soil samples, found that the ASW of well-structured soils was one-third to twice as large as that in comparable (similarly-textured) poorly structured or degraded soils. Bearing in mind that ASW varies with natural weathering and management, Table 8 gives typical values of ASW for various soil texture classes.
Hydraulic conductivity (K) of a soil is its conductivity to movement of water down a pressure gradient. High values of K are associated with well-structured soil and contiguous pores; they allow high infiltration rates and rapid drainage. Earthworm channels, which can have populations of 500 m^-2 in Mediterranean climates (Barley 1959), and continuous deep voids left by dead roots (5-10 000 m^-2) contribute greatly to hydraulic conductivity. Hydraulic conductivity varies with soil type and management (Table 9). K values below 10 mm/h are low and likely to cause runoff following rainfall or problems with irrigation, given that steady rain falls at about 10 mm/h. K values of 10 to 20 mm/h can give intermittent runoff (a downpour falls at about 50 mm/h) while values up to 120 mm/h are associated with occasional, increasingly rare runoff. Values above 120 mm/h may facilitate regular drainage to the groundwater, causing potential problems for heavily-fertilized soils, and those
treated with effluent, herbicides or pesticides.
Both soil water content and saturated hydraulic conductivity generally relate to the number and continuity of pores, particularly the larger macro-pores. It is, however, difficult to measure these soil attributes and they are highly location-specific, so that variability is great and they sometimes have little interpretive value. Moran et al. (1988), however, in a study of a soil in a wet-and-dry environment, show that a soil treated with minimum tillage had more pores, identified directly by image analysis, and higher hydraulic conductivity, measured in the field, than did a similar soil traditionally cultivated (Figure 14). Figure 14 also illustrates the impact of management on soil pores and soil water characteristics; this is discussed further in the section below.
Surface sealing and crusting are common in wet-and-dry climates. Sealing increases runoff and seriously reduces the amount of water infiltrating into the soil thus reducing the water held in the soil. Sealing can also increase ponding at the surface and thereby evaporation.
Infiltration rates are often reduced 1000-fold by crusting. The crust can have a skin with a conductivity of only about 0.1 mm/h, able only to accommodate the lightest rate of precipitation (fine mist) and commonly overlies a layer of poorly-aggregated material which also has a conductivity substantially lower than that of the underlying soil.
Chase and Boudouresque (1989) and Chase et al. (1989) illustrate the impact of crusting in the Sahel on increased runoff from soils. They show how runoff may be reduced, and the depth of wetting increased, by covering the soil surface with mulch.
Soil fabric, density and strength
The solid soil material is arbitrarily divided into fractions, the proportions of which determine the texture of the soil. The fractions in the International Method of particle-size analysis are:
FIGURE 14 - Photographic images of vertical slices of soils: the vertical faces of soil were taken from a direct drill (DD) treatment (a) and a conventionally tilled soil (b) at the same location. Hydraulic conductivities were 42.5 and 5.0 mm/h respectively (Moran et al. 1988)
FIGURE 14 - (a)
FIGURE 14 - (b)
Sand: grains, which feel gritty and are large enough to be seen and felt individually; coarse sand has particle sizes between 2 and 0.2 mm and fine sand 0.2 and 0.05 mm.
Silt: imparts a smooth, soapy or silky and only slightly sticky feeling, silt grains cannot be individually detected; their particle sizes range from 0.05 to 0.002 mm.
Clay: gives a sticky feel to the soil. Clay particles are less than 0.002 mm diameter.
These solid fractions contribute to the consistence and strength of the soil, and their packing determines bulk density.
Bulk density is a measure of the packing or compression of the three constituents of soil. Just as the inherent bulk density of a soil will vary by 30% according to its constituents, so the limiting values of bulk density for root penetration will range from about 1.4 g cm^3 in a soil of clay texture to 1.8 g cm^3 in a sandy one (see next section).
Soil strength is the resistance of soil to shearing or structural failure. This reflects the friction which is built up between the soil and an implement, and depends on the density, and the roughness and shape of the soil particles. The shear strength of an individual clod decreases with wetting but, more importantly, the strength of the bulk soil increases with increasing moisture to about the lower plastic limit (known to field operators as the 'sticky point'), at which each particle is surrounded by a film of water which acts as a lubricant. Soil strength drops sharply from that point to the upper plastic limit, where the soil becomes viscous. The difference between the moisture content at the upper and lower plastic limits, termed the plasticity index, is an index of the workability of the soil. A large range or high plasticity index implies a need for large amounts of energy to work the soil to a desired tilth.
Soil structure and crop growth
Soil physical properties affect root and shoot growth directly and indirectly, the latter for example through poor drainage causing pores to fill with water and plants to suffer from anaerobiosis. Root growth has been described under various soil physical conditions, but relationships have only rarely been established between features such as crop yield, root growth and soil pore size distribution or conductivity, a more aggregate measure.
The difficulty in establishing simple relationships does not mean that soil has little influence upon root growth; rather it points to the complexity of the interactions (Figure 13) and the internal homeostasis which plants maintain. Roots both elongate and proliferate and spread laterally as they grow and age. Concomitantly some roots die and others become suberized and function as conduits, but not as absorbers, of water and nutrients. Roots can elongate downwards as fast as 8 cm/d, as for example, soybean growing in a silt loam in a rhizotron (Kaspar et al. 1978). Deep-rootedness and maximum rooting depth reflect soil properties (for example, roots will not grow through pores that they cannot deform to a larger diameter than the root). However, relationships are not often reported. Maximum rooting depth varies with species and soil type. For example, wheat roots penetrated to 0.8 m in heavy-textured soils and to 1.2 m in a loamy sand (Rickert et al. 1987) but it is often
found that a variety will have a consistent rooting depth across similar soil types in a particular year (Hamblin and Hamblin 1985) or in one soil across several years (Pearson et al. 1991). Angus et al. (1983) found that rice and six dryland crops (mung bean, cowpea, soybean, groundnut, maize and sorghum) extracted different amounts of stored soil water (ranging from 100 mm for rice to 250 mm for groundnut) and that extraction was, in part, related to rooting depth.
The spread of roots with age (Figure 15a) can be related to the growth (increase in weight) of the whole plant, and to accumulated temperature or growing day-degrees (GDD) (Figure 15b); indeed, there is some evidence that temperature influences the direction of newly-appeared roots as well as the rate of appearance and extent of growth (Tardieu and Pellerin 1991). Clearly, however, there are factors other than plant size, temperature and soil which influence root proliferation. Otherwise the plants sown at three different times of year in the same soil in Figure 15b would align their root growth along a single growth-GDD relationship. These other factors, of which day length is probably particularly important, tend to mask underlying relationships between growth and soil structure.
Figure 15c shows that tillage can affect root length, though in this case its effects took three years to develop. Measurable differences in soil porosity developed under two tillage treatments: in the first year both root growth and water infiltration (K approximately 5 mm/h) were the same under minimum tillage and conventional tillage. By the third year, when differences were measured between roots, infiltration rates were 84 mm/h in minimum tillage and 0.2 mm/h under conventional tillage. Despite the differences in root growth there were no substantial differences in grain yield, reflecting the overall constraint of climate in the semi-arid environment.
One of the clearer associations between soil porosity and plant growth is described by Tisdall (1978) and Cockroft and Tisdall (1978). Soil was ameliorated by deep ploughing, inserting gypsum at depth, and incorporation of straw and green manure in the topsoil. This treatment gave 10-fold increases in the number of earthworms and a 4-fold increase in soil pores. Infiltration rates also increased 10-fold relative to untreated soil. Root growth was not measured, but fruit yields from peach trees increased from 18 to 75 t/ha.
FIGURE 15 - Spread of wheat roots with age, and effects on root growth of minimum or direct drilling compared with conventional tillage (Pearson et al. 1991)
FIGURE 15 - a
FIGURE 15 - b
FIGURE 15 -c
TABLE 10
Values of air-filled porosity (%) and bulk density (g cm^3) which are critical and which limit root growth for various soils (Source: Pierce et al. 1983)
Texture class
Non-limiting
Critical^1
Limiting
Air-filled porosity
Fine loamy
Coarse silty
Fine silty
Clay:
Bulk density
Sandy
Coarse loamy
Fine loamy
Coarse silty
Fine silty
Clayey:
^1 "Critical" is defined as causing <20% reduction in root growth; "limiting" is about the value at which root growth ceases.
Increases in soil density or strength retard root penetration and thus limit the volume of soil exploited by the crop and the water available. It is difficult to quantify the relationships between these soil parameters and plant growth. In the cases of bulk density and strength, particularly, a gross measure of either for an undisturbed mass of soil can give only a remote indication of what a root encounters. A determination of gross bulk density does not assess whether a root is growing within a pore (in which case it may deform surrounding soil before its radial environment reaches the density or strength of the gross soil) or if it is growing within the soil material, in which case it has already exerted a radial force equivalent to that measured for the gross soil.
This problem of scale - what is measured in a gross estimate cannot assess the micro-environment of the root, to which it (and through hormonal signals, the plant top) responds -does not invalidate some general hypotheses about plant behaviour in response to soil compaction and structural arrangement. Roots stop growing when they are unable to deform their micro-environment. This probably occurs at suctions about 60 kPa when they cannot generate adequate internal turgor. It is thought that root elongation declines curvilinearly with increasing either bulk density or shear strength. In the case of bulk density, little effect is noted until a 'critical value' and root elongation ceases within a further 10% increase in bulk density (Table 10). As explained earlier, these values vary with soil type.
Root elongation declines asymptotically with increasing soil strength (Figure 16) though the actual critical values would be expected to vary with soil type, water content and the method of measurement (those in Figure 16 were measured with a penetrometer).
Studies of the effect of bulk density or strength on other plant processes, particularly germination and shoot elongation, also suffer from the same technical problem of scale. Shoots are able to explore macropores without being subject to the gross values of the soil they are in. The actual local values which inhibit shoot elongation appear to be quite small, for example, 0.76 kPa (Addae and Pearson 1992). These values from controlled situations contrast sharply with gross field values and with the large number of inconsistent correlations which arise from attempting to correlate crop performance with grossly-measured soil structure. Perhaps, most encouragingly, studies of genetic variation in the sensitivity of crops to soil strength suggest that there is appreciable range in plant sensitivity. The relative ranking of genotypes is, however, the same when under near-critical stress as when growing with virtually no mechanical stress. Genotypes suited to stressful situations
may be selected, therefore, by screening at a single soil strength (Addae and Pearson 1992).
FIGURE 16 - Relative root length with penetrometer resistance for combined maize, wheat, cotton and groundnut data (Source: Bennie and Krynauw 1985)
TABLE 11
Grain and stover yield (t/ha) of maize and seasonal water runoff and soil loss under maize grown with and without alley cropping, with two tree legumes, and tillage in Nigeria (Source: Kang and Ghuman 1991)
Treatment
Maize
Runoff^1
(mm [% of rainfall])
Soil loss (t/ha)
grain
stover
Without alley cropping
Tilled control
No-tillage
Alley-cropped
2 m Gliricidia
4 m Gliricidia
2 m Leucaena
4 m Leucaena
^1 Seasonal rainfall (March-July 1988) = 704.2 mm.
The above comments relate to the direct effects of soil physical properties on crop growth. Two further points may be made. First, changing soil properties may not cause, or at least not immediately cause, measurable differences in plant performance (Figure 15). This neither invalidates an association between the soil and the plant, nor the need to remain concerned about changes in soil properties. It is common but not often reported, that changes in a cropping system and soil characteristics first affect aspects other than the crop. It is only when a system has become significantly degraded, and there are associated environmental impacts, that reduced plant performance is noticed. This is illustrated (Table 11) in a study at Ibadan, Nigeria, where no-till maize in rotation with cowpea gave similar yields to conventionally cultivated crops. The no-till fields had only one-tenth the runoff and erosion of those conventionally cultivated. Likewise, alley-cropping of the annuals
between six year-old hedgerows of tree legumes (Leucaena leucocephala, Gliricidia sepium) caused increased crop yields, but within the alley-cropping systems the yields of maize were very similar despite substantial variations in runoff and soil loss.
TABLE 12
Desirable crop attributes that sustain soil productivity
Attribute
Contributing characteristic
Rapid establishment
(Relatively) large seed for establishment and seedling vigour; abundant seed for propagation
Groundcover to reduce soil exposure, suppress weeds
Early branching; perhaps rhizomes or stolons; horizontal leaves (high canopy-extraction coefficient)
Low requirements for nutrients
· Colonization by associative bacteria (e.g., Brachyrhizobiun), micorrhizae (e.g., Glomus) and free-living organisms (e.g., Azospirillum)
· Low P, K, etc. requirement per unit dry matter, e.g., high "phosphate efficiency"
Efficient water use
Short growth duration (to utilize residual moisture after crop); high water use efficiency
Deep rooting to reduce water table (salinity) and recover nutrients at depth and increase macropores
Vertical root distribution; roots penetrate high impedence soils
Useful products
High leaf/stem ratio; edible seeds; easily digestible; no nutritional compounds in material for livestock; leaf retention on stems for cut and carrying to livestock
Non-host for diseases and pests of main crop (to break disease cycle) or decoy (to attract diseases from concurrent crops)
Botanically unrelated to main food crop(s)
Suppress other species
Allelopathy (leachates, exudates which suppress or kill other plant species); also physical attributes (as above)
The second point about soil-crop relations is that the crop also affects the soil through ground-cover, depth of rooting and other properties. The crop attributes that most influence soil physical properties are speed of establishment and development of foliage cover. Rapid establishment and growth minimizes topsoil structural decline and soil erosion by wind and water. Thereafter, deep-rooting directly affects soil structure, particularly if deep-rooted crops, such as safflower, are grown in rotation as a 'biological plough' to create macropores and these are minimally disturbed before the next crop is sown. A general list of desirable crop characteristics is given in Table 12. Not all these are universally applicable (nor indeed, accepted by all scientists) because some attributes such as stolons and rhizomes, on the one hand, can provide advantageous ground cover and bind the soil, but they are undesirable if the species presents weeding or other problems. The list
includes both herbaceous and tree species. Ezenwa (1991) considers the attributes important for the choice of trees in Sahelian areas as the ability to: (a) enrich a microsite by depositing litter; (b) fix nitrogen and not be allelopathic; (c) avoid competition; (d) withstand stress, either water or wind; and (e) provide alternative produce such as fodder, fuel or fruit.
FIGURE 17 - Relationship between herbage yield and plant numbers on marginal land near two villages in Syria where rainfall is about 270 mm (Source: Cocks et al. 1988)
How management directly affects soil structure
The three management practices which most affect soil physical properties (and consequent in-situ degradation and erosion) are groundcover, tillage and traffic load. Additionally, water harvesting techniques (FAO 1991) can be used to increase the amount of water stored within the soil and in surface catchments, though this does not necessarily affect soil structure.
Ground cover is crucial for the maintenance of soil structure in wet-and-dry climates. In marginal cropping areas in particular, plant populations (of weeds or pasture in non-crop periods) range widely and affect crop productivity. Their effects in semi-arid Syria are shown in Figure 17.
On resource-poor farms near the dry margins of the wet-and-dry croplands, populations of crop and weedy species tend to be small and variable during the cropping period. The effects of such sparse cover are clear, erosivity is directly related to the area exposed. In practice, during the crop phase there is a five-fold range in erosive risk associated with the area covered by living plants, consistent with the crop factor (C) values which are used in the Universal Soil Loss Equation (Table 13).
TABLE 13
Effect of crop cover on crop management factor C in the Universal Soil Loss Equation
Crop cover
C^1
No cover
Maize, sorghum
Groundnut
Cassava
Cotton, tobacco
Oil palm, coffee, cacao with cover crops
Rice
Rapidly growing cover crop
Savannah or pasture (without grazing)
Forest or crop with thick layer of mulch
^1 C values range from almost zero, when the vegetation stops loss of soil directly related to rain, to 1 when the soil is fully exposed to rain.
The very low value for forests in Table 13 has encouraged advisers to advocate planting of trees as part of mixed crop systems (Table 11). Young (1989) points out, however, that trees are usually part of spatially-heterogeneous systems, such as hedgerows. Thus the tree canopy is usually not extensive and does not cover and protect the cropped land. He believes that such tree canopies are not likely to reduce erosion and may indeed increase it. Under agroforestry systems, however, the use of cut leaves and litter as groundcover may directly or indirectly improve protection by providing barriers to lateral water flow and wind.
Mineral ions are lost during lateral surface erosion. Eroded sediment commonly contains a higher proportion of organic matter and nutrients than the topsoil from which it is derived. This enrichment, frequently 1.5-4-fold, but sometimes as high as 10-fold, is because the eroded soil comes from the uppermost layer with the more organic matter than the soil below and because water differentially removes light particles and soluble nutrients.
Loss of plant cover also increases downward movement of ions and fine soil particles. The loss of mineral ions to groundwater is illustrated in Table 14. Such losses contribute to the negative nutrient balance of cropping systems (Chapter 3) and may also pollute groundwater. Under bare soil, downward translocation of silt and clay particles may fill subsoil pores and thus reduce infiltration. Vertical loss of organic material and fine particles may create a less-well-structured surface layer with less water-holding capacity, poorer infiltration and a tendency to crust (Figure 14).
The best ground covers are living crops and pastures. Soil stability declines in the order: living mulch; dead mulch on surface and incorporated dead mulch; and lastly, no mulch. The benefits of mulch incorporation depend on slope, soil erodibility, and on the type of organic matter. These and the type of tillage used determine whether the dead mulch will remain on the surface. Costs and availability of both mulch and labour (human, animal or tractor) are also important. Though farmers may appreciate the benefits of surface mulching, it is unlikely that it will become practice in those tropical and temperate wet-and-dry climates where there is a shortage of feed for livestock in the dry period(s).
TABLE 14
Influence of plant cover of catchments on ion leaching (Source: Ryszkowski 1989)
Type of catchment
Catchment
Percent of area
Outflow of elements during 2 years (g m^2)
Arable
Forests
Grass-lands
N-N0[3]
P-PO[4]^3
K^+
Ca^2+
Mg^2+
Larger contribution of cultivated fields
Mean
Smaller contribution of cultivated fields
Mean
TABLE 15
Objectives, advantages and disadvantages of soil tillage in crop production
Objective
Type of tillage
Advantage
Disadvantage
Soil conditioning
Cutting, loosening, granulating
Weed control, water conservation, structure improvement, seedbed preparation, better drying of wet soils
Greater erosion potential, high energy input^1, increased evaporation
Eradication or control of plants or plant materials
Cutting, inverting, mixing
Weed control, volunteer plant control, water conservation, establish desirable plant populations, pest control^2, better drying of wet soils, mineralization of soil nutrients
Greater erosion potential, may cause compaction, high energy input, decreased soil organic matter, increased evaporation
Establishing soil boundaries and surface configurations
Cutting as with coulters to improve ploughing, operation, land forming
Weed control, soil conservation, water conservation, residue incorporation, seedbed preparation, better drying of wet soils, warmer soil temperatures
Greater erosion potential, may cause compaction, high energy input, increased evaporation
Incorporating, covering, or handling foreign materials
Cutting, inverting, mixing
Weed control, residue incorporation, mineralization of soil nutrients, fertilizer and pesticide incorporation, pest control, better drying of wet soils, warmer soil temperatures
Greater erosion potential, may cause compaction, high energy input, decreased soil organic matter, increased evaporation
Segregation
Move soil materials from one layer to another
Wind erosion control, better drying of wet soils
High energy input, increased evaporation
Mixing
Mixing
Better drying of wet soils, improved soil amendment distribution, fertilizer and pesticide incorporation, soil texture improvement (mixing of two or more layers), soil structure improvement, mineralization of soil nutrients
Great erosion potential, high energy input, decreased soil organic matter, increased evaporation
Compaction or firming
Rolling or pressing
Improved seed-soil contact
May cause compaction
^1 High energy input: may include fuel for tractors, feed for animals, labour and equipment inventories or usage.
^2 Pests controlled may be insects, diseases, rodents, etc.
The objectives, advantages and disadvantages of tillage are summarized in Table 15. Had this been written 8-10 years ago, tillage would have been emphasized (for example, Unger 1984). Currently, tillage is seen as appropriate for some objectives, for example to break impervious layers of subsoil and to incorporate organic matter topsoil, but generalizations about the value of tillage or the 'best' type of tillage are not regarded as transportable from one system to another. Tillage may be defined as the mechanical manipulation of soil to enhance the outcomes from a cropping system. So, given the broad range of system outcomes (Chapter 1), it is likely that tillage will continue for reasons such as tradition and satisfaction long after its beneficial benefits on soil structure and weed control have been discounted.
FIGURE 18 Variation in crop yield for different soil depths of a Vertisol in the Central Highlands of Queensland, Australia (Source: Littleboy et al. 1989)
When advocating particular tillage methods, or interpreting experimental results and their transferability to other environments, it should be noted that tillage is usually affected by the type of ground cover. The variables of tillage are the degree of contact with the soil, the type of manipulation, and the number of implement passes through the soil. Thus, minimum tillage (one-pass) and conventional tillage (perhaps 3-5 passes, in the Australian farming system), might have the same effects on the soil, differing only in degree. Conservation tillage, which uses different implements and ground covers, is defined as 'any tillage or cultivation system that maintains at least 30% of the soil surface covered by residue after planting to reduce soil erosion by water; or where soil erosion by wind is the primary concern, maintains at least 450 kg/ha of flattened small grain residue equivalent on the surface during critical erosion periods' (Mannering et al. 1987).
In seasonally wet-and-dry climates, the most apparent benefits from tillage are weed control and reduced evapotranspiration from weeds preceding the crop. This increases the water available at the beginning of the crop period and the volume of soil into which roots may penetrate (and thus, the available soil water). The impact of tillage on soil volume is modelled in Figure 18. This shows that rooting depth (or soil depth in this example) has a marked effect on the probability of achieving certain crop yields. Thus, exploitation of larger soil volumes may both increase yield and increase the likelihood of attaining a particular yield, that is, reduce the year-to-year risk.
The variable effects of type of tillage on crop growth (Figure 15) are interpreted by recognizing that some effects of tillage, such as increasing the potential root volume, occur within the season of tillage, while other effects are longer term. Tillage will, over several years, reduce the outer permeability of clods, restricting water-holding capacity and increasing the power required for further effective tillage. In some soils it dis-aggregates clods, causes downward movement of silt and clay which fills soil pores and reduces infiltration. It can also accelerate the breakdown of organic matter. Some of these effects on plant growth are discussed in the previous section and Unger (1984) presents further data on the impact of different types of tillage implement on soil and erosion.
FIGURE 19 - Bulk density profiles for each treatment for 1987 and 1990 (Source: Douglass et al. 1992) - Curves from left to right at the top: 0, 40, 100 kPa for 1990; 0, 40, 100 kPa for 1987; s.e.d. is the standard error of difference between the means.
Compaction by machinery or by treading by livestock is common and is reviewed elsewhere. The ultimate example of soil degradation through tillage and compaction is the formation of impermeable beds for rice production. Figure 19 illustrates the effects of compaction and plant activity on bulk density. Three levels of compaction were created (0, 40 and 100 kPa) under grassland. At depths below 15 cm the porosity and pore length reflected these pressures. In some places the volume of pores was halved by the heaviest compaction treatment. The subsoil bulk densities also reflect the deleterious effect of pressure. From 1987 to 1990, however, all bulk densities near the surface decreased. Grass roots were apparently able to offset the effects of machinery pressure.
Field indicators of physical problems
General field indicators of poor soil physical conditions include:
1. Patchiness or absence of vegetation. This can be an obvious sign of degraded structure or other factors. When structural, it may reflect surface structure degradation (see previous sections) or non-wetting characteristics which give rise to poor infiltration, or subsoil impermeability.
2. Weedy vegetation. Cyperaceae or Juncaceae may indicate soil structural decline because they flourish where water has been ponded on the surface, suggesting poor infiltration or an impermeable subsurface horizon.
3. Rill and sheet erosion. Erosive runoff may be symptomatic of poor surface structure. The turbidity of water in ponds and lakes after rain may be a good indicator of erosion.
4. Surface crusts.
5. Hard-setting surfaces.
6. Poor infiltration and ponding. This may be indicated by puddles following rain in an area where one would expect rapid infiltration, or by wetting to only a shallow depth (as seen when dug with a spade).
7. Pale surface soil colour and absence of organic matter. The surface of degraded soils may be brittle and pale, lacking organic matter and having lost clay either through eluviation (differential movement downwards) or by water or wind erosion.
8. Cloddiness. This may be apparent if after a single cultivation, large, tough clods are formed requiring further cultivation to form a reasonable seedbed.
9. Restricted root growth. This can be seen by digging with a narrow-faced spade and washing the roots free of soil. The root mass can be restricted to the upper soil or be constricted in particular places such as a less pervious layer, above and below which the roots may proliferate.
When assessing soil degradation on a large scale as for a catchment, Hamblin (1991a) argues that most precise (scientific) measurements are time-consuming and complex, and that robust surrogate assessments amenable to remote sensing are appropriate. Vegetation cover is one useful surrogate. Ranges in groundcover (often easier to estimate than plant densities) provide a direct index of soil productivity and they usually, although not necessarily, correlate closely with underlying problems of soil structure or fertility. Sparse groundcover might also, of course, reflect inappropriate management of non-degraded soil. This could suggest inefficient management which will lead to loss of sustainability though there are no current problems with soil structure. The surrogate features Hamblin appears to favour are turbidity of water, transient ponding and waterlogging. Transient ponding is particularly attractive as it can be sensed remotely, relates directly to the field being
measured, and reflects several important physical aspects. These latter include surface degradation, continuity of vertical macropores, and subsurface compaction, none of which can currently be satisfactorily measured directly to give cheap meaningful data.
At farm level, attuned observers and local farmers will probably identify, often subconsciously, more indicators than those in the above list. Farmers are often good observers of their fields and can recognize soil degradation. For example, interviews with 55 farmers in Mindanao, Philippines, found that 90% reported yield declines associated with soil erosion: 'Many farmers said their soils initially had been dark on top and reddish underneath but over time the top layer had eroded away. The infertile, red subsoils were exposed. Farmers estimated that erosion reduced the depth of the darker soil from 50 cm in 1976 to 10 cm in 1986' (Fujisaka and Garrity 1991). Table 16 illustrates their insights to declining soil productivity. Many farmers recognize changes in soil structure (e.g., compaction) through the increased power needed during tillage, or by the formation of brick-like clods rather than a fine crumby tilth. These observations, however, are made at the beginning of
the growing season, when there is little opportunity for soil amelioration. Farmers should be encouraged to dig small inspection holes to examine roots during the life of the crop. This supplements observations described above. Live roots are easily exposed and reflect many soil structural factors. Such examinations allow the farmer to consider soil amelioration, using stubble and crop residues, prior to the next crop. Figure 20 illustrates clear differences in root patterns revealed by digging in three tillage systems in India.
TABLE 16
Examples of farmer concepts/statements concerning aspects of sustainable crop production (Source: Fujisaka and Garrity 1991)
Crops and soil nutrients
"Cassava adds soil acidity."
"Cassava gobbles up soil nutrients."
"Rice is more tolerant of acidic soils than is maize."
"Rice is more vigourous on an area previously planted in tomato."
"Intercropping is good only if there are complete chemicals."
Nutrient depletion
"Soil fertility has been used up."
"The soil is weak."
"Fertility is spotty."
"Soils are overtrained."
"The soils are getting older."
"Poor, but not used up, in the sense of the hardest part within a log."
Fallows
"The decomposing leaves of the weeds help to enrich the soil."
"The land is resting so the soil can store some nutrients."
"Rich because it is rested."
"Fertility is added and the soil is made cool."
"The soil is slightly enriched if left a short time."
Weeds
"Rice was harmed by cogon (I. cylindrical) roots."
"Poor soil if cogon dominates."
"D. longiflora and cogon consume soil nutrients and destroy soil quality."
"Acidity increases where cogon dominates."
"Weeds are thin on infertile soils."
"R. cochinchinensis rapidly produces seed; thus, easily soars in population; if not weeded, it exceeds the height of rice or corn."
"Fertility is added and the soil is made cool" (re. Calapogonium spp.).
"Soil is good where there are weeds/grasses with nodules."
Soil erosion
"Soil slides down and floats away."
"Nutrients are drawn down."
"Plants are eroded along with soil."
"Soil was drawn down and fertility was washed out."
"The land was shaven and eroded after trees were removed."
"Fertilizer is collected (on lower plots) due to rain."
Erosion control
"Banana and coconut are better because they hold the soil."
"Contour plowing reduces downslope erosion losses."
"Weedy strips can decrease erosion effects."
"Trees planted above and below fields can decrease erosion effects."
"Banana planted above and below fields can decrease erosion effects."
FIGURE 20 - Roots of sorghum plants grown on a Luvisol under three tillage systems (Source: Laryea et al. 1991) - Left to right: deep tillage, mouldboard ploughing and traditional ploughing sampled 75 days after emergence.
It is important too that farmers, whether resource-poor or advanced, understand the conditions under which soil degradation is most likely to be severe. Broadly, human-induced structural damage occurs during tilling, when heavily trampled by livestock, and by poor management of soil cover.
Weather-induced damage is episodic rather than continuous. Virmani (1990) explains wind and water erosion as follows:
Wind erosion is a serious problem in the arid and semi-arid tropics on sandy, loamy sand or sandy loam surface soils low in organic matter with weak topsoil structure in areas with high winds (>20 km/h). In tropical areas where wind erosion occurs the annual rainfall is generally less than 600 mm and is seasonal. The rest of the year is dry. In the tropics, 80-90% of the annual wind erosion losses occurs in the hot and dry period preceding the short rainy season. During this period the daily maximum temperature usually exceeds 35-40°C, the wind speeds exceed 20 km/h, and open pan evaporation exceeds 8 mm/d. As a rule of thumb, on uncultivated bare sandy soils, the soil displaced by wind erosion is around 1 t/ha/WED, where WED is the sum of the number of days during which the wind speed exceeds 20 km/h, the day temperature exceeds 35 °C and the wind fetch is more than 60 km. For freshly cultivated soils the amount of soil eroded may be as large as 50 t/ha/WED.
Water erosion is serious in areas with an average annual rainfall of 600-1100 mm. Using the concept of a rain erosion month (REM), that is a month in which rainfall exceeds pan evaporation, Virmani (1990) states that water-induced erosion at rates of approximately 1 t/ha/REM occurs on cropped Vertisols in areas where the rain/pan evaporation ratio ranges between 1 and 2 and where improved soil and water conservation practices have been applied. He records rates of 4 to 8 t/ha/REM where practices are not improved.
Management for maintenance of soil physical properties
'In the struggle against aridization and desertification, dry-farming is no less important or urgent than revegetation and irrigation' (Kovda, 1982). Maintenance or improvement of soil structure requires: (a) recognition of the interrelated nature of soil attributes and their interaction with cropping; (b) the ability to recognize the symptoms indicating physical problems or their likely existence; and (c) action.
The interrelated nature of soil and plant attributes, and measures of degradation, are discussed above. The size of the problem, regionally and internationally, is also well recognized. Likewise, the magnitude of local soil losses is established: for example, values as high as 200 t/ha/y in Niamey (Virmani 1990) and measured losses of 282 t/ha/y in the highlands of Ethiopia (Gander 1990). Lastly, and significantly, it is becoming recognized that soil physical characteristics may be less robust than chemical attributes. In Australia, the rates of degradation of structure and compaction are faster, on the same soil types, than the degradation of chemical attributes (Table 17).
TABLE 17
Rate of change in soil physical and chemical characteristics from various locations in Australia (Source: Hamblin 1991b)
Characteristic
Measure of change
Time for change to occur (years)
Surface structure
loss
Subsoil compaction:
traffic pan
Organic matter
formation
one-third loss
5-8 sand
15-20 loam
pH
decrease by
one unit
7-12 sand
20-30 various
Salinity
not quantified
The issue now is to reflect in a general way, as is possible only in a bulletin like this, on appropriate action.
There are many regionally-based assessments of land degradation and various studies on how management may improve, or reduce the rate of deterioration in, soil physical structure (e.g. Thomas et al. 1989). Regional identification of the size of the problems, and general prescriptive strategies to ameliorate them, are appropriate for planning and allocation of resources. An example from Africa (FAO 1986) is outlined in the extensive quotation that follows:
TABLE 18
Changes in cropping patterns and calculated erosion hazard in three regions in Italy between 1954 and 1976 (Source: Chisci 1986)
Location
Catchment and area (ha)
Change in cropping systems
Change in calculated erosion hazard (t/ha/year)
Tuscany
Mixed crops replaced with monoculture, particularly vines, using mechanical, non-contour tillage; minimal pastures in new catchments
6.4 to 7.7
7.8 to 8.1
1.7 to 16.2
Emilia
Traditionally forested; catchment logged and abandoned for regrowth and not cultivated
4.2 to 16.2
Piedmont
Mixed cropping; some reduction in cropping while retaining contour tillage
40.0 to 33.5
22.5 to 21.8
The African environment is being seriously degraded as a result of the over-exploitation of cropland. The degradation of cropland can best be halted by improving soil fertility, limiting soil erosion, and introducing water harvesting and dryland farming techniques. Options for the first two include:
· replacing shifting cultivation with perennial tree crops such as oil palm, coconut, coffee and cacao;
· growing crops between alleys of leguminous trees and shrubs, and supplementing the nitrogen and organic matter they supply with farmyard manure;
· using zero or minimum tillage systems to minimize soil erosion;
· adopting integrated plant nutrition to supply nitrogen by using animal manure alone or mixed with mineral fertilizers, or by growing leguminous crops; and
· constructing physical barriers to soil erosion, such as earth bunds, bench terraces and tied ridges.
Where population pressure has led people to cultivate hillsides with marginal soils, or to settle in semi-arid areas better suited to pastoralism, three simple measures can reduce degradation: the construction of small dams to conserve water, and tree planting on upper slopes; the use of dryland farming techniques; and, finally, the use of short-season, drought-resistant cultivars.
To tackle the problem at a local level work needs to be done in cooperation with the farmers themselves: 'start with what they know, build on what they have' (Altieri 1988). Table 18 illustrates a locally-targeted analysis of erosion risk in the hills of Italy. It combines calculations of erosion risk with on-farm assessment of changes in land use. There is a predictable increase in erosion hazard associated with deforestation and increased cropping of monocultures, especially under vines, where there is no additional ground cover and where the land is not ploughed around the contours. Erosion risk fell where cropping declined over the 20-year study period.
It seems most likely that lasting changes to cropping practice and control of erosion will be based on farmers' recognition of trends such as those in Tables 16 and 19, coupled with strategies which farmers find appropriate for their goals. These strategies are listed in Table 19, which broadly sets out the options. Soil physical sustainability depends on activities which are explicitly aimed at its maintenance, and if necessary, any activities needed to ameliorate or control damage already done. Water harvesting can be used as a complementary strategy, the options for which are summarized by Critchley and Siegert (FAO 1991). All the strategies in Table 19 are described above and some have been illustrated. It is appropriate to repeat, however, that few such strategies are universally applicable in detail. For example, minimum soil disturbance may, after several years, enhance sustainability in temperate semi-arid Australia and USA (e.g. Figure 15) whereas tillage
experiments in Africa and Asia support conventional, even deep, ploughing (e.g. Figure 20). While the philosophy of minimal disturbance may be biologically 'right', differences in soil texture may require different approaches to sustainability. For example, Sahelian soils are commonly coarse-textured with high bulk densities and form crusts. They do not readily develop macropores. Though it is desirable to mulch such soils with straw, there is none available as it is used to feed livestock.
TABLE 19
Aspects to consider for maintenance or amelioration of soil physical properties
Maintenance: prevention of physical degradation
- Crop choice.
· Rotations + sequential cropping
· Mixed cropping
· Relay cropping
· Alley cropping, parkland + agroforestry
- Crop cultural practices
· Tillage + residue management
· Time of planting
· Seed quality and soil organism symbioses
· Inorganic fertilizers
· Organic matter management
· Cultivar: ground cover, complementarity with other crops
· Biological pest + weed management
- Inter-crop ley and fallow
· Cover crop
· Pasture ley
· Maintenance of surface litter in absence of living vegetation
- Mulches
· In situ live mulch
· Green manure crops
· In situ dead residues
· Transported residues
· Animal wastes, composts
· Industrial wastes
· Inorganic covers e.g. gravel
Amelioration to control damage
- Management of water erosion
· Contour ploughing
· Graded channels
· Bunds
· Grassed waterways
· Ponds
- Management of wind erosion
· Wind-breaks + interplanting with trees
· Shrub + tree revegetation
· Soil coverage
· Ridges
- Soil surface management
· Coverage with residues, transported waste, etc.
· Also Inter-crop ley and fallow and Mulches
- Compaction
· Deep tillage, subsoiling
· Deep-rooted "natural plough" plants
<section>5</section>
Chapter 3 - Biological and chemical aspects of soil productivity
Soil biology and the biological micro-environment
Organic matter
Soil organisms associated with the crop
Weeds, crop pests and diseases
Inorganic nutrition
Field indicators of biological and nutritional problems
Management for maintenance of soil biology and nutrition
Observations such as the accumulative beneficial effects of pasture, and the degradative impacts of successive cereal crops on a coarse-textured sandy loam soil in Australia shown in Figure 21, provide a basis for recommending rotations to maintain sustainability. There are many beneficial effects from growing legume crops and pastures in rotation. They improve soil structure, biological activity and crop yields, as well as increasing soil organic matter and nitrogen (Figure 21). This Chapter describes those aspects of soil biology, organic matter and soil nutrition central to the observed benefits of crop rotations.
Soil biology and the biological micro-environment
Organic matter, microscopic and macroscopic organisms (e.g., fungal hyphae and invertebrates), detritus from fungi and animals, and bacteria, and biological exudates, all assist in stabilizing soil structure. The role of each part of the biomass differs according to its size (Figure 22). Broadly, large aggregates greater than 250 m m diameter (macro-aggregates), are stabilized by their inherent physical structure (Chapter 2), wetting and drying cycles, and organic matter. Micro-aggregates (< 250 m m) are stabilized by live or dead roots, fungi, invertebrates and micro-organisms (Figure 22).
The populations of soil organisms of all sizes are linked functionally through their roles in the degradation of various forms of organic material. The latter includes live and dead plant material and other live or dead organisms. A schematic food web is shown in Figure 23. This shows that animals such as nematodes and some fungi feed directly on live plants while other fungi and bacteria feed predominantly on litter.
Earthworms and other large invertebrates create, and inhabit, burrows and pores, and are very mobile. The most notable of these are termites, which are divided into three groups according to the structure of their nests: those that build mounds (a) above ground, (b) on the soil surface, and (c) below ground. Small arthropods, microfauna and fungi live mostly in larger voids and in association with roots. Foster (1988) reviewed the location of the various types of soil-dwelling organisms and found that fungi, which constitute about 80% of the biomass in many soils, tend to be restricted to the rhizosphere of roots, to larger pores between aggregates and to the surface of aggregates. Bacteria, by contrast, are found on roots in the rhizosphere, in small colonies in the larger micropores, within aggregates and on and within cell debris. For more information on location refer to Foster (1988). Smiles (1988) describes the physics of the micro-environment of small soil organisms.
FIGURE 21 - Trends in total soil nitrogen and wheat grain in a long-term rotation experiment at Wongan Hills, Western Australia (adapted from Rowland 1980) - U is uncleared land, F is fallow (cultivated intermittently for one year, before planting pasture) 1 to 7 are successive years of legume-based pasture while 1 to 4 are successive years of wheat cropping which was begun after year 2 or 2 or 5 or 7 of the pasture phase
Organic matter
Both plants and animals provide inputs of organic matter to soils. Once within the soil organic residues can be distinguished on the basis of their chemical structure (e.g., old lignified humic substances that degrade slowly), by their source (plant or animal) or by location.
The standing crop of litter in semi-arid grasslands is usually more than 3 t/ha and in temperate dry steppe may exceed 11 t/ha (e.g., Klemmedson 1989). There has been much debate about the relative contents of organic matter in tropical and temperate soils. Within those wet-and-dry climates that have hot summers assisting rapid decomposition, there is no evidence of inherently lower levels of organic matter in the tropics than in comparable temperate regions (Juo and Payne 1993).
Kowal and Kassam (1978) and Juo and Payne (1993) review the role of organic matter in tropical soils. Here, it is sufficient simply to state that organic matter has various interrelated effects on soil fertility. These are summarized in Table 20. In particular it should be noted that both chemical and physical effects are of relatively great importance in the soils of the semi-arid tropics because these generally have low cation exchange capacity (effective CEC values less than 14 meq/100 g clay, see Chapter 1, section Soils, and this chapter, section Inorganic nutrition).
FIGURE 22 - Model of aggregate organization with major binding agents indicated (Source: Tisdall and Oades 1982) - Major binding agent
FIGURE 22 - Model of aggregate organization with major binding agents indicated (Source: Tisdall and Oades 1982) - Roots and hyphae (medium-term organic)
FIGURE 22 - Model of aggregate organization with major binding agents indicated (Source: Tisdall and Oades 1982) - Plant and fungal debris encrusted with inorganics (persistent organic)
FIGURE 22 - Model of aggregate organization with major binding agents indicated (Source: Tisdall and Oades 1982) - Microbial and fungal debris encrusted with inorganics (persistent organic)
FIGURE 22 - Model of aggregate organization with major binding agents indicated (Source: Tisdall and Oades 1982) - Amorphous aluminopsilicates, oxides and organic polymers sorbed on clay surfaces and electrostatic bonding, flocculation (permanent inorganic)
FIGURE 23 - Representation of detrital food web in shortgrass prairie. Fungal-feeding mites are separated into two groups (I and II) to distinguish the slow-growing cryptostigmatids from faster-growing taxa. Flows omitted from the figure for the sake of clarity include transfers from every organism to the substrate pools (death) and transfers from every animal to the substrate pools (defaecation) and to inorganic N (ammonification). Source: Doran (1987)
The relative importance of litter (crop residue) and manure as inputs of organic matter, varies between cropping systems and spatially within a system. Figure 24 illustrates the flow of litter, manure and by-products (such as dung cake for fuel) in Indian villages practising approximately one-third single cropping and two-thirds double cropping. Here, most of the above-ground crop residue is fed to animals, but an equal amount of below-ground crop material enters the soil organic matter pool. It is noteworthy that in Figure 24 five times as much dung is distributed naturally to grassland and forest than is recycled to the crop.
The pattern of flow of manure and litter to the cropping soil in Figure 24 falls within the wide range of practice common in wet-and-dry climates. Generally, all the root material (say, 40% of total crop growth) and 10-30% of top material may be recycled in an annual cropping system. Where alley cropping and agroforestry are practised, values are more variable, but possible inputs could be very significant where the trees, from which the litter is taken, are grown away from the annual crops. Table 21 gives values for leaf production from trees. If, say, two-thirds of the leaves from leguminous trees are harvested annually, litter values will be substantially higher and the material of better quality than the leaf and stem residue from an annual crop likely to be recycled in the field. Some qualifications, however, should be made. Tree root material is not available for decomposition in the crop field unless it is spatially overlapping (e.g. as an intercrop), in which case
the trees will compete with the crop for soil nutrients, water, light and space.
TABLE 20
Effects of organic matter on soil fertility (Source: Young 1989)
Primary effects
Consequences
Physical effects
Binding of particles, root action leading to improved structural stability, balance between fine, medium and large pores
Improved root penetration, erosion resistance and moisture properties; water-holding capacity, permeability, aeration
Chemical effects
Nutrient source, balanced supply, not subject to leaching, with slow, partly controllable, release
Including better response to fertilizers, non-acidifying source of N, mineralization of P in available forms
Complexing and enhanced availability of micronutrients
Increased cation exchange
Better retention of fertilizer nutrients
Improved availability of P through blocking of fixation sites
Biological effects
Provision of a favourable environment for N fixation
Enhanced faunal activity
The proportion of animal and human manure used on cropland is more variable. Some farmers have developed stable systems which strongly emphasize the use of animal manure on crops. For example, Norman et al. (1982) describe how farmers in northern Nigeria managed to apply 4 t/ha of manure to their heavily-cropped crop land though they had only 3 cows each. Many other farmers do not ensure adequate recycling, either because they are more concerned with livestock management or they do not know the importance of maintaining a 'zero nutrient budget' to replace nutrients removed by the crop. For example, Norman et al. (1982) also describe farmers with 10 cows each, who applied only 1.9 t manure/ha to their crops.
Within a cropping system, manuring practice varies with location. There is transference towards the centre of the system. On traditional farms, the area near the household or village is highly fertilized with human and animal manure while more distant fields receive little or no organic matter. Fussell (1992) describes such a traditional 'ring' farming system in semi-arid west Africa. Here, if houses are thatched, the village needs rebuilding or moving every 2 to 4 years. Moving takes advantage of the fertility gradient. Where the huts are not moved, the fertility gradient becomes steeper with time. Rather than trying to even out fertility by labour-intensive transport of manure, farmers vary the cropping of the fields (Figure 25). Continuous cropping of millet is sustainable close to the hut or village where there is plenty of human and animal manure but crop rotations are essential at the periphery.
FIGURE 24 - Energy flow through the agro-ecosystems. Values are means from five villages = 1 SE (× 10^6 KJ/yr/ha cultivated land solar radiation = 6.5 x 10^10 kJ/yr/ha (Source: Singh and Singh 1992)
TABLE 21
Biomass production of leaves from multipurpose trees (Source: collated in Young 1989)
Country
Land use
Tree
t/ha/year
Malaysia
Plantation
Acacia mangium
Philippines
Plantation
Albizia falcataria
Costa Rica
Hedgerow intercropping
Calliandra calothyrsus
Philippines
Plantation
Gmelina arborea
Indonesia (Java)
Plantation
L. leucocephala, A. falcataria, Dalbergia latifolia, Acacia auriculiformis
Cordia alliodora
Plantation crop
C. alliodora + cacao,
Costa Rica
combination
Erythrina poeppigiana,
E. poeppigiana + cacao
Nigeria
Hedgerow intercropping
Cajanus cajan
Nigeria
Hedgerow intercropping
Gliricidia sepium
Nigeria
Hedgerow intercropping
L. leucocephala
Nigeria
Hedgerow intercropping
Tephrosia Candida
India
Plantation
L. leucocephala
FIGURE 25 - Fields around the residence, Senegal (Source: Fussell 1992)
Closed systems, which rely on maintenance of fertility by recycling organic matter, are not sustainable. Nitrogen levels may be maintained or even enhanced (Figure 21) by using legume crops or pastures in rotation but even then further inputs of nutrients are required to replace those removed by the crop. Fussell (1992) describes the inevitable need to use inorganic nutrients or organic nutrients from off-farm sources such as wastes from cities to complement farm organic matter in the African Sahel:
"Although the importance of organic manure in increasing cereal yields is well recognized, it is unlikely that there is sufficient available, on a regional basis, to sustain yields without the use of additional chemical fertilizers. For example in the Western African savannah 10 t/ha/year of manure are required for sustainable cropping of millet or sorghum.....while in northern Nigeria 2.5 t/ha/year are sufficient to maintain yields in most areas." This four-fold difference largely reflects the integration of livestock with cropping in Nigeria which results in relatively high levels of soil organic matter. Farmers elsewhere, for example in Ghana, give lower priority to crop fertility, which lowers soil organic matter levels and leads to greater nitrogen loss through water erosion when there is little litter cover on the ground. Irrespective of these differences, however "It is doubtful if either of these levels of application can be achieved, as... estimates cattle and sheep
manure outputs in the northern savannah zone of Nigeria are estimated to be only 1.4 and 0.25 t dry matter per head per annum respectively."
Off-farm sources of manure, organic matter generally (e.g., industrial by-products) and soil ameliorants will become increasingly important. Some, such as sewage from cities, are being researched. Their use in developing countries seems likely to increase, particularly as labour for transporting these materials is cheap relative to the cost of other nutrients such as manufactured inorganic fertilizers. The treatment and efficacy of various off-farm sources of organic matter are outside the scope of this Bulletin. It suffices to point out that substantial amounts of material are available (Table 22).
TABLE 22
Annual production of organic wastes in the USA and their current use on land
Organic wastes
Total production
Current use on land^1 (%)
Million metric tons
Percentage of total
Anumal manures
Crop residues
Sewage sludge and septage
Food processing
Industrial organic
Logging and wood manufacturing
Municipal refuse
Total
^1 Values in parentheses are rough estimates because of insufficient data.
TABLE 23
Decomposition constants, k, for tropical legumes. Values were calculated with exponential equation for decomposition using data reported in the literature (Source: Juo and Payne 1993)
Species
Location
Mean annual rainfall
Mean annual temperature °C
k/year
Gliricidia sepium
Ibadan, Nigeria
Flemingia congesta
Ibadan, Nigeria
Cassia siamea
Ibadan, Nigeria
Lonchocarpus cyanescems
Ibadan, Nigeria
Inga vera
El Verde, Puerto Rico
Inga sp. And Erythrina (mixed)
Caracas, Venezuela
Erythrina sp. (mixed with non-legumes)
Caracas, Venezuela
Inga edulis
Yurimaguas, Peru
Cajanus cajan
Yurimaguas, Peru
Erythrina sp.
Yurimaguas, Peru
The rate of breakdown of litter and other organic materials both determines and depends on the populations and activities of organisms in the soil. It also determines the extent to which minerals taken up by a crop are released from its organic residues and made available as inorganic ions to the subsequent crop. There are numerous mathematical models of organic matter degradation. Almost all assume that the rate of degradation decreases with time, as the more soluble, digestible and accessible material is selectively and progressively degraded by soil organisms. This selectivity is often arbitrarily described by recognizing several 'pools' of organic matter (Figure 23) and, with time, 'passing' material from labile to less-labile compartments. In practice its physical and chemical composition changes gradually with time, as does its physical binding with soil particles and its relation to the predators that feed on it.
The rate of decomposition of leaf litter depends on its environment, particularly on soil temperature and soil water. Both these affect the physical breakdown of the litter and determine the population and activity of soil animals and fungi that feed on it. Decomposition also varies with plant type and age of litter, being slower for heavily lignified material. The specific properties of litter from different species, and the generally exponential form of litter decay (the rate of decomposition slowing with time) lead to values (Table 23) that suggest half-lives of litter ranging from 1 to about 10 years. Because of the importance of temperature in determining decomposition, rates decline from tropical to temperate locations within wet-and-dry climates.
Plant species, water and temperature are not the only factors affecting the speed of litter decomposition and mineral cycling. Management plays a role. There are four ways for managing crop residues: (a) stubble mulch in which residues are left standing; (b) surface mulch, where above-ground residues are cut and left on the top of the soil after harvest; (c) incorporation by ploughing; and (d) cut-and-carry, in which surface residue is removed and (if not used for livestock or thatching, etc.) returned as a surface mulch about planting time for the subsequent crop; this is usually combined with ploughing of below-ground residues.
Two of the above treatments involve the fragmenting of root residues. All of them affect a range of soil properties (Chapter 2). The degree of contact between the residue and the soil (and its organisms) and other unexplained factors affect the rate of decomposition.
Table 23 suggests that the rates of release of minerals from organic matter, particularly litter, are a significant element in nutrient cycling and crop productivity in semi-arid environments. Such climates have a rainy season in which rainfall exceeds evaporation, so there is a risk of mineral loss through runoff and mineral loss and acidification by leaching. During the dry season there is potential loss of nitrogen as ammonia. This suggests the need to manage litter so most decomposition takes place when the subsequent crop is growing rapidly and is able to take up the nutrients released. It is wise at the same time to maintain ground cover if possible (Chapter 2). Manipulation of litter requires labour, which may already be in maximum demand prior to sowing.
Soil organisms associated with the crop
Bacteria and nitrogen
Fungi, algae and nutrients
Bacteria and nitrogen
Cropping in dryland regions needs nitrogen to be economically successful (e.g., Keating et al. 1991). Two sources of nitrogen are from organic matter (Chapter 2, section Soil pores and water characteristics) and from nitrogen-fixing bacteria associated with plant roots. Bradyrhizobium and Rhizobium species infect plant roots forming galls or nodules, and fix nitrogen from the soil atmosphere directly to the plants. Locally-adapted, heat-tolerant strains survive from crop to crop in wet-and-dry climates and, whether established by natural colonization or by inoculation of the crop seed at sowing, they subsequently fix variable quantities of nitrogen.
Where bacterial infection is effective, the bacteria commonly fix between 70-100% of the nitrogen used by the crop, though the proportion is lower when the crop is given inorganic fertilizers.
TABLE 24
Effect of soil mineral N and N fertilizers on crop N productivity and the proportion (P) and amount of crop N derived from N[2] fixation (Source: Peoples and Craswell 1992)
Species
Location
Level
Total crop
N[2] fixed
Soil mineral N (kg N/ha)
Fertilizer N (kg N/ha)
N (kg N/ha/crop)
Proportion
Amount (kg N/ha/crop)
Groundnut
India
Chickpea
Australia
10 (to 120 cm)
Soybean
Australia
70 (to 120 cm)
India
Common bean
Kenya
Cowpea
Kenya
India
* Uninoculated.
** Inoculated.
The extent of the effectiveness of infection of legume crops in the wet-and-dry tropics needs to be surveyed. Temperate research indicates that nitrogen fixed by bacteria ranges from 20 to 120 kg N/ha in a growing season for annual crops (Table 24). In the semi-arid tropics, amounts of nitrogen fixed per hectare range from none, where nodulation is ineffective, to 16 kg N in soybean naturally colonized by rhizobia, to 84 kg N when inoculated. Nitrogen fixation in soybean and groundnut of 50-70 kg N/ha/growing season is reported in Senegal (Gigou et al. 1985). Nitrogen-fixing bacteria associated with tree legumes can fix similar quantities (Table 25).
Rhizobia rarely fix all the nitrogen used by the crop and a substantial amount of nitrogen is removed from the field as grain, so the net benefit from symbiosis varies. For example, if rhizobia fix 50% of the crop's requirement and 60% of above-ground nitrogen is in the grain at harvest, soil nitrogen is depleted irrespective of the amount of nitrogen fixed or the grain yield. Peoples and Craswell (1992), studying 21 cases of tropical grain legumes, found positive nitrogen balances in 15 and negative ones in five. Similarly, many experiments with grain legumes in southern, semi-arid Australia show that rhizobial associations give net benefits in more than three-quarters of cases and that the benefit from lupins is substantially greater than that from field peas, largely because a smaller proportion of nitrogen is harvested and removed in lupins.
Fungi, algae and nutrients
Various fungi facilitate uptake of nutrients by plants, particularly phosphorus. Numerous fungi live in close association with plant roots. One group, vesicular arbuscular micorrhizal fungi (VAM), form both vesicles and arbuscules (knot-like structure) on the surface and within the root. They also colonize soil animals including earthworms and woodlice (Table 26).
TABLE 25
Nitrogen fixation by trees and shrubs. Values are per growing season or per year unless the number of months is given in brackets (Various sources, compiled by Young, 1989 and Peoples and Craswell 1992)
Species
N fixation (kg N/ha/year)
Acacia albida
Acacia mearnsii
Allocasuarina littoralis
Casuarina equisetifolia
Coffee + Inga spp.
Coriaria arborea
Erythrina poeppigiana
Gliricidia septum
Inga jinicuil
Inga jinicuil
Inga jinicuil
Leucaena leucocephala
Leucaena leucocephala (in hedgerow intercropping)
Leucaena leucocephala
Prosopis glandulosa
Prosopis glandulosa
Prosopis tamarugo
Rain forest fallow
Mature rain forest
Alachynomene afrospera
Glyricidia sepium
Sesbania spp.
Xalliandra colothyssus
They are most prolific in the topsoil, to about 10 cm depth (Habte 1989). They facilitate uptake of nutrients, particularly phosphorus from soils low in that element. They provide some protection to the host plant, their presence being associated with decreased colonization by pathogens. Ellis et al. (1985) also found that wheat plants inoculated with VAM were more drought-tolerant than plants without VAM. Importantly, comparisons of conventional cropping systems using inorganic fertilizers and herbicides with organic systems not using herbicides have found much higher levels of infection of crop roots by these beneficial fungi in the organic system (Ryan et al. 1994). This suggests that management for desired, associative soil organisms, should become a part of future sustainable cropping.
Other organisms associated with or infecting plants include endophytic fungi which affect plant growth rates and confer resistance to some insects. Cyanobacteria, which belong to the blue-green algae, are believed widespread in the semi-arid tropics and contribute 0.5 to 15 kg N/ha/year. Azospirillum, Klebsiella, Enterobacter and other species are free-living but largely inhabit the root rhizosphere; their distribution and role is still to be defined for cropping systems in wet-and-dry climates. Actinorrhizal associations are known between Casuarina and Frankia sp., but these are not exploited. It is claimed that such associations can fix as much as 60 kg N/ha/year. There are no doubt other symbioses yet to be discovered and exploited.
Weeds, crop pests and diseases
Weeds, pests and diseases all compete with or directly reduce the vigour of crops. Many pests and diseases are soil-borne. Weed life-cycles depend on replenishment of the soil seed bank and survival of the seeds against natural decay, predation by soil animals and depletion by human management, particularly cultivations. Ecological weed control thus aims to minimize recruitment of new seed into the soil as a long-term strategy as well as trying to reduce artificially the size of the weed seed bank in the soil.
TABLE 26
Frequency (%) of VAM fungi in soil-dwelling macro-invertebrates sampled from natural and agricultural ecosystems in Ohio (data are combined from 1986 and 1987 samplings) (Source: Rabatin and Stinner 1989)
Taxa
Ecosystem
Conventional tillage maize
No-tillage maize
Pasture
Old field
Lumbricidae (earthworms)
Isopoda (woodlice)
Carabidae (ground beetles)
FIGURE 26 - A general scheme of seasonal cycle of weed population
FIGURE 27 - Total dynamics of weed plants and seeds over two years. Figure gives average weed populations over two years in potato field during autumn (September-December) and summer (April-July) cropping seasons and intervening Winter (January-March) and summer (August-September) fallow periods. Average number of seeds/plant m^2 in 'jhum' (J) and terrace (T) fields are given in boxes. Values in parentheses indicate the percentage of plants arising from vegetative parts. Seedling survival (K), survival of plants, (P), fecundity (F) and growth rate of seed population (seasonal value l [1], annual value l [2]) in soil are shown along the lines. S indicates the fall of seeds from the parent plant. Source: Misra et al. (1992)
Weed life cycles and strategic weed control are well understood for temperate wet-and-dry climates. Figure 26 illustrates the life cycle of weed populations and Figure 27 gives informative data for weed populations in north India (2500 mm AAR of which 70-90% falls in 5 months). The weed populations were measured under the contrasting conditions of slash-and-burn and terrace cultivation. Seed recruitment to the soil seed bank was higher under terrace cropping than under slash and burn but fewer survived.
It is generally accepted that there are links between weed populations, their competitiveness, and soil fertility. A good example of this is the various species of witch weed (Striga hermonthica, S. generioides, S. asiatica and approximately 25 other species). These species infect the roots of millet, sorghum, maize and sugar cane. S. generioides also infects legumes and tuberous crops. They are a serious nuisance and are widespread in semi-arid Africa. It is estimated that they currently infect 21 million ha and a further 44 million ha are at risk. Their spread and increased aggressiveness is considered to be due largely to declining fertility and soil carbon contents.
The incidence of insect pests and crop diseases depends on the complexity of the cropping system and the types of crops grown. It depends too on management factors, such as the timing and type of tillage and the treatment of the crop residues. These aspects are so complex they warrant a Bulletin to themselves, so they are only touched upon here.
The incidence of pests and diseases is generally believed to be less frequent and/or intense in diverse cropping systems. Data on insects are relatively scarce but Andow (1983) is frequently quoted as showing a positive relationship between insect pest populations and the practice of monoculture. His experience, however, is mainly with cotton, a unique crop, and wheat, though he gives a few examples from maize and rice.
TABLE 27
Viruses for which disease incidence is lower in more diverse cropping systems (Source: various, collated in Power 1990)
Pathogen
Type^1
Vector
Alfalfa mosaic virus
N
Aphid
Bean common mosaic virus
N
Aphid
Bean yellow mosaic virus
N
Aphid
Beet yellows virus
P
Aphid
Cauliflower mosaic virus
N
Aphid
Chlorotic mottle virus
N
Aphid
Maize stunt spiroplasma
P
Leafhopper
Cucumber mosaic virus
N
Aphid
Groundnut rosette virus
P
Aphid
Pepper veinbanding mosaic virus
N
Aphid
Tomato yellow leaf curl virus
P
Whitefly
Turnip mosaic virus
N
Aphid
^1 Type of pathogen transmission system is given as P (persistent) or N (non-persistent).
Power (1990) shows that the incidence of virus diseases is less in complex cropping systems (Table 27). He suggests that disease transmitted by insects is less common in multiple-cropping than in monocultures because aphids and some other insects settle on plants in response to visual cues that do not enable them to distinguish between host and non-host plants. In this way polyphagous insects can acquire a pathogen from an infected plant and transfer it when feeding on a non-host plant. If the insect is preferentially attracted to the non-host crop, it may be speculated that this crop acts as a 'trap' or 'protection' crop. Power (1990) reviews situations where intercropping or the inclusion of a second, barrier species has led to lower disease levels. In contrast, bacteria and fungi in the root region and rhizosphere are reported to be slightly fewer in a coconut monocrop than in a multi-storied mixed cropping system (Bopaiah and Shetty 1991). Differences in populations, and
in their varied (positive or negative) effects on the food crop, are no doubt best understood through analysis of the feeding habits and predation of the organisms themselves, rather than by making superficial generalizations about their numbers. Fick and Power (1992) and Hearn and Fitt (1992) review pest management generally and pests and diseases in cotton crops specifically.
Inorganic nutrition
Inorganic nutrients occur in soil as ions and minerals, e.g., as oxides, silicates and phosphates, both adsorbed onto the surface of clay particles and organic matter, and in solution.
A large proportion of some nutrients, most notably nitrogen, is found in organic matter in all but the most highly degraded soils, so organic matter and the organisms associated with it are given prominence in this chapter.
Clay particles, because of their crystalline structures, carry an inherent electrical charge. This results in attractive forces (mainly van der Waals forces) and repulsive forces (electrostatic forces) which give clay species their particular characteristics. The inherent surface charge also causes a layer of associated ions to align next to the solid particles forming a so-called diffuse double layer because it consists of a relatively inexchangeable layer (the Stem layer) closest to the surface of the particle and an outer, readily exchangeable layer, of varying thickness, called the diffuse layer. Sposito (1984) explains this more fully.
In the present context, it is appropriate to describe briefly four aspects of the physico-electrical structure of soils. These are: the inherent exchange capacity; the linkage between soil particles and soil organic matter, and its effects on soil stability; ions in solution and their solubility; and the ion imbalances (from the perspective of crop growth) associated with acidity and salinity.
TABLE 28
Representative cation exchange capacities (in mol[C]/kg) of surface soils (Source: Sposito 1984)
Soil order
CEC
Alfisols
Aridisols
Entisols
Histosols
Inceptisols
Mollisols
Oxisols
Spodosols
Ultisols
Vertisols
Adsorption is the net accumulation of matter at the interface between a solid phase and an aqueous solution. Readily exchangeable ions are those so loosely adsorbed to clay or other particles that they are replaced easily by leaching with an electrolyte solution. The ion exchange capacity of soil is the number of moles of adsorbed ion charge which can be displaced from a unit mass of soil; in most applications, this refers to readily exchangeable ions. Sposito (1984) notes that 'Much controversy exists over the surface chemical significance of ion exchange capacities'. The maximum surface charge measurement indicates a soil's potential to adsorb ions while its actual capacity, which is more relevant agriculturally, has a lesser value. Table 28 gives representative cation exchange capacities (CECs) for selected soil orders. It is notable that though the CEC of each order ranges widely, the predominant soils in wet-and-dry climates have low CECs.
The readily exchangeable proportion of the CEC varies with soil pH: the proportion available to readily-exchangeable bases decreases from about 1 at pH 8 to 0.5 at pH 6 to perhaps 0.2 at pH 4.5. Below pH 6 an increasing proportion is taken up by various aluminium ions and complexes, which are variably toxic to plants.
The electrical conductivity and CEC of a soil are related to its clay content (e.g., Rhoades 1990a). Similarly, because of the electrical charge of the clay particles, a high but variable percentage of the soil organic matter is bound to them. Table 29 shows that it may be as high as 90% and Figure 28 illustrates the two postulated main ways that organic matter is bonded to clay. These are weak anion exchange and strongly-held ligand exchange which is a form of chemical bonding.
It follows from the electrically-charged nature of clay and organic matter and the high likelihood of their association that both contribute to the nutrient-holding capacity and stability of soils. This intimacy led Pieri (1992) to propose that structural stability, at least of the African soils he studied, could be described by a critical value of S greater than 9, where S is the ratio of organic matter to clay plus silt, expressed as a percentage. This is shown in Figure 29.
TABLE 29
Proportion of soil organic carbon in the clay-organic complex
Percent organic carbon in soil
Percent soil carbon in clay-organic complex^1
Podzol
Solonized brown soil
Grey clay soil
Terra rossa
Groundwater rendzina
Black earth
Krasnozem
Red brown earth
^1 Defined as the material sinking when the soil was ultrasonically dispersed in an organic liquid of density 2 g/cm^3.
FIGURE 28 - Diagram illustrating anionic bridging: anion exchange. R is a polyanionic humic colloid.
FIGURE 28 - Diagram illustrating anionic bridging: ligand exchange. R is a polyanionic humic colloid.
Plants take up most minerals as inorganic nutrients from the soil solution (except legumes, which may fix dinitrogen gas directly from the soil air). An element is available (to the plant) if it is present as, or can be transformed into, a free ion, and it is within the plant root zone. Most elements move within physical proximity of roots through soil water movement and into the plant through evapotranspiration. Diffusion along concentration gradients is important for less-mobile ions such as phosphorus, particularly where soil solution concentrations are weak and root densities are high (i.e., the transport path is short). Sposito (1984) and others give calculated values for the diffusivity of nutrients. Diffusion times range from 1 day for an ion to move 3 mm (which is comparable with the time it would take to move by convection in the mass flow of water) for nitrate to about 200 days for potassium, magnesium and molybdenum, and to thousands of days for other nutrients.
The concentrations of nutrients in solution fluctuate daily and seasonally. The most dynamic are nitrate and ammonium ions, which are interconverted by bacteria. Fluctuations can be explained by the effects of temperature and soil water on mineralization (breaking down organic matter to release ammonium), immobilization (the reverse) and nitrification (conversion of organic matter to nitrate, which is stable and highly soluble), and by the effects of rainfall leaching nitrate to depth. In seasonally wet-and-dry cropping systems, there is a flush of nitrate following the start of the wet season and nitrate-N may accumulate in the topsoil by capillary rise of water during the dry season. Within the major seasonal patterns driven by soil water, Rochester et al. (1991) found that the soil nitrate cycle lagged three months behind changes in temperature.
FIGURE 29 - Critical organic matter levels for maintenance of physical stability (proposed by Pieri 1992)
Low soil pH affects plant roots directly because of the effects of the hydrogen ion concentration on root membrane integrity and exchange capacity. Acidity also affects roots indirectly in two ways. It alters the availability of ions in the soil solution (possibly making available toxic aluminium species, relatively toxic to plants). It also affects mineralization through the protons competing with cations for dissolved ligands and surface charged groups. Soil pH also affects micro-organisms, and thus the speed of transformations, for example, those between nitrate and ammonium. Poor plant growth on acid soils may thus be caused directly by hydrogen ions, by toxicities of aluminium or manganese, or through deficiencies of calcium, magnesium, potassium, phosphorus, nitrogen or trace elements. Chase et al. (1989) describe these relationships for sandy Sahelian soils. Variation in pH across distances of 15 m can be as much as pH 4.5 to 7.5, with associated decreases in
aluminium and hydrogen ions, and increases in crop productivity. The critical pH at which crop growth is affected varies with crop, cultivar and soil type. Critical levels may be as high as pH 5 to 5.5 for less tolerant plants in soils with soluble sources of aluminium but otherwise can be as low as pH 3.9 to 4.
FIGURE 30 - Salt tolerance of grain crops (Source: Rhoades 1990b)
TABLE 30
Relative salt tolerance of various crops at emergence and during growth to maturity (Source: Rhoades 1990b)
Crop
Electrical conductivity of saturated-soil extract
Common name
Botanical name
50% yield (dS/m)
50% emergence (dS/m)
Barley
Hordeum vulgare
Cotton
Gossypium hirsutum
Sugarbeet
Beta vulgaris
Sorghum
Sorghum bicolor
Safflower
Carthamus tinctorius
Wheat
Triticum aestivum
Beet, red
Beta vulgaris
Cowpea
Vigna unguiculata
Alfalfa
Medicago sativa
Tomato
Lycopersicon lycopersicum
Cabbage
Brassica oleracea capitata
Corn (maize)
Zea mays
Lettuce
Lactuca sativa
Onion
Allium cepa
Rice
Oryza sativa
Bean
Phaseolus vulgaris
TABLE 31
Annual rate of organic matter loss measured in the field in the savannah area (Source: Pieri 1992)
Place and source
Dominant rotation
Clay + silt
(0-20 cm)
Annual rate of loss
Notes
k (%)
No. of years
Burkina Faso
Ploughed
Sorghum monocropping
No fertilizer
Sorghum monocropping
Low rate manure
Sorghum monocropping
High rate manure
Sorghum monocropping
m + crop residues
Cotton-cereal
Much erosion
Cameroun
Cotton-cereal
No fertilizer
Cotton-cereal
Fertilizer
Cotton-cereal
Fertilizer + kraal
Côte d'Ivoire
Cotton-cereal
Low rate manure
Cotton-cereal
Low rate manure
Cotton-cereal
Improved fallow
Senegal
Ploughed
Millet-groundnut
No fertilizer
Millet-groundnut
Fertilizer
Millet-groundnut
Fertilizer + straw
Millet monocropping
PK fertilizer
Cereal-legume
F0T0
Cereal-legume
F0T2
Cereal-legume
F2T0
Cereal-legume
F2T2
Cereal-legume
F1T1
Chad
Ploughed, v. fertile
Cotton-cereal
Cotton monoculture
Cotton-cereal
+ 2-year fallow
+ 4-year fallow
Togo
Cotton-cereal
Low rate manure
Cotton-cereal
High rate manure
Saline soils and saline-sodic soils have electrical conductivities greater than 4 dS/m. The saturated soil extract of saline soils contains more than 15% exchangeable sodium; that of sodic soil less than 15%. The pH values of both kinds of soils range between 7 and 10.5 directly reflecting the amount of sodium bicarbonate present, this being completely dissolved in moist soil. The sensitivities of crop yields to salt (electrical conductivity of the soil) are shown in Figure 30 and Table 30. Longer lists of plant tolerance to salt are given by Maas (1986) and Rhoades (1990b).
Field indicators of biological and nutritional problems
In this chapter, whilst reviewing relevant recent work on soil organic matter, soil biology and inorganic soil nutrients, a non-traditional perspective has been taken by placing emphasis on soil organic matter and the close chemical and functional relationship between organic matter and soil particles. It is therefore consistent to suggest that the most obvious indicator of biological and nutritional problems is the absence of, or reduction in, organic matter. Rates of loss of organic matter independent of erosion tend to be slow, but important as they are cumulative. Table 31 suggests that under dryland cropping in west Africa, rates of loss are about 2-4% per annum.
TABLE 32
Soil attributes and standard methodologies for their measurement to be included as part of a minimum data set (MDS) for monitoring soil quality (Source: Larson and Pierce 1991)
Soil attribute
Methodology
Total organic carbon
Dry or wet combustion
Labile organic carbon
Digestion with KCI
Nutrient availability
Analytical soil test
pH
Glass electrode-calomel electrode pH meter
Electrolytic conductivity
Conductivity meter
Texture
Pipette or hydrometer method
Plant-available water capacity
Determined in field best or from water desorption curve
Structure
Bulk density from intact soil cores field measured permeability of Ksat
Strength
Bulk density or penetration resistance
Maximum rooting depth
Crop specific - depth of common roots or standard
Larson and Pierce (1991) propose that minimum, analytically-gathered data sets are essential for monitoring soil sustainability. They include two measures of organic matter among the ten attributes that they consider essential (Table 32). Their concept of requiring agreed minimum data sets is consistent with the approach to assessing sustainability outlined here in Figure 4. Once the minimum data set is constructed (Larson and Pierce 1991), each soil attribute is determined for a reference time (T0) and the change in soil conditions can then be measured over time (T1), which they suggest should be one to ten years.
While suggesting that agreed repeated observations or measurements are essential, it is preferable to empower farmers to take responsibility for recording their own observations of surrogate measurements rather than giving responsibility for analytically-based measurements to outsiders.
Policy-makers need to address the need for analytical or surrogate assessments of soil sustainability. A first step would be to ask farmers for their observations of soil characteristics (cf Table 16) and their attitudes and concerns about soil productivity.
In the case of soil organic matter measurements, it is believed that the limited availability of expertise, the costs and the inherent sampling errors make direct measurement of organic carbon neither cost-effective nor informative. As described in Chapter 2, it is more likely that surrogate measures are adequate and, if sufficiently simple and cheap, have some likelihood of being used. Pieri (1992) (Table 33) suggests that a bleached (possibly brittle) soil surface and plant deficiency symptoms are useful surrogates for loss of organic matter, low CEC and soil nutrient imbalances. Given that loss of organic matter is concomitant with soil structural degradation, indicators suggested in Chapter 2, such as turbidity of water in surface catchments, remain useful.
Indicators of plant nutrient deficiencies include: colour (e.g. redness for potassium deficiency); paleness (a more general symptom, but especially obvious in nitrogen deficiency); and small leaves and plants. Other symptoms, such as leaf curling and accelerated dropping of older leaves, may also be helpful but might equally indicate water deficits. There are several publications with photographs of nutrient deficiencies; these, however, might require further tailoring to specific combinations of crops and soils.
Soil acidity is most obviously indicated by stunted plants, by bare ground, and by better relative growth of acid-tolerant weeds in a sensitive crop. Salinity too is indicated by vegetation changes such as trees dying for no apparent reason or an increase in the proportion of salt-tolerant herbs. Other symptoms of salinity include: waterlogged or bare soil; livestock congregating and licking the soil surface for salt; visible salt crystals; the smell of salt; and clear catchment water because salt settles sediment.
TABLE 33
Mineral nutrients and the decline of fertility (Source: Pieri 1992)
General problems
Signs of simple problems
Where they occur
Probable causes
Limitation of nutrient supply to crops
· Nutrient imbalance
Deficiency in organic matter
Bleaching and destruction of soil surface
Senegal, Niger, Burkina Faso, Mali
Insufficient return of crop residues
Accelerated mineralization of dry matter
Too little fertilizer
N (S) deficit
N (S) deficiency in cereals, legumes and cotton
Throughout area
Too little N (S) applied in fertilizers or manures. High C/N ratio
Very little N fixation
Leaching of nitrate
K-Ca-Mg deficit
K deficiency, Al toxicity
Frequent K deficiency in cotton
Al toxicity in groundnut and cotton (Senegal)
Severe leaching of Ca, Mg, K.
Fertilizers low in Ca, Mg, K.
· Low buffer capacity
Progressive drop in CEC
Loss of fine mineral and organic soil particles
Senegal, Mali, Cote d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Niger, Chad
Poor erosion control
Rapid mineralization
Acidification
Senegal, N Cote d'Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Chad
NO[3]/Ca + Mg leaching
Fertilizers too low in Ca, Mg
Too little or no liming
Marginal soils
Nutrient deficiencies
Senegal, N Togo, S Mali, Burkina Faso
Land shortage
Poor cultivation
Inefficient utilization of nutrients
Management for maintenance of soil biology and nutrition
The aim of management should be to create balanced organic matter and mineral budgets. It should ensure that, over several years (a complete crop rotation), soil organic matter is not depleted and that nutrients added equal or exceed those removed by cropping or lost in various ways.
Various approaches to good management are outlined in Table 34. These complement the aspects listed in Table 33 and the advice on saline water management given by Kandiah (1990) and that on water harvesting offered by Critchley and Siegert (FAO 1991).
When managing organic matter farmers should recognize that the effects of animal and human manure, sewage sludge and plant residues last longer than those of green manure crops. Green manures, though valuable, usually last only one or two seasons because they are incorporated before they are mature and lignified. The longer-term beneficial effects of manures on soil organisms are indicated in Table 35.
TABLE 34
Aspects to consider for maintenance or amelioration of soil biology and nutrition
Maintenance: prevention of degradation
- Crop choice
· Preference for rotations and intercropping with several species, as for Table 19
· Inclusion of legume in rotation
- Cultural practices
· Use of inorganic fertilizers to maintain a neutral nutrient budget
· Plant litter conservation
· Incorporation of human and animal manure
· Incorporation of organic wastes from industry and cities
· Tillage: minimum soil disturbance
· Biological pest and weed management
· Reduce rate of acidification through crop choice, litter and fertilizer management
- Water management
· Water harvesting
· Minimization of salinity, if a problem is likely, through seasonal leaching and other practices
Amelioration to control damage
- Nutrient imbalances and deficiencies
· On basis of visual symptoms, use inorganic fertilizers
· Change cropping pattern to reduce acidity
- Soil surface degradation through loss of organic matter, wind and water erosion
· Increase organic matter through transported wastes, mulches, cover crops, etc. as in Cultural practices above and Table 19
Juo and Payne (1993) advise: 'In spite of the many proven benefits of soil organic matter, its management and recycling in an intensified, modem agro-ecosystem must necessarily revolve around two fundamental characteristics of the system, namely, the availability of organic material at the farm level, and the economic incentive for conserving and recycling organic matter'. To this may be added consideration of the benefits and costs of treating and transporting human wastes from cities (cf Table 22). On-site organic matter, organic material brought in from outside and industrially-produced fertilizers will be used according to their benefit cost ratios and the attitudes of governments and crop managers.
Tillage reduces the frequency of VAM, at least in invertebrates (Table 26). Tillage reduces earthworm populations 10-30-fold, both killing them directly and destroying their burrows (Brust et al. 1986). Haines and Uren (1990) show that differences in earthworm populations between tillage treatments and stubble burning are reflected by 50% differences in numbers of soil pores.
Tillage also effects the location, numbers and activity of micro-organisms within the soil, depending on the type of tillage. For example a mouldboard plough that inverts topsoil has more effect than minimal tillage. Doran (1987) found microbial biomass and potentially-mineralizable nitrogen to be 54% and 37% higher respectively in the top 7.5 cm of no-till than ploughed soil. These would be critical differences if translated to the semi-arid tropics (Keating et al. 1991). Microbial and fungal biomasses may be 20-70% higher after 1 and 2 years no-till (Doran 1980). However, conventional tillage, by burying topsoil, may cause microbial populations and their activities to be higher than under no-till at depths of say 7.5 to 15 cm (Doran 1980). Differences in soil organisms (e.g., microbial biomass) under differing tillage treatments are seasonal, generally being greatest in the period when the weather is most favourable for soil organism activity and plant growth (Carter and
Mele 1992). Rasmussen and Collins (1991) summarize many data on the impact of tillage on soil properties and conclude that stubble-mulching with zero tillage conserves up to 2% more organic matter per year than ploughing.
TABLE 35
Micro-arthropod populations in top 10 cm of clay soil 1 and 2 years after adding organic fertilizers in Italy. Additions were made to achieve 4% organic matter and inorganic N and P were to make all treatments equivalent to the manure (Source: Fratello et al. 1989)
Taxon
Control
Fowl manure
Sludge
Green manure
Straw
One year after application
Collembola
Entomobryidae
Onychiuridae
Isotomidae
C. coecus
C. thermophilus
I. Minor
F. Parvulus
Sminthuridae
Neelidae
Acarina
Pauropoda
Microarthropods
Two years after application
Collembola
Entomobryidae
Onychiuridae
Isotomidae
C. coecus
C. thermophilus
I. Minor
F. Parvulus
Sminthuridae
Neelidae
Acarina
Pauropoda
Microarthropods
Cropping patterns and rotations affect soil nutrition. Diversity of cropping increases the number and variety of soil organisms and reduces pests and diseases (e.g., Table 27).
Soil acidification and salination are extreme cases of nutrient imbalance and, unlike other deficiencies, cannot be corrected simply by adding mineral fertilizers. The management techniques to reduce acidification are: (a) to reduce the net proton production of the system by minimizing nitrate leaching (a special problem in seasonally wet-and-dry climates); (b) to avoid using ammonium fertilizers and reduce the accumulation of organic matter; (c) to lime the soil. Liming is a high cost option while adoption of perennial species (to avoid seasonal accumulation of organic matter and nitrate leaching) is less costly. By contrast, salinity is usually managed by strategic leaching. This is done with the sparing use of low-salt water when both soil moisture and the water table are low.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 4 - Sustainable crop rotations
African examples
Asian examples
Australian and mediterranean examples
Rotations and soil productivity
Papendick et al. (1977), Beets (1978; 1982), Steiner (1984), Palaniappan (1985) and others have brought together information on cropping patterns, including crop rotations and crop arrangements within multiple crops. Much has been written on the theoretical and practical benefits of mixed cropping and on its problems (e.g., competition). This work is not reviewed here but the aim is to describe briefly some of the cropping patterns currently used in the semi-arid tropics and contrast them with systems used in semi-arid temperate regions. The aims are to draw attention to practical constraints and to identify opportunities for more-sustainable dryland crop rotations in wet-and-dry environments.
The systems chosen are in Africa (the Sahel, east Africa and Ethiopian highlands), south Asia (India and east Indonesia) and in temperate Australian and Mediterranean regions. All include livestock (Table 36). The climate varies within all these areas. Rainfall increases north to south in the Sahel, and changes with relief in the Rift Valley, and in the mountains and rain-shadow areas in E and NE Africa. It increases from east to west in Indonesia and is lower inland than on the coast in India and Australia. In mountainous country in Ethiopia, tropical crops are replaced by temperate species as altitude increases. In contrast, temperate species only can be grown in the wet, cool season climates of much of Australia and the Mediterranean.
In labour-intensive Africa and Asia, villages are the units of production. They can be either traditional or, as in Ethiopia, reformed government-directed settlements. In Australia, the farm family is the decision-making and labour unit, whether they own or manage the properties. These differences in organization and ownership are relevant to sustainability. Where a collectively-determined cropping strategy is not sustainable, migration from the village is accompanied by necessary (often slow) changes in land use, or the village is abandoned. In extensive, mechanized, family-managed systems, economic or biological non-sustainability causes changes in ownership which are quickly followed by changes in cropping practices.
Within labour-intensive systems food security has high priority. This and family under-employment encourage the focusing of labour near the house. The importance of the household garden thus varies with the size of the property (Harwood 1975). This is more apposite in Asia and the wet tropics than in the wet-and-dry tropics, where sequential cropping of vegetables under a household tree crop (using, if necessary, hand-carried water), gives way to a seasonal vegetable crop followed by fallow in the dry season. When villages are moved and land use is changed to commercial agriculture, recreation or forestry, as has occurred to a marked extent in Thai highlands, the intensively-used household gardens are abandoned and the overall intensity of management and the fertility of the system is reduced.
TABLE 36
Components of cropping systems illustrated in this chapter
Location
Major crops
Major animals
Feed source
W. Africa Sahel
Millet/sorghum, maize, groundnuts, cowpea, sesame, cassava, yams, tree legumes
Cattle, goats, sheep, poultry
Fallow weeds, crop residue, vines, tree crop cuttings, oil cake, cull tubers
E. Africa
Maize/barley, sorghum, millet, tef (Ethiopia)
Donkeys, cattle, goats
Crop residues, fallow weeds, tree cuttings
S. Asia
Sorghum/millet (India), maize/rice (other); cassava; kenaf, wheat, groundnut, soybean, chickpea
Cattle, buffalo, goats, sheep
Bran, oil cake, crop residues
S. Australia
Wheat/barley; lupins, peas (subterranean clover, annual pasture medics)
Sheep, cattle
Pasture ley, crop residues
TABLE 37
Land utilization by district, Sine-Saloum, Senegal (Source: Pieri 1992)
Fatick
Foundiougné
Gossas
Kaffriné
Kaolack
Nioro
Sine-Saloum
Total area (km^2) (ST)
Rural population
Density (population/km^2)
No. of farms
Mean pop./farm
Livestock
Cattle
Horses
Mules
Sheep/goats
Areas
Cultivated (ha) 83/84
Proportion cropped:
Millet and sorghum
Maize
Groundnut
Area/inhabitant (ares)
Area needed for wood^a (km^2)
Area needed for livestock^b (km^2)
Total Areas (T)
Degree if exploitation (T/ST%)
^a Norm at 0.2 ha forest to cover fuel needs for cooking and timber for building.
^b Based on 1 ha pasturage per month of the dry season per LU (livestock unit). As animals are partly fed from fodder crops and harvest residues, values used are: 2 ha/LU (cattle and horses), 0.4 ha (mules). 0.2 for sheep and goats.
African examples
Key resource issues for sustainability in Africa
In substantial areas of semi-arid west Africa and the highlands of Ethiopia the present land use is not sustainable. The areas needed for food crops, for livestock and fuel exceed the actual land available. This is illustrated in Table 37 for selected districts in Senegal (Pieri 1992). Pearson (1992) and Pol (1993) draw similar conclusions for some districts in Ethiopia and Mali.
It is unrealistic to suggest that changing crop rotations will provide the quantitative answer needed in areas such as those in Table 37. The most obvious answer is to remove livestock from the system. According to Table 37 they need one to two times the area currently under food crops. Animals are kept for prestige, for their products and for traction. Substitutes for their products (e.g., soy milk and meal) might be provided more cheaply, in real terms, if soil sustainability is assigned a value. They could be traded for crop surpluses. Grain legumes can be substituted for some livestock products and increased planting of a wider variety of legumes would improve the sustainability of the cropping system. This has already be done elsewhere, for example in parts of east Indonesia.
The value of draught animals is also debatable. Sandford (1989) interprets conflicting data to suggest that farmers often use animal traction to increase the area cropped, rather than for more timely management of existing land to increase yields. If this is so, livestock reduce productivity in two ways: directly through their need for food and through their traction being used to increase the area, but not necessarily the management skill.
There are two obvious difficulties when recommending removal of livestock from a district. First, the livestock may be owned by people other than those who cultivate. In these circumstances, integration of livestock with cropping is unlikely. Livestock removal usually involves relocation or re-employment of the herdspeople, neither of which is easy. Secondly, it is not easy to identify and foster peasant-based industries to generate cash for fuel and livestock products such as milk.
Conventional wisdom is turned upside down by the suggestion that, in densely populated regions where fallows are short (<4 years) and land use is not sustainable, land used for livestock and fuelwood should be turned to food crops. For example, recent inventories and land assessments for east Africa place equal priority on livestock, fuel and food (Kassam et al. 1991). Such equal emphasis is surely inconsistent with the belief that the priority product of a cropping system is food security (Chapter 1). Similarly, and perhaps underlying the notion that fallow-for-forage has equal status with cropping, is the widely-repeated belief that soil degradation is caused by shortened fallow periods (e.g., Brown and Thomas 1990) and, therefore, that sustainable cropping depends on some minimal fallow period between crops. Many current land assessments include calculated 'fallow requirements' (e.g., Kassam et al. 1991). Fallow as such, however, does not restore soil structure,
biological activity or nutrient status. A fallow, long enough to allow re-establishment of deep-rooted perennial plants crops that draw nutrients from depth and maintain soil surface cover, will improve soil productivity provided that nutrients are not removed (e.g., as milk or meat) from the system. This rarely holds nowadays. Most commonly, a short fallow of weedy annual species leaves the soil bare and liable to erosion in the dry season, there is structural degradation through trampling and plant uprooting, and insufficient soil water is conserved for the next crop. There is no reason why a well-managed continuous cropping system should be less sustainable than one including unmanaged short fallows from which nutrients are removed by livestock or as fuel.
FIGURE 31 - Seasonal calendar of a peasant association in Wollo, Ethiopia (Source: Ethiopian Red Cross Society, pers. comm. 1988)
As well as taking up land for their feed, animals are a key constraint on crop rotations. Poulain (1980) describes a typical example, in the Serere, Senegal: 'the system comprises a typically triennial rotation and the integration of cropping with cattle rearing and fodder trees'. The herd is enclosed in one field during the crop-growing season and immediately after harvest the cattle are released to graze on crop stubble and Acacia albida trees. Around the village there are permanent fields of millet, cowpeas and spices fertilized with household refuse while more distant from the settlement the rotation is typically groundnut-millet-fallow.
Seasonal cropping and grazing patterns for mid-altitude Ethiopia are shown in Figure 31. The specific food crops favoured in Ethiopia vary with altitude (Pearson 1992), but the seasonality of crop growth, livestock needs and labour requirements, shown in Figure 31, are broadly typical. This figure also illustrates the pressure on human resources in the semi-arid tropics during the period around the start of the wet season, when the highest demand for labour (for tilling and planting) occurs at a time when human diets are deteriorating and there is a high incidence of debilitating diseases.
Local distributions of cropping largely radiate from the house. As shown in Figure 25, gradients of organic matter and nutrients from the house create semi-permanent gradients in crop rotations. Continuous cropping nearest the house is sustained by replenishment of nutrients using animal and human manures and food residues. Long-season crops (e.g., maize), and/or those favoured socially (e.g., t'ef, in Ethiopia) are grown nearest the house. Examples of spatial variations in crop rotations are illustrated in Figures 32 and 33.
There is a wide diversity of cropping systems in dryland Africa. There are 'parkland systems' in semi-arid west Africa. On the arid margin of cropping in north and east Africa there are traditional cultivated fields among bush-fallow as well as parklands. The parklands of the Sahelian zone are predominantly Acacia albida with food crops, particularly pearl millet and groundnuts. These are structurally and functionally similar to the Prosopis cineraria/pearl millet parklands of parts of India.
One crop or, at best, two in relay, can be grown in the seasonally wet-and-dry climate of the parkland that has a perennial tree component. The cultivated ground layer carries an annual food crop, the stubble of which is grazed leaving the ground more or less bare through the dry season. The land used for food crops is traditionally cultivated, often by first cutting-back trees and bushes at the start of the wet season. The soil is ploughed and soil and organic matter piled into mounds, which are then burnt. The ash from the mounds is then spread and the soil re-tilled as often as necessary. For t'ef in Ethiopia, there may be as many as nine tillage operations spread over three months, with consequent loss of cropping opportunity (soil water which is not used). Tillage and mounding are labour-intensive. They destroy topsoil structure and disrupt the continuity of macropores (Chapter 2). Nonetheless, and despite the scientifically-demonstrated benefits of maintaining soil
surface cover, traditional tillage can give higher yields than minimum- or zero-tillage. As shown in Figure 15, the benefits from zero tillage may take several years to accumulate so it is not surprising that one-year experiments in the Sahel failed to demonstrate the benefits of minimal soil disturbance. Ridging may also be practised. This helps to reduce wind erosion and wind-caused seedling death, improving establishment by 50% in experiments. While the benefits of ridges seem intuitive, it does not follow that the ridges need to be broken and re-formed each year. Permanent ridges have the advantages of both reducing wind erosion and maintaining undisturbed topsoil.
FIGURE 32 - Homestead and bush field land use and cropping pattern at Dalung, Benue Plateau (Netting 1968)
The main food crop is usually pearl millet but sorghum and maize are grown in more favoured areas. The cereal crop is usually planted between the trees in hills or pockets of up to ten seeds. The seedlings are thinned or compete with each other so that commonly only 2-3 survive to maturity. A low plant density, commonly 5000 hills, is equivalent to between 10 000 to 15 000 plants per hectare. In these circumstances, on-farm experiments suggest that inorganic fertilizers may give only marginal economic returns. Again, the dilemma raised in Chapter 1 is illustrated: biological sustainability may not equate with short-term economics. As Figure 34 illustrates, plant populations need to be increased substantially (with attendant risks of population-induced water deficits, in dry years) to get economic benefit/cost ratios from applied inorganic nutrients, at least in the year in which the fertilizers are applied. However, this and similar analyses, highly relevant to short-term
decisions of individual farmers, do not allow for: (a) residual benefits from fertilizers in the seasons following application of phosphorus and nitrogen, as found by Bationo et al. (1992); or (b) indirect benefits from the fertilizers, such as, say, reduction of the incidence of parasitic weeds (e.g., Striga) and the increased effectiveness of nodulation by rhizobia in subsequent legume crops.
Millet and sorghum yields are generally higher when grown the year following a grain legume. Though, on poor soils, legumes such as cowpea in rotation with millet have little effect on the millet yields if phosphorus fertilizer is not added (Fussell 1992). The beneficial effects of grain legumes are somewhat disputed. There is substantial evidence showing relatively small residual nitrogen benefits from groundnuts and soybeans. Australian systems are similar in this respect. The benefits, associated with relatively high nitrogen fixation, only accrue when nutrients, particularly phosphorus, are adequate for both rhizobia and crop growth. The systems require small inputs of inorganic phosphorus for sustainability.
FIGURE 33 - Cropping schedules and pattern of planting for some crop combinations in northern Nigeria (Source: artificial composite of figures from Norman 1973)
Fertility is increased under tree legumes by: (a) fixation of dinitrogen gas from the soil atmosphere; (b) the gathering of livestock and humans beneath their shade so concentrating their manure; (c) recycling of nutrients from the deep subsoil by leaf fall; and (d) trapping and accumulation of nutrients moved laterally by wind or water from elsewhere. Since soil fertility is higher beneath the trees, crop yields may also be higher (though in dry years yields can be expected to be lower because of the water used by the trees). Thus, farmers often sow sorghum under the trees to take advantage of the improved soil conditions which are not so well exploited by pearl millet, with its lower yield potential.
Figure 35 illustrates the nitrogen benefits from the prunings of tree legumes. Juo and Payne (1993) review the use of tree legumes as windbreaks to alter the crop micro-environment. They conclude that there are beneficial effects of the trees other than nitrogen enrichment, but go on to question the use of tree legumes as alley crops in the semi-arid tropics: 'In West Africa, drought stress and acute P deficiency are major factors limiting the growth and establishment of leguminous trees and shrubs at closer (than naturally-occurring) spacings. For example, even at row widths of 6 to 8 m, nearly double those recommended for humid and sub-humid conditions, marked yield depression was observed when alleys are pruned up to 3 times during the short cropping season in semi-arid India. Thus, the adoption of alley cropping systems in the semi-arid tropics would largely depend upon the identification of specific locations where soil texture and fertility level, groundwater table and
rainfall distribution are more favourable for alley establishment'. A similar view led to targeting existing fencelines as the most realistic sites for the introduction of tree legumes in Ethiopia (Table 38).
FIGURE 34 - Effect of plant density and fertilizer use options on millet yield in farmers* fields where Y = grain yield kg/ha, D = plant density (10^3 pockets/ha) and PN represent P fertilizer only and P + N fertilizer codes with values of 1 and 0 represent treatments with and without fertilizer respectively (Source: Bationo et al. 1992)
FIGURE 35 - Partitioning of nitrogen from prunings of Leucaena leucocephala to crop, tree and soil in an alley-cropping system on an Lixisol at Ibadan, Nigeria (K. Mulongoy, unpublished data)
TABLE 38
Strategies for introducing forage legume into the Ethiopian crop-livestock systems (Source: Pearson 1992) (Species are speculative until further field evaluation.)
Strategy
Low altitude <2000 m
Medium 2000-2400 m
High >2400 m
Forage strips
trees
Leucaena (Leucaena leucocephala), Sesbania (Sesbania brachycarpa), pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan)
Tagasaste (Chamaecytisus prolifer), sesbania Pigeon pea
Tagasaste
herbs
Siratro (Macroptilium atropurpureum), silver leaf desmodium (Desmodium intortum), greenleaf desmodium (Desmodium uncinatum), Verano stylo (Stylosanthes humilis)
Desmodium (greenleaf)Axillaris (Axillaris spp.) white clover, vetch
Vetch
Backyard forage
trees
Leucaena, sesbania, pigeon pea
Tagasaste, sesbania pigeon pea
Tagasaste
herbs
Desmodium, alfalfa (Madicago sativa)
Alfalfa, vetch
Alfalfa
Undersown and relay legumes in crops
herbs
Lablab (Lablab purpureus), cowpea (Vigna unguiculata), siratro, greenleaf desmodium, Verano stylo, vetch (Vicia sativa), Cassia rotundifolia
Vetch, desmodium
Vetch
Oversown legumes in pasture and fallow
herbs
Verano stylo, Siratro
Livestock exclusion areas
trees
Leucaena, sesbania
Tasasaste, sesbania
Tagasaste
herbs
Siratro, stylos, Axillaris
Axillaris, siratro
Conventional pastures and special-purpose forages
herbs
Stylo (Verano), siratro, desmodium (greenleaf and silverleaf)
Desmodium (greenleaf and silverleaf), vetch
Alfalfa, vetch
Others (e.g., Kerkof et al. 1990) rightly draw attention to the need for technical packages which incorporate various options for tree legumes: intercropping and alley cropping; planting along contour lines and farm boundaries; as wood lots; as wind-breaks and the promotion of natural regeneration of trees in pastoral areas. It is best for the farmers to decide which option fits their goals.
FIGURE 36 - Scheme to illustrate how observed deterioration in agriculture may be linked back to root causes, which are themselves interrelated. Here, observed declining productivity and stability are linked back to key attributes which were discussed in earlier chapters.
To conclude this overview of African dryland systems, it is appropriate to consider their constraints. Obviously, the main constraint is the rainfall amount, its distribution and reliability. These severely limit the opportunities for increasing productivity per unit area. The limitations, nonetheless, can be tackled effectively using a range of strategies. For example, in a region of Somalia, with a rainfall of 580 mm in a good year, four practices for better soil water use were tried (ridging; bunding; intercropping with a grain legume; incorporation of residue from the previous cereal crop). Even in a season of above-average rainfall, all increased the yield of sorghum, the main crop, by 30-50% (Eagleton et al. 1991). Clean fallow (a crop- and weed-free season), with the aim of conserving water for the next crop, did not improve the sorghum yield. In areas with higher and more reliable rainfall, opportunities for water conservation and relay cropping increase.
Key resource issues for sustainability in Africa
In regions where single crops are the most realistic expectation, the seven aspects outlined below may be considered 'key local resource issues which are involved in production and sustainability' (Figure 4). They are not listed here for prescriptive purposes. Any prescriptive list should be compiled by people working and living in the relevant regions. They can, however, be used as realistic examples of the resource issues/problems/opportunities related to sustainable rotations for the semi-arid tropics. It is useful to link these issues schematically, and attempt to make their root causes explicit, perhaps through a flow diagram as in Figure 36. Similar diagrams could provide a basis of discussion and, perhaps, action which may lead to changes in cropping practice and agreement with farmers as to how to monitor the sustainability of their system (Figure 4).
1. Too large a proportion and area of land is used for livestock or fallow which is marginally beneficial for livestock and fuel production. Reducing livestock numbers and/or keeping them penned in a cut-and-carry forage system, rather than allowing them to graze freely for most of each year, frees land for food cropping. Fallow as such confers no positive benefits to the sustainability of cropping. Indeed, contrary to the implication in Kassam et al. (1991), poorly-managed short fallows grazed by livestock can be associated with degradation of soil structure and chemical depletion.
2. There are too few local markets to generate cash so that farmers aiming for food security could purchase livestock-products and fuel. There is a need for more markets to overcome the constraint described in 1 above. There are opportunities to add value, for example small-scale processing of soybean meal. Such steps are immediate and create local employment, and are presumably more realistic than suggesting that semi-arid Africa tries to compete internationally with, say, the USA for markets in soybeans. Subsistence farmers competing with mechanized agribusiness may be likened to a runner competing against a fast car.
3. The health and strength of human (and animal) labour varies seasonally. Labour is needed for tillage when debilitating disease is most likely and when seasonal deterioration in diet starts. Sowing and weeding coincide with the seasonal minimum in diet. Thus, human labour constraints enhance traditional conservatism with respect to maintaining uncropped areas and, combined with traditional high intensity tillage, reduce the area of crops sown and make sowing untimely.
4. For cropping systems to be sustainable, nutrients other than nitrogen need to be imported. This constraint cannot be overcome even if recycling of manures is made more effective and degrading practices such as mounding, burning and ploughing are stopped. It follows that cash generation (2, above) is essential to increase purchases of fertilizers.
5. To sustain nitrogen levels, crop legumes are essential. Their absence near homesteads needs to be balanced by giving legumes a dominant role in rotations in outer fields.
6. Parts of the cropping system with herbaceous legumes do not currently dominate cropping systems in dryland Africa nor are they likely to with present species and cultivars. Groundnuts are highly competitive and have poor water-use efficiency. They, however, have an appreciable, largely un-exploited, variation in nitrogen-fixing capacity (Giller et al. 1987). Cowpeas have a longer growing season and are more susceptible to pests and diseases than is desirable. For legumes to dominate part of a cropping system there is a need to move, for example, to 1:1 intercropping with cereals and 3:1 years legume/cereal rotations to maximize the net benefits of legumes to soil structure and fertility. The adoption of such rotations requires: (a) legumes that can be used as an alternative to groundnuts; (b) legumes which are promiscuous, that is able to be infected by many naturally-occurring rhizobia; and (c) legumes which are more effective at nodulating and can benefit more from
their rhizobia. These opportunities are developed in Chapter 5: they can be seen as part of a system that focuses on the improvement of a few selected grain legumes, and their processing. In this way the present causes of non-sustainability listed in 1 to 4 above can be addressed
7. Naturally-occurring tree legumes that have been sustainably managed by trimming and browsing can be augmented with the same species or introduced species, particularly as part of stable land systems, along fencelines or on permanent soil ridges.
TABLE 39
Traditional and improved crops and cropping systems for selected locations in the semi-arid tropics of India (Source: Singh and Reddy 1988)
Location
Crops
Stable cropping systems
Traditional
Improved
Intercrop
Sequential
Cambisols
Jodhpur (380 mm, 11 weeks)
Pearl millet
Moth bean
Cluster bean
Mung bean
Sesame
Rapeseed-mustard
Hybrid, pearl millet
Improved mung bean
Castor bean
Cluster bean
Sunflower
Safflower
Green gram or cluster bean/pearl millet (BJ 104)
Cenchrus ciliaris mung bean (T 44) (normal rain)
Cenchrus ciliaris cluster bean (FS277) (for >500 mm rain)
Pearl millet-fallow
Pearl millet (BL 104)-mustard (T 59) (for >500 mm rain)
Hisar (400 mm, 13 weeks)
Pearl millet
Cluster bean
Mung bean
Chickpea
Hybrid pearl millet
Cluster bean
Improved mung bean
Rapeseed-mustard
Pearl millet/mung bean
Pearl millet/cowpea (fodder)
Pearl millet-chickpea
Mung bean-mustard
Shallow Luvisols
Anantapur (570 mm, 14 weeks)
Groundnut
Pigeonpea
Foxtail millet
Sorghum
Groundnut
Castor
Pearl millet or sorghum
Pigeonpea
Mesta (rozella)
Groundnut (Kadiri-1)/pigeonpea (PDM 1)
Groundnut/castor bean
Pearl millet/pigeonpea
Medium Vertisols
Rajkot (625 mm, 17 weeks)
Pearl millet
Cotton
Sorghum
Groundnut
Sorghum
Cotton
Castor
Groundnut
Groundnut (J-11)/ Groundnut (J-11)/ pigeonpea
Cotton/green gram
Shallow Luvisols
Hyderabad (770 mm, 17 weeks)
Sorghum
Castor bean
Pearl millet
Castor bean
Sorghum
Foxtail millet
Pearl millet
Sorghum/pigeonpea
Pearl millet/pigeonpea
Castor bean/cluster bean
Pigeonpea/mung bean
Deep Luvisols
Bangalore (890 mm, 32 weeks)
Finger millet
Maize
Groundnut
Horse gram
Finger millet
Maize
Groundnut
Finger millet (PR 202)/ soybean
Groundnut/pigeonpea
Finger millet/maize or pearl millet (fodder)
Cowpea-fingar millet
Shallow to medium Vertisols
Solapur (722 mm, 23 weeks)
Pearl millet
Sorghum
Safflower
Chickpea
Hybrid pearl millet
Sorghum
Groundnut
Chickpea
Pearl millet/pigeonpea
Pearl millet-chickpea
Mung bean-rabi sorghum
Bijapur (680 mm, 17 weeks)
Pearl millet
Groundnut
Cotton
Hybrid pearl millet
Foxtail millet
Sunflower
Green gram
Safflower
Groundnut/pigeonpea
Pearl millet/pigeonpea
Chickpea, safflower
Green gram-rabi sorghum
Green gram-safflower
Deep Vertisols
Hyderabad (770 mm, 25 weeks)
Sorghum
Maize
Safflower
Chickpea
Sorghum
Safflower
Chickpea
Sorghum/pigeonpea
Sorghum-saff lower
Sorghum-chickpea
Maize-chickpea
Bellary (500 mm, 8 weeks)
Cotton
Rabi sorghum
Safflower
Coriander
Rabi sorghum
Safflower
Field beans
Chickpea
Cotton/setaria
Sorghum/coriander
Cotton/chickpea
Asian examples
The largest areas of seasonally wet-and-dry climate in south Asia are the 12 zones (Hutchinson et al. 1992) in India and the II and 12 zones in Laos and Cambodia (Figure 6). There are also much smaller, densely populated, areas, in east Java and the eastern islands of Indonesia.
Venkateswarlu (1993) and others review rotations in the Indian semi-arid tropics. As in west and north-east Africa, tree and shrub legumes are sometimes present and planting of elite crops such as pigeonpea, (Cajanus cajan) are encouraged. Annual crops, however, are dominated by pearl millet and sorghum, as in the Sahel. Table 39 lists traditional crops and their association with the length-of-growing season. As explained earlier this varies substantially with soil water-holding capacity in areas having the same annual rainfall. Maize is grown on favoured microsites, on soils with relatively high water-holding capacity (cf. Figure 9) and on the wetter margins of the region.
Animals are important in Asian farming economies, cut-and-carry systems of feeding being more common, for example, in Indonesia than in India or Africa. It is common practice at the end of the wet season, before the crops are harvested and residues available to livestock, for farmers to strip leaves from the maize or sorghum during grain filling. As Pearson and Hall (1984) have shown, lower leaves can be removed to provide nutritious feed without harming the food crop, but removal of upper leaves, which is not uncommon, reduces grain yield.
TABLE 40
Management of two cropping patterns commonly used in upland areas of Indonesia
Cropping pattern
Crop
Spacing (m)
Population per ha (1000 plants)
O
N
D
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
- - - maize - - -
maize
2.0 x 0.4
- - upland rice - -
upland rice
0.4 x 0.2
- - - - - - - cassava - - - - - - -
cassava
4.0 x 0.4
- - - maize - - - -
maize
2.0 x 0.4
- - - upland rice - - -
upland rice
0.4 x 0.2
- - - - - - - - cassava - - - - - -
cassava
4.0 x 0.4
groundnuts
- - - rice beans - - -
groundnuts
0.2 x 0.2
ricebeans
0.4 x 0.2
TABLE 41
Relative yield of transplanted and dry-seeded rice obtained from on-farm trials in Iloilo and Pangasinan, Philippines, 1977 (Source: Gomez and Gomez 1983)
Location
Seedling establishment
No. of fields
Grain yield (t/ha)
Source
Iloilo
dry-seeding
Interdisciplinary Research Team 1978
transplanting
Interdisciplinary Research Team 1978
Pangasinan
dry-seeding
Gines et al. 1978
transplanting
Gines et al. 1978
As in Africa, trees for firewood are important in India. Shortage of fuelwood has caused other communities (e.g., in east Java) to trade crop surpluses for petroleum products. Budgets of fuel and forage needs for farms and regions are published by Srivastava and Rao (1989) and others. Where community populations are sufficiently sparse, it is realistic to recommend one-fifth of available land for silviculture and a substantial proportion for tree alley crops (16%). Planting of trees for fuel and forage on 'alternative land' which has been degraded and is unstable, should be seen as a conservation measure and not as a cost against food cropping.
Tandon and Rego (1989) review crop responses in India to inorganic nutrients other than nitrogen. They conclude that responses are often large and that phosphorus and zinc are of major importance, though yield responses to potassium and sulphur are also common on some soils and iron chlorosis is an emerging problem.
Published figures giving areas of grain legumes (mostly chickpea, cowpea and gram), suggest that cereal-legume rotations and intercropping mixtures are, in practice, about 4:1 cereal and oilseeds: legumes (Venkateswarlu 1993). Thus, cropping systems in India have similarities with the Sahel though differing soils, social factors and markets should caution against extrapolating, or trying to transfer, solutions from one to the other.
Semi-arid cropping systems in India, and to a greater extent in Indo-China and east Indonesia, use dryland or upland rice when possible during the wet season. Table 40 shows typical dryland cropping patterns in east Java, with rice the preferred wet season crop if the length of the growing season (duration of rainfall), or the availability of runon water, permit. Otherwise, monoculture maize is grown, with little interplanting of grain legumes. The grain legumes are used as a second, relay crop, often hand-broadcast into the rice stubble or as a marginal wet-season crop, planted late and on less-favoured fields.
The advantage of semi-arid south-east Asia over, say, the Sahel, is its varied topography, so that many areas are able to capture run-on water which allows extension of the growing season. Thus, dryland rice grown with a significant period in standing water is possible. In India, ICRISAT has successfully popularized water harvesting to create local areas suitable for rice or relay cropping in less hilly regions. This increases both crop diversity and economic and ecological stability.
Traditionally, rice has been grown largely by transplanting seedlings from nurseries. Societal change, driven by women preferring to do piece-work for cash instead of maintaining transplant gardens, is encouraging direct seeding. This has several advantages. It shortens the crop life cycle allowing two crops in some situations (Gomez and Gomez 1983). It is less labour intensive and avoids transplant shock. Transplanted rice has no inherent yield advantage over directly-seeded rice (e.g., Table 41).
A list of constraints on and opportunities for dryland cropping in south Asia might identify similar key issues to those listed in the previous section. Livestock is segregated from cropping in parts of the region, though notably not in India. The absence of livestock and dearth of trees for fuel elsewhere in Asia, however, illustrate that communities may move from devoting land to livestock and fuel crops to essentially food-crop only systems. Recognition of the benefits of tree legumes and their adoption seems broadly feasible. Within the food crop component of the cropping system, there remains the problem of having insufficient legume cropping to maintain a neutral nitrogen budget. The productivity of the herbaceous legumes currently grown is of the order of 0.3-0.9 t/ha only (Venkateswarlu 1993). Thus, to achieve sustainable cropping in south Asia attention is needed to the following constraints (Compare with Item 6; previous section):
1. The proportion of herbaceous legumes in crop mixes, and the effectiveness of nitrogen fixation (residual value) of the legumes need to be increased.
2. Visual symptoms should be used to diagnose the need for inorganic fertilizers, particularly those containing phosphorus and zinc.
Soybean and mungbean are currently grown, and may be more nitrogen-effective and less degrading than groundnuts. They are, however, less extensive than cereals, which suggests that more legumes should be grown as intercrops. Table 42 summarizes potential intercropping systems, including crop legumes, shown by ICRISAT to be agronomically viable.
TABLE 42
Promising intercropping systems that include legumes in India
System
Row ratio
Potential areas
Sorghum + pigeonpea
Semi-arid red soil regions of southern Telengana, semi-arid black soils of Vidarbha region and semi-arid black soils of Malwa plateau
Pearl millet + pigeonpea
Semi-arid black soils of Deccan region of Maharashtra as well as Karnataka and semi-arid black soils of Saurashtra
Pigeonpea + soybean
Semi-arid/sub-humid black soils of Madhya Pradesh and sub-humid red soils of Chotanagpur region
Sorghum + mung bean
Semi-arid black soils of Bidarbha and Marathwada region
Pigeonpea + sunflower
Semi-arid black soils of Deccan region of Maharashtra
Finger millet + pigeonpea
Sub-humid red soils of Orissa and semi-arid red soils of southern Karnataka
Groundnut + pigeonpea
Semi-arid red soils of Rayalaseema
Maize + mung bean
Sub-humid submontane regions of northwest Uttar Pradesh and Jammu and semi-arid black soils of Malwa plateau
In parts of Asia, for example northeast Thailand and east Indonesia, root crops, particularly cassava, are grown extensively for local consumption, local processing (e.g., into packaged chips) and for export (e.g., as stock-feed to Europe). The profitability of root crops for export varies widely. Their local use, however, and their good storage properties and transportability once processed, suggest that root crops will remain a component of semi-arid cropping. Inter-planting of a non-competitive legume crop shortly after planting cassava stakes could substantially increase the area sown to grain or forage legumes. The low yields of legumes (e.g., Venkateswarlu 1993) suggest a need to improve both inorganic nutrition and rhizobial effectiveness.
Australian and mediterranean examples
Cropping in temperate dryland climates (E2, Figure 7) is based on cereals, mainly wheat and barley, as is cropping in the wet-and-dry regions of north east Africa above 2400 m and in the Near East. Although the climates in Australia and the Mediterranean areas under discussion are similar they have different traditions, the Mediterranean systems being aimed towards village food security until recently while the Australian systems, developed since the 1880s, are aimed at producing bulk grain for export. Farm size differs, Australian mechanized farms averaging 2800 ha (1983/4). Mediterranean systems recognize traditional practices and farmers' values, and there is more local consumption of food crops, so there is a variety of cropping systems around the theme of cereal/fallow or cereal/hay crop/fallow (Table 43). Australian systems have developed more limited options around crop/legume pastures or crop/volunteer weedy species rotations (Table 44). On the Australian dry margin
and on fine-textured soils the systems usually include a long fallow (9-12 months), primarily to conserve water but also to assist the mineralization of nitrogen, and control weeds and diseases. The efficiency of the system, as assessed by water use (WUE), generally ranges from 10 to 16 kg grain/ha/mm, which is very similar to that of cereal crops in the United Kingdom and Syria.
TABLE 43
Main rotation patterns in Mediterranean cropping systems (Source: Lopez-Bellido 1992)
Country
Main rotation
Italy
Cereal-hay crops-cereal
Fallow-cereal-cereal-fallow (has grazing value)
Cereal-tobacco, sugar beet, grain legumes
Greece
70% cereal-cereal
10% cereal-hay crops
2% cereal-grain legumes
18% with other alternatives (cotton, sugar beet, tobacco)
Portugal
Cereal-fallow (falow has grazing value)
Fallow-fallow-cereal
Fallow-cereal-subterranean clover
Annual cropping:
Cereal-cereal-hay crop
Cereal-sunflower (grain legumes are being abandoned due to broomrape)
Spain (rainfed)
40% fallow-cereal
25% annual cereal
10% cereal-sunflower
10% cereal-hay
5% cereal-grain legumes
10% others (mainly grazed forage)
Algeria
80% fallow-cereal (fallow has grazing value)
15% cereal-hay crops
5% cereal-grain legumes
Egypt
Usually 3-year rotation including cotton, maize, rice
Morocco:
low rainfall
25% fallow (has grazing value)
75% continuous cereal
high rainfall
15% continuous cereal
79% grain legumes
15% fallow (grazed)
Tunisia
16% fallow-fallow-cereal
42% fallow-cereal
17% cereal-cereal
14% cereal-hay crops
11 % cereal-grain legumes
Cyprus
20% fallow
6% continuous cereal
20% cereal-hay crops. Nigligible grain legumes
Jordan
Fallow (no grazing value) exists only in low rainfall.
The majority of the area is cereal-grain legumes or cereal-vegetables
Lebanon
Little remaining fallow. Where it exists it has grazing value except in low rainfall zone
Rotations are wheat-barley-wheat-alfalfa and wheat-lentils
Turkey:
low rainfall
95% fallow-cereal
5% grain legumes
high rainfall
50% continuous cereal
10% hay crops
10% grain legumes
30% others
TABLE 44
Major small-grain production systems of Australia subdivided on rainfall and soil texture
Winter rainfall
Summer rainfall
Low (<300 mm)
Medium
High
Coarse-textured soils
Fine-textured soils
C-(VP...)
F-C
C-(P...)
C-(P...)
SF-C
C-GL
C-C
C-C
C-P-P
F-SC
F-C-(P...)
C-GL
SF-C-SF
C-GL
C-GL-C-(P...)
-F-SC
F-C
Key: C, cereal crop; GL, grain legume; SF, summer fallow; VP, volunteer pasture; F, fallow; P, legume pasture.
FIGURE 37 - Rhizobium trifolii soil populations over four seasons with wheat (1983-84) and direct-sown (and inoculated) subterranean clover (1985) and regenerating clover (1986).
Land use in Mediterranean climates presents problems for soil sustainability, particularly on hill land. These are not so much directly related to cropping practices (although contour ploughing, for example, is not uniformly practised) but to deforestation (Table 18) and depopulation of hill country (S. Orsi, personal communication). In Australia, land preparation methods vary greatly with location and season and may confer non-sustainability. Land to be cropped is usually heavily grazed shortly before the wet season; residual vegetation (pasture or weeds) is then killed with desiccant herbicide. The crop is then sown four hours to four days later either with minimum soil disturbance, or conventionally using 3-5 passes of a tined implement. There is some attendant loss of topsoil organic matter and structure. It is noteworthy that, in a system depending on the survival and growth of rhizobia, direct drilling creates lower bulk densities (Carter and Steed 1992) and maintains
higher rhizobia populations than tillage (Figure 37).
TABLE 45
Estimates of equilibrium values of the amount of soil organic matter nitrogen which builds up under various cereal crop-legume pasture rotations, and its mineralization in the crop year, in Australia (Source: Perry 1992)
Equilibrium soil N (kg/ha)
Mineralization (kg/ha/yr)^1
Continuous pasture
2 crop: 4 pasture
1 crop: 1 pasture
Continuous crop
^1 A decomposition constant of 0.04 is assumed, but this would vary with season, crop and cultural condition.
Australian cereal-based cropping systems need to maintain a neutral nitrogen budget through the non-cereal phase. They require addition of phosphorus and other elements as inorganic fertilizers. Organic matter levels need to be kept up. Dunne and Shier (1935) criticized the rotations used then as not maintaining fertility for cropping. As a result pasture legume periods were lengthened. From about 1950 to 1980, pastures were widely included in rotations, the period in pasture commonly being one and a half to three times that of the crop. The accumulation of nitrogen under pasture is illustrated in Figure 21. The average annual increment of soil nitrogen from 22 estimates was 67 kg N/ha/year, the highest value being 182 kg/ha/year (Perry 1992). Perry argues that the key to the functioning of the system is the rate of mineralization which makes the nitrogen available to the crop. Table 45 shows a 4-fold range in rate of mineralization among four common crop-pasture rotations.
Nutrient elements other than nitrogen, particularly phosphorus, sulphur, zinc and molybdenum, are routinely added at sowing in quantities sufficient to compensate for their removal in the grain. As well as giving economic crop yield responses in the year of application, these nutrients have indirect benefits. Heavy applications of inorganic nutrients reduce the incidence of root diseases (e.g., Brennan 1992).
The cereal-legume pasture system, so widely used from 1950 to 1980 and publicized internationally, depended on relatively favourable international prices for grains and sheep products, especially wool, and a balance between them. Successive years of drought with high grain and relatively low wool prices in the early 1980s led to intensification of the cereal crop phase. Continuous cropping became widespread and fewer legume pastures were sown. Then, in the early 1990s, following a short period of artificially high wool prices and increased sheep numbers, wool became marginally economic so sowing and management of legume pastures were again largely abandoned. Recently, concern about erosion associated with overgrazing and the extent of bare soil that occurs under annual pasture species such as Trifolium subterraneum and medicago, has shifted attention towards the inclusion of grass, particularly perennial grass, in the non-cereal phase of rotations. This is supported by
research which shows that the rate of soil acidification beneath perennial grass is slower than under annual ryegrass (Lolium rigidum) pasture in a seasonally wet-and-dry environment (Ridley et al. 1990).
FIGURE 38 - Linkages between major agronomic problems or issues identified from the conduct of a topical rapid rural appraisal in the Forbes Shire in Australia (Source: Ison and Ampt 1992)
TABLE 46
Impact of lupins on soil nitrogen under cereal and cereal-legume rotations: mean soil mineral nitrogen (NH[4]+NO[3]+NO[2] kg/ha, 0-20 cm) after growing wheat (W) and lupins (L) in rotation (Source: Reeves et al. 1984)
Soil mineral nitrogen after
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
W
71.2b^1
WW
79.6d
WWW
65.8c
WWL
99.6b
L
105.7a
LW
102.5c
LWW
66.4c
LWL
109.2ab
WL
127.8b
WLW
78.0c
WLL
120.5a
LL
172.3a
LLW
77.7c
LLL
126.1a
^1 Within columns, values not followed by a common letter differ significantly (P<0.05).
The present system is arguably not sustainable, because of the changes in markets and attitudes, depending as it does on nitrogen fixed by a pasture phase that is increasingly botanically-impoverished. This is illustrated by farmers' perceptions that the nitrogen concentration of the cereal grain is declining, and that pasture and soil factors are causing this (Figure 38).
The Australian system described above is a good example of how biological and soil sustainability depends on markets, in the absence of policies of land management agreed by land managers. It shows how sustainability and agronomic practices can change rapidly. Another issue raised by recent changes in Australia is the need for adapted grain legumes. The system is likely to return to sustainability only by introduction of legume crops, particularly field peas and lupins (Lupinus angustifolius and L. albus). These fix more nitrogen than legume-based pastures and, depending on the proportion of nitrogen removed from the field as grain, usually give a residual benefit of about 20-50 kg N/ha (field peas) and 50-90 kg N/ha (lupins). The latter value exceeds that for many tropical grain legumes (Table 24). As Table 46 shows, the soil nitrogen responds positively, quickly and substantially to the inclusion of a temperate grain legume (in this case, Lupinus angustifolius in NE
Victoria). Grain legumes currently occupy only 12% in west and 4% in the east of the cereal areas. These areas need to be increased to help maintain general levels of soil nitrogen, organic matter and good soil structure.
One aspect, perhaps better documented for semi-arid Australia than elsewhere is that of timeliness. As Loss et al. (1990), Perry (1992) and others have described, there is a window of opportunity for sowing at the beginning of each wet season. Any delay in sowing causes substantial reductions in grain yield. This is a universal phenomenon that emphasizes the need for:
· knowledge of the probabilities of an effective beginning to the growing season, so that sowing will be neither premature and unreasonably risky or, as is common in developing countries, delayed so much by late, excessive cultivation that yield potential is routinely lost;
· sufficient knowledge by the farmer of the best timing and type of soil treatment at sowing for plant establishment. This requires ready availability of machinery and the use where possible of minimum tillage. Where cultivation is necessary because of local conditions, it should be coupled with sowing, so that at least some fields are sown in a timely manner and are not delayed until cultivation of the last field is complete.
Sowing is only one of several recurring operations in both crop and fallow phases (Figure 39). For each, timeliness may be critical. In some cases it is doubtful whether the operation should be undertaken at all. For example, ploughing and grazing at unsuitable soil-moisture contents can be detrimental to soil structure. Grazing is most beneficial if timed so that the livestock eat immature weed seeds, but it is detrimental if delayed until after seed fall and causes uprooting of plants when the topsoil is friable and dry.
Within both Australia and Mediterranean regions there are examples of family farmers and large corporations with an ethic of land care who manage their soils for sustainability, and others who do not. Table 47 summarizes some of the characteristics of these extremes in Australia. Unsustainable management is almost always oriented to short-term market prices without knowledge or interest in the biological mechanisms which underlie soil and crop behaviour, and the patterns which characterize sustainable crop rotations. Table 47, although necessarily general, illustrates the fifth premise of this Bulletin (Chapter 1), namely that tailoring an understanding of generic mechanisms to local situations is a powerful way of creating sustainable cropping systems.
FIGURE 39 - Scheme to draw attention to the need for clear time-lines, and critical timeliness of operations, in cropping in the semi-arid tropics
Figure 38 illustrates a non-sustainable situation in east Australia. The key indication that the system is not sustainable (declining protein concentration in grain) is linked to its root causes within the system. Similar schemas, together with local knowledge of seasonal work demands and social constraints (e.g., Figure 31), can form the basis for debate about any action to be taken (Chapter 5).
TABLE 47
Management aspects of dryland cropping systems from an Australian perspective
Not biologically sustainable
Sustainable
· Cropping decisions made annually only on grain and livestock prices
· Cropping broadly based on rotations and ethic of land care
· Focus on few products: 2 crops, 1 -2 crops, 1-2 livestock (e.g., wool, sheep meat)
· Diversity of products
· No rotations; grasses dominate system
· Rotations with balance between grasses (cereals and legumes)
· Full utilization of crop residues for livestock, hay, etc.; bare soil in dry season
· Organic matter and soil biology management: soil surface coverage, residue incorporation, permanent contour ridges/bunds
· Inorganic nutrients added (sometimes) according to product prices
· Inorganic nutrients added regularly to maintain zero-loss budget, i.e., to compensate for nutrients removed in grain and livestock products
· Annual conventional cultivation (>2 passes)
· Minimum tillage
· Fallow not managed; without legume
· Fallow perceived as integral part of crop rotation: contains pasture legume which is managed to maximize seed products and self-regeneration
· Uncontrolled seeding of weeds including annual grasses during fallow
· Conscious weed management to minimize weed seed rain
· No perennial grasses or trees
· Some perennial vegetation: grasses in waterways, exposed hillsides; tree legumes
· Livestock populations high; grazing pressure uncontrolled, causing, e.g., soil structure degradation in wet areas
· Livestock populations conservative, flexible for surviving drought
Rotations and soil productivity
On the balance of experimental evidence, those cropping elements that help to maintain soil productivity in parts of Africa, Asia and Australia have been emphasized. These include: (a) the need to retain organic matter and soil structure; (b) the need for appropriate tillage which, in many situations, involves minimal soil disturbance; (c) the need to replenish the nutrients removed in grain, straw and livestock products; (d) the essential need to maximize ground cover; (e) the desirability of mixing crop species, particularly to include legumes with effective nodulation (grain crops, forage crops, trees and shrubs); and (f) the need for any fallow period to be managed rather than to be left bare to be exploited by livestock, or for weed seeds and pests to accumulate in the soil.
The question arises: how are these conceptual elements best exploited in crop rotations? Table 47 provides a framework, and Figure 39 illustrates the dynamic, and recurring, nature of decisions involving the choice of rotations and techniques for the maintenance of soil productivity.
Figure 21 illustrates the value of effectively-nodulated legumes (in this case, a pasture ley) in increasing soil nitrogen, as long as the nitrogen is not removed as a product. Figures 37 and 28 show associated increases in soil rhizobia and vesicular arbuscular miccorhizae under undisturbed pasture legumes. Tables 13 and 14 show the impact of plant architecture and ground cover on soil loss and mineral leaching. All the above give estimates of the benefits, to soil biology and chemistry, of the crop elements in a rotation. The aspects they illustrate are reflected by some Australian farmers' practices (Table 44), under which the rotations chosen appear to maintain soil productivity (Table 46) though soil nitrogen levels at equilibrium may be only half those under continuous legume pasture (Table 45). However, there are very few long-term studies which quantify the effects of different crops on soil conditions. Indeed, such studies seem to be a priority to encourage changes
in cropping systems. For example, there are few data on nitrogen fixation by legumes on farms in Africa and Asia, and no known studies, that compare the effects of groundnuts on soil structure and fertility (which are possibly degrading) with other legumes such as soybeans.
There is little information on the effects of fallow management on soil biology, particularly on weed seeds, pests and diseases. On many farms, weeds spread uncontrolled during the fallow period, while experiments often unrealistically contrast weed-free extremes. Caporali and Onnis (1992), in re-affirming the importance of crop/legume rotations, interestingly also show that weed density increased more during ten years of sunflower-based cropping under sunflower monoculture than under a sunflower-lucerne rotation. They show too that there are more weeds after mechanical- than chemical-control.
There is much information available on the effects of tillage and litter/stubble treatments on soil properties. The data, however, are not always consistent. This is not surprising as the timeliness of an operation is relevant to its effects on the soil and there are rapid changes in soil properties in the days following sowing (Addae et al. 1991; Ghuman and Lal 1992). Moreover, several years of treatment are often needed before there are lasting effects upon soil characteristics that influence crop growth, for example, root length density (Figure 15).
Notwithstanding the variation, and at times the ephemeral effects of management on soil properties, it is clear that there are benefits from those crop rotations that enable crop residue retention. Three examples follow. Gill and Aulakh (1990) show that zero tillage for three years gave the lowest soil bulk density and highest crop yields. Radford et al. (1992) found that zero tillage plus stubble removal gave the least soil water storage but that zero tillage plus stubble retention gave the greatest soil water capacity. Chan et al. (1992) record that ten years, conventional (three-pass) cultivation and stubble burning gave least soil organic matter whilst direct drilling plus stubble retention gave most organic matter. In this study, tillage had a cumulative effect, causing 31% differences in organic matter (2.42% as against 1.68% organic carbon); a loss of 1% organic carbon was calculated to result in a loss of almost 3 cmole of negative charge per kilogram of soil. As a
working hypothesis, it seems that stubble and litter retention (and incorporation if necessary to avoid removal by grazing or wind) is the key to sustainable rotations. Bearing in mind soil organisms, however (Chapter 3, section Organic matter), it may be necessary occasionally to till and mix the soil layers (Alegre et al. 1991).
Mineral nutrition is, together with crop choice, stubble/litter treatment, and soil management, a key to sustainable rotations. For example, the removal of a 600 kg grain crop requires 1.8 kg phosphorus to be replaced using manure or mineral fertilizer. Nine kilograms of nitrogen are also needed (most realistically, from the breakdown of a previous legume crop or pasture, or by application of manure). A long fallow, in which deep-rooted perennials draw nutrients from depth, may help to balance the loss of nutrients. However, nitrate may move down the profile during the fallow, commonly giving a net annual decline in soil nitrogen in the absence of legumes (Martin and Cox 1956). Standley et al. (1990), however, found that there was an increase (of 30 kg N/ha) during a short (7-8 months) fallow which balanced the loss during the crop phase. If weeds or pasture grow during the fallow and are grazed, then nutrient losses of about 20% are common. These losses are by removal of
animal products and volatilization of urine. Grazing can also redistribute nutrients as dung from one field to another.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 5 - Summary of physical, biological and management aspects of dryland cropping
Lessons for dryland cropping systems
The balance of future research and development
This chapter draws together and summarizes the various physical, biological and management aspects arising from knowledge of the biological mechanisms which underlie soil and crop management (Chapters 2 and 3) and present cropping practices (Chapter 4). It also draws attention to some unresolved issues and the diverse lessons that have been learned. Some of the views outlined below are broadly accepted, but others may appear contentious or contradict accepted wisdom. In the final section, selected issues are raised because they require more debate and resolution before policies are developed and resources found to deal with them.
Lessons for dryland cropping systems
Need to import nutrients
Need for realistic pricing to encourage better crop and management choices
Participation by farmers and their responsibility for land care
Measurement of cropping sustainability
Desirability of matching biological solutions to local circumstances
Appropriate soil management and the use of fallows
Need for more legume crops
Weeds, pests and diseases as indicators of management expertise
Need to import nutrients
It is emphasized above that there is usually marked spatial variation in fertility within a farm. Further, modem markets ensure that crops, livestock and their products are exported from farms, including those in dryland regions, to sustain largely urban populations elsewhere. In this way, nutrients are being removed at faster rates than they are replenished through soil mineralization.
Such nutrient export is of no concern as long as soil and crop resources are conserved by importing nutrients regularly to balance the losses (e.g., Table 47). Thus, a biologically sustainable dryland cropping system could require an annual off-farm input of say 1.8 kg P/ha to replace that removed in grain and residue from a 600 kg/ha grain crop. Looking at it another way, a 2 t/ha grain crop (an appropriate target where there is 200 mm rainfall during the growing season), requires 6 kg P/ha to replenish that removed in the crop. This assumes a water-use efficiency of 10 kg grain/ha for every millimetre of rainfall, and that 30 g P/ha should be applied for every millimetre.
Though there are no qualitative, generic differences in biological sustainability across semi-arid regions, some systems appear inherently more sustainable than others. Examples include sparsely-populated mechanized systems in Australia and USA where farm surpluses are usually sufficient for farmers to afford inorganic nutrients. Thus, with respect to dryland cropping in developing countries, the question is not simply how to help to make it biologically sustainable, but can economic signals or support mechanisms be developed (e.g., subsidies from city-dwellers) that cause local farmers to act rationally in economic terms and encourage them to maintain the sustainability of their soil and cropping system. Jolly (1989) draws attention to the relationship between the farmers' economic environment and their decisions about fertilizer use. Put another way, the challenge for agricultural policy-makers is to make economics coincide with soil sustainability.
TABLE 48
Economic analysis of cropping systems tested for rainfed black soils in NE monsoon season (Source: Palaniappan 1985)
Cropping system
LER
Gross income (Rs/ha)
Cost of cultivation (Rs/ha)
Net income (Rs/ha)
Return per rupee invested (RS)
Sole safflower
Sole bengalgram
Sole coriander
Sole wheat
Safflower + bengalgram
Saff lower + coriander
Saff lower + wheat
Bengalgram + safflower
Bengalgram + coriander
Bengalgram + wheat
FIGURE 40 - Overview of the framework for economic analysis of tillage alternatives (Source: Stonehouse 1991)
As an illustration of the kind of economic circumstances that could be developed to achieve biological sustainability, European governments wishing to have national food security and valuing an inhabited scenic countryside, may be prepared to subsidize both food production and countryside management, thereby making cropping economically and biologically sustainable. Developed countries and, perhaps, those developing countries with sufficiently-wealthy urban populations, may take a similar philosophical view of their semi-arid croplands. It may be better to provide marginal support through fertilizers or recycling of city wastes to maintain long-term biological and economic sustainability of dryland cropping than to devote greater resources to social issues such as migration, particularly if such issues are associated with loss of sustainability. If such a transfer of resources from cities to cropping systems, is seen to maintain sustainability (Table 1), and as the best and
least cost option, the question becomes not 'What can be done?' but which is the best source of nutrients - inorganic fertilizers or organic city wastes.
Need for realistic pricing to encourage better crop and management choices
Biological sustainability is currently compromised by the need for short-term economic sustainability; the question arises: how can economic signals or support mechanisms be developed which will cause farmers to act economically yet maintain the sustainability of their cropping system? It is clear that the most suitable rotations are those that include leguminous grain, forage and tree crops and those that take a long-term view of soil management, for example by retaining soil cover rather than feeding everything to livestock. To encourage farmers to take rational economic decisions and be biologically responsible, the relative prices of agricultural products need to be considered, and systems-based budgeting is required.
Table 48 illustrates the dilemma by giving an economic analysis of a range of crops for India. Coriander has substantially the highest gross income, highest net return and highest return per rupee invested. Sole cropping of coriander might logically follow. The second most attractive option, coriander intercropped with the legume bengal gram, would not be grown if farmers made their cropping decisions based only on the likely profit of their next crop.
In the absence of regulations, sustainable crop rotations could be encouraged by: (a) the artificial manipulation of grain legume prices; (b) a market rise in the relative prices of grain legumes, associated with increasing scarcity of other protein sources (e.g., livestock, fish); and (c) by the preparation and promulgation of full budgets that include the indirect and residual benefits and costs of various crop rotations.
There is a real need for greater use of systems-based budgeting in both developed and developing countries. Figure 40 gives a schematic example of the components of such a budget for tillage. It takes into account all costs, including the direct variable costs which determine net returns to the farmer in the year under consideration and the indirect (usually un-measured) on-farm costs such as erosion and external costs, for example, watercourse pollution. Assessing indirect and external costs gives farmers a more realistic base for their on-farm decisions, and politicians and the public greater knowledge of the real environmental costs of farmers and policy-makers continuing to act to maximize short-term profits.
Participation by farmers and their responsibility for land care
Farmers need to recognize the indirect and external benefits of sustainable cropping if they are to manage their land 'with care'. They can be encouraged to meet formally or informally to discuss and develop sustainable cropping practices. The Land Care and Total Catchment Management groups of the Australian Murray-Darling basin are a good example of an appropriate farmer-based initiative (Watkins 1991).
By contrast, government management directives, subsidies and taxes may be ineffective or inequitable. Furthermore, where government directives are applied, for example to avoid pollution of waterways, there is a responsibility, not always exercised, to assess the impact of the directives on the whole cropping system. To give one example, if the government was to prohibit the use of fire to manage woody weeds in western New South Wales, Australia, it is estimated that it would be necessary to increase the size of each property by 80% to compensate for loss of income (MacLeod 1990).
Measurement of cropping sustainability
In Chapter 1 (Figure 1) it is suggested that sustainability can be measured by the rate of resource change (degradation), forcing, inertia, elasticity, and amplitude. It seems that the concepts of the rate of resource change and forcing are the most practical. The easiest aspects of forcing to estimate are subsidies from the non-agricultural sector and inorganic fertilizer input. Useful aspects of resource changes are many. They include vegetation (plant population and diversity), soil colour and texture (these can be scored by farmers), soil chemical attributes (e.g., pH), and pollution of groundwater or surface drainage from a farm.
The process is more important than the key indicators eventually chosen. Figure 4 suggests how key indicators of the sustainability of crop rotations for particular areas can be chosen. A move to sustainable cropping will only take place if all participants (farmers, researchers, extension officers, policy-makers) are involved in selecting what is to be measured. The process is one of farmer education. One of the best ways to ensure the farmers' commitment is to establish that they are in charge of the process and have the responsibility for monitoring sustainability.
Delegating responsibility to farmers raises two issues: (a) how are spatial and temporal variability, and externalities accommodated; and (b) what measurements should be chosen?
Farmer-led measurements may give some variability in scoring, though this assertion assumes, without much justification, that external judgements, e.g., laboratory analyses, are accurate as well as precise. Given that the quest for increased sustainability involves changing farmer attitudes, does it matter if one village uses a different yardstick, or is more attuned to problems, than its neighbour, provided that both are becoming increasingly aware? Further, it is likely that small differences in climate and soil resources, and subtle differences in markets and social values, may mean that it is not appropriate for individual villages in a region to emphasize the same measures of sustainability. This leads to the proposal, consistent with Dixon (1992), that it may be more helpful to talk in terms of spatially dispersed cropping system domains, rather than large contiguous zones based on climate.
If farmers are to control the development of sustainable systems (and is there, realistically, any alternative?) then the choice of key indicators of sustainability is severely constrained. As suggested earlier there are many indicators of soil structure, biological and chemical condition to choose from. These include visible indicators of soil physical problems (Chapter 2, section Field indicators of physical problems) and soil fertility (Chapter 3, section Field indicators of biological and nutritional problems and Table 33). Given the constraints of farmer education, interest, time and equipment, the choice is limited to a few surrogates such as: (a) plant population and species diversity (Figure 17); (b) scoring soil colour, texture and hardness; and, perhaps, (c) biennial measurement of topsoil pH. Through measurements, farmers would become increasingly aware of interrelationships within their cropping systems, and reflect on issues such as the impact of erosion and
loss of topsoil. Education, through measurement and reflection, might increase local expertise to the point of impact assessment. This is illustrated in Figure 5.
This participatory approach contrasts with the wide support by scientists and policy-makers of the need for minimum data sets. Because of their analytical complexity, these have to be the responsibility of external experts and remote laboratories. The contrasts between the analytical and participatory approaches are so great that discussions will be needed to resolve which method, or mixture of methods, is locally appropriate
Desirability of matching biological solutions to local circumstances
In the fifth premise in Chapter 1, it is suggested that 'It is better to tailor the understanding of generic mechanisms to local situations than to apply prescriptions for one cropping system to another'. It is instructive that rotations have broken down and cropping systems have become unsustainable in developed countries as well as in those parts of Asia and Africa described in Chapter 4. Various crops have been transferred from one system to another, but they are not always the answer to local human goals. To return to Figure 1, these goals include food security and profit, so markets and processing need to be considered if new crops are to be introduced. The goals also include satisfaction.
The characteristics of sustainable rotations are outlined earlier (e.g., Table 47), as are the options for maintaining soil physical properties (Table 19) and soil biology and nutrition (Table 34). Some of the desirable crop attributes suggested in Table 12 vary from those in previously-published lists. This might provoke thought. Table 49 summarizes the views of Reijntjes et al. (1992) on many of the aspects listed in Table 12 and relates them to crop rotations. Much work remains to fine-tune these broad recommendations to specific, spatially-dispersed, cropping systems.
TABLE 49
Choosing crops for rotation (Source Reijntjes et al. 1992)
A crop rotation should meet the needs of the particular farm for which it is designed, and it should meet the requirements for sustainability.
Needs of the farm. When designing a crop rotation, some questions that should be asked regarding the needs of the farm are:
· Is there a market for crops in the rotation?
· Are the crops suitable for the soil types on the farm?
· Are the crops suitable for the moisture and climate conditions of the farm?
· Can the crops be produced with the equipment available on the farm or with minimal changes in equipment?
· Do the crops supply the on-farm feed and on-farm green manure needs as well as the farm's cash and subsistence needs?
Requirements for sustainability. The crop rotation requirements for sustainability revolve around the following principles:
· Does the rotation provide effective week control?
· Does the rotation provide a balance of crop production and soil conservation?
· Does it contribute to soil building?
· Does the rotation include root systems that penetrate soil compaction, bring nutrients to the surface and allowing air and water to infiltrate the soil more readily?
· Does the rotation provide for effective insect and disease control?
· Does the rotation effectively utilize available moisture? Are moisture-conserving practices included? Are high moisture users alternated with plants requiring less moisture?
· Does the rotation provide for a sufficient diversity of crops to increase stability and therefore minimize risks?
· Do the crops avoid any buildup of undesirable elements?
Appropriate soil management and the use of fallows
There is substantial experimental data suggesting worthwhile long-term benefits from: (a) the retention of crop residues on the soil surface; (b) minimum tillage; and (c) in some situations, permanent ridging (Chapters 2 and 3). These practices may not give immediate benefits. Desirable conservation practices can be introduced where there is no short-term cost (relative, say, to traditional tillage). Where, however, the long-term benefits incur short-term costs, there is a return to the need for whole-system budgeting and the introduction of appropriate financial incentives for long-term soil care.
Chapters 3 and 4 question the benefit of fallows particularly as they are sometimes regarded as a pre-requisite for rotations. Fallows long enough to develop woody vegetation and high levels of soil organic matter, in the absence of livestock, no doubt have beneficial effects in traditional bush fallow-crop rotations (Chapter 1). Short-term fallows in which the soil is kept bare to conserve water for the next crop, may also have their place but only where soil structure is not degraded by repeated tillage and grazing. Short fallows are also valuable where they are managed as legume leys, to increase soil nitrogen and organic matter and improve soil structure. Under the traditional well-managed Australian system (Figure 21) such leys provide high-quality stock feed. Poorly-managed one or two year (or, perhaps, longer) fallows within intensive dryland crop rotations are, however, too short to build up significant soil organic matter. The style of management may be
inappropriate, irrespective of the duration. Such fallows may be characterized by significant bare ground, a mixture of weeds that seed uncontrolled (Table 47), heavy treading, grazing, and removal of nutrients by livestock. These fallows do not increase the sustainability of the system.
Various workers 'build in' requirements for fallows, for example: 'the prime reason for incorporating fallows into crop rotations is to enhance sustainability of production through maintenance of soil nutrient fertility" (Kassam et al. 1991). Instead, this Bulletin draws attention to management of the fallow as an indication of the sustainability of the whole system (Table 47). It follows, though this is not conventional wisdom, that in densely-populated areas, planners should encourage: (i) de-stocking and conversion of fallows to managed crop land; or (ii) the inclusion of well-managed legume forage crops between the main crops. Such actions should increase, rather than decrease, the sustainability of the whole system.
Need for more legume crops
The beneficial effects of effectively-nodulated leguminous crops are reviewed above. They need to be used more in dryland crop rotations. Such recommendation is not new. Over ten years ago an FAO workshop (FAO 1982) recommended 'research and application programmes that will lead to achieving the full potential of symbiotic and asymbiotic nitrogen fixation techniques in developing countries of the Near East Region. These programmes should include enhancing biological nitrogen fixation through:
- introduction of legumes, particularly those having a high nitrogen-fixing efficiency;
- legume inoculation using highly-efficient strains of rhizobia;
- algalization of rice fields;
- propagation and adaptation of azolla/blue-green algae systems when and wherever possible; and
- reduction of genetic and physiological constraints that limit the nitrogen fixing process.'
Since 1982 there has been more awareness of the opportunities for nitrogen fixation, both through symbiosis with Bradyrhizobium and Rhizobium and from free-living, nitrogen-fixing organisms. Much research is underway to exploit such symbioses in dryland cropping. Three particular fields of study are the development of promiscuous host plants (able to accept colonization by a wider range of native soil organisms than previously); genetic engineering of elite bacteria; and the development of new inoculation techniques. These together should produce low-cost, highly-effective rhizobia applied as a coating on seed.
Weeds, pests and diseases as indicators of management expertise
Weeds, pests and diseases are part of the cropping system. In order to establish truly sustainable systems, there should be a change in the way of thinking, by taking account of weed, pest and disease cycles (Figures 26 and 27) rather than simply reacting when pest and disease damage becomes obvious, for example, by changing the next crop. Hearn and Fitt (1992) provide a good example of this kind of new approach. Consideration of weeds, pests and diseases should play a key role in planning back-to-back grain/legume cropping. The dry-season and fallow vegetation should be managed with weeds, pests and diseases in mind. This is increasingly being seen to play a role in the management of soil condition.
The balance of future research and development
Recent research can be divided into two kinds: (a) with, and, (b) without farmers' involvement. The latter, to be effective, should support on-farm research, and not be independent of it. There are many variations on the theme of complementary on-farm and off-farm research. Chambers' proposed the 'farmer first and last' cycle has been employed and evaluated in developing countries (e.g., Merrill-Sands et al. 1989). It has been developed also for working with farmers in mechanized agricultural systems (e.g., Ison and Ampt 1992). Chambers and Ghildyal's list of researchers' attitudes when working with farmers rather than for the benefit of farmers is worth attention. A truly participatory approach involves farmers from the outset and includes them in formulation of the research design and the identification of key indicators of sustainability. Researchers learn from farmers, for instance, by comparing the efficiencies of various practices (Haen and Runge-Metzger 1989). They in
turn educate farmers, for example, in the relationships that underlie soil sustainability (Chapters 2 and 3) and facilitate farmers' own learning in various ways, mainly by encouraging formalized observation and recording of indicators of soil structure.
Research not involving farmers has burgeoned in the past decade, driven largely by rapid advances in technology, notably in computerization, remote (satellite) sensing of vegetation, geographic information systems and most recently, expert or decision support systems. FAO (1983) and Diepen et al. (1991) review methods of land evaluation.
Remotely sensed or derived data provide valuable insights to the constraints to crop rotations. For example, the climatic analysis in Chapter 1, section Drylands, is based, arguably for the first time, on comprehensive meteorological data, while multi-layered geographical information systems can be used to propose land uses. Kassam et al. (1991) make quantitative assessments of crop duration, firewood requirements etc., and suggest land uses in Kenya. Diepen et al. (1989), for instance, offer maps of Zambia, showing variability in crop yield on the basis of rooting depth and available soil water and other inputs. One of the greatest constraints on dryland cropping may be uncertainty about the actual start of the growing season, so that risk-averse farmers delay planting and the crop fails to utilize available soil water and mineralized nitrogen. Satellite sensing of the reflectance of vegetation can now detect seasonal changes in greening in semi-arid environments (Figure 4
la) so that the start of the season, and its year-to-year variation, can be quantified (Figure 41b).
Remotely-sensed data and computers should help to make better on-farm decisions by giving assurance that cropping intensification (e.g., Figure 6, 37) will not incur unacceptable risk. They may also lead (Stewart, 1988, 1991) to more flexible 'response' farming, though one should be cautious that flexibility does not encourage short-term opportunism that is incompatible with sustainability.
Information generated remotely will inevitably be used to help to make land-use policy. Perhaps it will be most influential if it is widely published. Data on regional variations in the length-of-season, or the extent of soil degradation, could cause adjustments in market prices for land. Thus, an economic incentive could develop which, through land prices, will encourage good management.
While acknowledging the impressive achievements of 'remote' research, the author has some misgivings about the technology-driven collection of data by external experts. For example, Okpala (1992) advises that: 'The effectiveness of land management in developing countries requires an improvement in the quality of survey data and information on which such management is based. This should be the focus and emphasis of current national and international efforts...'. Perhaps so, but Figure 1 draws attention to human, as well as biological, elements in crop and soil systems. Many other workers (e.g., Deffontaines 1991, Napier et al. 1991) remind us that land management is in part a social activity. Perhaps it is time to re-emphasize the views of various researchers (Beets 1978; Merrill-Sands et al. 1989 and Friedrich 1992) that rural development ultimately depends on farmers increasing their awareness of the mechanisms which underlie their cropping systems, and taking
responsibility for their sustainability.
<section>8</section>
Chapter 6 - Social and economic issues
Factors influencing farming systems
Strategies to achieve sustainability
Conclusions
As emphasized in the previous chapters, the semi-arid tropics are currently in crisis, not only in terms of current agricultural productivity but also in the prospects for sustainable agricultural development. Recently, rainfed agricultural development has been assigned high priority in the plans of many Asian developing countries and it continues to enjoy an important place on the development agenda of many African countries.
Of the many interacting factors contributing to the current crisis, two are fundamental. First, much of the semi-arid tropics (SATs) is characterized by soil and climate not conducive to agriculture. Secondly, the human populations of the SATs have increased rapidly in recent years, thus intensifying the pressure on agricultural resources.
This chapter aims to analyse the socio-economic aspects of sustainable agricultural development, both in general and in relation to farming systems in particular. The socio-economic analysis focuses on four key areas:
1. In many cases, government policies and international markets have, directly or indirectly, reduced the incentives for agricultural production in the SATs so contributing to stagnation.
2. In general, there has been limited success in developing technologies to improve the productivity of semi-arid agriculture.
3. The limited capacity of the non-agricultural sector to provide alternative employment for the increasing population of semi-arid areas.
4. In the absence of technological breakthroughs or favourable policy incentives, the increasing population pressure on semi-arid agricultural resources has created a crisis in the development of sustainable agriculture.
The discussion that follows relies on three main premises:
1. It is essential to understand the reasons for the current situation in order to devise reasonable, practical strategies for improvement.
2. Farmers must be intimately involved in diagnosis of the problems and in devising improvement strategies.
3. Agricultural technologies and policies (and support systems) are complementary means of improving agricultural productivity and sustainability.
FIGURE 42 - Schematic representation of some farming system determinants (Norman et al. 1982)
Figure 1 represents a farming system as three overlapping sub-systems. Figure 42 taken from Norman et al. (1982) expands the socio-economic dimension. The combination of production processes (crop, livestock and off-farm activities) is the farming system. As illustrated in Figure 1, the environment in which farm households make decisions has biophysical and socio-economic elements.
The biophysical elements, dealt with in previous chapters, determine the physical potential, and constraints on, livestock, tree and crop enterprises. The socio-economic elements include exogenous and endogenous factors.
Exogenous factors are those largely out of the control of the individual household such as: (a) community institutions, including structures, norms and beliefs; (b) support services and policies, related to extension, credit, input distribution systems, markets and land tenure; and (c) non-institutional factors, such as population density, location and infrastructure development.
Endogenous factors, on the other hand, are those that the household manages to some degree, including land, labour, and capital.
These inputs and managerial ability differ for each household to affect the performance of its farming system. The household is at one and the same time a production and a consumption unit (Singh et al. 1986). Farming systems are embedded in multi-level agricultural systems. Two higher systems levels relevant to this discussion are community systems and the national agriculture sector (Dixon 1990). Decisions on agricultural resource management are made at all three levels. These interact. For example, sector policies and programmes influence community decisions. These in turn influence household choices. Influences too can work the other way.
The extent to which a farming system fulfils the household goals depends, amongst other things, on managerial skills and, in most semi-arid areas, considerable luck with the weather and other uncertain environmental elements outside household control (Anderson and Dillon 1992). The dynamic aspect of farming systems should also be noted: current farming systems reflect the cumulative interaction of the biophysical and socio-economic elements over time (Norman et al. 1981; Pingali et al. 1987).
Factors influencing farming systems
Households in the SATs
Communities in the SATs
Effects of support services and policies
Land
Labour
Capital and cash
Cropping patterns
Interactions between crops and livestock
Other factors influencing farming systems
The conceptual framework above is a convenient way of structuring the discussion on trends and constraints relating to current farming systems in the SATs. Though the socio-economic or human dimensions are emphasized below, the decisions and actions of households are also conditioned by their unfavourable biophysical environment.
Households in the SATs
Development workers define a rural household as a group of people who live together and eat from the same pot, that is, they share the same hearth. Members are usually related (Ellis 1988). Some points related to this definition with particular reference to the SATs (Norman 1992) are:
1. Semi-arid farm households cultivate mainly using their own labour and only small amounts of capital.
2. Individual household choices are often limited by external forces, including community decisions.
3. Household economies are often in transition from traditional systems to 'partial engagement in markets which tend to function with a high degree of imperfection' (Ellis 1988). Thus, it is not surprising that there is sharing and reciprocity between such households.
4. Households in transition consume a proportion of their produce, which gives them some ability to survive independently of the larger economic system.
The goals of farm households, particularly in unfavourable environments like the SATs, are not always easy to identify. It seems, however, that most wish to earn as much as possible with least effort and risk. Some studies on the goals of farm households and farmers' attitudes to risk and uncertainty have been undertaken in the SATs (Binswanger 1980; Bartlett et al. 1982; Walker and Jodha 1986). There is substantial indirect evidence that farmers like to avert risk by the practice of mixed cropping and crop and livestock diversification. In recent years, it has been increasingly recognized that individual farm households are not usually a simple decision-making unit with a single utility function that represents the joint welfare of its members. This has increased the realization that intra-household relationships influence economic behaviour. Four points to note about intra-household relationships in the SATs (Ellis 1988; Feldstein and Poats 1989) are:
1. Internal relationships become particularly important where there is a high degree of congruence between the production and consumption units. They are also important where some imperfection exists in terms of integration with the factor and product markets.
2. The economic role of individuals within households often differs. For example, men and women may have quite independent income streams.
3. Male and female labour cannot be freely substituted one for the other. Division of labour constrains its seasonal availability, the responsiveness to price changes, and influences the composition and volume of farm output.
4. Increases in household income do not usually benefit all household members equally. Technological innovations tend to disadvantage women relative to men.
Understanding the goals of households and their members is important when designing relevant strategies to improve agricultural productivity and sustainability in the SATs (Matlon and Spencer 1985). Knowledge of their attitudes towards risk and uncertainty and the degree to which they are integrated, or are willing to be integrated into the market economy, is a key input in designing such strategies.
Communities in the SATs
In the SATs, communities often manage common property (and resources) and take mutual steps or to preserve the environment. McCorkle et al. (1987) describe many indigenous farming communities that have successfully managed and sustained the productivity of their rangelands over centuries. Though households in a community vary in wealth, there are often patron-client relationships that provide a safety net for the poorest. On the other hand, individualistic behaviour is often sanctioned, including the adoption of modem technologies. Isolated and inaccessible communities are generally less integrated in the factor and product markets so they tend to be more influenced by community structures, norms, and beliefs. Such influences weaken with increased contact with external institutions, for example, greater dealings with the factor and product markets and with government bureaucracies (Bromley 1989). In this way, sanctions, against the individualistic behaviour of households,
crumble. The probability of increased differentiation and exploitation in the society increases, and the potential of community-inspired systems to monitor and control natural resource management declines (Jodha 1990). These trends tend to be reinforced by population increases. Some of the developments associated with these trends are summarized as follows:
1. Poverty is becoming individualized. Haswell (1975) terms it 'institutionalization' of poverty. New power groups in the villages (traders, money lenders), often lack the responsibility of traditional patron-client relationships.
2. There is a trend towards individualization of land tenure (Kohler 1968), though in most areas it is not recognized by law. Usufructuary rights to the use of land are increasingly being rented, purchased, and pledged, particularly where population pressure is becoming increasingly heavy (Raynaut 1976; Smith et al. 1994).
3. The traditional systems of communal and reciprocal labour are being replaced by labour paid in kind or, increasingly, in cash, by the job or by the day (Unité d'Evaluation 1978). Even the navetane system, strongly associated with the cultivation of cash crop groundnuts in Gambia and Senegal, is becoming increasingly monetized.
In spite of rapid social changes, traditional hierarchical structures still influence village life so village leaders should be involved in the introduction of agricultural change. It is important, however, that inequalities in living standards within a village are not increased by reinforcing traditional social power with newly-attained economic power.
Unless government makes explicit efforts, common property resources are likely to deteriorate (Jodha 1986) and not be managed for the benefit of the community as a whole. However, it is argued later that community action, control, and regulation need to be increasingly emphasized in strategies to protect common property resources (including grazing land, woodlots, wildlife, water) (FAO 1993) and in controlling degradation and erosion.
Effects of support services and policies
Support services and policies generate incentives for resource management and agricultural production by farm households. An historical perspective is helpful in explaining the type and organization of central institutions in the countries of the SATs.
Policy has had significant influences on semi-arid farming systems in Asia. In China and Mongolia, strong central control led to a surprising uniformity of farming systems until recently. With the introduction of the individual household responsibility in China some 15 years ago, farming systems began to adapt to reflect local resources and other circumstances including market liberalization.
In India, major Government programmes have influenced some farming systems in the SATs. These include the National Watershed Development Programme (Government of India 1990) and various employment guarantee schemes which have propped up farm incomes during drought periods. In a different way, the promotion of well and tank irrigation has re-oriented many rainfed farming systems around small concentrated areas of irrigated land and cash crop production (Walker and Ryan 1990). Another policy change with wide impact has been the liberalization of grain trading between states. The recent coordinated effort to improve oilseed production, under the leadership of the Technology Missions for Oilseeds, has been a classic success for commodity research and development. An interesting byproduct is the adoption of improved crop rotations and cultivation practices for other crops.
In Africa, the different colonial experiences of the Francophone and Anglophone countries have left their mark. Both have much in common, such as commodity-based research programmes, a bias towards research on cash crops during the colonial era (and, to a lesser extent, in the post-colonial era), a general pre-occupation with agricultural productivity issues, and institutionally weak relationships between the social and bio-physical sciences. The differences, however, are more striking. The link, for cash crops, between research and implementation (including extension work) has been much stronger in Francophone countries, where support systems have been strongly coordinated with respect to a individual crops (e.g., groundnuts in Senegal and cotton in Mali).
In general, commodity-based implementation programmes have been less common in Anglophone countries. Consequently, yields of cotton and groundnuts have tended to be larger and there has been greater use of oxen in Francophone countries.
In the 1970s, the popularization of integrated rural development projects embracing both food and cash crops brought about convergence. A major success story of the last 15 years has been the widespread adoption of an improved maize variety in a traditional sorghum and millet area in the wetter part of semi-arid Nigeria (Smith et al. 1994). Similar progress has been witnessed in Kenya. The reasons given for the widespread adoption are: (a) a maize variety that is very responsive to fertilizer; (b) good infrastructural support (good road systems, establishment of integrated agricultural development projects, heavily-subsidized fertilizer, a ready market for the maize); and (c) the fact that it has become a food as well as cash crop for the producers. One of the results (Smith et al. 1994) is that this cash-earning, land-intensive technology has brought widespread use of animal traction, alleviating seasonal labour bottlenecks. Similar secondary effects have also occurred with
the adoption of land-intensive technologies for groundnuts and cotton in Senegal and Mali.
Two major objectives have influenced the choice of food policies by African governments in recent decades, particularly in Francophone countries (Stryker 1978), namely, the encouragement of exports of cash-crops to provide much needed foreign exchange and the political desire to provide cheap food for the towns. In general, however, neither approach has met with much success. During the 1980s, exports of cash crops have suffered not only from overvalued exchange rates but also from declining terms of trade on international markets. At the same time, 'cheap food' policies generally acted as a disincentive as far as food production was concerned. Support systems to encourage food production, at least in the African SATs, have rarely been effective.
As a result of increasing pressures for structural adjustments, there has been a trend to allow free market forces to operate. It is likely that the terms of trade for the traditional food crops of SAT Africa (millet, sorghum, and cowpeas) will continue to decline relative to those of the crops that are preferred when incomes go up (rice, wheat, and maize). It seems, therefore, that recent increases in agricultural productivity have occurred in spite of the increasing role of external institutions, and not as a result of their positive influence.
Apart from soil conservation programmes to combat soil erosion and some production-oriented development programmes, particularly in the Francophone countries, relatively few programmes have been implemented with domestic funding to encourage sustainable agricultural development. The Indian National Watershed Development Programme is one exception. Botswana, which is financially prosperous compared to most, is another of the few countries in the SATs with an approved soil conservation strategy. There are, however, even here few links between policy/support systems designed to encourage improvement in agricultural productivity and those designed to ensure sustainable agricultural development. This must be put right if relevant strategies to encourage sustainable agricultural development are to be developed and implemented.
Evidence is emerging from low-income countries that reducing trade restrictions and freeing prices (that is undergoing a structural adjustment process), not only encourages economic growth, but reduces poverty and by doing so, reduces the pressure to over-exploit resources (ADB 1990; De Boer 1993). It is believed, therefore, that freeing the market and reducing market distortions, improves the returns from agricultural activities. This is a key ingredient in implementing effective strategies to address productivity and sustainability simultaneously in low income countries.
Land
Throughout the SATs, many farm households have only usufructuary rights to land. Such land cannot be used as collateral although, as indicated earlier, there are changes towards individual tenure as a result of increased population pressures. This is especially so in Asia and in some African districts with settlement and irrigation schemes or mechanized farms.
In areas with low population pressure, the amount of land farmed has generally been a function of household size (i.e., labour force) and land quality. Traditionally, lighter soils are preferred to heavy ones, though the latter have been cultivated using irrigation during the dry season, particularly in India and to a lesser extent in Africa.
As population density increases, five significant changes are evident:
1. Farm size decreases with the result that the short-term private opportunity cost of leaving land fallow increases. Thus, new ways to maintain soil fertility become more and more important, as the length of fallow and amount of land fallowed have both decreased. However, leaving land fallow does not necessarily ensure that soil fertility is restored. In areas where cash crops are grown; the decline in fertility has been counteracted to some extent through increasing use of inorganic fertilizer.
2. Distribution of land among producers may become an increasing problem. There is some evidence that inequalities are growing, especially in Asia. Such trends have serious implications for the future and, because of the apparent increasing range of farm size, for the differentiation of development strategies to improve agricultural productivity and sustainability.
3. In much of the SATs, farms are being progressively fragmented, particularly where the Maliki law applies in West Africa. Though a degree of fragmentation has some advantages (for example, encouraging equitability in the distribution of land of different qualities, in spreading risk, etc.) it causes problems when mechanization is being introduced or soil conservation strategies requiring cooperation between neighbouring farmers are necessary (World Bank 1992).
4. Poorer quality and heavier land is being brought into cultivation. Poorer land is usually more vulnerable to environmental degradation, and heavier soils are less flexible in use.
5. The opportunity cost of soil moisture is increasing, especially for dry season irrigation. Thus, well irrigation is spreading in the Indian SATs, particularly for cash crops.
Labour
Household composition
Total labour inputs
Seasonality
Household composition
A common trend in the SATs is that the traditionally-preferred extended family unit, consisting of more than one married man plus dependents, is breaking up into nuclear or simple units of one married man plus dependents. The underlying reasons revolve around increased contact with the outside world and monetization of the economy. The rate at which this change is taking place depends on several complex interactions. The introduction of cash crops, secular education, increased off-farm employment opportunities, new settlements, and migration may encourage this breakup, although the speed at which it takes place may be tempered by the strength of the traditional hierarchical structure, the ethnic origin of the people concerned, the ownership of cattle and other factors.
Implications of such a trend in West Africa are:
Fields farmed by a household are traditionally divided into common and individual fields. The common fields, controlled by the head of the household, provided food for all members of the household. An increasing proportion of the fields are coming under the control of other individuals in the household. The obligation of household members to work the common fields is decreasing, and the assurance of food from the household farm to meet subsistence needs no longer exists. Increased individualization of fields and the need for cash to pay taxes have both encouraged the growth of market crops Decisions are increasingly made by individuals within sub-households rather than by the extended-household head. This creates problems in introducing improved technology, especially if an extension or institutional credit programme is involved, because such programmes tend to be directed at household heads.
In many areas, the break-up of families is resulting in smaller farms, increased fragmentation of fields and younger, less-experienced household heads. Dependant-per-worker ratios are commonly increasing, giving poorer net worth and cash liquidity levels. Such trends raise questions about the appropriateness of the use of certain types of technology, for example oxen and the question of cattle ownership. Poorer liquidity and net worth are likely to make the purchase of cattle more difficult, and ownership could entail management by herders because of labour limitations.
In Southern Africa, for example Botswana, fragmentation of farm households has taken place and up to 30% of the households engaged in cropping are headed by women. Where senior males are linked with such households, they spend much of their time at the cattle posts, which are generally distant from the cropping areas or, more recently, increasingly work full-time in towns (Heinrich et al. 1990).
Similar trends are evident in marginal, dry, mountain areas, for example, in the hills of Pakistan where up to 70% of household income may be derived from seasonal migration to the towns. Such trends also occur on desert fringes, for example in the Sindh, Pakistan, and in Rajasthan, India. The break-up of the extended family increases the vulnerability of individuals to droughts or other adverse setbacks to the farming system.
Total labour inputs
Farm work in the SATs revolves around crops, livestock, and off- farm enterprises. Because of the seasonably of agriculture, in many areas where population densities are relatively low, labour rather than land is the greater constraint to expansion of production (Unite d'Evaluation 1978; Heinrich et al. 1990). In Asia, in contrast, land has been relatively scarce in the SATs for at least a generation, so farm size tends to be determined by land availability rather than seasonal labour peaks.
The major labour input on the household farm tends to be provided by household members. In West Africa, these are often male adults in contrast to Southern Africa and Asia. Reciprocal and communal labour have slowly given way to a significant level of contract and wage labour.
The total annual work done by household members often appears to be rather small mainly because of seasonally of cropping. Typically, the coefficient of variation for monthly labour inputs increases as one moves into the drier parts of the SATs.
Seasonality
Although the allocation of labour to crops is particularly seasonal, household livelihood strategies tend to spread labour demand over the year. For example, during the dry season, livestock absorbs considerable labour for watering and grazing, and off-farm work is emphasized. Attempts to increase the productive use of labour during the dry season include cultivation using residual moisture or irrigation; and the traditional response of short-season migration. In parts of Southern Africa, for example, Botswana, where rainfall amounts and its dependability both between and within years tends to be unreliable, less effort is made to synchronize seasonal activities. The diverse activities related to crops, livestock and off-farm employment tend to be undertaken independently.
Seasonal labour bottlenecks are characteristic of the SATs and can critically influence the level of agricultural activity of a household throughout the rest of the year. They are influenced by several factors including: the significance of timeliness in operations, the length of the growing season (the shorter it is, the more peaked its labour activity), the type of technology employed, and the power source used. At risk of oversimplification, the following generalizations appear to apply in a West African context:
· Where only hand labour is available, weeding is often considered to be the most demanding operation.
· Introducing improved technology (for example improved seeds and fertilizer) without changing the power source shifts the bottleneck from weeding to harvesting the increased yields.
· A change from hand to animal power, using indigenous technology and ridging equipment, accentuates the weeding bottleneck, and, under certain conditions, the harvesting bottleneck.
· Combining animal power with ridging, planting, and weeding equipment - together with improved land-intensive technology - tends to accentuate the harvesting bottleneck even further.
Farmers use various strategies to alleviate labour bottlenecks. Some well-established ones are: (a) working more days and longer hours per day on farm work at busy periods; (b) reducing time spent on off-farm work; (c) using more women and child labour; (d) hiring labour - though of limited potential, this tends to increase as population density rises (Smith et al. 1994); and (e) growing crops in mixtures.
Unlike India (Walker and Ryan 1990), the African SATs tend, generally, not to have landless labourers in rural areas. The opportunity cost of hired labour, which comes from other farming households, is therefore high. Such labour is often offered because cash liquidity levels are low (Matlon 1977). Thus the negative effects of labour bottlenecks in Africa are probably greater than in India. In India the effects may be positive because bottlenecks provide employment for landless labourers.
Turning to Southern Africa, where animal draught (cattle or donkeys) is traditional, timeliness of ploughing and planting is critical in ensuring operations are undertaken under good soil moisture conditions. This is important in ensuring good stand establishment. Row planting combined with inter-row cultivation using animals is a major advance from the broadcast and hand weeding system traditionally practised (Heinrich et al. 1990).
Seasonal labour bottlenecks have implications when developing strategies to improve agricultural productivity and sustainability. Too often, strategies aimed simply to maximize production per unit area or to increase the area cultivated have led to development of inappropriate technology, that accentuates seasonal bottlenecks (Kafando 1972). Use of animal power to alleviate specific bottlenecks has been most common, but chemical methods (herbicides) and biological improvements (including new varieties and practices) are still in their infancy. The importance of improving labour productivity at busy periods is illustrated by the fact that the marginal productivity of labour at such times can be as much as three to four times higher than the wage rate (Norman 1970). Thus, although water availability and soil fertility may be the major physical constraints on soil productivity and sustainability throughout the SATs, strategies to improve them are unlikely to succeed unless they
are compatible with increasing the productivity of labour at times of seasonal bottlenecks.
Capital and cash
Apart from livestock, the capital of small farm households consists largely of goods produced by them directly, such as hand tools, grain stores, etc. Consequently, capital tends to be small. As population density and land use intensity increase, capitalization tends to increase. With the introduction of improved technology, capital tends to increase further and change in character, enabling farmers to buy items such as inorganic fertilizer and animal equipment etc.
In Asia, cash has been most needed to purchase foodgrain in the gap before the next harvest, and for social expenditure on marriage and festivals. This contrasts with West Africa, where most explicit farm expenditures are for non-household labour. When agricultural activity is approaching its peak (June to September) cash resources are at their lowest. Introduction of improved technology is likely, initially at least, to exacerbate this. Traditional sources of credit, often obtained to buy food pre-harvest, commonly incur high implicit, if not explicit, interest rates (Ellis 1988).
Institutional credit tends to be repaid quickly only where programmes are carefully coordinated with other external institutions and support systems, particularly input distribution and product marketing. Certainly, this is true of the introduction of draught oxen systems in West Africa to help grow cash crops (e.g., groundnuts in Senegal and the Gambia, cotton in Mali Sud and the Gombe area of Nigeria, and maize, also in Nigeria).
In India and to some extent in Southern Africa, oxen are an integral part of subsistence farming. In West Africa, however, it is difficult to envisage millet and sorghum, which are mainly food crops, justifying the costs of oxen and equipment. Oxen have been tried in areas without a cash crop but pricing policies, particularly in Francophone countries, together with unimproved technology, have generally made such efforts futile. As indicated earlier, maize grown in northern Nigeria both as a cash crop and for household consumption, and oilseed production in India, are exceptions.
Cropping patterns
A wide range of crops can be grown in the SATs despite the physical and biological limitations. The crops actually grown reflect socio-economic circumstances, both exogenous and endogenous, past and present. Such circumstances need to be understood to appreciate the dynamic, evolving nature of agriculture in the SATs. Understanding can help predict the future (Pingali et al. 1987).
Crop and livestock husbandries have evolved over generations and are often adapted to the environment. Relatively recent, accelerated population increases have tended to upset the process of gradual adaptation. This highlights the need to develop relevant improved technologies to increase productivity and ensure sustainability. It is apparent that many traditional practices can be used as building blocks to develop improved farming systems. Three such practices are particularly important in many parts of the SATs:
1. The use of mounds etc. Whether crops are grown on ridges, mounds, or on the flat depends on many factors, including rainfall, availability of organic matter, culture, soil type, and type of power used (animal, hand, etc.).
2. The 'ring' cultivation system. This system, which used to be popular in West Africa, involves the permanent cultivation of some fields, usually near the compound, where fertility is maintained by manuring. Fields farther away are cultivated for a few years, after which soil fertility is restored by fallowing (Marchal 1977). Increasing pressure on land is leading to a higher proportion of permanently cultivated fields, and the remaining outer fields are being left fallow for progressively shorter periods. There is evidence that the total amount of manure applied increases as the proportion of permanently cultivated land rises.
3. The use of mixed cropping. Crops are grown in mixtures in many parts of the SATs. Norman (1974) shows that though yields of individual crops are often depressed when grown in mixtures, this is more than offset by other crops in the mixture, resulting in a higher return (value) per hectare. In spite of higher total labour inputs, the returns over the year per work-hour and, to a greater extent, per work-hour during the bottleneck period, are usually higher for crop mixtures than for single crops. Crops grown in mixtures at existing technological levels tend to be more profitable, whether land or labour is more limiting. They are also more dependable (Abalu 1976) and are a form of rotation.
In general, traditional agricultural practices have been neglected in the development and dissemination of improved technology. The major programmes undertaken in Asia have concentrated on multi-environment on-farm testing of technologies first developed on research stations. Small-scale applications by non-government organizations are an exception to this generalization.
In African Francophone countries, where cash crops for export have been introduced and their yields substantially increased, much of the crop is grown in pure stands. This is partly because the technology was developed for sole stands and partly because of the success of the external support systems that encourage growing of these crops according to official recommendations. Where improved technology has not been adopted and yields are less improved, such cash crops are often still grown in mixtures, for example as in Nigeria. The practice of mixed cropping still dominates food crops. In India, high-yielding varieties increase the significance of single cropping (Jodha 1977). Only relatively recently has the potential of mixed cropping using improved technology been demonstrated. This could have important implications for ensuring sustainability. It has also been demonstrated that, though the number of crop mixtures decreases with the introduction of animal traction, mixed
cropping is not incompatible with animal traction (Unite d'Evaluation 1978).
Increased emphasis on the development of improved technologies for mixed crops appears to be justified. This is particularly so in districts where they are still dominant and in areas where the potential for sequential cropping is limited by the shortness of the rainy season. Complementarity of cropping enterprises will be enhanced when one or more of the following characteristics outweigh the negative competitive effects between species: (a) different growth cycles, (b) different rooting habits, (c) symbiosis between species, (d) compatible labour requirements. Mixed cropping is most effective when the products have varied or multiple uses for both human and animal consumption. For example, in some areas the crop residues from cowpeas (used to feed livestock) may be a more important product than the grain, which is used for human consumption.
Interactions between crops and livestock
Animals as a source of power
Livestock are often an under-estimated part of the farming system. Whilst one-third or more of household income in the SATs may come from livestock they also have multiple uses: (a) they are a form of saving and investment (McIntyre et al. 1992); (b) a source of meat, milk, manure, fuel and other by-products; and (c) a source of draught power.
Ownership of livestock, other than cattle, tends to be widely dispersed, both between and within households. Cattle ownership, on the other hand, tends to be unevenly distributed, being concentrated in wealthier, often more influential, households. In West Africa and, in places, in Southern Africa and the Middle East, cattle ownership and management are often separate. In West Africa management is in the hands of nomadic herders, usually the Fulbe, who also own cattle in their own right.
The potential benefits of some degree of integration between crops and livestock have been recognized traditionally in the SATs. Integration of crops and livestock can, in theory, lead to more efficient use of land unsuitable for crop production. It can provide a use for crop residues and by-products, provide manure, and be a source of income, savings, and investment. In West Africa, this is so even where livestock are owned and managed by nomadic herders, and crops are grown by sedentary farmers. Such symbiosis developed in areas with relatively favourable land/labour relationships.
Increases in population density, however, have forced and are forcing changes in traditional relationships. The diminishing availability of land is resulting in conflicts between herders and farmers, and conflicts about whether resources such as labour and capital should be devoted to products for human consumption or to animal production. There is concern too about declining soil fertility. It is one of the paradoxes of the ever-decreasing land to labour ratio that increasing conflicts between crop or animal production inhibit the benefits of livestock manure in preventing the decline of soil fertility.
Unfortunately, most of the land newly taken into cultivation has been prime pasture land, thus depriving livestock of a relatively sure supply of better quality fodder. This increasingly forces livestock owners to rely upon degraded common pasture (termed 'wasteland' in India) for grazing. Because of overgrazing, such common resources become heavily degraded.
The currently-developing competitive relationships need to be reversed and symbiotic relationships re-established if ecological stability is to be achieved. In the last 15 to 20 years, a major spontaneous trend has developed in the middle belt of Nigeria for many of the nomadic Fulbe to settle with their animals. Here population densities are lower than farther north. Progressive tree cutting has resulted in the southward movement of the zone in which tsetse fly become a problem for livestock.
Livestock have a key role in ecological sustainability in the SATs in the maintenance of soil fertility. The role of manure in the 'ring' system is described above. Its application increases crop yield and improves soil quality. Within the SATs, its use is quite varied and its marginal value product appears to increase with increasing population density (McIntyre et al. 1992). Significantly, in the most densely populated areas where little forest is left, such as the Indian SATs, manure is collected and much is burnt as fuel. One of the drawbacks of manure as fertilizer is its bulk in relation to nutrient content.
It can incur high handling costs even within a farm.
The demand for livestock feed and fodder is substantial in the SATs, but biomass production is small and unreliable. Sown pastures are not economic, but improved use of crop residues appears a possibility. As population density increases, the value of crop residues for use as fuel rises. In the case of fresh milk production, treatment of crop residues to improve digestibility appears economic. In other cases, residue treatment is not attractive. The only successful instance of urea treatment of straw for livestock fattening is in a higher rainfall zone in China.
A special case deserves mention. In Syria, traditional links between nomadic herders and sedentary farmers provides all-important manure for the latter's fields. Here the value of manure outweighs that of the crop residues removed by grazing.
Animals as a source of power
Animals are a traditional source of power in the farming systems of the Asian SATs. Oxen are used as cart and plough animals throughout most of southern Asia, but many small farmers do not own oxen and some are forced to exchange human labour for that of oxen. In contrast, animal traction has been used in the West African SATs for little more than 70 years. Introduction of animal traction can help increase the efficiency and productivity of human resources by the use of equipment designed to maximize the effectiveness of labour during seasonal bottlenecks. The standard idea that draught power is best used to increase the area cultivated (extensification) has been replaced, particularly in Francophone countries, by the concept of its use in intensification to increase soil productivity through manure application, deep ploughing, burial of crop residues, etc. Donkeys and horses as well as oxen are used in the SATs, particularly on lighter soils. In West Africa, animal traction
is now closely linked with commercialized cropping. Its successful introduction was often linked to a particular cash crop and the use of improved technologies that give high yields per hectare. This provided the revenue to pay for the equipment and sometimes the animals. It was often complemented by a strong support system embracing an input distribution network, institutional credit, appropriate extension services, and a market for the product.
Many problems have been encountered on the way to the successful adoption of animal traction in West Africa (Faye and Niang 1977). They include: (a) shortage of trained animals and operators, especially for inter-row cultivation; (b) the weakness of draught animals caused by lack of supplementary feed; (c) use of inappropriate equipment; (d) inadequate facilities for repair and servicing of equipment; (e) the non-availability of suitable equipment; (f) under-use of animals during the year as a whole; (g) fragmented holdings that reduce work efficiency; (h) damage to equipment from the large numbers of tree stumps in the fields; and (i) the lack of finance to help farmers hire draught animals. There are two further major problems relating to animal traction in West Africa:
· Prices for cash crops have often increased more slowly than prices of animals and equipment. This has slowed the adoption of draught animals and reduced beneficial interactions between crop production and livestock. Interactions can develop between farmers who own oxen and equipment and those who do not. Households who own draught animals can plough for those who do not and the latter can pay with labour. The potential for exploitation is obvious, especially if such labour is demanded at times when its opportunity cost is high. This will always occur to some degree, but it is most likely when relatively few households own animals. Interestingly, this does not appear to have been a problem in Botswana, where draught animals are traditional. However, those households not owning traction tend to plant late and be less timely in relation to soil moisture. Consequently, their yields tend to be lower.
· Incorporation of residues by deep ploughing after harvest, the cornerstone of past intensification in Francophone countries, particularly Senegal, has not been particularly successful (Hopkins 1974). Although land intensification technologies enabled the adoption of animal traction, many farmers see the use of animals more as a means of extensification. The central problem, however, is that deep ploughing is both time-consuming and power-intensive, while the period available after harvest when the soil is suitably moist is too short for the operation with animal draught.
Other factors influencing farming systems
Although many farm households in the SATs have undoubtedly improved their standard of living over the last 50 years, progress has not been as great as desired. Indeed, there is reason to be seriously concerned about the future. With increased accessibility to the outside world, there have been three trends with important implications when considering future action:
· Though there has been significant migration to the towns, it has been insufficient to check or reduce increasing population pressure of less favoured rural areas in the SATs.
· Because of progressive absorption into the market economy and the movement towards individual rather than shared poverty (i.e., central government rather than community control and responsibility), many farm households have become more vulnerable to drought. Consequently, annual variations in living standards have become more marked, except where incomes have been raised substantially above subsistence level.
· Another trend, also related to increased monetization and individualization of poverty, is increased differentiation in living standards within many communities. A long-standing feature of subsistence farming in many parts of the SATs, particularly West Africa, is the seasonal variation in living standards known as 'hungry gap' (soudure). This is now more open to being exploited; food is often least available when the demands of the agricultural cycle are highest. Two important implications of seasonal hunger are:
- Increased labour effort, except perhaps through changing the power base, is unlikely for many farm households during peak labour demand periods without an improvement of their nutritional levels.
- The hungry gap affects the more disadvantaged households and members of society worst. With the changes from shared poverty and social power to increased individualization and economic power, poor households are becoming more vulnerable to exploitation. Another change with equally severe long-run consequences is for poor farmers to obtain credit before harvest at high rates of interest (Dubois 1975). In the Indian SATs, unlike West Africa, localized shortages do not translate into sharply rising food prices (Walker and Ryan 1990) because of the well integrated nature and the large size of the economy combined with the fact that dry periods tend to be geographically localized.
Hill (1972) and Matlon (1977), referring to the SATs of West Africa, suggest that households have always had a degree of heterogeneity, but laws of inheritance, a relatively egalitarian land tenure system, the availability of surplus land, traditional hand-powered technologies, and community-minded ruling elites led to fairly-even income distribution. Matlon also presents evidence supporting the view that the degree of equality is inversely correlated with the degree of involvement in cash markets and also with village size and population pressure. The same study also provides some evidence that incomes derived from farming, in semi-arid Nigeria, are less variable than off-farm sources of income, though analysis of all sources of income revealed greater equality in income distribution.
The proportion of income derived from farming tends to be higher for poor households than for wealthier ones, though absolute levels are much lower. At the same time lower-income farmers earn a higher proportion of their income as farm labourers for others than higher-income farmers. This is presumably because the poor needed cash income to overcome seasonal problems, and hired farm work is available when their need for additional income is greatest. However, the higher income households tended to participate in more remunerative off-farm work that required some capital (e.g., trading), thus further differentiating themselves from the poor.
The trend towards increasing inequalities in income at village level and the associated seasonal hunger that often arises is obviously of major concern. Is this avoidable? The answer is yes. Up to now technology development has not recognized the heterogeneity of farmers and support systems have been geared towards the better endowed or more influential farmers. However, technology alone cannot be expected to solve all the problems of income distribution; the design and implementation of suitable policies will play a critical role. In the Indian SATs, the dense population and legislative threats to impose land ceilings seem to have reduced farm size and encouraged intensive use of labour and land, no matter what the farm size (Walker and Ryan 1990). On this basis, the same types of technology seem to be relevant for all farmers in the SATs, though some differentiation might be desirable when other factors are taken into consideration (for example, differentiation in terms of
accessibility to support systems, cash flows, etc.).
The challenges of the SATs include the general one of identifying sustainable ways to increase agricultural productivity but also the need to recognize the heterogeneity of the farming population when developing strategies. This will enable the livelihoods of all to be improved and become sustainable in the long run. In doing so, it is important to recognize limitations other than those relating to resources, that prevent many farm households from maximizing their technical efficiency. Failure to do so will exacerbate the situation and further inequalities will develop.
Strategies to achieve sustainability
Background - Policies and institutions
Role of livestock
Productivity with sustainability
Agricultural productivity
Ecological sustainability
Need for a coordinated approach
Background - Policies and institutions
It is generally recognized that environmental degradation in high-income countries usually results from wealth, over-development, and waste generation exceeding the assimilative capacity of the environment. In low income countries, however, degradation is often associated with poverty and is caused by depletion of the resource base (Altieri 1988; Mellor 1988; World Bank 1992).
As indicated above and by many others (Oram 1988), farmers in the SATs are compelled to modify traditionally sustainable practices in ways that are environmentally damaging. They do this trying to maintain their short-term standards of living, which are frequently little above the survival level.
In the SATs, rapid population growth, combined with the fact that many people still live in rural areas, creates enormous, ever-increasing pressures on an already stressed ecological environment. The challenge of attaining and maintaining a sustainable agriculture cannot be met without addressing several fundamental issues, which go way beyond the relatively narrow focus of the present discussion. These issues involve the governments of SAT countries in political commitments through the vigorous support of appropriate programmes. These are well articulated in a recent document FAO (1993). They include programmes designed to cut down population growth rates and to create employment opportunities outside the agricultural sector. Whatever happens, given the current population growth and the relatively low absorptive capacity of the non-agricultural sector, it is likely that more rather than fewer people will be trying to derive a living from agriculture for years to come.
Migration of people to less populated areas has limited potential. Even in India, with its well-integrated economy embracing several ecological zones, there has been less migration from poor areas than expected (Walker and Ryan 1990). Where migration has occurred it has sometimes been a very mixed blessing, particularly where movement has been into even more fragile ecosystems (e.g., more arid areas of Niger) rather than wetter areas (e.g., sub-humid zone of Nigeria).
Even assuming that population expansion in rural areas can be tightly controlled, the challenges of ensuring crop sustainability are formidable. If the issues are to be successfully addressed, it will be necessary to widen the focus from simple crop sustainability to a concept of sustainable livelihoods for farm households. As indicated earlier, such households derive their living from a combination of growing crops, keeping livestock and off-farm, income-earning activities. Failure to consider the current and potential, positive and negative, relationships between these three types of activities could seriously limit both the choice of strategies that can be used and the chances of ensuring crop sustainability.
All the issues cannot be discussed here, but off-farm employment could play a key role in solving cash flow problems of farm households, and also provide income independent of the natural resource base. Obviously, the more reliable such income, the greater will be the potential for relieving the pressure on the natural resources and the greater the chances of achieving crop sustainability. Indeed, there is some agreement with Walker and Ryan (1990) that the demand for off-farm labour must accelerate. Unfortunately, government incentives and programmes to encourage off-farm employment outside the urban areas are rare. This is particularly true for employment in the informal sector, in which most of these jobs are found (Liedholm and Mead 1993). Studies show that the potential for stimulating employment in the informal sector is substantial, especially where agriculture is partly commercialized, so two-way links to the non-agricultural sector are already established. There is
a need for investment of public funds in training, etc. This needs greater attention by public authorities not only to generate employment but, by doing so, to help relieve pressure on the natural resource base. The difficulties of absorbing any population increases into the non-agricultural sector are illustrated by the relationship, R = P/N where: R represents the rate at which the jobs need to expand to absorb all increases in population, P is the rate of growth in the population/labour force, and N is the proportion of the labour force in the non-agricultural sector. In many SAT countries, P is often about 3% and N often only 0.25, indicating that R is about 12% - an almost impossible task.
In conclusion, two basic points are reiterated, which are the foundation for addressing productivity and sustainability issues:
· Markets should be liberalized allowing market signals to guide allocation of resources and product mixes. This will allow opportunities for comparative advantage to be exploited, thereby encouraging more efficient use of resources and national goals of food self-sufficiency to be replaced by goals of food security at household and national levels. Subsidies need to be given sparingly and selectively and to be designed to bring about congruence between production and sustainability. It is recognized that this is not necessarily the most desirable approach, but until full-resource, cost accounting systems (De Boer 1993) can be implemented, there are few alternatives.
· Ways are needed to re-establish a degree of community responsibility, control, monitoring, and regulation of natural resources. These should include soil conservation strategies requiring community action so that the community as a whole benefits (FAO 1993).
Role of livestock
Although it has been suggested that livestock should be discouraged and, if possible, eliminated from areas in the SATs, particularly those densely populated, it is obvious that such a strategy may not be feasible or indeed rational. Reducing livestock numbers or keeping them penned was advocated on page 77. One implication behind such proposals is that livestock have caused many problems. Others argue that rapid increases in human population and crop cultivation are the major causes (Winrock International 1992).
Many of the inhabitants of the SATs are traditional livestock owners. Coercion to dispose of livestock is likely to meet with resistance, and incentives to do so are beyond the resources of many governments. After all, even in densely populated India, livestock remain an important component of most farming systems.
As land use intensifies and labour requirements rise, animal traction (usually oxen but sometimes donkeys) is required to deal with seasonal bottlenecks (Pingali et al. 1987) This in spite of the increased use of temporary hired labour, sometimes originating from other areas (Smith et al. 1994). The alternative use of tractors is unlikely to be economic, given the rapidly increasing population densities (and smaller farms) and the time-bound nature of some of the tasks in dryland agriculture. This inhibits the development of profitable contract hire or rental markets for expensive tractors (Pingali et al. 1987; Walker and Ryan 1990).
Livestock husbandry is one sustainable use of land that is unsuitable for crop cultivation. Such use depends on improving the pasture quality, while allowing some of its fertility to be transferred to cultivated land through the livestock's dung. Incentive schemes for improved livestock husbandry have generally failed, either because they required fundamental changes in the way livestock owners lived and/or because the incentives were insufficient. As an example, in Northern Nigeria in the 1960s, the nomadic Fulbe were encouraged to operate in grazing reserves, and a market was provided for the milk their animals produced.
As implied above, there is, in terms of resources available to individual households, a degree of complementarity or symbiosis between crops and livestock, which would be lost if livestock were eliminated. The challenge is to try to identify attractive ways that maintain complementarity whilst allowing fundamental changes be determined by market forces. For example, in Nigeria during the last 15 to 20 years, increasing conflicts between nomadic or semi-nomadic livestock owners and sedentary cultivators, have arisen as a result of increasing population densities. This has brought about economic incentives for many Fulbe to settle in the southern part of the semi-arid zone and in the sub-humid zone. Given this situation, it is felt that more intensive ways should be sought to keep livestock through the use of legumes (both grasses and trees), fodder banks, alley farming, and living hedges. Such systems are likely to be attractive, if a secure market can be developed for a
product that can be regularly and readily marketed (e.g., milk for urban markets).
Similarly, in India, cattle are not only a key component of the farming system but also have spiritual significance, so development cannot proceed without fall consideration of their multi-faceted role. It is believed that livestock have a future in the SATs. There is, however, a need to identify and implement strategies that will:
· maintain the complementarity between crops and livestock in productive ways that help attain long-term sustainability. Given the human population trends in the SATs, these will undoubtedly evolve in the direction of more integrated, mixed crop/livestock systems (Winrock International 1992);
· encourage both the increased commercialization of livestock husbandry and the adoption of intensification. The off-take rates for meat animals, for example, could be increased. Currently these are often as low as 8% compared with commercial levels of 15%. In other words, market forces may be used to encourage the necessary adjustments.
Productivity with sustainability
Until recently, in most low-income countries, priority has been given to increasing agricultural productivity, in particular that of foodgrain. Lip service has been paid to issues of ecological sustainability, but only recently has this become the focus of donor agency support. The challenge in the SATs is to increase agricultural productivity whilst ensuring ecological, economic and social sustainability.
Governments are preoccupied, because of the poor state of their economies, with the short-term problems of increasing production and do not have the resources or security to worry about long-term sustainability. As indicated earlier, policies often have not even encouraged improvements in agricultural productivity.
The poorer and closer to subsistence level farmers are, the greater the likelihood that their felt needs are those requiring fulfilment in the short term (e.g., producing enough food to survive until next year). Davies et al. (1991) and Frankenberger and Hutchinson (1991) have stressed the critical nature of the relationship between food security and sustainable resource management. Only relatively rarely, where soil erosion is very severe and threatens immediate survival, will farmers be inclined to implement soil conservation measures, without immediate payoff in terms of income (Norman and Douglas 1994).
Agricultural productivity
As will be apparent to anyone familiar with the SATs, adoption of improved technologies resulting in increased output per person as land has become more limiting has been relatively rare. Population-induced land intensification without appropriate technologies to raise productivity substantially is unlikely to increase output per worker or food available per head (Smith et al. 1994).
The development of relevant improved technology is complicated not only by the relatively poor and heterogeneous environment in which the farmers operate (Walker and Ryan 1990), but also by social and economic factors. Figure 43 illustrates the difficult task of developing improved technologies in various parts of the West African savannah. The schematic diagram shows the relationships of five interwoven variables: household goals, market and support system development, population density, market opportunities, and primary technology development requirements.
The complexity of identifying appropriate paths for the improvement of agricultural productivity is reinforced by the following observations:
· Population density affects the emphasis. In areas of sparse population (Areas 1 and 4), labour-saving strategies are more significant, but in densely settled areas (Areas 3 and 6), yield-increasing strategies are required. At intermediate densities (Areas 2 and 5), both technological options must be taken into account.
· Market system development, including the development of a good road and transport system, permits the traditionally important goal of food self-sufficiency to become at least partly diluted in favour of a more commercialized agriculture that involves entering the market place (i.e., food security). In general, however, as is shown by the history of market development in the West African SATs, the markets for improved inputs and input-related services lag behind those for the products. The introduction of improved crop technologies can be slowed in areas where markets for inputs and services are still relatively poorly developed (Areas 1 and 3). Historically, market-system development, particularly on the input side, has been concentrated where rainfall is high enough for cash crops to be grown (Areas 4 and 6). Recently, however, there has been considerable success with maize and oilseeds in the SATs, These initially were cash crops sold domestically to consumers further
south but they have now also become a food crop for the producers themselves (Smith et al. 1994).
Though the use of oxen to replace human labour is an obvious attraction, the cost affects their potential in the West African savanna. Where new inputs are part of a technology package, their ability to replace other inputs, or to complement them, must be considered. Because oxen or donkeys have not been used in the traditional food production sector in the West African SATs, labour-saving technologies using animal traction have worked better where there is adequate rainfall for cash crops (Areas 4 and 5) rather than where market system development is poor (Areas 1 and 2). They have also worked better when combined with yield-increasing technologies intrinsically more relevant to locations like Area 6.
FIGURE 43 - Schematic breakdown of relationship between population density and market system development (Source: Norman et al. 1982)
Input delivery systems and input-related services are likely to be more relevant where land is a constraint and land is intensively used. Yield-increasing techniques, including the use of improved seed, fertilizers, and pesticides, make it easier for scientists to develop improved technologies suited to districts like Area 6 than for those like Area 4.
With scientists' current orientation, prospects are not good for developing technologies to benefit farm households in locations such as Areas 1 to 3, where market systems are generally poorly developed. Though it would not increase productivity spectacularly, some progress could be made in such areas by scientists changing their orientation from modifying the environment to fit the plant to modifying the plant to fit the environment.
The greatest challenges lie in Areas 2 and 3 where both marketing systems are poorly developed and the unexploited carrying capacity of the land is small compared with Areas 5 and 6. Although this discussion focuses on the interdependence of support systems (i.e., market-structure development) and improved technologies, there are also interdependencies within villages between the two types of factors. From the communities' point of view, designing and implementing relevant strategies that help all farm households are obviously desirable. Such strategies should include both improved technologies and support systems.
Heterogeneity within the villages must be recognized when designing such strategies. The challenge is to find ways to help disadvantaged farm households. It is easy to design improved technologies suitable for large-scale farmers only, but it is almost impossible to do so just for small-scale ones. Where support systems are limited or there is a hierarchical village structure that causes problems of accessibility, the probability of differential access is greater than elsewhere. The need here is to design a cost-efficient support system that will ensure fair access but not alienate the village leadership.
The above indicates broadly that the relevant improved technologies actually chosen will be determined by the interaction of several variables, socio-economic and physical. In contrast to this differentiation it is important to note that the physical characteristics and constraints that define the SATs provide a degree of commonality to the general approach for developing appropriate technologies. The rainfall patterns and soil heterogeneity pose five important implications (Heinrich et al. 1990):
1. Farmers are likely to adjust their farming plans as the cropping season unfolds. This means that, by using a decision-tree strategy, the area planted, the crops grown, and the practices used can be very different from those originally planned. The implication is obvious: researchers need to mimic such sequential decision-making by developing options from which the farmer can choose, depending on the seasonal circumstances.
2. The heterogeneity of a farmer's soils (and, for that matter, of the resource base) implies the need to target technologies to varied situations to make them more relevant. Such a location-specific approach demands greater emphasis on farmer-based work and farming systems research than is necessary in more uniform, favourable environments.
3. Because of the uncertain and heterogeneous characteristics of the SATs, researchers need to develop considerable amounts of conditional information indicating what should be done 'if this or that happens'.
4. Because of the harsh and heterogeneous nature of the SATs, most technologies are likely to give incremental changes rather than marked jumps in productivity. Unlike the more favourable environments of the Green Revolution areas, much more attention needs to paid in the SATs to the lower rungs on the technology ladder. This is because these often relate to ensuring better timeliness in operations to maximize the return from limited soil moisture. As a result, they require relatively large changes in the farming systems for their implementation. Such 'lumpy' changes are much less likely to be adopted, without substantial cajoling and support, than the 'divisible' types of technology (e.g., improved seed, fertilizer) associated with the Green Revolution. The latter land-intensive technologies only start to become relevant after the 'lumpy' changes have been adopted.
5. Given the environment of the SATs and the precarious level of living of most farmers, it is likely that a high premium will be placed on stability of return (e.g., a certain level of food grain production each year to meet household needs). Most farming households in the SATs are likely to interpret this in terms of self-sufficiency (producing the food themselves) rather than in terms of food self-security achieved by earning enough to ensure adequate food for the household. In the Indian SATs, variation in supplies may result from annual variations in the area planted because of differences in the number of planting rains, rather than from variations in yield per hectare (Walker and Ryan 1990). Although this kind of factor is recognized, researchers still need to concentrate on technologies that ensure reliable yields per hectare, even though they do not give maximum yields in some years. This may be justified because: (a) farmers often articulate stability of yield
as an issue; (b) as population densities increase, land will become more limiting, so the variation in area planted is likely to decrease; (c) the marked variation in rainfall pattern in some of the harsher parts of the SATs (e.g., Botswana) means that farmers are likely to suffer wide annual variations in area planted and in yields per hectare.
Ecological sustainability
It is more challenging to attain and maintain ecological sustainability in regions where it is difficult to increase agricultural productivity (e.g., Area 3) than in areas where agriculture has become to some degree commercialized (e.g., Area 6) and where some reliance can be placed on profitable new technologies, market access and external inputs. Even the more favourable areas face problems because:
· appropriate new technologies cannot be devised and introduced fast enough to match ever-increasing population densities, both from local fertility and lowered mortality, and from migration from less favoured areas;
· the trend towards free market economies and reduction of fertilizer subsidies (e.g., more than 80% in Nigeria), credit, etc., which will make external inputs less attractive though perhaps more readily available. One point of concern is that, over the next 20 years or so, increasing scarcity of phosphatic fertilizer and fossil fuels may cause rising prices;
· the continuation of commercially-oriented farming systems is likely to encourage specialization as in some of the maize-growing areas of northern Nigeria where cereal crops are emphasized at the expense of legumes (Smith et al. 1994). In India too, increased integration of the economy, aided by improvements in marketing and infrastructure, has resulted in increased specialization in agricultural activities based on comparative advantage (Walker and Ryan 1990).
Need for a coordinated approach
Preventive measures
Corrective measures
Policy measures
The separate measures generally used to increase productivity and ecological sustainability have not been particularly successful. For example, the approach to problems of soil erosion by soil conservation specialists has often been expensive and fruitless. A new perspective is needed. Three broad kinds of measures need to be implemented to bring congruence to agricultural productivity and sustainability in an acceptable, resource-efficient way (Norman and Douglas 1994). These are preventive, corrective and policy measures. The following discussion focuses the approach on land degradation, but it could equally be applied to other aspects of sustainability.
Preventive measures
These aim to prevent loss of soil productivity by developing and disseminating technologies that yield short-term production benefits and at the same time at least maintain the long-term productivity of the land. This approach involves: (a) the screening of all potential technologies to ensure, as far as possible, that they will have no negative environmental impact; and (b) the development of technologies that have a positive production impact and are also likely to enhance soil productivity in the long run. This implies changes in the types of research to be encouraged.
Much greater emphasis is needed on productive legumes, for human and livestock consumption and for mulching and green manure. Though there have been increases in rainfed production of oilseeds in India, there has not been a general Green Revolution in legume husbandry.
Increased emphasis needs to be placed on technologies with small external inputs. Good examples would be the development of cultivars that improve the efficiencies of the use of soil nutrients and soil moisture, or cultivars that are striga resistant.
Greater attention needs to be paid to constructive exploitation of the biological interactions in traditional farming systems. This implies favourable consideration of biodiversity, nutrient recycling, the role of mixed cropping in reducing soil erosion (Odemerho and Avwunudiogba 1993), alley farming, tree legumes, wind breaks, etc.
Exploitation of biological interactions to attain ecological sustainability is critically important where commercialization of agriculture is very limited. It could also have a key role in reducing reliance on external inputs in districts where agriculture is already highly commercialized.
All this implies changes in the approach to research and extension work:
· Research. The conventional reductionist approach to developing improved technologies needs to be complemented by a more complex participatory systems approach. This is necessary because of the required change in direction from a commodity- to a production-systems or farming systems approach.
· Extension work. Greater emphasis is required on information-based technologies (Hudgens 1992) rather than on material-input technologies. This change from a commodity to a production system emphasis implies a need for re-organized extension services that interact effectively with farmers (Hudgens 1992) or for greater use of farmers as surrogates for extension agents.
Corrective measures
These are mainly physical in nature and have been part of the traditional approach to soil conservation. They place emphasis on physical structures to check further erosion once it has developed or in some case to avoid erosion on land just being opened up to cultivation. Appropriate solutions need to be based on an understanding of the causes of the soil erosion, rather than on the symptoms.
Policy measures
Preventative and corrective measures are not mutually exclusive; indeed they overlap. The thrust of overall policy can be used to coordinate the best approach. Policies can be devised that prevent losses in soil productivity or erosion arising in the first place and also help to check them, once they have developed. This involves designing and implementing policies that: (a) eliminate possible conflicts between the short-term aims of production and measures designed to encourage long-term sustainability (i.e., conservation); (b) use incentives to encourage adoption of strategies that conserve the environment for use by future generations.
The first approach is obviously preferable. Using appropriate technology, it is likely to be more effective in maintaining soil fertility and in promoting good land-use management. The second approach, on the other hand, is likely to be more effective in rehabilitation programmes. A combination of strategies is most likely to maximize the effectiveness of a soil conservation programme.
It is critical for success that programmes designed to sustain or improve soil productivity exploit the complementary relationship between technology and policy. For example, policy measures relating to soil conservation can be influential in encouraging or discouraging the adoption of technologies developed as preventative measures. Heavily-subsidized chemical inputs, for example, may discourage the adoption of other technologies that rely less on chemicals and have a neutral or positive rather than negative impact on ecological sustainability. Implementation of policies that encourage greater community responsibility and control of natural resources could be used constructively in encouraging sustainability. The increasing individualization of tenure occurring in many areas could also be used in this way.
The policies can be used in two other ways to encourage farmers to adopt strategies encouraging ecological sustainability:
· Subsidies for soil conservation measures may make them more attractive to farm households. They are likely to be most applicable in the promotion of corrective measures which usually emphasize physical structures. They are not likely to be very attractive to farm households close to survival level who do not see degradation or erosion as immediate threats. Soil conservation itself offers little in the way of immediate benefits though it may lead to benefits in the future. Finally, severe limits to government budgets are likely to preclude subsidies to strategies that pay off only at some time in the future.
· Cross-compliance policies can be designed to encourage production and conservation simultaneously. This carrot-and-stick approach (Napier 1987) fosters the notion that, if something is taken out of the land to encourage production, something then needs to be put in to sustain productivity in the future. It requires that the farmers participate in a specific conservation practice, if they are to benefit from programmes designed to stimulate production. In the USA in recent years, production and conservation policies have been increasingly linked. For example, government subsidized loans are available to purchase inputs only if the farmer pursues certain conservation strategies. Unfortunately, such policies appear not to be applied currently in low-income countries (Anderson and Thampapillai 1990). Cross-compliance policies may be difficult to put in place for farmers operating near the survival level. On a related point, legislation is often used in high-income countries
to control or prevent damaging practices such as overuse of chemicals causing pollution of water supplies. In low-income countries, however, short-run pre-occupations, such as ensuring enough food for next year predominate. Only limited resources are therefore available for enforcement of any approved legislation and many households are unable to pay penalties for any violations. Thus, it is unlikely legislation will be very effective. Consequently, using market forces as far as possible to encourage sustainability is favoured rather than instituting expensive and unenforceable regulations. This could, for example, involve the elimination of overvalued exchange rates and/or the removal of subsidies on credit for the purchase of fertilizer, pesticides, etc.
The combined objectives of all these strategies should be to bring convergence between the private short-term interests of farm households wishing to achieve an adequate current standard of living and the long-term interests of society in maintaining the environment for future generations. The carrot-and-stick approach is likely to be more practicable than encouraging the adoption of conservation strategies through direct soil conservation subsidies. Obviously, if possible, the preventative approach is the least costly and most attractive.
Conclusions
The central theme of this chapter is that conservation strategies will not be successful in the SATs, unless they are closely linked with strategies for increasing agricultural productivity and profitability. This link is necessary for two reasons. Firstly, conservation innovations must be attractive to farmers; and secondly because of the complex interactions of the bio-physical and socio-economic determinants of sustainability (CGIAR 1989; Smith 1993).
SAT development also requires, amongst other things, the efficient operation of market forces and the development of productive, more-sustainable technologies. Technological 'fixes' to ensure long-term sustainability are unlikely. Even in high-income countries, where the standard of living of most farmers is much better, non-market incentives (subsidies) are still applied in a search for sustainability. Any proposed market and profit-oriented strategies need to be supplemented with natural-resource management components that are compatible with long-term sustainability (Hudgens 1992).
For these measures to be effective, development must be assigned a high priority by governments (FAO 1993). Moreover, it is believed that the limited financial resources available in low-income countries will need to be supplemented with resources from donor countries over a period of years. Donor countries have been primarily responsible for the current emphasis on sustainable issues, which is but the latest in a succession of approaches, also mostly promulgated by donors (Ruttan 1991). They should now be encouraged to support the changes in agricultural research and development institutions (Eicher 1990) and the subsidy of policies that encourage sustainability described above.
To conclude, there is no quick fix to improve the situation in the SATs. On the contrary, successful development requires the implementation of a series of well-integrated strategies formulated through interactive consultation of all involved in agricultural development including farmers, researchers, planners, extension agencies, non-governmental organizations and commercial firms. This, together with the very heterogeneity of the farming systems in the SATs and the limited resources available for research and development, encourages strong support for either an interdisciplinary approach involving farmer participation (see Chapter 3, section Field indicators of biological and nutritional problems and Chapter 4, section African examples), or a farming systems approach (FAO 1989a, 1990) to addressing agricultural productivity and sustainability problems in the SATs.
<section>9</section>
References
Abalu, G.O. 1976. A note on crop mixtures under indigenous conditions in northern Nigeria. Journal of Development Studies 12: 212-220.
ADB [Asian Development Bank]. 1990. Economic Policies for Sustainable Development. Manila, Philippines.
Addae, P.C., Collis-George, N. and Pearson, C.J. 1991. Overriding effects of temperature and soil strength on wheat seedlings under minimal and conventional tillage. Field Crops Research 28: 103-116.
Addae, P.C and Pearson, C.J. 1992. Variability in seedling elongation of wheat, and some factors associated with it. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture 32: 377-382.
Alegre, J.C., Cassel, D.K. and Amezquita, E. 1991. Tillage systems and soil properties in Latin America. Soil and Tillage Research 20: 147-163.
Altieri, M.A. 1988. Environmentally Sound Small Scale Agricultural Projects. Codel/Vita, Arlington, Virginia.
Altieri, M.A. 1988. Beyond agroecology: making sustainable agriculture part of a political agenda. American Journal of Alternative Agriculture 3: 142-143.
Anderson, J.R. and Dillon J.L. 1992. Risk analysis in dryland farming systems. Farm Systems Management Series No. 2. FAO, Rome. 117 p.
Anderson, J.R. and Thampapillai, J. 1990. Soil conservation in developing countries: project and policy intervention. Policy and Research Series No. 8. World Bank, Washington DC.
Andow, D. 1983. The extent of monoculture and its effects on insect pest populations with particular reference to wheat and cotton. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 9: 25-35.
Angus, J.F., Hasegawa, S., Hsiao, T.C., Liboon, S. P., and Zandstra, H.G. 1983. The water balance of post-monsoonal dryland crops. Journal of Agricultural Science 101: 699-710.
Barley, K.P. 1959. Earthworms and soil fertility. IV. The influence of earthworms on the physical properties of a red-brown earth. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 10: 371-376.
Bartlett, B., Blake, B. and McCarl, B. 1982. Goal programming via multidimensional scaling applied to Senegalese subsistence farms. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 64: 720-727.
Bationo, A., Christianson, C.B., Baethgen, W.E. and Mokwunye, A.U. 1992. A farm-level evaluation of nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizer use and planting density for pearl millet production in Niger. Fertiliser Research 31: 175-184.
Beets, W.C. 1978. Multiple cropping systems reviewed. Span 21: 114-116
Beets W.C. 1982. Multiple Cropping and Tropical Farming Systems. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Bennie, A.T.P. and Krynauw, G.N. 1985. Causes, adverse effects and control of soil compaction. South African Journal of Plant and Soil Science 2: 109-114.
Binswanger, H.P. 1980. Attitudes towards risk: experimental measurement in rural India. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 62: 395-407.
Bopaiah, B.M. and Shetty, H.S. 1991. Soil microflora and biological activities in the rhizospheres and root regions of coconut-based multistoreyed cropping and coconut monocropping systems. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 23: 89-94.
Boserup, E. 1965. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth. Alien and Unwin, London. 124 p.
Brennan, R.F. 1992. The role of manganese and nitrogen nutrition in the susceptibility of wheat plants to take-all in Western Australia. Fertiliser Research 31: 35-41.
Bromley, D.W. 1989. Natural resource destruction in Asia and Africa: the policy response. Economic Issues No. 110. Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA.
Brown, H.C.P. and Thomas, V.G. 1990. Ecological considerations for the future of food security in Africa. In: Sustainable Agricultural Systems. C.A. Edwards, R. Lal, P. Maddem, R.H. Miller and G. House (eds.). AP353-77. Soil and Water Conservation Society Ankeny, Iowa.
Brust, G.E., Stinner, B.R. and McCartney, D.A. 1986. Predation by soil inhabiting arthropods in intercropped and monoculture agroecosystems. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 18: 145-154.
Caporali, F. and Onnis, A. 1992. Validity of rotation as an effective agroecological principle for a sustainable agriculture. Agriculture, Ecosystems and environment 41: 101-114.
Carter, M.R. and Mele, P.M. 1992. Changes in microbial biomass and structural stability at the surface of a duplex soil under direct drilling and stubble retention in north-eastern Victoria. Australian Journal of Soil Research 30: 493-503.
Carter, M.R. and Steed, G.R. 1992. The effects of direct-drilling and stubble retention on hydraulic properties at the surface of duplex soils in North-Eastern Victoria. Australian Journal of Soil Research 30: 505-516.
CGIAR [Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research]. 1989. Sustainable agricultural production: report of the CGIAR Committee. CGIAR Document No. MT/89/14. CGIAR, World Bank, Washington DC.
Chan, K.Y., Roberts, W.P. and Heenan, D.P. 1992. Organic carbon and associated soil properties of a red earth after ten years of rotation under different stubble and tillage practices. Australian Journal of Soil Research 30: 71 -83.
Chase, R.G. and Boudouresque, E. 1989. A study of methods for the revegetation of barren crusted Sahelian forest soils. In: Soil, Crop, and Water Management Systems for Rainfed Agriculture in the Sudano-Sahelian Zone. T. Gaillard and V. Sadland (eds.). pp. 125-135. ICRISAT, Patancheru.
Chase, R.G., Wendt, J.W. and Hossner, L.R. 1989. A study of crop growth variability in sandy Sahelian soils. In: Soil, Crop, and Water Management Systems for Rainfed Agriculture in the Sudano-Sahelian Zone. T. Gaillard and V. Sadland (eds.). pp. 229-240. ICRISAT, Patancheru.
Chisci, G. 1986. Influence of change inland use and management on the acceleration of land degradation phenomena in Apennines hilly areas. In: Soil Erosion in the European Community. Impact of Changing Agriculture. G. Chisci and R.P.C. Morgan (eds.). pp. 3-16. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Cochrane, T.T. 1975. Land use classification of the lowlands of Bolivia, pp. 109-125. In: Soil Management in Tropical America. North Carolina State University, Raleigh.
Cockroft, B and Tisdall, J.M. 1978. Soil management, soil structure and root activity. In: Modification of Soil Structure. W.W. Emerson, R.D. Bond and A.R. Dexter (eds.). pp. 387-392. Wiley Interscience, Chichester, UK
Cocks, P.S., Thomson, E.F., Somel, K. and El-Moneim, A.A. 1988. Degradation and Rehabilitation of Agricultural Land in North Syria. International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas, Aleppo, Syria. 23 p.
Conway, G.R. 1985. Agroecosystem analysis. Agricultural Administration 20: 31-55.
Conway, G.R. and Barbier, E.B. 1990. After the Green Revolution. Sustainable Agriculture for Development. Earthscan, London. 205 p.
Coventry, D.R and Hirth, J.R. 1992. Effects of tillage and lime on Rhizobium trifolii populations and survival in wheat-subterranean clover rotation in southeastern Australia. Soil and Tillage Research 25: 67-74.
Davies, S., Leach, M. and David, R. 1991. Food Security and the Environment: Conflict or Complementarity? Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.
De Boer, J. 1993. Building sustainable agricultural systems: economic and policy dimensions. Development Studies Paper Series. Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development, Morrilton, USA.
Deffontaines, J.P. 1991. L'agronomie, science du champ. Le champ, lieu d'interdisciplinarité: de l'écophysiologie aux sciences humaines. Agronomie 11: 581-591.
Diepen, C.A. van, Keulen, H. van, Wolf, J. and Berkhout, J.A.A. 1991. Land evaluation: from intuition to quantification. Advances in Soil Science 15: 139-204.
Diepen, C.A. van, Wolf, J., Keulen, H. van, and Rappoldt, C. 1989. Wofost: a simulation model of crop production. Soil Use and Management 5: 16-24.
Dixon, J. 1990. Ways forward for the fanning systems approach in Asia. Paper given at Asian Farming Systems Research and Extension Symposium. Bangkok, Thailand.
Dixon, J. 1992. Future developments in Asian agriculture and the farming systems approach. In: Readings in Farming Systems Development. K.H. Friedrich (ed.). pp. 33-58. FAO, Rome.
Douglass, J.T., Koppi, A.J. and Moran, C.J. 1992. Changes in soil structure induced by wheel traffic and growth of perennial grass. Soil and Tillage Research 23: 61-72.
Doran, J.W. 1987. Microbial biomass and metabolizable nitrogen distribution in no-tillage and plowed soils. Biology and Fertility of Soils 5: 68-75.
Doran, J.W. 1980. Soil microbial and biochemical changes associated with reduced tillage. Soil Science Society of America Proceedings 44: 765-771.
Dubois, J.P. 1975. Les Serer et la question des Terres Neuves au Senegal. Cahiers ORSTOM, Serie Sciences Humaines 12: 81-120.
Dunne, T.C. and Shier, F.L. 1935. A modified rotation for the wheat belt. Journal of Agriculture, Western Australia 3: 172-184.
Eagleton, G.E., Mohamed, A.A., Odowa, A.A. and Muse, H.A. 1991. A comparison of moisture-conserving practices for the traditional sorghum-based cropping systems of the Bay Region, in Somalia. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 36: 87-99.
Eicher, C.K. 1990. Building African scientific capacity for agricultural development. Agricultural Economics 4: 117-143.
Ellis, F. 1988. Peasant Economics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Ellis, J.R., Larsen, H.J. and Boosalis, M.G. 1985. Drought resistance of wheat plants inoculated with vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizae. Plant and Soil 86: 369-378.
Ezenwa, M.I.S. 1991. Important considerations for choice of species for the scattered farm tree agroforestry model in the Sudano-Sahelian areas of Nigeria. Savanna 12: 65-72.
FAO. 1982. Organic materials and soil productivity in the Near East. Soils Bulletin 45. FAO, Rome. 336 p.
FAO. 1983. Guidelines: land evaluation for rainfed agriculture. Soils Bulletin 52. FAO, Rome. 249 P.
FAO. 1986. African Agriculture: The Next 25 Years. Executive Summary. PAO, Rome
FAO. 1987. Improving productivity of dryland areas. COAG (Committee on Agriculture) report 87/7. FAO, Rome.
FAO. 1989a. Farming Systems Development: Concepts, Methods, Applications. AGSP/FAO, Rome. 46 p.
FAO. 1989b. Sustainable agricultural production: implications for international agricultural research. Research and Technology Paper 4. FAO, Rome. 152 p.
FAO. 1990b. Farming Systems Development: Guidelines for the Conduct of a Training Course in Farming Systems Development. AGSP/FAO, Rome. 266 p.
FAO. 1991. Water harvesting. A manual for the design and construction of water harvesting schemes for plant production. W. Critchley and K. Siegert. AGL/MISC/17/91. FAO, Rome. 133 p.
FAO. 1993. Key Aspects of Strategies for the Sustainable Development of Drylands. FAO, Rome. 69 p.
FAO. 1993. World Soil Resources. An explanatory note on the FAO World Soil Resources Map at 1:25000000 scale. Rev.1, AGLS/FAO, Rome.
Faye, J. and Niang, M. 1977. An experiment in agrarian restructuration and Senegalese rural space planning. African Environment 2: 143-153.
Feldstein, H.S. and Poats, S.V. (eds.). 1989. Working Together: Gender Analysis in Agriculture. Kumarian Press, West Hartford, USA.
Fick, G. and Power, A.G. 1992. Pests and integrated control. In: Field Crop Ecosystems. C.J. Pearson (ed.). Elsevier, Amsterdan. pp. 59-84.
Foster, R.C. 1988. Microenvironments of soil microorganisms. Biology and Fertility of Soils 6: 189-203.
Frankenberger, T.R. and Hutchinson, C.F. 1991. Sustainable resource management based on a decentralized food security monitoring system. Discussion Paper. Office of Arid Lands Studies, University of Arizona, Tucson, USA.
Fratello, B., Sabatini, M.A., Mola, L., Uscidda, C. and Gessa, C. 1989. Effects of agricultural practices on soil Arthropoda: organic and mineral fertilizers in alfalfa fields. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 27: 227-239.
French, R.J. and Schultz, J.E. 1984. Water use efficiency of wheat in a Mediterranean-type environment. II. Some limitations to efficiency. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research 35: 765-775.
Friedrich, K.H. (ed). 1992. Readings in Farming Systems Development. FAO, Rome. 116 p.
Fujisaka, S. and Garrity, D.P. 1991. Farmers and scientists: a joint effort. In: Development of Conservation Fanning on Hillslopes. W.D. Moldenhauer (ed.). Soil and Water Conservation Society, Arkeny, Iowa.
Fussell, L.K. 1992. Semi-arid cereal and grazing systems of West Africa. In: Field Crop Ecosystems. C.J. Pearson (ed.). Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 485-578.
Gander, M. 1990. Soil conservation research in Ethiopia. In: Land Conservation for Future Generations. S. Rimwanich (ed.). Proc. 5th International Soil Conservation Conference. Thailand Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Bangkok, pp. 10-12.
Gigou, J., Ganny, F. and Pichot, J. 1985. Nitrogen balance in some tropical agrosystems. In: Nitrogen Management in Farming Systems in Humid and Subhumid Tropics. B.T. Kang and J. van der Heide (eds.). pp. 247-268. Institute for Soil Fertility, Haren, Netherlands.
Gill, K.S. and Aulakh, B.S. 1990. Wheat yield and soil bulk density response to some tillage systems on an Oxisol. Soil and Tillage Research 18: 37-45.
Gilier, K.E., Nambiar, P.T.C., Rao, R.S., Dart, P.J. and Day, J.M. 1987. A comparison of nitrogen fixation in genotypes of groundnut (Arachis hypogaea L.) using ^15N-isotope dilution. Biology and Fertility of Soils 5: 23-5.
Ghuman, B.S. and Lal, R. 1992. Effects of soil wetness at the time of land clearing on physical properties and crop response on an Ultisol in southern Nigeria. Soil and Tillage Research 22: 1-11.
Gomez, A.A. and Gomez, K.A. 1983. Multiple Cropping in the Humid Tropics of Asia. IDRC, Ottawa. 248 p.
Government of India. 1990. National Watershed Development Project for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA) - Guidelines. Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi.
Habte, M. 1989. Impact of simulated erosion on the abundance and activity of indigenous vasicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal endophytes in an Oxisol. Biology and Fertility of Soils 7: 164-7.
Haen, H. de. and Runge-Metzger, A. 1989. Improvements in efficiency and sustainability of traditional land use systems through learning from farmers' practice. Quarterly Journal of International Agriculture 28: 326-350.
Haines, P.J. and Uren, N.C. 1990. Effects of conservation tillage farming on soil microbial biomass, organic matter and earthworm populations, in north-eastern Victoria. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture 30: 365-371.
Hamblin, A.P. 1991a. Sustainability: Physical and Biological Considerations for Australian Environments. Bureau of Rural Resources Working Paper. 60 p.
Hamblin, A.P. 1991b. Sustainable agricultural systems: what are the appropriate measures of soil structure? Australian Journal of Soil Research 29: 709-15
Hamblin, A.P. and Hamblin, J. 1985. Root characteristics of some temperate legume species and varieties on deep, free-drainage Entisols. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research 36: 63-72.
Harwood, R.R. 1975. Farmer-oriented research aimed at crop intensification. In: Proceedings of the Cropping System Workshop. International Rice Research Institute, Los Banos, Philippines. pp. 12-32.
Haswell, M.R. 1975. The Nature of Poverty. Macmillan, London.
Heam, A.B. and Fitt, G.P. 1992. Cotton cropping systems. In: Field Crop Ecosystems. C.J. Pearson (ed.). Elsevier, Amsterdam. pp. 850-942.
Heinrich, G., Siebert, J., Modiakgotia, E., Norman, D. and Ware-Snyder, J. (eds.) - 1990. Technical summary of ATlP's activities, 1982-90: research results. ATJP RP 5. Department of Agricultural Research, Ministry of Agriculture, Gaborone, Botswana.
Hill, P. 1972. Rural Hausa. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Hoare, J. 1992. Sustainable dryland cropping in southern Australia: a review. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 38: 193-204.
Hopkins, E. 1974. Operation groundnuts: lessons from an agricultural extension scheme. International Development Service Bulletin 5: 59-66.
Hudgens, R.E. 1992. Selecting technologies for sustainable agriculture. Development Studies Paper Series. International Institute for Agricultural Development, Morrilton, USA.
Hutchinson, M.F., Nix, H.A. and McMahon, J.P. 1992. Climate constraints on cropping systems. In: Field Crop Ecosystems. C.J. Pearson (ed.). pp. 37-58. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
IRRI. 1978. Annual Report for 1978. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, Philippines.
IRRI. 1984. Cropping Systems in Asia. On-farm Research and Management. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, Philippines. 196 p.
Ison, R.L. and Ampt, P.R. 1992. Rapid rural appraisal: a participatory problem formulation method relevant to Australian agriculture. Agricultural Systems 38: 363-386.
Jodha, N.S. 1977. Resource base as a determinant of cropping patterns. ICRISAT Economics Program Occasional Paper No. 14. International Centre for Research in the Semi-Arid Tropics, Hyderabad.
Jodha, N.S. 1986. Research and technology for dry farming in India: some issues for the future strategy. Indian Journal of Agricultural Economics. 4.
Jodha, N.S. 1990. Mountain agriculture: the search for sustainability. Journal of Farming Systems Research and Extension 1: 55-75.
Joly, C. 1989. Résponse des cultures aux engrais et influence des facteurs agroécologiques sur les rendements dans la zone soudano-sahelienne. In: Soil, Crop, and Water Management Systems for Rainfed Agriculture in the Sudano-Sahelian Zone. T. Gaillard and V. Sadland (eds.). pp. 201-203. ICRISAT, Patancheru.
Juo, A.S.R. and Payne, W.A. 1993. Management of Organic Matter for Sustained Food Production in the Tropics. FAO, Rome.
Kafando, T.W. 1972. Contribution a l'étude du développement intégré du Liptako-Gourma: introduction a l'étude des systèmes agro-pastoraux. Senegalt Africain de Développement Economique et de Planification, Dakar.
Kandiah, A. (ed.). 1990. Water, soil and crop management relating to the use of saline water. AGL/MISC/16/90. FAO, Rome. 197 p.
Kang, B.T and Ghuman, B.S. 1991. Alley cropping as a sustainable system. In: Development of Conservation Farming on Hillslopes. W.C. Moldenhauer, N.W. Hudson, T.C. Sheng and S.W. Lee (eds.). pp. 172-184. Soil and Water Conservation Society, Arkeny, Iowa.
Kaspar, T.C., Stanley, C.D. and Taylor H.M. 1978. Soybean root growth during the reproductive stages of development. Agronomy Journal 70: 1105-1108.
Kassam, A.H., Velthuizen, H.T. van., Fischer, G.W. and Shah, M.M. 1991. Agroecological land resources assessment for agricultural development planning. A case study of Kenya. Resources database and land productivity. World Soil Resources Report No. 71. Land & Water Development Division, FAO, Rome, and & International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Vienna. FAO, Rome.
Keating, B.A., Godwin, D.C. and Watiki, J.M. 1991. Optimising nitrogen inputs in response to climatic risk. In: Climatic Risk in Crop Production: Models and Management for the Semiarid Tropics and Subtropics. R.C. Muchow and J.A. Bellamy (eds.). pp. 329-358. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Kerkhof, P., Foley, G. and Bamard, G. 1990. Agroforestry in Africa: A Survey of Project Experience. Panos Publications, London. 216 p.
Klemmedson, J.O. 1989. Soil organic matter in arid and semi-arid ecosystems: sources, accumulation, and distribution. Arid Soil Research and Rehabilitation 3: 99-114.
Kohler, J.M. 1968. Activités agricoles et transformations socio-économiques dans une région de l'ouest du Mossi. ORSTOM Mission, Ouagadougou, Upper Volta.
Koppen, W. 1900. Versuch einer Klassification der Klimate, vorzugsweise nach ihren Beziehungen zur Pflanzenwelt Geogr. 6: 593-611 and 657-679.
Kovda, V.A. 1982. To prevent aridization, combat salinity. Environmental Conservation 9: 323-327.
Kowal, J.M. and Kassam, A.H. 1978. Agricultural Ecology of Savannah. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 403 p.
Larson, W.E. and Pierce, F.J. 1991. Conservation and enhancement of soil quality. In: Evaluation for Sustainable Land Management in the Developing World. International Board for Soil Research and Management (IBSRAM) Proceedings 12. Vol. 2. Bangkok, pp. 175-203.
Laryea, K.B., Pathak P. and Klaij, M.C. 1991. Tillage Systems and Soils in the Semi-Arid Tropics. Soil and Tillage Research. 20: 201-218
Liedholm, C. and Mead, D. 1993. The structure and growth of microenterprises in Southern and Eastern Africa: evidence from recent surveys. GEMINI Working Paper No. 36. Michigan State University, East Lansing, USA.
Littleboy, M., Silbun, D.M., Freebaim, D.M., Woodruff, D.R and Hammer, G.L. 1989. Perfect: A Computer Simulation Model of Productivity, Erosion Runoff Functions to Evaluate Conservation Techniques. Queensland Department of Primary Industries, Brisbane. 110 p.
Lopez-Bellido, L. 1992. Mediterranean cropping systems, pp. 311-356. In: C.J. Person (ed.) 1992. Field Crop Ecosystems. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Loss, S.P., Perry, M.W. and Anderson, W.K. 1990. Flowering times of wheats in south-western Australia: a modelling approach. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 41: 213-223.
Maas, E.V. 1986. Salt tolerance of plants. Applied Agricultural Research 1: 12-26.
MacLeod, N.D. 1990. An economic evaluation of the impact of conservation-oriented land use regulations on pastoral leases in mallee landscapes of Western New South Wales. In: The Mallee Lands, a Conservation Perspective. J.C. Noble, P.J. Joss and G.K. Jones G.K. (eds.). pp. 287-292. CSIRO, Melbourne.
Mannering, J.V., Schertz, D.L. and Julian, B.A. 1987. Overview of conservation tillage. In: Effects of Conservation Tillage on Groundwater Quality: Nitrates and Pesticides. T.J. Logan, J.M. Davidson, J.L. Baker and M.R. Overcash (eds.). pp. 3-17. Lewis Publishers, Chelsea, Minnesota.
Marchal, J.Y. 1977. The evolution of agrarian systems in Yatenga. African Environment 2: 73-85.
Martin, A.E. and Cox, J.E. 1956. Nitrogen studies on black soils from the Darling Downs, Queensland. 1. Seasonal variations in moisture and mineral nitrogen fractions. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research 7: 169-183.
Matlon, P.J. 1977. The Size Distribution, Structure and Determinants of Personal Income among Farmers in the North of Nigeria. PhD Thesis. Cornell University, Ithaca, USA.
Matlon, P. and Spencer, D. 1985. Increasing food production in Sub-Saharan Africa: environmental problems and inadequate technological solutions. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 66: 671-676.
McCorkle, C.M., Nolan, M.F., Jamtgaard, K. and Giles, J.L. 1987. Highlights from sociological research on small ruminants. Pastoral Development Network Paper No. 24d. Overseas Development Institute, London.
McIntyre, J., Bourzat, D. and Pingali, P. 1992. Crop-Livestock Interaction in Sub-Saharan Africa. World Bank, Washington DC.
Mellor, J.W. 1988. The intertwining of environmental problems and poverty. Environment 30: 8-30.
Merrill-Sands, D., Ewell P., Biggs, S.D. and McAllister, J. 1989. Issues in institutionalizing on-farm client-oriented research: a review of experiences from nine national agricultural research systems. Quarterly Journal of International Agriculture 28: 279-299.
Middleton, N.J. and Thomas, D.S.G. 1992. World Atlas of Desertification. Edward Arnold, London.
Misra, J., Pandey, H.N., Tripathy, R.S. and Sahoo, U.K. 1992. Weed population dynamics under "jhum" (slash and burn agriculture) and terrace cultivation in northeast India. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 41:285-295.
Moran, C.J., Koppi, A.J., Murphy, B.W and McBratney, A.B. 1988. Comparison of the macropore structure of a sandy loam surface soil horizon subjected to two tillage treatments. Soil Use and Management 4: 96-101.
Napier, J. 1987. Farmers and soil erosion: a question of motivation. Forum 2: 85-94.
Napier, T.L., Napier, A.S. and Tucker, M.A. 1991. The social, economic and institutional factors affecting adoption of soil conservation practices: the Asian experience. Soil and Tillage Research 20: 365-382.
Netting, R. McC. 1968. Hill Farms of Nigeria. University of Washington Press, Seattle. 251 p.
Norman, D.W. 1970. Initiating change in traditional agriculture. Proceedings of the Agricultural Society of Nigeria 7: 6-14.
Norman, D.W. 1973. An Economic Study of Three Villages in Zaria Province. Samaru Miscellaneous Paper 37. Institute for Agricultural Research, Samaru, Nigeria.
Norman, D.W. 1974. Rationalising mixed cropping under indigenous conditions: the example of Northern Nigeria. Journal of Development Studies 11: 3-21.
Norman, D.W. 1992. Household economics and community dynamics. In: Sustainable Crop-Livestock Systems for the Bolivian Highlands. C. Valdivia (ed.). pp. 39-70. University of Missouri, Columbia.
Norman, D.W. and Douglas, M. 1994. Fanning systems development and soil conservation. FAO Farm Systems Management Series No. 7. FAO, Rome.
Norman, D.W., Newman, M.D. and Ouedraogo, I. 1981. Farm and village production systems in the semi-arid tropics of West Africa. Research Bulletin 4(1). ICRISAT, Hyderabad, India.
Norman, D.W., Simmons, E.B. and Hays, H.M. 1982. Farming Systems in the Nigerian Savanna: Research and Strategies for Development. Westview Press, Boulder, USA. 275 p.
Norman, M.J.T., Pearson, C.J. and Searle, P.G.E. 1984. The Ecology of Tropical Food Crops. Cambridge University Press. (2nd ed. 1995).
Odemerho, F.O. and Avwunudiogba, A. 1993. The effects of changing cassava management practices on soil loss: a Nigerian example. The Geographical Journal 159: 66-69.
Okpala, D.C.I. 1992. Land survey and parcel identification. Data for effective land management. Land Use Policy 9: 92-98.
Okigbo, B.N. 1984. Cropping systems and rotations development for improving shifting cultivation and related intermittent production systems in tropical Africa, pp. 121-140. In: Improved Production Systems as an Alternative to Shifting Cultivation. FAO Soils Bulletin 53. FAO, Rome.
Oram, P. A. 1988. Moving toward sustainability: building the agroecological framework. Environment 30: 14-26.
Palaniappan, S.P. 1985. Cropping Systems in the Tropics. Principles and Management. Wiley Eastern, New Delhi. 215 p.
Papadakis, J. 1975. Climates of the World and their Potentialities. Libro Edicidn Argentina, Buenos Aires.200p.
Papendick, R.L, Sanchez, P.A. and Triplett, G.B. 1977. Multiple Cropping. American Society of Agronomy, Madison.
Pearson, C.J. (ed.). 1992. Field Crop Ecosystems. Ecosystems of the World. Vol. 18. Elsevier, Amsterdam. 576 p.
Pearson C.J. and Hall, A.J. 1984. Maize and pearl millet. In: Control of Crop Productivity. C.J. Pearson (ed.). Academic Press, Sydney. pp. 141-158.
Pearson, C.J. and Ison, R.L. 1987. Agronomy of Grassland Systems. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 169 p.
Pearson, C.J., Mann, I.G. and Zhang, Z.H. 1991. Changes in root growth within successive wheat crops in a cropping cycle using minimum and conventional tillage. Field Crops Research 28: 117-133.
Peoples, M.B and Craswell, E.T. 1992. Biological nitrogen fixation: investments, expectations and actual contributions to agriculture. Plant and Soil 141: 13-39.
Perry, M.W. 1992. Cereal and fallow/pasture systems in Australia. In: Field Crops Ecosystems. C.J. Pearson (ed.). pp. 451-483. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Pierce, F.J., Larson, W.E., Dowdy, R.H. and Graham, W.A.P. 1983. Productivity of soils: assessing long-term changes due to erosion. Journal of Soil Water Conservation 38: 39-44.
Pieri, C.J.M.G. 1992. Fertility of Soils. A Future for Farming in the West African Savannah. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Pingali, P., Bigot, Y. and Binswanger, H.P. 1987. Agricultural Mechanization and the Evolution of Farming Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa. John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, USA. 216 p.
Poincelot, R.P. 1990. From the editor. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture 1: 1-3.
Pol, F. van der. 1993. Soil mining. An unseen contribution to soil mining in southern Mali. Bulletin 325, Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam.
Poulain, J-F. 1980. Crop residues in traditional cropping systems of West Africa- effects of the mineral balance and level of organic matter in soils- proposals for their better management. pp. 38-71. In: Organic Recycling in Africa. FAO Soils Bulletin 43. FAO, Rome.
Power, A. 1990. Cropping systems, insect movement, and the spread of insect-transmitted diseases in crops. In: Agroecology Researching the Ecological Basis for Sustainable Agriculture. S.R. Gliessman (ed.). pp. 47-69. Ecological Studies 78. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Rabatin, S.C. and Stinner, B.R. 1989. The significance of vesicular-arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal-soil macroinvertebrate interactions in agroecosystems. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 27: 195-204.
Radford, B.J., Gibson, G., Nielsen, R.G.H., Butler, D.G., Smith, G.D. and Orange, D. N. 1992. Fallowing practices, soil water storage, plant-available soil nitrogen accumulation and wheat performance in South West Queensland. Soil and Tillage Research 22: 73-93.
Rasmussen, P.E. and Collins, H.P. 1991. Long-term impacts of tillage, fertilizer, and crop residue on soil organic matter in temperate semiarid regions. Advances in Agronomy 45: 93-134.
Raynaut, C. 1976. Transformation du système de production et inégalité économique: le cas d'un village Haoussa. Canadian Journal of African Studies 10: 279-306.
Reeves, T.G., Ellington, A. and Brooke, H.D. 1984. Effects of lupin-wheat rotations on soil fertility, crop disease and crop yields. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture and Animal Husbandry 24: 595-600.
Reijntjes, C., Haverkort, B. and Waters-Bayer, A. 1992. Farming for the Future. An Introduction to Low-External-Input and Sustainable Agriculture. ILEIA/Macmillan, Leusden. 250 p.
Rhoades, J.D. 1990. Measuring and monitoring soil salinity. pp. 71-88. In: A. Kandiah (ed.) 1990. Water, soil and crop management relating to the use of saline water.
Rhoades, 1990b. Principle effects of salts on soils and plants. pp. 19-33. In: A. Kandiah (ed.) 1990.
Rickert, K.G., Sedgley, R.H. and Stem, W.R. 1987. Environmental response of spring wheat in the south-western Australian wheat belt. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research 38: 655-670.
Rickson, R., Saffigna, P., Vanclay, F., and McTainsh, G. 1987. Social bases of farmers' responses to land degradation. In: Land Degradation: Problems and Policies. A. Chisholm and R. Dumsday (eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ridley, A.M., Slattery, W.J., Helyar, K.R. and Cowling, A. 1990. Acidification under grazed annual and perennial grass based pastures. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture 30: 539-544.
Rocheleau, D., Weber, F. and Field-Juma, A. 1988. Agroforestry in Dryland Africa. ICRAF, Nairobi. 311 p.
Rochester, I.J., Constable, G.A. and MacLeod, D.A. 1991. Mineral nitrogen dynamics in a fallow grey clay. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture 31: 237-44.
Rowland, I.C. 1980. The role of legumes in Australian dryland agriculture. In Proc. Int. Congr. Dryland Farming. Dept. of Agriculture, South Australia.
Ruttan, V.W. 1991. Sustainable growth in agricultural production: poetry, policy and science. Staff Paper. Department of Agriculture and Applied Economics, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, USA.
Ryan, M.H. Chilvers, G.A. and Dumaresq, D.C. 1994. Colonization of wheat by VA-mycorrhizal fungi was found to be higher on a farm managed in an organic manner than on a conventional neighbour. Plant and Soil 160: 33-40.
Ryszkowski, L. 1989. Control of energy and matter fluxes in agricultural landscapes. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 27: 107-118.
Salter, P.J. and Williams, J.B. 1967. The influence of texture on the moisture characteristics of soils. Journal of Soil Science 18: 174-181.
Sandford, S.G. 1989. Crop residue/livestock relationships. In: Soil, Crop, and Water Management Systems for Rainfed Agriculture in the Sudano-Sahelian Zone. T. Gaillard and V. Sadland (eds.). pp. 169-182. ICRISAT, Patancheru.
Senanayake, R. 1991. Sustainable agriculture: definitions and parameters for measurement. Journal of Sustainable Development 1: 7-28.
Singh, R.P. and Reddy, G.S. 1988. Identifying crops and cropping systems with greater production stability in water-deficit environments. In: Drought Research Priorities for the Dryland Tropics. F.R. Bidinger and C. Johansen (eds.). pp. 77-85. ICRISAT, Patancheru.
Singh, V.P. and Singh, J.S. 1992. Energetics and environmental costs of agriculture in a dry tropical region of India. Environmental Management 16: 495-503.
Singh, I., Squire, L. and Strauss, J. (eds.). 1986. Agricultural Household Models: Extensions, Applications, and Policy. John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, USA. 335 p.
Smiles, D.E. 1988. Aspects of the physical environment of soil organisms. Biology and Fertility of Soils 6: 204-215.
Smith, G.D. 1993. Strategies for the Development of Improved Soil Management in the Semi-arid Rainfed Environment. Mimeograph. Land and Water Development Division, FAO, Rome.
Smith, J., Barau, A.D., Goldman, A. and Mareck, J.H. 1994. The role of technology in agricultural intensification: the evolution of maize production systems in the Northern Guinea Savanna of Nigeria. Economic Development and Cultural Change 42: 537-554.
Sposito, G. 1984. The Surface Chemistry of Soils. Oxford University Press, New York. 234 p.
Srivastava, A.K. and Rao, M.S.R.M. 1989. Agroforestry for sustained agricultural production. Indian Farming 39: 33-35.
Standley, J., Hunter, H.M., Thomas, G.A., Blight, G.W. and Webb, A.A. 1990. Tillage and crop residue management affect Vertisol properties and grain sorghum growth over seven years in the semi-arid sub-tropics. 2. Changes in soil properties. Soil and Tillage Research 18: 367-388.
Staveren, J.Ph. van and Stoop, W.A. 1985. Adaptation to toposequence land types in West Africa of different sorghum genotypes in comparison with local cultivars of sorghum, millet and maize. Field Crop Res. 11: 12-35.
Steiner, K.G. 1984. Intercropping in Tropical Smallholder Agriculture with Special Reference to West Africa. 2nd edition. Deutsche Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit, Eschborn, Germany. 304 p.
Stewart, J.I. 1988. Development of management strategies from minimizing the impact of seasonal rainfall variation. In: Drought research priorities for the dryland tropics. International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics, Patancheru, India, and the Foundation for World Hunger Alleviation through Response Farming (WHARF), Davis, California, pp. 131-150.
Stewart, J.I. 1991. Principles and performance of response farming. In: Climatic Risk in Crop Production: Models and Management for the Semiarid Tropics and Subtropics. R.C. Muchow and J.A. Bellamy (eds.). pp. 361-382. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Stonehouse, D.P. 1991. The economics of tillage for large-scale mechanized farms. Soil and Tillage Research 20: 333-351.
Stryker, J.D. 1978. Food Security, Self-sufficiency and Economic Growth in the Sahelian Countries of West Africa. Food Research Institute, Stanford University, Palo Alto, USA.
Tandon, H.L.S. and Rego, T.J. 1989. Management of fertilizer nutrients other than nitrogen in the semiarid tropics of India. In: Soil Fertility and Fertilizer Management in Semiarid Tropical India. C.B. Christiansen (ed.). pp. 71-78. International Fertilizer Development Centre Special Publication No. 11, Fertilizer Development and Consultation Organisation, New Delhi.
Tardieu, F. and Pellerin, S. 1991. Influence of soil temperature during root appearance on the trajectory of nodal roots of field grown maize. Plant and Soil 131: 207-214.
Thomas, D.B., Biamah, E.K., Kilewe, A.M., Lundgren, L. and Mochoge, B.O. 1989. Soil and Water Conservation in Kenya. University of Nairobi, Nairobi.
Tisdall, J.M. 1978. Ecology of earthworms in irrigated orchards. In: Modification of Soil Structure. W.W. Emerson, R.D. Bond and A.R. Dexter R. (eds.). pp. 297-304. Wiley Interscience, Chichester, UK.
Tisdall, J.M. and Oades, J.M. 1982. Organic matter and water-stable aggregates in soils. Journal of Soil Science 33: 141-163.
Trewartha, G.T. 1968. An Introduction to Climate. 4th ed. McGraw Hill/Kogakusha, Tokyo. 408 p.
Unger, P.W. 1984. Tillage systems for soil and water conservation. FAO Soils Bulletin 54. FAO, Rome.
Unité d'évaluation. 1978. Evaluation de l'opération arachide et cultures vivrières: étude agroéconomique de 32 exploitations agricoles en zone OACV. Institut d'economie rurale, Bamako, Mali.
Venkateswarlu, J. 1993. Crop Rotation in Relation to Maintenance of Soil Productivity in the Rainfed Semi-arid tropics of India. FAO, Rome.
Virmani, S.M. 1975. The agricultural climate of the Hyderabad region in relation to crop planning. International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics, Hyderabad, India. Mimeo. 61 p.
Virmani, S.M. 1990. Agroclimatic considerations in planning conservation-effective farming systems in the semi-arid tropics. In: Land Conservation for Future Generations. S. Rimwanich (ed.). pp. 877-884. Proceedings of the Fifth International Soil Conservation Conference. Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Bangkok.
Young, A. 1989. Agroforestry for Soil Conservation. CAB International, Wallingford UK. 276 p.
Walker, T.S. and Jodha, N.S. 1986. How small farmers adapt to risk. In: Crop Insurance for Agricultural Development: Issues and Experience. P. Hazell, C. Pomareda and A. Valdes (eds.). John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, USA.
Walker, T.S. and Ryan, J.G. 1990. Village and Household Economies in India's Semi-arid Tropics. John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, USA. 394 p.
Watkins, W.A. 1991. Environmental aspects and their impact on sustainable land management. In:
Evaluation for Sustainable Land Management in the Developing World. Vol. 2: Technical Papers. Proc. pp. 121-33. IBSRAM, Bangkok.
Williams, J., Prebble, R.E., Williams, W.T. and Hignett, C.T. 1983. The influence of texture, structure and clay minerology on the soil moisture characteristic. Aust. J. Soil Res. 21: 15-32.
Winrock International. 1992. Animal Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa: Executive Summary. Winrock International Institute, Morrilton, USA.
World Bank. 1992. Development and the environment. World Development Report 1992. World Bank, Washington DC.
<section>a</section>
Glossary
Agroforestry
land-use systems in which trees or shrubs are grown in association with agricultural crops, pastures or livestock, and in which there are both ecological and economic interactions between trees and other components.
Double cropping
a form of sequential cropping in which two crops are grown in sequence within a year on a piece of land by seeding or transplanting one after the harvest of the other.
Intercropping
more than one crop on a given area at one time arranged in a geometric pattern. A typical pattern in India might be two rows of sorghum alternating with one row of pigeonpea.
Land equivalent ratio (LER)
the land needed under monoculture to produce the same amount of crop yields as from 1 ha of intercropping or mixed cropping.
Mixed cropping
growing two or more crops simultaneously in the same field without rows.
Monoculture
growing only one crop on the land in a given crop season.
Multiple cropping
the practice of growing more than one crop on the same land in one year. It involves several alternative patterns of crop arrangement in space and time such as mixed cropping, intercropping, relay-cropping, sequential cropping, double cropping, triple cropping, etc.
Multiple cropping index (MCI)
the sum of areas planted to different crops harvested during the year, divided by the total cultivated area.
Ratoon cropping
the cultivation of an additional crop from the regrowth of stubbles of a main crop after its harvest, thereby avoiding replanting as in sugar cane, sorghum and rice.
Relay cropping
a form of intercropping growing two or more crops in a sequence usually planting the succeeding crop after the flowering, but before the harvesting of the preceding crop.
Sequential cropping
growing two or more crops in a sequence, planting succeeding crop after the harvesting of the previous one.
Strip cropping
growing two or more crops simultaneously in different strips widely enough to permit independent cultivation but sufficiently narrow for the crops to interact agronomically.
Turnaround time
period between the harvesting of the preceding crop and planting of the succeeding crop in a specific field.
FAO TECHNICAL PAPERS
FAO SOILS BULLETINS
Soils of the arid zones of Chile, 1965 (E*)
A survey of soils laboratories in sixty-four FAO member countries, 1965 (E*)
Guide on general and specialized equipment for soils laboratories, 1966 (E*)
Guide to sixty soil and water conservation practices, 1966 (E*)
Selection of soil for cocoa, 1966 (E* F* S*)
Aerial photo interpretation in soil survey, 1967 (C* E* F* S*)
A practical manual of soil microbiology laboratory methods, 1967 (E*)
Soil survey interpretation and its use, 1967 (E*)
The preparation of soil survey reports, 1970 (E* F* S*)
Physical and chemical methods of soil and water analysis, 1970 (E F S)
Soil fertility investigations on farmers' fields, 1970 (E F S*)
The response of wheat to fertilizers, 1971 (E)
Land degradation, 1971 (C* E*)
Improving soil fertility in Africa, 1971 (E* F*)
Legislative principles of soil conservation, 1971 (E*)
Effects of intensive fertilizer use on the human environment, 1972 (E)
Trace elements in soils and agriculture, 1972 (E F S*)
Guide to the calibration of soil tests for fertilizer recommendations, 1973 (E S*)
Soil survey interpretation for engineering purposes, 1973(EF-S*)
Fertilizer legislation, 1973 (E* S)
Calcareous soils, 1973 (E* F*)
Approaches to land classification, 1974 (E*)
Management properties of ferralsols, 1974 (E)
Shifting cultivation and soil conservation in Africa, 1974 (E* F S)
Sandy soils, 1975 (E*) ^s
Planning and organization of fertilizer development in Africa, 1975(E*)
Organic materials as fertilizers, 1975 (E* F* S*)
S.I. Units and nomenclature in soil science, 1975 (E)
Land evaluation in Europe, 1975 (E*)
Soil conservation for developing countries, 1976 (Ar C* E* F* S*)
Prognosis of salinity and alkalinity, 1976 (E)
A framework for land evaluation, 1976 (C* E* F* S*)
Soil conservation and management in developing countries, 1977 (E F)
Assessing soil degradation, 1977 (E*)
Organic materials and soil productivity, 1977 (C* E)
Organic recycling in Asia, 1978 (C* E*)
Improved use of plant nutrients, 1978 (C* E)
Soil and plant testing and analysis, 1980 (E)
Soil and plant testing as a basis of fertilizer recommendations, 1980 (E* S*)
Salt-affected soils and their management, 1988 (Ar E)
China: recycling of organic wastes in agriculture, 1977 (E F* S)
China: azolla propagation and small-scale biogas technology, 1978(E*FS)
Soil survey investigations for irrigation, 1979 (C* E F)
Organic recycling in Africa, 1980 (E)
Watershed development with special reference to soil and water conservation, 1979 (C* E F S*)
Organic materials and soil productivity in the Near East, 1982 (E with Arabic summary)
Blue-green algae for rice production - a manual for its promotion, 1981 (E)
Le recyclage des résidus agricoles organiques en Afrique, 1982 (F)
Micronutrients and the nutrient status of soils: a global study, 1982 (E)
Application of nitrogen-fixing systems in soil management, 1982 (C* E F S*)
Keeping the land alive: soil erosion - its causes and cures, 1983 (E F S)
El reciclaje de materias orgánicas en la agricultura de América Latina, 1983 (S*)
Guidelines: land evaluation for rainfed agriculture, 1983 (C** E F S)
Improved production systems as an alternative to shifting cultivation, 1984 (E F S)
Tillage systems for soil and water conservation, 1984 (C E F S*)
Guidelines: land evaluation for irrigated agriculture, 1985 (C E F S)
Soil management: compost production and use in tropical and subtropical environments, 1987 (E F S)
Soil and water conservation in semi-arid areas, 1987 (C E F)
Guidelines: land evaluation for extensive grazing, 1991 (E)
Nature and management of tropical peat soils, 1988 (E)
Soil conservation for small farmers in the humid tropics, 1989 (E S)
Radioactive fallout in soils, crops and food, 1989 (E F S)
Management of gypsiferous soils, 1990 (Ar** E)
Micronutrient assessment at the country level: an international study, 1990 (E)
A study of the reasons for success or failure of soil conservation projects, 1991 (E F S)
Status of cadmium, lead, cobalt and selenium in soils and plants of thirty countries, 1992 (E)
Manual de sistemas de labranza para América Latina, 1992 (S)
Agro-ecological assessments for national planning: the example of Kenya, 1993 (E)
Field measurement of soil erosion and runoff, 1993 (EF)
Soil tillage in Africa: needs and challenges, 1993 (E)
Introduction à la gestion conservatoire de l'eau, de la biomasse et de la fertilité des sols (G C E S), 1994 (F)
Tillage systems in the tropics: management options and sustainability implications, 1995 (E)
Sustainable dryland cropping in relation to soil productivity, 1995 (E)
Availability: December 1995
Ar
Arabic
C
Chinese
E
English
F
French
P
Portuguese
S
Spanish
Multil
Multilingual
Out of print
In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
The main themes of this bulletin are that management of soil productivity Is central to sustainable dryland cropping and that successful management depends on understanding the mechanisms underlying soil productivity and recognizing non-technical factors such as human goals. It follows that the publication's conclusions are not prescriptive; rather It aims to encourage researchers and policy-makers to work jointly with farmers to develop better cropping systems and to devise locally acceptable indicators of sustainability.
