<title>A system of economic accounts for food and agriculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
A Handbook of Economic Accounts for Agriculture (EAA) was released in 1974 "to help statisticians compile agricultural accounts in the most useful and standardized form that is possible ... and to provide world guidelines in the construction of economic accounts for agriculture". This Handbook, which was based on the 1968 United Nation System of National Accounts, referred mainly to the productive activities of crop and livestock producers. The present revision of the Handbook entitled "A System of Economic Accounts for Food and Agriculture" (SEAFA), provides a broader framework to bring together various kinds of databases relating to food and agriculture (including forestry and fisheries) in an integrated system. The concepts and accounting structure of the system are based on the revised System of National Accounts ( 1993). The present Handbook, in addition to describing the system, includes details of crop and livestock production and linkages with the FAO's Food Balance
Sheets. It is planned to extend the coverage of SEAFA to include similar information about forestry, logging and fisheries together with some natural resource accounts or environmental accounts. The revised system is intended to be helpful for all countries, irrespective of their stage of development.
In view of the status of statistical development in some developing countries, a section on methods and techniques of estimation has also been included to facilitate the compilation of SEAFA. It is also planned to make the section on methods and techniques more comprehensive by including suggested solutions for problems faced by various countries in the compilation of SEAFA. Comments and suggestions for improving the Handbook and making it more comprehensive would be greatly appreciated. These comments should be sent to the Director, Statistics Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalle, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Director
Statistics Division
<section>2</section>
PART ONE: THE SYSTEM
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Why a separate system?
The role of the system
The arrangements of the handbook
Acknowledgements
Why a separate system?
1.1 A System of Economic Accounts consists of a coherent, consistent and interrelated set of economic accounts for sectors or sub-sectors of the economy, industries or the economy as a whole. It provides a set of concepts, definitions and classifications within a broad accounting framework. It is designed for purposes of economic analysis and policy-making, including the formulation and monitoring of economic programmes and development planning. Data of a scientific, technological or social nature can be systematically related to economic data within the framework of an overall system of accounts. Work on the formulation of such a system started at individual research level well before the Second World War. The first United Nations System of National Accounts (SNA) was published in 1953. The UN recommended countries to compile their economic accounts within the SNA framework to achieve consistency and facilitate international economic comparison. However, the interest of
policy-makers in relating the outcomes of various scientific and technological studies, plans and programmes to the socio-economic status of the population, encouraged the further elaboration of the system. This elaboration included the establishment of links with the distribution of income and consumption; stocks of tangible and non-tangible assets; a balance sheet; stocks of human capital; and various other monetary and quantitative databases relating to different types of activities. SNA has been revised several times to take account of these wider concerns. The latest version' of the system was completed in 1993 and provides measures of production, income, consumption, savings, capital formation and their financing for individual sectors and not only for the economy as a whole. It also provides linkages with various monetary and quantitative databases relating to different types of activities through Satellite Accounts. SNA is a powerful and flexible tool to provide the
detailed economic information required to meet analytical and policy needs. A System of Economic Accounts for Food and Agriculture (SEAFA) can be viewed as a specific application of SNA to meet the requirements of analysts, policy-makers and planners dealing with various economic activities relating to food and agriculture.
1.2 Policy-making and decision-taking with increasing socio-economic linkages and interdependencies within and between nations, is a necessary activity of every government. Agricultural development, like many other activities, has also become complex and comprises a number of separate but interrelated subjects. In many developing countries a large share of agricultural land is held in the form of small and marginal holdings. In most such countries the population is rising. Although new jobs may be created in non-agricultural activities the rate of increase in employment opportunities may be far less than the growth of population, giving rise to increasing poverty. Very often the resources at the disposal of primary agricultural workers diminish. On the one hand, the worker is forced to follow traditional production techniques while, on the other hand, the economy increases its demands on food production. An economy may also be faced with a situation in which the prices of
food are high but farm incomes are low. Scarce foreign exchange is often used to pay for food imports. Diets are below the normal level and contain insufficient quantities of protein and fat. Animal husbandry activity and fisheries are inadequately developed because of a lack of resources. There is increasing pressure on land. Labour moves out of agriculture not because of the mechanization of farm activity but because of uncertainty and lack of resources. The high risk leads to agricultural credit being in short supply. Marketing systems, transportation and communication networks are inadequate. These factors, combined with social factors, hinder the commercialization of agriculture. In countries endowed with large forest resources, government policies frequently fail to secure the maximum benefits and efficient resource use. This results in economic and fiscal losses and contributes to the wastage of forest resources. Scarcely any resources are devoted to the development
of the eco-system and the conservation of natural resources. The list of topics could be extended further but it is already sufficiently long to illustrate the complex and interrelated nature of the problem. In the face of this situation, however, the decision-maker has very little reliable data or information available for analysis. To solve such problems an information system is needed that keeps in close touch with various aspects of agriculture and shows the place and role of agriculture in the total economy. SEAFA is intended to meet this need. A separate system of economic accounts for food and agriculture is proposed for the following reasons:
(a) The basic needs of human populations for food, fibre, fuel and shelter are supplied by a combination of agriculture, fishery and forestry activity. Policy-makers need a comprehensive integrated view of the system as a whole to emphasize the importance of the subject and to make optimum use of resources in the long term.
(b) The activity of agriculture defined by the International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) under Divisions 01, 02 and 05 covers crop production, animal husbandry, forestry and fisheries, but for day-to-day decision-making, policy-makers and planners require information on many other areas in order to have a comprehensive view. These areas include the availability of food production, the impact of food and agricultural activities on the eco-system and the current status of natural resources.
(c) Planning exercises require information on numerous topics such as labour force participation, research and development, agro-industries, the management and production of inputs, the balance of trade and the balance of payment, the depletion of natural resources and impacts on other sectors.
(d) Agriculture, being an important part of economic activity, is recognized in the ISIC and SNA classification of economic activities as a separate activity. " Food production", however, is not specifically identified. Food production cuts across ISIC by combining economic activities covered under agriculture, forestry, fishery and manufacturing (food processing).
(e) Food availability and consumption may be expressed in terms of physical quantities of food or in terms of the nutritional level provided by the basket of food consumed, which is expressed in terms of calories (number), protein (grams), fat (grams), etc., for specific analytical use.
1.3 The economic accounts for food and agriculture have been designed to cover all these aspects. FAO thought it appropriate to provide a comprehensive framework for the economic accounts for food and agriculture in order to present traditional agricultural statistics on output, input, capital formation and uses of agricultural products in a logical consistent framework together with other information required by users either directly or through satellite accounts as recommended by the 1993 SNA.
1.4 In order to take coherent decisions regarding the availability of food, the level of nutrition of the population, the economic condition of the rural population (especially those engaged in agricultural production), the preservation of the ecosystem and the improvement of the efficiency of production, a comprehensive system is required. Such a system should provide information on the various subjects listed above and link the information system of agriculture with that of the rest of the economy and the rest of the world. The system would have both physical as well as monetary databases, as analysts and policy-makers need to know the impact of changes in one on the other. Thus, to provide a sufficiently flexible tool to policy-makers, it is necessary to formulate a comprehensive system of economic accounts for agriculture linked to the 1993 SNA. With such a framework it would also be possible to make international comparisons.
1.5 SEAFA has been designed to meet analytical needs and requirements for the formulation of plans and policies relating to food and agriculture. The framework of the System has been formulated using the concepts recommended by the 1993 SNA for establishing a system of economic accounts and by FAO for the collection of various data.
The role of the system
1.6 SEAFA recommends covering a large number of productive activities that are of interest to decision-makers. These activities fall under ISIC Divisions 01, 02 and 05 dealing with crop and animal husbandry, forestry and fisheries, and also under other divisions dealing with the production of fertilizer and pesticides, machinery and equipment, research and development, education and health, recreation, etc. SEAFA does not, however, propose that the accounts should be prepared for all activities. It suggests that part of the information should be presented in the form of supplementary tables of statements. The basic objective of this Handbook (SEAFA) is to illustrate how to organize useful information in an integrated manner for decision-making in FAO Member Countries. This Handbook is not a questionnaire for the collection of data on food and agriculture by FAO and it is proposed to address this matter separately.
The arrangements of the handbook
1.7 The Handbook has been divided into two parts. The first part deals with the structure of the system. As well as this introductory Chapter, it includes three more Chapters. Chapter 2 presents an overview of the System and includes the structure and formats of various accounts as well as illustrative list of statements recommended for different activities. FAO's traditional Food Balance Sheets are linked with SNA's supply and use accounts for food products. The linkage of SEAFA with the 1993 SNA has also been illustrated in this chapter. In Chapter 3, the basic national accounting concepts and definitions of the main flows used in the System are presented together. Obviously, this Chapter entirely depends on the 1993 SNA and many relevant portions have been extracted from SNA's text and reproduced. The concepts listed in this Chapter are uniformly applicable to all the economic activities covered in SEAFA. Readers familiar with the 1993 SNA may omit this Chapter. Chapter 4
covers the various uses of the System. Part TWO of the Handbook, which is intended primarily for compilers in developing countries, consists of two Chapters. The first chapter of Part TWO is devoted to crop and animal husbandry activities and discusses the application of the concepts given in Chapter 3 in Part ONE as well as describing the various sources of the data required to compile the accounts. The second Chapter of Part TWO presents a schematic classification of available data used to prepare SEAFA, keeping in view the reliability of resultant estimates. This chapter also includes some discussion of simple statistical techniques which are generally used by official statisticians to process primary data and impute missing data or observations. This discussion explains the assumptions underlying the techniques used. It is proposed to provide similar details about the structure of accounts and sources of data for other activities included in SEAFA in separate supplements
to the Handbook.
Acknowledgements
1.8 This Handbook on SEAFA has greatly benefited from the comments and suggestions offered by various subject matter specialists and economists at FAO and in other international organizations on the first draft issued in March 1995 and also from the views expressed at the seminar on the 1993 System of National Accounts organized by the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (Canberra, September 1994), the Expert Consultation on Use and Analysis of Food and Agricultural Data organized by FAO (Bangkok, June 1995) and the Study Group on Food and Agricultural Statistics in Europe, Conference of European Statisticians, organized jointly by the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) and FAO (Geneva, July 1995) where the draft Handbook was presented. The basic concepts and structure of accounts were also discussed with the representatives of ECE, the Statistical Office of the European Communities (EUROSTAT), the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) and the Ministry of Agriculture of France. Their contribution in suggesting improvements to the draft is gratefully acknowledged. Some editing of the final draft was also undertaken by Mr. Peter Hill working as a consultant to the FAO and his help is also gratefully acknowledged.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2 - The system of economic accounts for food and agriculture
What are the requirements?
The contents of SEAFA
The relationship of SEAFA to SNA
The agricultural household sub-sector
The sequence of accounts for the agricultural household sub-sector
Accounts for the other sub-sectors
The accounts for agriculture as a productive activity
Agricultural activity accounts
Goods and services accounts
Satellite accounts and supplementary tabulations relating to food (food balances)
What are the requirements?
2.1 The contents and structure of a system of economic accounts depend on the requirements for which the system is being designed. The requirements cover two aspects: which economic activities and transactions; and whose economic activities and transactions? Although general answers to these questions are given by the 1993 SNA for the economy as a whole, in the present Handbook a specific system is proposed to serve analysts and decision makers dealing with food and agricultural activities.
2.2 SEAFA is intended to serve policy-makers dealing with the preparation of production plans for agriculture and food designed to optimize the use of domestic resources, minimize the import of essential agricultural goods and stabilize the level of prices of food and agricultural products, while keeping in view the impact of these policies on the living standards of the rural population dependent on agriculture. The plans may be formulated for product diversification to achieve the desired level of nutrition for the country's population or to maximize the economic benefits. Policy-makers are generally not concerned with other matters, such as the financial assets and liabilities of the units engaged in the activities. The main objectives of agricultural policies can be divided into three broad groups as follows:
(a) securing improvements in the efficiency of the production and distribution of food and agricultural products;
(b) improving the condition of the rural population;
(c) raising people's level of nutrition and standard of living.
The two questions raised in paragraph 2.1 are examined in the following discussion keeping these objectives in view.
2.3 The economic activities covered in SEAFA relate to various aspects of the food and agricultural production of a country or region. Such a system needs to incorporate all the economic statistics relating to agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food and nutrition in one framework. This is necessary because these activities are interrelated and also because it allows the study of the impact of changes induced in the system through various policy measures. Such a framework may include detailed information for making recommendations on subject matters such as improved methods of producing, processing, marketing and distributing food and agricultural products, import substitution, improvement in nutritional intake, financing requirements and conservation of natural resources. The system, therefore, requires the following types of data:
 production, productivity and income accruing from the activities of agriculture, forestry, fisheries and food production;
 the inputs and labour required for carrying out the activities;
 consumption patterns and food habits, along with the nutrient content of the food;
 the status of infrastructural development related to agricultural and food production activities and their financing requirements.
2.4 The data included in the system depicts such issues as labour force participation, development of a skilled workforce, extension and research activities or cover the economic, social and scientific aspects of the utilization of natural resources. These data establish the relationships between domestic production and foreign trade (import and export), the relationship of land and other assets with size of holding and production, the relationship of agro-climatic factors with the genetic characteristics of crops and animals and with their production, etc.
2.5 For purposes of economic planning, the system also needs to have clear linkages with other related economic activities such as the processing of agro-based products and the production, import and export of intermediate inputs, machinery and equipment used in agriculture, as well as other activities that have an indirect impact on agriculture. This latter group includes the development of infrastructure (e.g. power, communication and storage) and services activities such as distribution. In view of these requirements, SEAFA (like SNA) is based on the structure of inter-industry transaction tables. This structure links targeted output not only with inputs required but also with the level of consumption, imports, exports and changes in stocks of food and agriculture products as well as with other economic activities not covered by SEAFA.
2.6 The second question from paragraph 2.1 (whose activity and transaction) could more specifically be answered by taking each of the objectives separately. For example in case of the first objective, namely, "securing improvements in the efficiency of production and distribution of food and agricultural products" it is necessary to cover all units that are responsible for taking the decisions to carry out the economic activity, i.e. all institutional units engaged in agricultural activity, as well as the units of location (physical) where the economic activity actually takes place. This also partially satisfies the second objective (improving conditions of the rural population) because it applies to the income of all households with agriculture as their principal activity. In the case of developing countries, for which this objective is relevant, a major share of the total rural population depends on such agricultural activities. A regular set of information for rural areas
has not been included in SEAFA as the area that can be described as rural area changes very frequently even if the concept remains the same. To study the third objective (i.e. raising the level of nutrition and standards of living of the people) within the total consumption of the population, it is necessary to study food as one sector. In this respect SEAFA may include the activity of establishments engaged in production of food products as well as in the supply and use of food products. In other words, to take policy decisions on the above questions, the system needs to cover the transactions of two types of units, viz. institutional units and establishments whose principal activity is production of food and agricultural products. These transactions may relate to economic activities of production, income generation and supply and use of food and agricultural products and the composition of food items for the total population along with its nutrition content. While
designing SEAFA these aspects have been kept in mind and are discussed in more detail in the following presentation.
The contents of SEAFA
(a) The coverage of economic achvity
(b) Units used in SEAFA
(c) The system of accounts of SEAFA
2.7 The contents and coverage of SEAFA can be presented in terms of economic activities using the ISIC codes, units used in the system and the type of economic accounts that are described below.
(a) The coverage of economic activity
2.8 The System as a whole is concerned with the following types of economic activities:
(1) Crop and animal husbandry: agriculture covering crop husbandry, animal husbandry and related activities (ISIC Division 01);
(2) Forestry, logging and related activities (ISIC Division 02);
(3) Fishing (ISIC Division 05);
(4) Food production: includes (i) food production covered under ISIC Divisions 01, 02 and 05, (ii) production of food covered under ISIC Division 15, i.e. the manufacture of food products and beverages;
(5) Environmental protection activities: such as desertification control, water resource protection, marine pollution control erosion control, flood prevention or control and natural reserves (action to preserve biodiversity).
(6) Other activities: includes (i) research and development relating to crops, livestocks, forestry, fisheries and food production included in ISIC class 7310; (ii) veterinary activities, ISIC class 8520; (iii) technical and vocational and higher education relating to agriculture, forestry and fishery included in ISIC classes 8022 and 8030; (iv) agro industries other than food products covered under ISIC Divisions 16, 17, 19 and 20; (v) production of inputs for intermediate consumption and machinery and equipment for use in the agricultural sector covered under ISIC class 2412 (manufacture of fertilizers and pesticides), ISIC class 2921 (manufacture of agricultural and forestry machinery), ISIC class 2925 (manufacture of machinery for food, beverage and tobacco processing) and ISIC class 3511 (building of fishing boats and fish processing factory vessels, development of infrastructure for rural areas).
(b) Units used in SEAFA
2.9 The following three kinds of units are used both in SNA and SEAFA:
 institutional units
 establishments
 products, i.e., goods and services.
A brief description of the 1993 SNA's concepts applied to SEAFA with special reference to agriculture is given below. Although the same units are used for preparing accounts or tables for other activities listed in paragraph 2.8 above, a similar activity-specific description will be included in the proposed supplements to the Handbook.
1. Institutional Units
2.10 An institutional unit is defined as:
"an economic entity that is capable, in its own right, of owning assets, incurring liabilities and engaging in economic activities and in transactions with other entities" (1993 SNA paragraph 4.2).
An institutional unit is therefore a real economic unit. It is an economic agent or transactor. SNA distinguishes four main kinds of institutional unit: households; corporate and quasi corporate enterprises, government units and non-profit institutions (NPIs). It is possible to compile a complete set of accounts, including balance sheets, for an institutional unit because, by definition, it is capable of owning assets and incurring liabilities in its own right. It can receive and spend income, borrow and lend, and so on.
2.11 Sectors and sub-sectors in SNA are groups of resident institutional units and SNA recommends the compilation of a complete set of accounts for each sector. SEAFA proposes to identify a sector of the economy consisting of institutional units whose principal activity is agricultural production. Such a sector is not specifically identified in the 1993 SNA and it is useful to see how the agricultural sector relates to the standard sectors defined in SNA. The agricultural sector consists of three sub-sectors each of which is, in turn, a sub-sector of a standard SNA sector namely:
 agricultural households as defined below;
 agricultural corporate or quasi-corporate enterprises;
 government-owned NPIs by whose principal activity is agricultural production or research.
2.12 Within the agricultural sector, SEAFA's primary concern relates to agricultural households. From the SNA point of view, these constitute a sub-sector of the household sector and SNA defines a household as:
"a small group of persons who share the same living accommodation, who pool some, or all, of their income and wealth and who consume certain types of goods and services collectively, mainly housing and food". (1993 SNA paragraph 4.132)
This definition is essentially the same as that used in population and housing censuses and quoted in paragraph 5.28 of FAO's Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000. An agricultural household is one whose principal source of income, whether in cash or in kind, is derived from its own agricultural production (see paragraph 2.20 below for a more precise definition). SEAFA proposes to compile SNA-type accounts for the sub-sector consisting of agricultural households because of the policy interest not only in their agricultural production, but also in their total income and general welfare.
2.13 SNA treats institutional units as integral, indivisible units. For example, the production account for a household covers the productive activities of all the members of the household who may not necessarily all be engaged in the same activity. The production account for an agricultural household is not necessarily confined to agricultural production, although in practice this may often be the only kind of production undertaken. Similarly, the primary income of a household may include wages received by one or more members of the household from outside employment and is not necessarily confined to the income generated by the household's agricultural production. The gross capital formation of an agricultural household covers all its capital formation, including net acquisition of valuables, and not only the gross fixed capital formation in its agricultural activities.
2.14 Apart from agricultural households, the other main type of institutional unit within the agricultural sector consists of a corporate or quasi-corporate enterprise whose principal activity is agricultural production. Most such enterprises are likely to have large production units, such as plantations growing rubber, tea, coffee or cocoa or specialized farms raising turkeys, which may be owned by resident units, including government units, or non-resident units. From the SNA viewpoint, this group of institutional units is a sub-sector of the non-financial corporations sector.
2.15 There may also be some NPIs owned and controlled by government units that are engaged in agricultural production. These would constitute a third sub-sector, which is also part of the SNA general government sector.
2. Establishments
2.16 Establishments are units which are identified only for purposes of measuring production. An establishment is intended to be a unit whose production is as homogeneous as possible and ideally it should be engaged in only a single type of production activity. It may, therefore, correspond to only part of an enterprise where an enterprise is to be understood as an institutional unit engaged in production. It is not itself an institutional unit. An establishment is defined in SNA as:
"an enterprise, or part of an enterprise, that is situated in a single location and in which only a single (non-ancillary) productive activity is carried out or in which the principal productive activity accounts for most of the value added". (1993 SNA paragraph 5.21)
This definition is essentially the same as that given in ISIC Rev. 3 and the concept of the establishment is the same in SNA and ISIC. An agricultural establishment is one whose principal activity is agricultural, as defined in Division 01 of ISIC. As in the case of industrial and service establishments, an agricultural establishment may have one or more secondary activities which it would not be feasible to separate from the principal activity. For example, an establishment engaged mainly in growing cereals or other crops (ISIC 0111) may raise domesticated animals (ISIC 0122) as a secondary agricultural activity. Alternatively, the secondary activity may not even be agricultural; for example, grain milling (ISIC 1531) or slaughtering (ISIC 1511) which are classified as food manufacturing in ISIC. Thus, the total output of a set of agricultural establishments, including Division 01 of ISIC as a whole, will in practice tend to include some non-agricultural products produced
as outputs from secondary activities within those establishments.
2.17 In the context of agriculture and SEAFA, the establishment may, in most cases, be equated with the agricultural holding as defined in paragraph 5.7 of FAO's Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000. This is the unit traditionally used in agricultural censuses and surveys. However, it is possible that some agricultural holdings ought to be divided into two or more separate establishments if there are two or more different types of agricultural activity, as defined in ISIC, taking place on the holding and if it is possible to compile separate production accounts for them.
3. Products: goods and services
2.18 The third type of unit used in SEAFA consists of a product, i.e. a good or service produced as output by a process of production. Goods and services accounts are compiled for individual products or groups of products. These accounts may also be described as balances of supplies and uses.
2.19 The general classification of products corresponding to ISIC is the Central Product Classification (CPC). Agricultural products may be identified with products in Divisions 01 and 02 of CPC and manufactured food products with Divisions 21 to 23. FAO has its own more detailed draft classification of agricultural and food commodities (FAO, 1994). The goods and services accounts in Part TWO of SEAFA refer to agricultural or food products as just defined.
(c) The system of accounts of SEAFA
2.20 SEAFA consists of three types of accounts or tables for food and agriculture:
Part I Selected accounts for Agriculture defined as a sector of the total economy including, in particular, production and primary income accounts for the sub-sector of the SNA household sector consisting of Agricultural Households, and also their capital formation;
Part II Production and generation of income accounts for all establishments whose principal activity is agricultural production; also goods and services accounts for food and agricultural products;
Part III Satellite accounts and supplementary tabulations relating to food and agriculture.
Each set of accounts or tables is described below. First, it is useful to clarify the relationship between SEAFA and SNA, and to describe the units used in the two systems.
The relationship of SEAFA to SNA
2.21 As a system, the 1993 SNA consists of a complete and interdependent sequence of accounts, namely Production, Income and Accumulation Accounts and Balance Sheets. These accounts may be compiled for sectors or sub-sectors, consisting of groups of institutional units, or for the total economy, i.e. the entire set of resident institutional units. Furthermore, SNA has also recommended that "for analysis of production in which the technology of production plays an important role" it is possible to compile production accounts and generation of income accounts. The 1993 SNA also includes goods and services accounts and supply and use tables which record the total supplies of goods and services produced by domestic industries and imported from abroad and the use of those supplies for intermediate or final consumption, capital formation or export. The industries in the supply and use tables consist of groups of establishments, as distinct from the institutional units used in the
sector accounts. SEAFA follows SNA by recommending the compilation of sector accounts for all those institutional units in the economy whose resources derived mainly from agriculture as well as production and generation of income accounts for establishments whose principal activity is agricultural production. It also follows SNA in recommending goods and services accounts for agricultural products. The accounts listed under Parts I and II above corresponds to these recommendations. Similarly, the accounts included in Part III are also according to the 1993 SNA's recommendation
"to expand the analytical capacity of national accounting for selected areas of social concern in a flexible manner (satellite accounts could be used), without overburdening or disrupting the central system....Typically satellite accounts or system allows for:
(a) the provision of additional information on particular social concerns of a functional or cross-sector nature;
(b) the use of complementary or alternative concepts, including the use of complementary and alternative classifications and accounting frameworks, when needed to introduce additional dimensions to the conceptual framework of national accounts;
(c) extended coverage of costs and benefits of human activities;
(d) further analysis of data by means of relevant indicators and aggregates; and
(e) linkage of physical data sources and analysis to the monetary accounting system. " (SNA paragraph 21.4)
The agricultural household sub-sector
2.22 As explained earlier, the reason for compiling these accounts is the policy interest in the production, income and welfare of households engaged in agricultural production where resources are derived mainly, or entirely, from this activity. The 1993 SNA strongly recommends sub-sectoring the household sector but also notes in paragraph 4.158
"There are thus many useful ways in which the households sector may be sub-sectored and statistical agencies are advised to give due consideration to the various possibilities. More than one method may be adopted if there is a demand for different breakdowns of the households sector from different users, analysts or policy-makers."
2.23 Sub-sectoring of the household sector is one area in which the 1993 SNA recommends that the System should be implemented flexibly (see Annex 2.3). In the context of a system of SEAFA, interest is focused on households whose resources are derived primarily from their own agricultural production and it is entirely in the spirit of the 1993 SNA to define a sub-sector of this kind. Following the same kinds of criteria as used in SNA an agricultural household may be defined as a household whose largest source of income consists of mixed income(s) derived from agricultural production, agriculture being defined as in the activity accounts, namely Division 01 of ISIC, Rev. 3. This does not necessarily imply that the total mixed income from agriculture accounts for more than half of the total household income defined as the sum of the primary incomes and the transfer incomes received by all members of the household. In paragraph 4.153, the 1993 SNA distinguishes three types of
household income:
 mixed incomes;
 compensation of employees;
 property and transfer incomes.
2.24 An agricultural household is one in which the total mixed income from agriculture is larger than either of the total incomes received under (2) or (3) (or than the mixed income received from non-agricultural production). Mixed income is the balancing item on the generation of income account of a household enterprise (excluding the notional enterprise that produces housing services for own consumption) and is explained more fully below. It replaces the operating surplus of a corporate or quasi-corporate enterprise (see Chapter 3, paragraphs 3.46 to 3.49).
2.25 The following points should be noted about the definition of an agricultural household and the production accounts for the agricultural household sub-sector:
- When the household is engaged on production for own consumption, in particular the production of goods for own final consumption within the household, the value of both the output and the consumption is imputed, and the mixed income derived from the production is a form of income in kind.
 The total output and value added produced by all agricultural households may diverge significantly from the total output and value added of all agricultural establishments, even in developing countries where most agricultural production is carried out by households. For example, a lot of production may be carried out in establishments owned by corporate enterprises, or even by non-agricultural households, while conversely agricultural households may have significant nonagricultural output.
2.26 In practice, the total output of agricultural households will often be much less than total agricultural output. The compilation of accounts for the agricultural household subsector is therefore no substitute for estimating total agricultural output from establishment or product data, but must be viewed as an end in itself because of the policy interest in the general economic circumstances of these households, which are often very poor. In some developing countries one-half or more of the population may be found in agricultural households. As the proportion of the population living in agricultural households declines, the need to identify and compile accounts for an agricultural household sub-sector may also decline. In economically advanced countries with relatively very small agricultural sectors, it may not be considered worthwhile to compile such accounts, although there is considerable policy interest in the incomes of agricultural households in even the most
highly developed countries because of the common practice of subsidizing agricultural production in those countries.
The sequence of accounts for the agricultural household sub-sector
1. The production account
2. The generation of income account
3. The allocation of primary income account
4. Other (income) accounts
5. Capital account
2.27 SEAFA considers five accounts from the 1993 SNA which are useful for economic analysis. The purpose of this section is to provide a brief description of each of the accounts to be compiled for the agricultural household sub-sector. The format of these accounts is the same as for the institutional sector accounts described in the 1993 SNA. Moreover, the definitions of the individual items contained in the accounts are the same as in SNA. They are given in more detail in Chapter 3 of the present handbook. It is not proposed to describe the entries in the accounts in detail here, but rather to explain the structure of the accounts and their balancing items.
2.28 In SEAFA it is proposed to calculate three current accounts for agricultural households, namely:
1. the production account;
2. the generation of income account;
3. the allocation of income account.
It is, of course, possible to calculate the full sequence of accounts for agricultural households, if desired, but the three accounts just listed should be the first priority. The accounts themselves are presented in Tables 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3.
1. The production account
2.29 The "resources" side of this account consists of only a single item, the total output produced by agricultural households. It should be valued at basic prices or at producers' prices if basic prices cannot be used. These prices are explained in Chapter 3 below. SEAFA recommends that output should be sub-divided in two ways: to distinguish market output from output for own final consumption or own capital formation; and to distinguish the different types of agricultural products, namely:
 food goods;
 non-food agricultural goods;
 agricultural services;
 other goods and services.
The fourth category includes the housing services produced for own consumption by owners of dwellings. The distinction between market output and output for own final use is explained in paragraphs 6.45 to 6.48 of the 1993 SNA.
2.30 Intermediate consumption, shown on the uses side of the account should be subdivided into eight types of goods or services as shown in Table 2.1. This breakdown permits intermediate inputs of agricultural products (e.g. seeds and feed) to be distinguished from other inputs.
2.31 The balancing item of the account is value added defined as output minus intermediate consumption. Following the 1993 SNA, value added may be measured gross or net of consumption of fixed capital. In practice, however, it is difficult to estimate consumption of fixed capital at current prices (as distinct from historic costs) and SNA recognizes it may not always be feasible to estimate net value added. For simplicity, it is assumed that consumption of fixed capital will not usually be calculable, and the balancing items in Tables 2.2 to 2.4 are shown "gross".
2. The generation of income account
2.32 This account is shown in Table 2.2. It shows the incomes generated in the course of production carried out by agricultural households. These incomes are all payable out of the value added created by production, the only item on the "resources" side of the account. There are three main categories shown on the "uses" side of this account.
i) Compensation of employees: Note that in this account this item is not a receivable. It is only recorded when there are paid employees from outside the household who work within an enterprise owned by the household.
ii) Taxes on production: These consist of taxes less subsidies on products and other taxes less subsidies on production. The content of this flow depends on whether output is valued at basic or producers' prices (see paragraphs 6.2110 to 6.227 and 7.5 and 7.6 of the 1993 SNA).
iii) Mixed income (gross): This is the balancing item of the account. In the case of household production, it shows the residual income accruing to the owner(s) of an unincorporated enterprise, such as a farm, after deducting from output intermediate costs, compensation of employees and taxes less subsidies on production. Note that interest and rent are not deducted -they constitute charges payable out of mixed income. The term "mixed income" is used because the balancing item implicitly contains an element of remuneration for the work done by the owner(s) and any unpaid family workers in the same household that cannot be separated from the return to the owner(s) in their capacity as entrepreneurs. See paragraphs 7.81, 7.85 and 7.86 of the 1993 SNA. As already explained, agricultural households are defined with reference to their mixed income. They are households whose mixed income from their own agricultural production is larger than either of the other two main
categories of income that may be received by household members, namely compensation of employees and property plus transfer income. The mixed income may be mostly in kind and not cash when the output of the farm is used mostly for own final consumption.
2.33 In the case of a corporate or quasi-corporate enterprise, the balancing item in this account is described as the "operating surplus". As the production of housing services for own consumption by their owners does not require any work from them, the balancing item from this kind of production is also not mixed income but operating surplus.
3. The allocation of primary income account
2.34 This account is shown in Table 2.3. The "resources" side of the account shows the primary incomes receivable by agricultural households, primary incomes consisting of the mixed incomes (or operating surplus) carried forward from the generation of income account, compensation of employees and property incomes (interest, rent and other property incomes). The "uses" side of the account shows the property incomes payable by agricultural households.
i) Compensation of employee: This item includes any wages or salaries receivable by members of the households, including the head of the household or the owner of the farm, for work done in other enterprises. Obviously, members of the household may work full or part time for any kind of enterprise, depending on local employment opportunities. If the income from this source were to exceed the mixed income from their own agricultural activity, the household would cease to be classified as an agricultural household. The household would be classified as an "employee household" see paragraph 4.153 of the 1993 SNA.
ii) Property incomes: These are both receivable and payable by households. In practice most poor agricultural households are unlikely to be recipients of property incomes, but they may well have to pay rent on their land and interest on their debts. The interest payable covers interest on all debts incurred by the household, whether to finance production or household consumption. In practice, other kinds of property income are only payable by corporate or quasi-corporate enterprises and may be ignored in this context.
iii) The balance of primary incomes (gross): This balance is equal to the sum of the three kinds of primary incomes receivable by households less the property incomes (rent and interest) payable.
4. Other (income) accounts
2.35 The 1993 SNA makes provision for another income concept or balancing item between the mixed income of the generation of income account and the balance of primary incomes. It is called entrepreneurial income and is only applicable to an institutional unit in its capacity as a producer (corporate, quasi-corporate or unincorporated enterprise). Entrepreneurial income is explained in Annex 2.4. SEAFA does not recommend the calculation of entrepreneurial income as a normal rule because of the practical difficulty of measuring it properly. It was, however, included in FAO's 1974 Handbook of Economic Accounts for Agriculture.
2.36 When data are available, it is desirable to calculate further accounts for the agricultural household sector. In particular, it would be useful to go on to calculate the disposable income of agricultural households, their household final consumption expenditures and their saving. The additional accounts required are the secondary distribution of income account and the use of income account of the 1993 SNA. These accounts can be compiled for agricultural households by utilizing the standard accounts of the SNA.
5. Capital account
2.37 Another account which is particularly important for agricultural households is the capital account of SNA. The "uses" side of this account records the following items:
 Gross fixed capital formation;
 Changes in inventories;
 Consumption of fixed capital (negative use);
 Acquisitions less disposals of valuables and non-produced non-financial assets, including land.
2.38 For the purposes of economic analysis and policy-making in agriculture, the first three items are the most relevant, although it would also be useful to obtain data on net acquisitions of land. As already noted, it may not be feasible to estimate consumption of fixed capital, so all the balancing items in the accounts from value added to saving have to be recorded gross.
2.39 In SEAFA, it is recommended to collect information on gross capital formation, including changes in inventories, even though it is not proposed to try to compile the complete capital account. The gross fixed capital formation should be broken down by type of asset, as shown in Table 2.4 to distinguish the main categories of fixed asset used in agricultural production. Similarly, changes in inventories should be sub-divided by type of asset. The various categories of asset are defined in detail in the Annex to Chapter XIII of the 1993 SNA (pp.305-314) which gives a complete classification of all types of asset and their code numbers.
2.40 If a complete set of current accounts from the production account to the use of income account is not compiled for agricultural households, their saving cannot be calculated. If saving is not available, it is not possible to complete the "resources" side of the capital account, even if the "uses" were to be complete. It is therefore not proposed to calculate the "resources" side of the capital account, unless a complete set of current accounts is compiled.
Accounts for the other sub-sectors
2.41 In some countries the agricultural corporations sub-sector consisting of agricultural corporate and quasi-corporate enterprises may account for a significant, or even a large, part of total agricultural production. In such a case, it is desirable to compile SNA-type sector accounts for this sub-sector also within the framework of SEAFA. It may well be possible to compile a complete set of accounts for the sub-sector including disposable income and saving. A complete set of accounts would, of course, include a complete capital account and not simply the gross capital formation of agricultural corporations.
2.42 The sub-sector consisting of agricultural NPIs owned and controlled by government is likely to be extremely small, and it may be neither worthwhile nor feasible to compile accounts for this sector.
2.43 It is desirable to try to estimate a complete capital account for the agricultural sector as a whole, even though the "resources" side of the account would have to be condensed and simplified compared with the standard SNA capital account, assuming that the resources side of the account is not available for agricultural households. At the level of the agricultural sector as a whole, it is important to identify the technical assistance from abroad consisting of capital transfers, in cash or in kind, received from the rest of world and intended to finance gross capital formation in agriculture.
2.44 The remaining resources are derived residually; they consist of a mixture of saving, domestic capital transfers receivable or payable and net borrowing or lending.
The accounts for agriculture as a productive activity
2.45 The Part II accounts in SEAFA consist of the production and generation of income accounts for groups of agricultural establishments and also goods and services accounts for agricultural products.
Agricultural activity accounts
1. Establishments cross-classified by sector of owner and type of productive activity
2. Other data for agricultural establishments
2.46 As already noted, an agricultural establishment may, in practice, be equated with an agricultural holding as defined in FAO's Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000. The activity accounts cover all agricultural establishments, or holdings, located on the economic territory whose principal activity is classified under Division 01 of ISIC. An establishment is a local unit as well as an activity unit and is actually described as a "local kind of activity unit" in the European System of Accounts (ESA, Eurostat, 1995).
2.47 The establishments may be owned by households, corporate or quasi-corporate units, government units or NPIs. The owners may belong to any sector or sub-sector of the economy and need not always be resident in the country concerned. If the owner of an agricultural establishment is not a resident institutional unit, that establishment is deemed to belong to a resident quasi-corporate enterprise that is in turn owned by the non-resident unit.
In SNA and Balance of Payments Statistics, all owners of land must be resident institutional units, as any unit owning land is deemed automatically to have a centre of economic interest in the country. If the owner is actually resident abroad, the owner is treated as if ownership were transferred to a notional institutional unit that is resident in the country (see paragraph 14.14 of the 1993 SNA).
2.48 As already explained, the only SNA accounts that can be compiled for establishments are production and generation of income accounts. It is, in fact, possible to combine these two accounts into a single more detailed kind of production account whose balancing item is mixed income or operating surplus. The production account of the 1968 SNA was defined in this way. Accounts for establishments can only be compiled with respect to their productive activities as the establishment is essentially only a production unit. To quote the 1993 SNA, paragraph 5.25:
"Establishments are conceptually quite distinct from institutional units. If an institutional unit contains only a single establishment, the two units coincide in the sense that the production account for the establishment is the same as that for the institutional unit. However, an establishment as such is not an institutional unit of the System, engaging in transactions on its own account, incurring liabilities, entering into contracts and so on. For example, the purchases and sales associated with the productive activities of an establishment are actually made by the institutional unit to which it belongs and not by the establishment itself. It is not possible, therefore, to envisage a complete set of accounts, including balance sheets, being compiled for an establishment, not because of practical data difficulties but because an establishment is not an entity capable of owning goods or assets in its own right or capable of receiving or disbursing income, etc."
2.49 Following SNA, the output of establishments or agricultural holdings in SEAFA must include goods or services produced by one establishment or holding and delivered to another establishment or holding owned by the same institutional unit, i.e. by the same household, corporate enterprise, government unit or NPI. On the other hand, goods which are used up again as intermediate consumption in the same period as they were produced, within the same establishment or holding that produced them, are not recorded either as output or as intermediate consumption. See paragraphs 6.80 to 6.83 of the 1993 SNA for further details on this point.
2.50 Some flexibility has to be permitted on this point within the SEAFA, however, agricultural establishments are different from industrial establishments. It is common, for example, for both crop production and livestock production to take place within the same agricultural holding, even though these are basically different kinds of productive activities and are recognized as such in ISIC (groups 011 and 012). In principle such holdings should be split into two separate establishments but this is often not feasible in practice. Moreover, it is also common for some of the outputs produced by one agricultural activity to be consumed as intermediate inputs by another activity within the same establishment. In particular, some of the output of crops may be used as feedstuffs to produce livestock. Outputs may even be recycled back as intermediate inputs into the same activity (for example, grain used as seeds) a phenomenon which must be rare in industrial establishments.
2.51 Because of the importance of intra-establishment intermediate consumption of own output and because of the practical difficulty of separating this output from other outputs, many countries prefer to use an enlarged concept of output, described as "total output", for agricultural production that includes outputs consumed within the establishment. Total agricultural output including output for own intermediate consumption may also be more suitable for many analytical and policy purposes. Accordingly, total agricultural output may be used instead of SNA output within SEAFA. It is important to note that the use of total, rather than SNA, output does not change value added or any of the flows derived from value added in SEAFA or SNA. Obviously, value added is unchanged if both the output and the intermediate consumption of an establishment are increased by equal amounts. If total output is used, it must also be used for enterprises as well as establishments to ensure
consistency between the industry and sector accounts.
2.52 It is possible to define an alternative version of total output in which only the output used as intermediate consumption by a different type of activity within the same establishment is recorded; for example, the grain used as animal feedstuffs, but not grain used as seed. Recording interactivity flows within a single establishment is consistent with the general philosophy underlying the SNA measure of output whereby output from one establishment used as intermediate consumption by another establishment belonging to the same enterprise is recorded both as output and intermediate consumption. In principle, in both SNA and SEAFA, the secondary activity of an agricultural establishment should be split off to form separate establishments and it is only the practical difficulties of separating the activities and compiling separate production accounts for them that prevent the split. If they were to be split, however, the flows of goods or services between the activities
would be recorded as output and intermediate consumption for the producer unit as a whole following SNA rules.
2.53 It is generally recognized that SNA needs to be implemented flexibly (see p. xxxiv of the Preface to the 1993 SNA). In this spirit, SEAFA leaves it to each country to decide exactly which concept of output it will use, especially since this does not affect value added and other flows. Within the framework of the SEAFA, either of the definitions of total output could he used according to which the individual country considers more appropriate or practical.
2.54 The contents and format of the production and generation of income accounts to be compiled for agricultural establishments or holdings in SEAFA are the same as those of the accounts for agricultural households described in the previous section. There is no need, therefore, to repeat the description of the individual items and the structure of the accounts. One additional factor to be taken into account, however, is the fact that the balancing item of the generation of income account may be either mixed income or operating surplus depending on whether or not the establishment is owned by a household. It is necessary, therefore, to have two lines for the balancing item of the generation at income account, one for mixed income and and one operating surplus. This procedure is followed in the 1993 SNA. Alternatively, it would be possible to have a single row for the balancing item described as "mixed income or operating surplus" if the two are not separately distinguished.
<section>4</section>
1. Establishments cross-classified by sector of owner and type of productive activity
2.55 For the purposes of economic analysis and policy-making, it is desirable to separate agricultural establishments owned by agricultural households from those owned by other types of institutional units. This raises the question of the ways in which agricultural establishments may be divided into sub-groups for purposes of the Part II accounts of SEAFA. There are several economically important criteria that may be used to classify and group agricultural establishments. These include:
 the type of institutional unit that owns the establishment;
 the type of agricultural activity -- growing crops, farming of animals, etc. as specified in ISIC;
 the location of the establishment;
 the size of the establishment in terms of land or number of workers.
Other characteristics may also be relevant. It is not necessarily appropriate for an international statistical system to specify the degree of detail in which statistics should be compiled in individual countries. Each of the characteristics listed above may be more or less important in particular countries and cross-classification of establishments by these characteristics could lead to a proliferation of accounts that are well beyond the statistical capability of any country. Nevertheless, it may be useful to indicate certain priorities.
2.56 First, it is recommended that agricultural establishments be classified by the type of institutional unit that owns them. As a minimum, it is desirable to separate establishments owned by households from these owned by other kinds of institutional unit. Second, it is recommended that establishments should also be grouped by main type of agricultural activity. This would suggest the following basic set of accounts for agricultural establishments. At the first level of breakdown, establishments are divided into those owned by households and those owned by other institutional units. At the second level of breakdown, establishments are divided into three groups on the basis of ISIC, namely:
 011, Growing of crops, market gardening and horticulture;
 012, Farming of animals;
 013, etc. Other sub-divisions of ISIC 01.
2.57 The cross-classification by type of owner and type of activity just given yields six sets of production and generation of income accounts. The 1993 SNA recommends the general cross-classification of output, intermediate consumption, gross value added and its uses by type of sector and industry in order to link the production accounts by sector with those by type of industry (see paragraphs 15.105 to 15.109, and paragraph 10, p. 524). The above proposal to cross-classify agricultural establishments and their accounts by type of owner and type of activity is a particular small-scale application of this general recommendation.
2.58 It should be noted that the aggregate production account for all agricultural establishments owned by households is not the same as the aggregate production account for all agricultural households in the sector accounts. A household whose principal source of income comes from agricultural production may possibly engage in some secondary nonagricultural activities and own more than one establishment. It is likely to produce housing services for own consumption. In general, the total production of an agricultural household must be greater than, or equal to, that of any agricultural establishment or establishments that it owns. It is also worth noting that some agricultural establishments may be owned by households that are not classified as agricultural households because their main source of income is not mixed income from their own agricultural production.
2.59 Nevertheless, agricultural production must usually account for most, if not all, of the production of agricultural households. The establishment-based accounts have the advantage that they show the share of total agricultural production that is carried out in agricultural households and they can be used to track changes in this share over time. There may also be important differences between the predominant types of agricultural activity undertaken by agricultural households and those undertaken by establishments owned by corporate or quasi-corporate enterprises, government units and NPIs.
2.60 Just as in the sector production account for agricultural households, it is recommended that the output of agricultural establishments should be broken down first to distinguish market output from output for own final use and second to distinguish different types of products in order at least to distinguish food products from other agricultural products. By dividing agricultural establishments into those owned by agricultural households and those owned by others, it is possible to measure and track the share of total food production produced by agricultural households.
2. Other data for agricultural establishments
2.61 Although the only accounts that can be compiled for agricultural establishments are the production and generation of income accounts, it is of course possible to collect additional data relating to these establishments that are not in the form of accounts. Again, in line with general recommendations made in the 1993 SNA, the following types of data may be collected for establishments:
 Numbers of persons employed in agricultural production; owners, employees, unpaid family workers (see Chapter XVII of the 1993 SNA);
 Gross fixed capital formation broken down by type of asset;
 Stocks at fixed assets used in production within the establishment;
 Quantity and Price Measures.
These types of data may be compiled for the different groups of establishments proposed above. Further details of quantity and price measures are given below.
2.62 The activity accounts for agricultural establishments provide a suitable framework for the compilation of quantity and price indices relating to agricultural production and also for the construction of accounts at the constant prices of same base year, if desired. For example, quantity and price indices may be compiled for all the major commodity flows in the activity accounts and also for value added.
2.63 The general methodology to be used is described in some detail in Chapter XVI of the 1993 SNA. It can be applied directly to the flows in the activity accounts. In line with recent developments in index number theory and practice it is recommended that annual indices should be chain indices in which each year is compared with the previous year and longer-term measures are obtained by linking together the year-to-year movements. When annual chaining is used, the results obtained are likely to be much closer to the underlying economic theoretic indices. The results are also much less sensitive to the choice of index number formula than when index numbers use the same base year over a long period of years.
Goods and services accounts
2.64 Goods and services accounts, as defined in the 1993 SNA, are also included in the Part II accounts of SEAFA. A goods and services account is compiled at the level of the total economy. For an individual product or any designated set of products, such as all agricultural products or all food products, it shows the total resources or supplies produced as outputs from domestic establishments plus imports and trade and transport margins on agricultural products; and the total uses for purposes of intermediate consumption, final consumption by households, government or NPIs, gross fixed capital formation, changes in inventories and exports. Provided the various flows are valued consistently the value of total uses must be identical with that of total resources or supplies. When outputs and imports are valued at different prices from intermediate and final uses, it becomes necessary to include an item for taxes or subsidies on products in the account, as explained below. As
already noted, the identity is secured because the change in inventories must be identical with the difference between all other uses and total resources.
2.65 The supply and use tables described in Chapter XV of the 1993 SNA constitute a major element in a system of national accounts. In effect, they constitute an integrated set of goods and services accounts for all the different products supplied and used in an economy, with intermediate uses broken down by industry of use, together with an integrated set of production accounts for the different industries based on establishment-type data.
2.66 In the context of SEAFA it is proposed to compile goods and services accounts for all agricultural products and for selected groups of agricultural and food products. The format of a specimen account is given in Table 2.5. It is necessary to clarify the way in which the various flows are to be valued. In accordance with SNA guidelines, the flows should be valued as follows:
 Output should be valued at basic prices, or, if this is not feasible, at producers' prices. Trade and transport margins on agricultural products are shown as a separate item.
 Imports should be valued c.i.f.
 The content of taxes and subsidies on products depends on how output is valued. Output is always valued excluding value added tax (VAT) invoiced by the producer so that the total non-deductible VAT actually payable by users is recorded here to ensure that total resources are valued consistently with total uses. Other taxes and subsidies on products must also be recorded here when output is valued at basic prices, but not when output is valued at producers' prices (see paragraphs 6.210 to 6.227 of the 1993 SNA). Taxes on imports must also be recorded when imports are valued c. i. f.
 Intermediate and final consumption and gross fixed capital formation should be valued at purchasers' prices.
 Changes in inventories of inputs and outputs should be valued at their respective purchasers' or basic prices at the times the changes occur.
 Exports should be valued f.o.b. -- in effect, at purchasers' prices at the border of the exporting country.
2.67 The uses of agricultural goods as intermediate inputs for other production can be divided to distinguish uses by other agricultural establishments, by food manufacturing establishments and by other industries, as shown in Table 2.5.
2.68 Goods and services accounts are described by different names in different contexts, even within SNA. For an individual product or group of products the balance between supplies and uses may be described as any of the following:
 a goods and services account;
 the balance between total resources (or supplies) and total uses;
 a food balance sheet (in the case of food products).
2.69 It should be noted that these are merely different names for the same type of account or balance, at least when the flows are expressed in monetary values and not in physical units. The use of the expression "balance sheet" for a flow account is not consistent with standard economic and accounting usage and is therefore potentially misleading. It may, for example, give the impression that a food balance sheet refers to stocks and not flows of foods.
2.70 To be consistent with general international statistical standards and classifications, in particular with ISIC, the classification of products used in the goods and services account, and in SEAFA generally, must be the Central Product Classification (CPC) of the United Nations. It is therefore recommended that goods and services accounts should be compiled for the following groups of products (the numbers in brackets apply to the CPC Divisions):
(01) Products of agriculture, horticulture and market gardening;
(02) Live animals and animal products;
(01) and (02) combined;
(21) Meat, fish, fruit, vegetables, oils and fats;
(22) Dairy products;
(23) Grain mill products, starches and starch products; other food products;
(21), (22) and (23) combined;
(24) Beverages;
(25) Tobacco products
2.71 At the level of a single homogeneous product, it is possible to compile a balance of total resources and total uses using units of physical quantity (kilograms, tons, litres, etc.). It may be useful to compile such accounts for a number of selected agricultural or food products within the framework of SEAFA when the corresponding products are also covered by the goods and services accounts, but accounts in physical units should be included in Part III rather than Part II of SEAFA.
Satellite accounts and supplementary tabulations relating to food (food balances)
1. Forestry and fisheries
2. Other tabulations
2.72 These accounts make up Part III of SEAFA. They consist of accounts or tables that are not to be found within the set of accounts or tables that make up SNA, although the concepts, definitions or classifications used should be consistent as far as possible with the main international statistical systems and standards, such as SNA, ISIC and CPC.
2.73 A major concern of FAO and its Member Countries is to raise levels of nutrition and standards of living. To meet this goal and to formulate national food and nutrition policies the following additional information is required:
(a) Quantities and types of food available for consumption in each country;
(b) Wastage and losses of food as a result of processing, distribution and other production channels as well as the food of consumption habits of the population;
(c) The current and evolving structure of the national food supply in terms of the major food commodities and their nutritive values;
(d) Various aspects of food availability such as domestic production of food; import or export of food products; set-up of food processing establishments in terms of production and capital formation, producer and consumer prices of food products; and generation of income.
2.74 FAO, in partial fulfilment of its goal, is preparing Food Balance Sheets which provide the most essential information. The Satellite Accounts for Food Balances (SAFB) include four accounts and six statements. Two of the accounts are, respectively, the production and income generation accounts for establishments whose principal activity is the production of food. Of the remaining two accounts one relates to capital formation in food production and the other shows the supply and use of food products. The supporting statements to the accounts establish links between monetary and physical data and are discussed in the next section. The framework of these accounts is given in Annex 2.6.
2.75 The supporting statements to SAFB express food availability in supply and use accounts. In the first statement, details of supply and utilization of food by type of products are presented in quantity terms. This statement also gives per caput per day utilization of food products. The other statements give producer or consumer prices of selected items of food products, calories (number), protein (grams) and fats (grams) contents of selected items of food products, per caput per day food utilization in terms of calories (number), protein (grams) and fats (grams) and total domestic food supply and utilization by components and by type of products at current and constant prices.
2.76 SAFB have been constructed on one hand to present the contribution made by various productive activities to food production and, on the other hand, to link the physical data presented in the FAO food balance sheets to their monetary counterparts. Without changing the conceptual basis for measuring the various aggregates, the coverage of SAFB has been restricted to food production for human consumption (but excluding catering services provided by hotels, restaurants, etc.). Thus, it includes foods that are wholly or partly for human consumption produced by agriculture, forestry and fishing establishments as well as by manufacturing establishments engaged in food production. As a result, all those agricultural products that are not for human (food) consumption, are excluded. To prepare accounts for this activity, the production of the agricultural, forestry, fishing and manufacturing establishments, that contribute to food production, is first divided into two subgroups
(i.e. food and non-food). While preparing the production and income generation account for this activity the non-food products produced by food producing units are treated as secondary products and are excluded from the account to the extent feasible. In this connection, however, it may also be noted that, apart from including non-food products, the total production of this account will also include that part of output of food products that is being used as intermediate consumption in food as well as non-food industries. However, it would not be possible to exclude the production of those non-food products for which the intermediate consumption and other inputs for production of food and non-food products cannot be separated from each other. Thus these accounts present the economics of food production as well as the details of intermediate consumption in terms of primary products of agriculture, forestry and fisheries going to the food processing activity. The production
boundary of SAFB is the same as in SNA. It includes the imputed value of own-account food production such as subsistence farming, kitchen gardening in urban areas or food gathering (including meat obtained from hunting, etc.), but does not include the processing of food for immediate consumption within the household.
2.77 In SAFB, the concept of wastage has been extended to include wastage of food by the household (during cooking, plate waste etc.). Thus, total wastage has been divided into two components: wastage in production and distribution channels (e.g. pre- and post-harvest losses, losses during processing and storage); and wastage by the household. Wastage of the former type is taken into account in the production account while the latter type is included in the goods and services account.
Economic Activities other than Agriculture
1. Forestry and fisheries
2.78 In the case of forestry the accounting framework is somewhat different. This sector has three special features: first, in most countries any forest will produce a large number of products and it becomes difficult to study the economics of an individual product; second, the forests are owned by all types of institutional units and the objective of policy-makers is to cover the total activity; and third, certain products that are derived from forests are not included in the output of the forestry industry. These include activities such as providing fodder for livestock, the use of forests for games or recreation and the impact of forest development on the ecosystem. Such items are not generally reflected in the industry's accounts except in the form of receipt of royalty. Thus standard production accounts may not meet the need of policy-makers. The System, therefore, includes the accounts recommended by SEAFA for the forestry sector as a whole as well as activity accounts
for different forests classified according to their management aspects (for details see Annex 2.7). The goods and services account is compiled only for the products of forestry as a whole and, the capital account in the system is intended to cover the forestry sector as a whole. However, the activities or output relating to forest-type areas of compact plantations not covered under forestry, can be included in the form of statements. This aspect will be covered in the next supplement of the Handbook.
2.79 The case of fisheries activity is somewhat similar to agriculture but for the fact that non-resident producers and the complete sector may be relatively more important. A background note on fisheries activity is given in Annex 2.8. Keeping in view the specific requirements of the sector, combined with specific problems in collection and compilation of data, it has been decided to cover this activity also in a separate supplement of the Handbook.
2. Other tabulations
2.80 The macro-economic information contained in the SEAFA accounts shows only a very small part of the performance of the total economy. The main functions of accounts containing such information is to show their inter-relationship and ensure consistency. These characteristics of economic accounts make them useful in the formulation of macro-economic models that are used for the preparation of plan targets and projections. Apart from such uses these accounts are also capable of giving indications of the current status and sometimes the presence of a disorder in the system. The indications can be compared to a high body temperature in human beings, which may or may not indicate the presence of a disease. For an in-depth understanding of the situation as well as for evaluation of economic policies additional detailed disaggregated information is necessary. The advantage of disaggregating the entries in the economic accounts are two-fold. First, it ensures internal consistency
and second, as the data contained in the accounts cover the entire economy, it allows assessment of the relative status and magnitude of the variable that has been picked up for further investigation. Although it is difficult to envisage the availability of data and requirements of any country in the abstract, a suggested list of statements has been included in the handbook for agriculture (ISIC 01) and food (Annex 2.9). Countries can enlarge or reduce the list depending on their needs. However, what can be noted from this list is that most of the statements included are nothing but the basic worksheets that are commonly used in the calculation of economic accounts. Thus the creation of such statements provides help in the calculation of economic accounts.
2.81 Another two aspects, referring to natural resources and other activities related to food and agriculture, are also included in SEAFA and are listed below.
2.82 In recent years, considerable discussion has been devoted to natural resource accounting and environmental accounting. There are three main approaches. The first, generally referred to as natural resource accounting, focuses on total natural resources in physical terms. The second approach uses satellite accounts which record monetary values, identify actual expenditures on environmental protection and show how environmental costs to natural and other assets caused by production activities can be treated in the calculation of net product. The third approach is welfare-oriented. It deals with the environmental effects borne by economic units other than the producers that cause these effects. Work is also in progress to define indicators that measure the impact of various economic activities on the environment. This work relates to the development of indicators of productivity, surface and groundwater quality, land use and soil quality, use of agro-chemicals, biodiversity
(genetic and species diversity, wildlife habitats), pollution and waste management, climate change and water use and quality. At present, the system of economic accounts for agriculture does not include these aspects, which are still at the exploratory stage and there is no clear consensus as yet on which to base the specification of international standards. The system includes a set of statements which provide links to measure the quantum of various types of problem areas. For example, if agricultural land is affected by the use of fertilizers and pesticides the SEAFA statement should indicate into which region, crop or class of society the land belongs and classify the total agricultural land according to degree of degradation. A more detailed discussion on these aspects will be included in the next supplement to this Handbook.
2.83 The last category of the system includes activities such as the production, import and export of agro-chemicals and machinery and matters relating to extension and training, etc., which may be classified under various ISIC divisions, groups and classes. These items are also included as statements in the system so that interrelated data are readily available to policy-makers for immediate analysis and to statisticians for in-depth analysis of the overall scenario. Since these activities are included in other ISIC groups and since the study of general economic issues generally does not come under the aegis of policy-makers in food and agricultural ministries, the system has not been loaded with detailed accounts of these activities. However, statistics relating to these activities, need to be linked with data contained in various accounts of the System.
Table 2.1
PRODUCTION ACCOUNT FOR THE AGRICULTURAL HOUSEHOLDS SUB-SECTOR
USES RESOURCES
SNA Code SNA Code
P.2 Intermediate consumption, of which: P.1 Output, of which:
Seed P. 11 Market output
Feed Food goods
Chemical fertilizers Non-food agricultural goods
Organic fertilizers Agricultural services
Pesticides, etc. Other goods and services
Power, heat and light P. 12 Output for own final use
Repairs and maintenance Food goods
Others, n.e.c. Non-food agricultural goods
Other goods and services
B.1g Value added, gross 
K.1 (less) Consumption of fixed capital
B.1n Value added, net 
Total Uses Total Resources
Table 2.2
GENERATION OF INCOME ACCOUNT FOR THE AGRICULTURAL HOUSEHOLDS SUB-SECTOR
USES RESOURCES
SNA Code SNA Code
D. 1 Compensation of employees B. 1g Value added, gross
D.2 Taxes on production and imports"
D.3 (less) Subsidies 
B.3g Mixed income, gross 
B.2g Operating surplus, gross 
Total Uses Total Resources
Table 2.3
ALLOCATION OF PRIMARY INCOME ACCOUNT FOR THE AGRICULTURAL HOUSEHOLDS SUB-SECTOR
USES RESOURCES
SNA Code SNA Code
D.4 Property income, of which: B.3g Mixed income, gross
B.2g Operating surplus, gross
D.41 Interest 
D.45 Rent D. 1 Compensation of employees
D.4 Property income, of which:
D.41 Interest
D.45 Rent
D.42-44 Other
B.5g Balance of primary incomes, gross
Total Uses Total Resources
Table 2.4
GROSS CAPITAL FORMATION BY AGRICULTURAL HOUSEHOLDS
(Appropriate SNA codes given for flows and types of assets)
P.511 Acquisitions less disposals of tangible fixed assets, divided into
Dwellings and other buildings (AN 1111 and AN 11121)
Other structures (AN 11122)
Machinery and equipment (AN 1113)
Cultivated assets (AN 1114), of which:
Livestock for breeding, dairy, draught, etc. (AN 11124)
Vineyards, orchards and other plantations yielding repeat products (AN 11142)
P.512 Acquisitions less disposals of intangible fixed assets
P.513 Additions to the value of non-produced, non-financial assets, of which
P.5131 Major improvements to non-produced, non-financial assets, of which Land (AN 211)
Other tangible, non-produced assets (AN 212, 213, 214)
P.5131 Costs of ownership transfer on non-produced, non-financial assets
Gross fixed capital formation (total of above items)
P.53 Acquisitions less disposals of valuables
K.2 Acquisitions less disposals of non-produced, non-financial assets, of which
K.21 Acquisitions less disposals of land under cultivation (AN 2112)
P.52 Changes in inventories, of which
Work-in-progress on cultivated assets (AN 1221)
Materials and supplies (AN 121)
Other (AN 1222 and AN 123)
Gross Capital Formation (total of all items)
Table 2.5
GOODS AND SERVICES ACCOUNTS FOR AGRICULTURAL GOODS
RESOURCES USES
SNA Code SNA Code
P.1 Domestic output, of which: P.2 Intermediate consumption
Agricultural establishment
P.11 Market output Food establishment
P.12 Output of own use Other establishment
Trade and transport margins 
D.21 Taxes on products' P.3 Final consumption expenditure
D.212 Taxes and duties on imports Households' consumption expenditure
excluding VAT Government's general consumption
D.211,213,214 Other taxes on products expenditure
D.31 Subsidies on products' NPISH's consumption expenditure
P.51 Gross fixed capital formation 
P.7 Imports c.i.f. Acquisitions less disposals of
cultivated assets (AN 1114)
P.52 Changes in inventories, of which:
Work-in-progress on cultivated
assets
(AN 1221)
Material and supplies (AN 121)
Other (AN 1222 and AN 123)
P.6 Exports
Total Resources Total Uses
NPISH: non-profit institutions serving households
<section>5</section>
Chapter 3 - The basic national accounting concepts
The UN System of National accounts
The institutional unit
Enterprise, establishment and industry
Households as producers
The principal, secondary and ancillary productive activities
The concept of production
The production boundary
Measurement of output
Basic, producers' and purchasers' prices
The output of agriculture, forestry and fishing
The value of output
Intermediate consumption
Consumption of fixed capital
Gross and net value added at current and constant prices
Compensation of employees
Taxes on production and on imports
Subsidies
Operadag surplus and mixed income
Gross fixed capital formation
Land
Changes in inventories
Property income
The UN System of National accounts
3.1 The purpose of the UN SNA, as given in the 1953 report "A System of National Accounts and Supporting tables", is to set out a standard national accounting system to provide a framework for reporting national income and product statistics of general applicability in such a way as to ensure consistency with the definitions and classifications used or recommended by international bodies. The system, after being introduced in 1953, has been revised four times to incorporate the expanding need of the users. The latest revision, undertaken jointly by EUROSTAT, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), OECD, UN and the World Bank, was approved by the UN Statistical Commission in 1993. The 1993 SNA embodies many new features including a complete, integrated set of accounts for all institutional sectors and for the consolidation of information on population and labour force, prices and volume measures and purchasing power parities. It recommends that the system be implemented
flexibly and not rigidly; it suggests the use of alternative classifications in the framework of a social accounting matrix to augment the tools for analyzing poverty and other social concerns. It recognizes the usefulness of having integrated economic and environmental accounts.
3.2 SEAFA, as mentioned in Chapter 2, uses the same basic concepts, definitions and accounting structure as the 1993 SNA. Some of the relevant concepts and definitions used in SEAFA have been reproduced in this chapter for the benefit of users and producers of SEAFA who may not have ready access to the 1993 SNA. The extracts reproduced in this Chapter have been tailored to the requirements of SEAFA but readers are advised to consult the 1993 SNA for further details and clarifications, if necessary.
The institutional unit
(see Chapter IV of the 1993 SNA)
3.3 The 1993 SNA recommends that complete sets of accounts should be compiled for sectors or sub-sectors consisting of groups of institutional units. Institutional units are economic entities that are capable of owning assets, incurring liabilities and engaging in economic activities and transactions with other entities. There are two main types of entities in the real world that may qualify as institutional units -- persons or groups of persons in the form of households and legal or social entities (such as a corporation, non-profit institution or government unit)" whose existence is recognized by law or society independently of the persons or other entities that may own or control them (see paragraphs 4.1 to 4.21 of the 1993 SNA for further details). These institutional units have been grouped into five mutually exclusive sectors on the basis of their principal functions, behaviour and objectives. The five sectors are: the non-financial corporations; the financial
corporations; the general government; the non-profit institutions serving households; and the households. The 1993 SNA also recommends that production accounts should be compiled for industries defined as groups of establishments, as in ISIC.
Enterprise, establishment and industry
(see Chapter V of the 1993 SNA)
3.4 An enterprise is an institutional unit in its capacity as producer. It may be a corporation, a non-profit institution or an unincorporated enterprise. A single enterprise, especially a large corporation, may engage simultaneously in many different kinds of productive activities, there being virtually no upper limit to the size of an enterprise. For the analysis of production, in which the technology of production plays an important role, it is necessary to work with groups of producers who are engaged in essentially the same kind of production. This requirement means that some enterprises must be partitioned into smaller production units that are as homogeneous as possible and that the system describes as "establishments". Furthermore, industries are defined as groups of establishments. The classification of production activities used to define establishments and industries in the system is the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities
(ISIC).
Households as producers
(see paragraphs 4. 139 to 4. 150 of the 1993 SNA)
3.5 A Household may be defined as "a small group of persons who share the same living accommodation, who pool some or all of their income and wealth and who consume certain types of goods and services collectively, mainly housing and food." Households may engage in any kind of economic activity and not merely consumption. In this respect:
 their economic behaviour may be more varied than that of legal entities whose activities may be restricted to the purpose for which they are created;
 they may participate in production either by operating their own unincorporated enterprises or by supplying labour to other unincorporated or corporate enterprises by working as employees;
 production within the household sector takes place within enterprises that are directly owned and controlled by members of households, either individually or in partnership with others. When members of households work as employees for corporations, quasi-corporations or government, the production to which they contribute takes place outside the household sector;
 the term "unincorporated enterprise" emphasizes the fact that the producer unit is not incorporated as a separate legal entity from the household itself. The fixed and other assets used in unincorporated enterprises do not belong to the enterprises but to their owners.
The principal, secondary and ancillary productive activities
(see paragraphs 5.7 to 5.16 of the 1993 SNA)
3.6 In the system of economic accounts production consists of processes or activities carried out under the control and responsibility of institutional units, in which inputs are transformed into outputs of goods and services. The classification of activities by grouping the producer units according to similarities in their outputs, inputs and technology of production, provides the basis for identifying industries and establishing linkages between them. To apply the system uniformly it is necessary to know the fundamental distinctions between principal, secondary and ancillary activities. These are given below.
3.7 The principal activity of a producer unit is the activity whose value added exceeds that of any other activity carried out within the same unit. The classification of the principal activity is determined with reference to the most detailed level of classification of economic activities as defined in ISIC. When completed, the output of the principal activity, i.e. its principal product and any by-product (that is, a product necessarily produced together with the principal product) must be capable of being supplied to other units.
3.8 A secondary activity is an activity carried out within a single producer unit in addition to the principal activity and whose output, as with that of the principal activity, must be suitable for delivery outside the producer unit.
3.9 The output of an ancillary activity, in contrast, is not intended for use outside the enterprise. An ancillary activity is a supporting activity undertaken within an enterprise in order to create the conditions within which the principal or secondary activity can be carried out. Ancillary activities have certain common additional characteristics related to their output:
(i) They typically produce outputs that can be found as inputs into almost any kind of productivity activity.
(ii) They produce services (and, as an exception, goods that may not become a physical part of the output of the principal or secondary activity) as output.
(iii) The value of an individual ancillary activity's output is likely to be small compared to that of the principal or secondary activities of an enterprise.
3.10 By definition, an ancillary activity is not undertaken for its own sake but purely in order to provide supporting services for the principal or secondary activity with which it is associated. As a result:
(i) The output of an ancillary activity is not explicitly recognized and recorded separately in the system, nor is the use to which that output is put.
(ii) All the inputs consumed by an ancillary activity are treated as inputs into the principal or secondary activity that it supports.
(iii) It is not possible to identify the value added of an ancillary activity.
3.11 In principle, an enterprise may have a choice between engaging in an ancillary activity or purchasing the required services on the market, but this is not always possible in practice. Furthermore, if the ancillary activity grows to the point which it has the capacity to provide services outside the enterprise, it should be treated as a secondary rather than an ancillary activity.
3.12 The production accounts of the system do not provide any separate information about the incidence or range of the ancillary activities carried out within producer units. The existence of ancillary activities can only be inferred by studying the structure of the inputs consumed by the producers.
The concept of production
(see paragraphs 6.6, 6.15 and 6.16 of the 1993 SNA)
3.13 'Economic Production' can be defined as activity, carried out under the control and responsibility of an institutional unit, that uses inputs of labour, capital and goods and services to produce outputs of goods or services. There must be an institutional unit that assumes responsibility for the process and owns any goods produced as outputs or is entitled to be paid, or otherwise compensated, for the services provided. A purely natural process without any human involvement or direction is not production in the economic sense. For example, the unmanaged growth of fish stock in international waters is not production, whereas the activity of fish farming is production. Thus, production can be described in general terms as an activity in which an enterprise uses inputs to produce outputs that can be delivered or provided to other institutional units. There are two kinds of output -- goods and services. Goods are physical objects for which a demand exists and over which
ownership rights can be established and transferred from one institutional unit to another by engaging in transactions on the market. The production of services must be confined to activities that are capable of being carried out by one unit for the benefit of another. Services are not separate entities over which ownership rights can be established.
The production boundary
(see paragraphs 6.7, 6.8, 6.24, 6.25, 6.30, 6.34 of the 1993 SNA)
3.14 Production is understood to be a physical process, carried out under the responsibility and management of an institutional unit, in which labour and assets are used to transform inputs of goods and services into output of goods and services. The goods must be such that their ownership can be exchanged in transactions between institutional units while the services must be such that they can be provided by one unit to another (i.e. they are capable of being purchased or acquired on markets). Accordingly activities that fall within the production boundary are:
(a) the production of all individual or collective goods or services that are supplied or intended to be supplied, to units, including the production of goods and services used up in the process of producing such goods or services;
(b) the own account production of all goods that are retained by their producers for their own final consumption or own gross capital formation.
3.15 Despite the obvious practical difficulties in obtaining data on illegal production, concealed production and the underground economy, the following activities are also covered in the System:
(i) the production of goods and services for which there is a market demand even though their sale, distribution or possession may be forbidden by law;
(ii) production activities that may be legal when carried out by authorized producers but that become illegal when carried out by unauthorized producers; e.g. the production of narcotics by cultivators who do not have a licence to produce them;
(iii) production of goods and services that are quite legal (provided certain standards or regulations are complied with) but that are deliberately concealed from public authorities to avoid taxes, social security contributions, staff regulation, etc.
3.16 The system includes the production of all goods whether they have been produced for delivery to other units or for own final use. At the time production takes place it may not be decided whether, or in what proportion, the goods produced are destined for the market or for own use. The following types of production that may be partly or wholly intended for own consumption within households are therefore included:
(1) the production of agricultural products and their subsequent storage; the gathering of berries or other uncultivated crops; cutting peat; forestry; wood cutting and the collection of fuelwood; hunting and fishing;
(2) the processing of agricultural products; the production of grain by threshing; the production of flour by milling; the curing of skins and the production of leather; the production and preservation of meat and fish products; the preservation of fruit by drying, bottling, etc.; the production of dairy products such as butter or cheese; the production of beer, wine or spirits; the production of baskets, mats, etc. by the households; (The cooking of foods and the preparation of meals for immediate consumption by members of the household is not included, however,).
(3) other kinds of processing and production of durables for own use.
3.17 It is not feasible to draw up a complete, exhaustive list of all possible production activities but the above list covers the most common types. It can be seen that this list includes activities that belong to different groups or divisions of ISIC. To the extent possible the grouping together of such different activities should be minimized. If a particular household activity becomes significant and details of its output as well as inputs are available, it should be treated as a separate household establishment and may be classified accordingly.
Measurement of output
(see paragraphs 6.37 to 6.50 of the 1993 SNA)
3.18 Goods and services are produced by processes of production. Output consists of those goods and services that are produced by an establishment within a given accounting period. The total output of an establishment is the sum total of (i) completed output, i.e. goods and services that become available for use outside that establishment (including for own final use) and (ii) work in progress, i.e. output that is not complete and, therefore, is not yet in the state in which it is normally marketed. The latter must be included if all the output produced is to be recorded. In practice, some of the goods sold or otherwise used within any given accounting period may have been withdrawn from inventories of goods produced in previous periods. This leads to the well-known accounting identity:
the value of output = the value of total sales or other uses of goods or services produced as outputs + the value of changes in the inventories of goods produced as outputs (including changes in work-in-progress)
3.19 A fundamental distinction is drawn between market output (output that is sold at prices that are economically significant, that is otherwise disposed of on the market or that is intended for sale or disposal on the market), output produced for own final use and other non-market output. Goods and services produced for own final use are valued at the average basic prices of similar products sold on the market provided they are sold in sufficient quantities to enable reliable estimates to be made of those average prices. If no suitable average prices are available, goods and services for own final use must be valued by their costs of production. The non-market output produced by government units and non-profit institutions and supplied free, or at prices that are not economically significant, to other institutional units or to the community as a whole is valued by total production costs, including consumption of fixed capital and any taxes (less subsidies) on production
except those on products.
3.20 The measurement of total output can be done either at the site where the production is taking place or at the end users. Whichever method is used to measure agricultural output, it is possible to obtain a clear indication of its coverage by listing the different ways in which it is used. Producers of goods and services must dispose of their output in one or more of the following ways during the period in which they are produced:
(1) they may be sold (only goods or services sold at economically significant prices are included here);
(2) they may be bartered in exchange for other goods, services or assets, provided to employees as compensation in kind or used for other payments in kind;
(3) they may enter the producers' inventories prior to their eventual sale, barter or other use (incomplete outputs enter the producers' inventories in the form of additions to work-in-progress);
(4) they may be supplied to another establishment belonging to the same enterprise for use as intermediate inputs into its production; they may also be used as intermediate inputs into a different kind of productive activity within a single agricultural establishment (for example, output of grain used as feedstuffs in the farming of cattle);
(5) they may be retained by their owners for own final consumption or own gross fixed capital formation;
(6) they may be supplied free or sold at prices that are not economically significant to other institutional units, either individually or collectively. In practice, agricultural outputs are unlikely to be disposed of in this way.
Basic, producers' and purchasers' prices
(see paragraphs 6.204 to 6.217 of the 1993 SNA)
3.21 The system utilizes two kinds of output prices; basic prices and producers' prices.
(a) The basic price is the amount receivable by the producer from the purchaser for a unit of a good or service produced as output minus any tax payable and plus any subsidy receivable on that unit as a consequence of its production or sale. It excludes any transport charges invoiced separately by the producer.
(b) The producer's price is the amount receivable by the producer from the purchaser for a unit of a good or service produced as output minus any VAT or similar deductible tax invoiced to the purchaser. It excludes any transport charges invoiced separately by the producer.
3.22 The purchaser's price is the amount paid by the purchaser, excluding any deductible VAT (i.e VAT on purchases that a producer is permitted to deduct from his liability of VAT to the government) or similar deductible tax, in order to take delivery of a unit of a good or service at the time and place required by the purchaser. The purchaser's price of a good includes any transport charges paid separately by the purchaser to take delivery at the required time and place.
3.23 Output valued at economically significant prices may be valued either at basic prices or at producers' prices. The preferred method of valuation is at basic prices, especially when a system of VAT, or similar deductible tax, is in operation, although producers' prices may be used when valuation at basic prices is not feasible. Expenditure by enterprises on goods and services intended to be used for intermediate consumption or gross fixed capital formation should be valued at purchasers' prices.
The output of agriculture, forestry and fishing
(see paragraphs 6.94 to 6.100 of the 1993 SNA)
3.24 The 1993 SNA recommends that, in order to have a concept of production that is consistent with economic activities other than agriculture, forestry and fishing along with the managed growth of crops, standing timber or other trees and fish and livestock reared for the purposes of food, under the control of institutional units should be treated as a continuous process of production whose output consists of work-in-progress -- that is, output that is not yet sufficiently processed to have reached the form in which it is usually marketed or used to produce other goods and services. When the crops are harvested, the trees felled or the animals killed, the process of production is completed and the work-in-progress is transformed into inventories of finished products ready for sale or other use (see paragraphs 6.94 and 6.95 of the 1993 SNA).
3.25 The 1993 SNA further states that when the process of production takes place over several periods (months, quarters or years for which accounts are compiled) to complete, the value of the output to be recorded as work-in-progress in each period is calculated by distributing the value of the finished product (the harvested crop, felled trees, slaughtered animals, etc.) in proportion to the costs incurred in each period. For this purpose, farms that are corporate enterprises need to be distinguished from those that are unincorporated. The output of corporate farms can be distributed in proportion to the actual costs incurred during each period, including compensation to employees. However, in the case of unincorporated farms owned by agricultural households, unpaid labour inputs provided by the owner(s) may account for much of the real costs incurred. The allocation of the work-in-progress for these farms may be accomplished as follows, first, actual costs (expenditure on
seed, fuels, etc.) are allocated to the periods in which they were incurred, then the remaining part of the value of the finished product is distributed in proportion to unpaid hours worked by the owner(s). For this purpose, rough indicators of the relative amount of work done in different periods may be sufficient.
3.26 When the value of the output is distributed as additions to work-in-progress, it is essential to record also the reduction in work-in-progress, which takes place at the moment when production is completed, to avoid double counting.
3.27 The system described above suggests that, if the entire production process is completed within a single accounting period, it may be superfluous to estimate the work-in-progress. In agriculture, as in other industries, it may sometimes be necessary to estimate the work-in-progress in advance of the production process being completed and before the value of the finished products (which is to be allocated as work-in-progress) is known. In such cases, the allocation may be done either on the basis of the expected value of the crop, taking account of its condition, or by marking up the actual costs incurred to account for operating surplus or mixed income based on previous experience. If a growing crop is badly damaged or destroyed prior to the harvest in the same accounting period, the earlier provisional estimates of work-in-progress obviously have to be revised downwards, to zero if necessary, even before the production process is completed.
The value of output
(see paragraphs 6.57-6.79 and 6.128 of the 1993 SNA)
3.28 The value of output sold or put to other uses is calculated separately from the value of the change in the stock of inventories. The principles for valuing the former have already been discussed in paragraphs 2.17, 2.18 and 2.22. The value of changes in inventories is equal to the value of the inventories acquired by an enterprise less the value of the inventories disposed of during the accounting period. Some of these acquisitions and disposals are attributable to actual purchases or sales, but others reflect transactions that are internal to the enterprise. When a good is entered into inventories it is acquired as an asset by the owner of the enterprise either by purchase (or barter) or by an internal transaction within the producer unit. Conversely, a good leaving inventories represents the disposal of an asset by the owner by sale or other use or by internal transfer to the production process, recurrent losses (wastage, accidental damage or pilfering). Inventories
movements that are not attributable to actual purchases or sales of the goods concerned are valued as if the goods were being bought or sold at that time. In other words, goods transferred out of inventories are valued at their current basic prices and goods transferred into inventories are valued as if they were being sold at that time. Additions to work-in-progress are valued in proportion to the estimated current basic prices of the finished product. Materials and supplies lost as a result of physical deterioration or recurrent accidental damage or pilfering are recorded and valued in the same way as if they were actually withdrawn to be used in production.
3.29 When prices are stable, the measurement of changes in inventories is relatively simple. However, when there is inflation, significant price increase may occur while goods are held in inventory. Holding gains occurring on goods held in inventory after they have been produced must not be included in the value of output.
3.30 In the case of work-in-progress, an estimate of the value of additions to work-in-progress during a given period is obtained by multiplying the current basic price of the finished product by the share of the total production costs incurred during that period. When there is general inflation, work-in-progress in successive accounting periods may be calculated on the basis of progressively higher expected sales prices. Despite the practical difficulty, this procedure has to be followed in order to match the values of inputs and outputs during each period and to obtain an economically meaningful measure of value added.
Intermediate consumption
(see paragraphs 6.147 to 6.177 of the 1993 SNA)
3.31 Intermediate consumption consists of the value of the goods and services that are consumed as inputs by a process of production, excluding fixed assets whose consumption is recorded as consumption of fixed capital. The goods and services may be either transformed or used up by the production process. Some inputs re-emerge after having been transformed and incorporated into the outputs; for example, grain may be transformed into flour which in turn may be transformed into bread. Other inputs are completely consumed or used up; for example, seeds, electricity and most services. The various items consumed as inputs may have been produced by other resident producers or imported from the rest of the world. The most common items of intermediate consumption are seeds and plants, animal products, energy and lubricants, fertilizers and soil improvers, plant protection products and medicines, feedstuffs, material and small tools, maintenance and repairs and irrigation charges and
services. In the 1993 SNA, the consumption by one establishment of goods or services produced by another establishment belonging to the same enterprise is counted as part of the first establishment's intermediate consumption. SEAFA permits this principle to be extended in the case of agricultural establishments with one or more secondary activities to include the consumption by one activity of goods or services produced by another (non-ancillary) activity within the same establishment. For example, grain produced by an agricultural establishment and used up as cattle feed within the same establishment is recorded as both output and intermediate consumption of that establishment. This treatment does not affect value added.
Some important points which need care and attention for estimating intermediate consumption follows:
1. The intermediate consumption of a good or service is recorded at the time when it enters production, as distinct from the time when it was acquired by the producer. In practice, the two times coincide for inputs of services, but not for goods which may be acquired some time in advance of their use in production.
2. A good or service consumed as an intermediate input is normally valued at the purchasers' price prevailing at the time it enters the production process; that is, at the price the producer would have to pay to replace it at the time it is used.
3. All the goods and services used up in ancillary activities form part of the intermediate consumption of the establishment or enterprise.
4. Certain goods and services used by enterprises do not enter directly into the process of production itself but are provided to employees working on that process. In such cases it is necessary to decide whether the goods and services are counted as intermediate consumption or as remuneration in kind to employees. In general, when the goods or services are used by employees in their own time and at their own discretion for the direct satisfaction of their own needs or wants, they constitute remuneration in kind. However, when employees are obliged to use the goods or services in order to enable them to carry out their work, they constitute intermediate consumption; for example, special clothing, gloves or footwear which must be worn to carry out the work are counted as intermediate consumption.
5. Expenditures on durable producer goods that are small, inexpensive and used to perform relatively simple operations may be treated as intermediate consumption when such expenditures are made regularly and are very small compared with expenditures on machinery and equipment. Examples of such goods are hand tools such as saws, spades, knives, hammers and screwdrivers.
6. Maintenance and repairs of fixed assets already in use in production constitute part of the intermediate consumption if it is required to keep the fixed assets in good working condition. Major expenditures on items that are used to extend the life, renovate or enlarge existing fixed assets should be taken as gross fixed capital formation.
7. Collective services provided by government units that are not specific to the requirements of agriculture are not included in intermediate consumption.
8. The types of services produced for own use by ancillary activities within the establishment can, alternatively be obtained from outside, i.e. from specialist market enterprises. If an establishment obtains the services from outside instead of from ancillary activities, its intermediate consumption is increased and its value added reduced, even though its principal activity remains completely unchanged.
9. The decision to rent rather than purchase buildings, machinery or equipment, can also have a major impact on the ratio of intermediate consumption to value added as the rentals paid for the hire of buildings or equipment are treated as purchases of services and recorded under intermediate consumption.
10. Capital consumption on the fixed assets owned by the enterprise forms part of gross value added, while interest costs (both actual and implicit) have to be met out of the net operating surplus. Only the costs of maintenance and repairs appear under intermediate consumption.
11. Expenditures by enterprises on valuables (works of art, etc.) held as stores of value are treated as capital formation and not intermediate consumption (see paragraph
10.116 of the 1993 SNA).
Consumption of fixed capital
(see paragraphs 6.179 to 6.187 of the 1993 sna)
3.32 Consumption of fixed capital may be defined as the decline, during the course of the accounting period, in the current value of the stock of fixed assets owned and used by a producer as a result of physical deterioration, normal obsolescence and accidental damage. It excludes the value of fixed assets destroyed by acts of war or other exceptional events unconnected with production, such as major natural disasters which occur very infrequently. The value of consumption of fixed capital may deviate considerably from depreciation as recorded in business accounts or as allowed for taxation purposes, especially when there is inflation.
3.33 The destruction of assets resulting from natural disasters, such as earthquakes, tidal waves and exceptionally severe hurricanes, or other occasional disasters is recorded in a new account in the 1993 SNA described as the "other changes in volume of assets account". The degradation of land because of flooding, erosion or pollution and the depletion of natural resources are similarly recorded in this new account. However, the entries in the "other changes in volume of assets" do not have counterpart entries elsewhere in the 1993 SNA. They, therefore, have no effect on the measurement of production and do not appear in the production account. See Chapter XII of the 1993 SNA, especially paragraphs 12.28 to 12.37, for a full explanation of this new account and its place in the SNA.
3.34 Fixed assets may have been purchased years before in the past and both the relative prices and the general price levels may now be quite different. However, the consumption of fixed capital recorded in the production account should be consistent with the other entries in the account, namely output and intermediate consumption which are also valued at current prices. Consumption of fixed capital should reflect underlying resource costs and relative demands at the time the production takes place. It should therefore be calculated using the actual or estimated prices and rentals of fixed assets prevailing at that time and not at the times the goods were originally acquired.
3.35 Capital consumption is calculated for all fixed assets -- that is, tangible and intangible produced assets used continuously or repeatedly in production -- but not for non-produced assets such as land. However, consumption of fixed capital must be calculated in respect of land improvements such as drainage systems, dykes or breakwaters and dams.
3.36 The consumption of fixed capital is one of the most important elements in the system. In most cases, when a distinction is drawn between "gross" and "net" recording gross means without deducting consumption of fixed capital while net means after deducting consumption of fixed capital. The consumption of fixed capital, being imputed is one of the most difficult items to measure and estimate. Depending on the level of development and the availability of data, the estimate of consumption of fixed capital can be subject to large errors. This aspect needs to be carefully understood by the users of the data. In recognition of the fact that it may not always be feasible to make a satisfactory estimate of the consumption of fixed capital, the main aggregates and balancing items of the accounts may record gross as well as net.
Gross and net value added at current and constant prices
(see paragraphs 6.222 to 6.239 and 16.71 to 16.77 of the 1993 SNA)
3.37 Value added measures the value created by production. It is an unduplicated measure of output in which the values of the goods and services used as intermediate inputs are eliminated from the value of output. It is a balancing item in the production account for an institutional unit or sector, an establishment or an industry. It may be calculated either before or after deducting the consumption of fixed capital on the fixed assets used. Thus, it is defined as follows:
(a) Gross value added is the value of output less the value of intermediate consumption;
(b) Net value added is the value of output less the values of both intermediate consumption and consumption of fixed capital.
To avoid repetition, only gross value added will be cited in following sections. The corresponding conclusions for net value added are obvious. The gross value added (OVA) can be expressed in the form of the algebraic expression:
GVA = (Q x P) - (q x p)
where Q and q are the quantities of goods and services produced (output) and intermediate consumption (input) and P and p are their respective prices. Generally, GVA measured at the prices of the accounting year in which the production takes place is known as gross value added at current prices. However, alternative measures of GVA may be obtained by combining different price vectors with a single quantity vector. For example, GVA may be measured using the prices of some other time period or some other country. When GVA is calculated using fixed prices of some base year it is described as being "at constant prices" of that base year.
Compensation of employees
(see paragraphs 7.21 to 7.47 of the 1993 SNA)
3.38 Compensation of employees is defined as the total remuneration in cash or in kind payable by an enterprise to an employee in return for work done by the latter during the accounting period. Compensation of employees is recorded on an accrual basis, i.e. it is measured by the value of the remuneration in cash or in kind which an employee becomes entitled to receive from an employer in respect of work done during the relevant period, whether paid in advance, simultaneously or in arrears of the work itself. No compensation of employees is payable in respect of unpaid work undertaken voluntarily, including work done by members of a household within an unincorporated enterprise owned by the same household. Unpaid family workers, including those working in unincorporated enterprises engaged wholly or partly in market production, are treated as self-employed. Compensation of employees does not include any taxes payable by the employer on the wages and salary bills.
3.39 Compensation of employees has two main components; wages and salaries payable in cash or kind; and the actual or imputed social contributions payable by employers to social security schemes, which are either funded or unfunded. The compensation of employees is directly related to the amount of work done or time spent at work. Furthermore, wages in kind include meals and drinks that are provided to employees at work and also other goods or services provided by the employer and used by the employee to satisfy his or her own needs or wants.
Taxes on production and on imports
(see paragraphs 7.48 to 7.50 and 7.62 to 7.70 of the 1993 SNA)
3.40 Taxes are compulsory, unrequited payments, in cash or in kind, made by institutional units to government units. They consists of:
(i) Taxes on products payable on goods and services when they are produced, delivered, sold, transferred, used or otherwise disposed of by their producers;
(ii) Other taxes on production such as taxes on the ownership or use of land, buildings or other assets used in production or taxes on the labour employed or the compensation of employees paid; and
(iii) Taxes and duties on imports that become payable when goods enter the economic territory by crossing the actual frontier or the customs frontier or when services are delivered to resident units by non-resident units.
3.41 At the level of an individual enterprise, taxes on production are recorded as being payable out of the enterprise's value added. In the past, such taxes were described as "indirect taxes" on the grounds that they can be passed on, in whole or in part, to other institutional units by increasing the prices of the goods or services sold. It is difficult to measure and generalize about the true incidence of this sort of taxes.
3.42 Taxes payable on production and imports are recorded under "uses" in the Generation of Income Account, while the receipt of taxes is recorded under "resources" in the Allocation of Primary Income Account of general government. In the generation of income account, taxes on imports are recorded only at the level of the total economy as they are not payable out of the value added of domestic producers. Moreover, at the level of an individual institutional unit or sector, only those taxes on products that have not already been deducted from the value of output of that unit or sector need to be recorded under uses in its Generation of Income Account. Such taxes, owever, vary depending on the way in which output is valued. When output is valued at basic prices, all taxes and subsidies on products payable or receivable on the goods or services produced as outputs are excluded from the value of that output and hence from the value added derived from it. They do not therefore
appear under "uses" in the Generation of Income Accounts of the units or sectors concerned, but are recorded only at the level of the total economy, in the same way as taxes on imports. On the other hand, when output is valued at producers' prices, all taxes or subsidies on products payable or receivable on outputs have to be recorded under "uses" in the Generation of Income Accounts of the units or sectors concerned, except invoiced VAT or similar deductible taxes as these are always excluded from the value of output. Non-deductible VAT and similar taxes are recorded under uses only at the level of the total economy, in the same way as taxes on imports.
3.43 Other taxes or subsidies on production -- i.e. taxes payable on the land, assets, labour, etc. employed in production -- are not payable per unit of output and are therefore never deducted from the value of output. They are always recorded as being payable out of the value added of the individual producers or sectors concerned.
Subsidies
(see paragraphs 7.71 to 7.79 of the 1993 SNA)
3.44 Subsidies are current unrequited payments that government units, including nonresident government units, make to enterprises on the basis of the levels of their production activities or of the quantities or values of the goods and services which they produce, sell or import. Subsidies are receivable by resident producers or importers. In the case of resident producers subsidies may be designed to influence the producers' levels of production, the prices at which their outputs are sold or the remuneration of the institutional units engaged in production. Subsidies are equivalent to negative taxes on production so far as their impact on the operating surplus is in the opposite direction to that of taxes on production. The subsidy may be a specific amount of money per unit of a good or service or it may be calculated ad valorem as a specified percentage of the prices per unit. A subsidy may also be calculated as the difference between a specified target price and the
market price actually paid by a buyer.
3.45 The 1993 SNA does not recognize consumer subsidies, all subsidies being treated as payable to producers. Any current transfers that governments make directly to households as consumers are treated as social benefits. Subsidies do not include grants that governments may make to enterprises in order to finance capital formation or to compensate them for damage to capital assets. Such grants are treated as capital transfers.
<section>6</section>
Operating surplus and mixed income
(see paragraphs 7.80 to 7.86 of the 1993 SNA)
3.46 Operating Surplus and Mixed Income are measures of the surplus accruing from the processes of production before deducting any explicit or implicit interest charges, rents or other property incomes payable on the financial assets, land or other tangible non-produced assets required to carry on production. Operating surplus or mixed income is the balancing item in the Generation of Income Account depending on the type of enterprises.
Operating surplus and mixed income
= value added minus compensation of employees payable minus taxes on production payable plus subsidies receivable.
3.47 The difference between operating surplus and mixed income is that the latter term has been reserved for the unincorporated enterprises owned by members of households, either individually or in partnership with others, in which the owners or other members of the households, work without receiving any wage or salary. An unincorporated enterprise is a producer unit that is not incorporated as a separate legal entity from its owner. The owner of an unincorporated household enterprise usually has a dual role to play: first as the entrepreneur who is responsible for the creation and management of the enterprise; and second as a worker who contributes labour inputs that could be provided by paid employees. The establishment of an unincorporated enterprise requires initiative, enterprise and capital equipment. To meet these requirements the owner has to raise the necessary finance at his or her own risk. Therefore the surplus arising from the productive activity of an
unincorporated household enterprise usually represents a mixture of two different kinds of income, namely labour income and a return to capital. As a result of the basic structure of unincorporated enterprises, the income contains an unknown element of remuneration for work done by the owner of the enterprise or by other members of the same household, as well as the surplus accruing from production. For this reason it is described as "mixed income" instead of operating surplus.
3.48 In this context, it may also be mentioned that it is often not possible to draw a clear distinction between the assets, including financial assets and liabilities, of the unincorporated enterprise and those of the owner in a personal capacity. Many fixed assets, such as buildings and vehicles, may be used partly for business purposes and partly for purposes of household final consumption. In addition, some goods or services ostensibly purchased for intermediate consumption may in fact be consumed by members of the household. Some owners may deliberately overstate their costs of production in order to reduce their tax liabilities, and mixed income may sometimes not be very reliable for these kinds of reasons.
3.49 In many countries, most agricultural production activity takes place within the household sector. When members of households work as employees for corporations, quasi corporations or government, the production to which they contribute takes place outside the household sector.
Gross fixed capital formation
(see paragraphs 10.26 and 10.32 to 10.88 of the 1993 SNA)
3.50 Gross fixed capital formation is measured by the total value of a producer's acquisitions less disposals of new or existing fixed assets by way of purchase, barter, capital transfers in kind and own account production (even if not yet completed or fully matured) during the accounting period. Fixed assets consist of tangible or intangible assets that have come into existence as outputs from processes of production and that are themselves used repeatedly or continuously in other processes of production over periods of more than one year. Changes in assets may be either positive or negative and it is possible for the gross fixed capital formation of an individual institutional unit or sector to be negative if it sells off or transfers enough of its existing fixed assets to other units or sectors. There is substantial diversity in the different types of gross fixed capital formation that may take place (see Table 2.4 in Chapter 2 above). The following main types of assets
may be distinguished as far as agricultural activities are concerned:
(1) Acquisitions, less disposals, of new or existing tangible fixed assets, subdivided by type of assets into: a) farm buildings and other structure, b) machinery and equipment, c) cultivated assets-plantations, trees and livestock - that are used repeatedly or continuously to produce products such as fruit, rubber or milk;
(2) Major improvements to tangible non-produced assets, including land;
(3) Costs associated with the transfer of ownership of non-produced assets.
3.51 The total of the three components given above constitutes gross fixed capital formation. Acquisitions of new assets include not only complete assets but also any renovations, reconstructions or enlargements that increase the productive capacity or extend the service life (or both) of an existing asset. In recognition of the newly increased capacity or newly extended service life, these improvements are treated as acquisitions of new assets even though, physically, they function as part of the existing assets.
3.52 Gross fixed capital formation is recorded when the ownership of the fixed assets is transferred to the institutional unit that intends to use them in production. However, assets produced for own account, including cultivated assets, are recorded as gross fixed capital formation as they are being produced, even if the assets are not completed or mature (see paragraphs 10.83 to 10.88 of the 1993 SNA).
3.53 Fixed assets acquired by the purchaser are valued at purchasers' prices, that is, including not only all transport and installation charges but also all costs incurred during the transfer of ownership in the form of fees paid to agents, technical consultants, surveyors, engineers, architects, lawyers, estate agents, etc. and any taxes payable on the transfer. In cases where such assets have been acquired by barter, they are valued similarly on the basis of estimated basic prices plus actual costs incurred in installation, transportation, consultations, etc. and taxes, if any. Own account produced assets are valued at basic prices or by their costs of production when basic prices are not available. Sales of existing fixed assets are valued after deducting any costs of ownership transfer incurred by the seller.
3.54 The coverage of fixed assets as far as agricultural activities are concerned is mostly self explanatory. A few specific points which need attention while preparing the estimates and using them for analytical purposes follows:
(a) Improvements to land may involve the reclamation of land by i) the construction of dykes, walls or dams, ii) the draining of marshes or the irrigation of deserts (by the construction of dykes, ditches or irrigation channels) and iii) the prevention of flooding or erosion by the sea rivers through by the construction of breakwaters, walls or flood barriers. These activities may lead to the creation of substantial new structures that are not themselves used directly to produce other goods and services.
It is therefore, useful to classify them separately.
(b) Livestock classified as cultivated assets consists of those animals that are used in production year after year. These include, for example, breeding stock, dairy cattle, sheep reared for wool and draught animals. Animals raised for slaughter, including poultry, are not fixed assets. Similarly, trees (including shrubs) that are cultivated for the products they yield year after year, such as fruit trees, vines, rubber trees and palm trees, are fixed assets while trees grown for timber that yield a finished product only once -- when they are ultimately felled -- are not fixed assets, just as cereal or vegetable plants that produce only a single crop.
(c) Exceptional losses of animals as a result of major epidemics of disease, plagues of insects, contamination, exceptional drought, famine or other natural disasters are not recorded as disposals but as "catastrophic losses" (K.7) in the other changes in the volume of assets account (see paragraphs 12.35 to 12.37 of the 1993 SNA).
(d) Incidental, regularly recurring losses of animals caused by occasional deaths from natural causes form part of consumption of fixed capital. Consumption of fixed capital on an individual animal is measured by the change in its value as it gets older.
(e) Gross fixed capital formation in plantations, orchards etc. may be approximated by the value of costs incurred in their production during the period. These include the costs of preparing the ground, planting, staking and protecting from weather or disease until the tree reaches maturity and starts to yield a product. Disposals consist of assets sold or otherwise transferred to other units.
(f) A financial lease is a contract between lessor and lessee whereby the lessor, purchases the goods and the lessee pays rentals that enable the lessor, over the period of contract, to recover all or virtually all costs including interest. Financial leases may be distinguished by the fact that all the risks and rewards of ownership are, de facto, transferred from the legal owner of the good (the lessor) to the user of the good (the lessee). In order to capture the economic reality of such arrangements, the goods under a financial lease are treated in the system as if they were purchased by the user, that is, as if a change in ownership had occurred.
Land
(see paragraphs 10.59, 10.60 and 10.121 to 10.125 of the 1993 SNA)
3.55 Land is defined in the system as the ground itself, including:
(a) the soil covering;
(b) associated surface water;
but excluding:
(a) building or other structures constructed on the land or through it such as roads and irrigation channels;
(b) vineyards, orchards or other plantations of trees and any growing crops etc.;
(c) subsoil assets;
(d) non-cultivated biological resources;
(e) water resources below the ground.
The associated surface water includes any inland waters-reservoirs, lakes, rivers, etc. -- over which ownership rights can be exercised and which can, therefore, be the subject of transactions between institutional units.
3.56 The total stock of land is not fixed. It may marginally increase or decrease due to reclamation or erosion by the sea or rivers. Similarly its quality can be improved or damaged, especially by appropriate or inappropriate methods of cultivation or other agricultural processes.
3.57 The cost of ownership transfer incurred on purchases and sales of land affect the values recorded in the same way as the cost of ownership transfer of other fixed assets. However, as land is not a produced asset, it is not possible to have gross fixed capital formation of land itself. The value of the costs of ownership transfer associated with purchases and sales of land must therefore be separated from purchases and sales themselves. They are recorded under separate headings in the classification of gross fixed capital formation. Consumption of fixed capital on this component may then be charged based on suitably long service life. However, as the land that has been sold disappears from the balance sheet of the seller, any acquisition costs previously incurred by the seller that have not already been written off as consumption of fixed capital together with the selling costs result in a holding loss for the seller. Furthermore, as purchases and sales of land between
residents are recorded excluding the cost of ownership transfer for both buyers and sellers, the total value of the purchases and sales of land must be equal to each other at the level of the total economy, although not at the level of individual sectors or sub-sectors. This transaction is recorded separately under "Acquisitions less disposals of land and other tangible non-produced assets".
3.58 Buildings, or other structures, and plantations are often purchased or sold together with the land on which they are situated without separate valuations of the two components. In such cases it may be found that one of the two components accounts for greater share of the total cost and the total transaction may be classified accordingly.
Changes in inventories
(see paragraphs 6.57 to 6.68 and 10.96 to 10.109 of the 1993 SNA)
3.59 Inventories consist of stocks of output (i.e. finished and semi-finished products) that are still held by the units that produced them and stocks of products acquired from other units that are intended to be used for intermediate consumption or for resale without further processing. Transactions involving inventories are treated in exactly the same way as transactions involving other assets. The matter of valuation of inventories and estimation as well as the coverage of work-in-progress have already been discussed under measurement of production.
Paragraphs 10.106 to 10.109 of the 1993 SNA, which refer directly to agriculture, are reproduced in full below:
"The natural growth of plants, trees and livestock, including farmed fish, is included within the production boundary when it is carried out under the direct control, responsibility and management of an institutional unit. In the present context it is necessary to distinguish single-use plants, trees and livestock that produce an output once only (when the plants or trees are cut down or uprooted or the livestock slaughtered) from trees (including vines and shrubs) and livestock that are used repeatedly or continuously for more than one year to produce outputs such as fruit, nuts, rubber, milk, wool, power, transportation and entertainment. Work-in-progress may need to be recorded for both types of crops or livestock.
In the case of single-use plants or livestock, any such crops or livestock that have not yet been harvested or slaughtered at the end of the accounting period constitute work-in-progress, as follows:
(a) When accounts are compiled quarterly, the value of the finished output of an annual crop -- i.e., the value of the grain or other crop actually harvested -- may be distributed over the quarters in which production has been taking place in proportion to the costs incurred each quarter. The value of the output produced in the quarter in which the crop is harvested is then equal to the value of the harvested crop less the value of the additions to work-in-progress produced in the previous quarters;
(b) If the accounts are compiled annually and if the crop year is contained within the accounting year, it will be unnecessary to calculate work-inprogress, except possibly under conditions of high inflation;
(c) If the accounts are compiled annually and if the accounting year ends in the middle of the crop year, it becomes necessary to calculate both additions to and reductions of work-in-progress during the accounting year. This does not imply, however, that the value of the additions to work-in-progress for the latest year covered must be estimated in advance of knowing the value of the harvested crop, as any annual crop sown in year t is likely to have been harvested by the time the annual accounts for year t are compiled and published. In any case, provisional estimates of additions to work-in-progress can always be calculated on the basis of costs plus a mark-up and revised when the value of the harvested crop becomes known.
Changes in work-in-progress for livestock reared for slaughter, including poultry, may be approximated by changes in the numbers of such livestock between the beginning and the end of the accounting period multiplied by the average price of the animals or poultry concerned.
In the case of trees and livestock that are intended for repeated or continuous use in production and are treated as fixed assets when they reach maturity, work-in-progress may have to be calculated in the case of specialist producers of such assets for example, breeders of racehorses or other special animals. However, when they are being cultivated or reared for own use -i.e., produced on own account -- the output produced is classified as gross fixed capital formation."
Property income
(see paragraphs 7.87 to 7.95 and 7.128 to 7.131 of the 1993 SNA)
3.60 Primary incomes are incomes that accrue to institutional units as a consequence of their involvement in processes of production or ownership of assets that may be needed for purposes of production. The primary incomes that accrue by lending or renting financial or tangible non-reproduced assets, including land, to other units for use in production are described as property incomes. Property incomes are classified in the following way in the system:
Interest; Rent;
Others (i.e distributed income of corporations: dividends, withdrawals from income of quasi-corporations; reinvested earnings on direct foreign investment; property income attributed to insurance policyholders).
In the following, only interest and rent are described. For the other items listed above reference may be made to the 1993 SNA.
3.61 Interest is a form of property income that is received by owners of certain kinds of financial assets, namely deposits, securities other than shares, loans and other accounts receivable. The interest is recorded on an accrual basis, i.e., interest is recorded as accruing continuously over time to the creditor on the amount of principal outstanding. This recorded interest may differ not only from the amount of interest actually paid during a given period but also the amount due to be paid within the period.
3.62 Owners of land and subsoil assets may put them at the disposal of other units by arranging contracts or leases under which the tenants or users of the assets agree to pay the owners property incomes in the form of rents. (Payments under operating leases are described as "rentals" and are treated as sales or purchases of services.) Rents are also recorded on an accrual basis. They may be paid in cash or kind. Under share-cropping or similar schemes the value of rent is not fixed in advance in monetary terms and is measured by the value at basic prices of the crops that the tenants are obliged to provide to the landowner under the contract between them. Rent on land may also include the rents payable to the owners of inland waters and rivers for the right to exploit such waters for various purposes, including fishing.
3.63 A landowner may be liable to pay land taxes or incur certain maintenance expenses solely as a consequence of owning the land. By convention, such taxes or expenses are treated as payable by the tenant who is deemed to deduct them from the rent that would otherwise be paid to the landowner. Rent reduced in this way by taxes or other expenses for which the landowner is liable is described as "net rent". By adopting this convention the income of the tenant does not change but there is no need to create a notional enterprise for the landowner if the landowner is not already engaged in some other kind of productive activity.
3.64 As already noted, the rental payable on buildings or other structures is treated as a purchase of services. In practice, however, a single payment may cover both rent and rental. For example, a farmer may rent a farmhouse, farm buildings and farmland in one contract. If there is no objective basis on which to split the payment between rent on land and rental on structure, it is recommended that, the whole amount be treated as rent or rental depending on which of the two is considered to be the larger.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 4 - Uses of economic accounts for agriculture
Introduction
Structural analysis and economic indicators
Use of simulation and modelling
References
Introduction
4.1 Agriculture is an essential component for sustainable economic growth. It is becoming increasingly clear that an appropriate long-term strategy for the agriculture sector is essential for both developing and developed countries. Decades ago the basic objective of agricultural policy was to meet the demand for food and fibre for growing populations. Today, the protection of natural resources and the preservation of the eco-system and additional objectives. Thus it has become essential to analyze the data carefully for policy purposes. The basic objectives for a policy-maker dealing with food and agricultural activities are:
(a) to monitor the current trends of agricultural growth within the process of overall economic development;
(b) to foresee the impact of various policy measures on agricultural development and the economic conditions of the population dependent on agriculture;
(c) to help policy-makers achieve optimum results in allocating increasingly scarce natural resources.
It is necessary to mention here that there are many different kinds of analytical work and the purpose of this Chapter is to illustrate only the possible role of SEAFA in this exercise. Separate work has also been done by FAO (see, for example, FAO, 1982 and 1986) in this direction. The objective of this chapter is twofold, namely, to list some of the common techniques or methods that must be taken into account by the compilers of the system to meet the requirements of policy-makers and to caution compilers about possible sources of errors that can invalidate the final conclusions.
4.2 One of the crucial problems for analytical studies is the chronic shortage of reliable data. Unless the available data are consistent with other related data and have similar coverage and concepts, meaningful analysis is not feasible. By definition, the systems of national or agricultural accounts represent consistent sets of statistical information. SEAFA has been developed partly on the model of a Social Accounting Matrix (SAM) structure by linking large amounts of other data to macro-economic flows in a flexible manner that suits the needs of different users in different situations. A SAM requires a large amount of data classified according to the economic issue under study. SEAFA proposes a limited set of internationally comparable economic accounts along with other kinds of data. (An overview of the areas that can be covered by SEAFA can be seen in Table 4.1.). Primary information related to different subjects may be suitably stored in disaggregated form and
appropriate software developed to enable a variety of tabulations to be made, each of them tailored to different user requirements. It is possible that the data may not support a full balanced SAM, but the user should be able to draw better, more relevant conclusions. The three types of analysis mentioned above can be suitably grouped into structural analysis and the development of economic indicators; and the use of simulation methods and modelling. A brief discussion of these uses of SEAFA is given below.
Structural analysis and economic indicators
(a) The SEAFA's set of accounts
(b) Supporting statements
(c) The System as the basis for quantity and price index numbers
4.3 The term structural analysis is generally employed to cover all those areas of economic analysis are concerned with changes in the "structure" of an economy such as changes in the relative importance of various commodities, industries, economic regions, institutional sectors and economic classes. The agricultural data collected in various censuses and surveys and from administrative records may be of limited use for such analysis because of incomplete coverage and a lack of other relevant information. Today, when the economic situation is changing because of vast communication networks, any policy decision depends on the interplay of a large number of factors. For example, the attitude of farmers towards growing a certain crop may depend on the prices and output of similar crops, or of its substitutes, in other parts of the country or international market; on costs of production and on weather conditions. Even if the relevant data are available it is necessary to know
their definitions and coverage. To achieve an overall favourable production pattern while trying to maximize farmers' incomes, the government may pursue certain pricing and subsidy policies. Accordingly, for efficient policy-making or plan formulation a sound information system is required consisting of aggregates and economic indicators based on up-to-date, reliable data and interconnected with each other. SEAFA provides the basic framework for establishing such a system.
(a) The SEAFA's set of accounts
4.4 The SEAFA includes five accounts using the accounting format recommended by the 1993 SNA. Each of these accounts provides an internationally comparable economic indicator to monitor specific phenomena:
TYPE OF ACCOUNT ECONOMIC INDICATOR
Production Account Value added originating from an economic activity
Generation of Income Account The entrepreneur's share of the income payable out of the value added
Allocation of Primary Income Account The balance of primary income accruing to the entrepreneur
Goods and Service Account Classification of output (and imports) by type of end use
Capital Account Capital formation and its source of financing (domestic resources/external assistance)
4.5 As already indicated in Chapter 3 these five accounts may be compiled for different groups of establishments or institutional units. Accordingly, the indicators will monitor the current status of industries or sectors.
(b) Supporting statements
4.6 SEAFA recommends a set of statements to present detailed disaggregated information on the various flows included in the accounts. Such statement can be utilized for structural analysis and the construction of economic indicators as well as evaluation of past performance and monitoring of the current economic situation. Although the Handbook makes suggestions about the kinds of illustrative statements which may be compiled these statements can be varied according to the needs of different countries. For example, some countries may wish to disaggregate production by forms of organization rather than according to type of productive activity. Similarly, for some purposes it may be preferable to disaggregate gross domestic product by type of payment rather than by factor employed. To keep the system more comprehensive and flexible it is not recommended that a fixed set of statements be compiled. The statements may be varied according to the current needs of policy-makers
using a primary database capable of producing different statements as required by various users. Some classification schemes that may be used follow:
(i) goods (e.g. cereal, pulses, oilseeds, sugar, fruits and vegetables, fibre crops, tree
crops, spices, medicinal and aromatic plants);
(ii) administrative regions, rural or urban areas, size of holdings;
(iii) agro-climatic or agro-ecological region;
(iv) natural resources (e.g. agricultural land by type of forest, forest land, animals, inland water coastal zone);
(v) uses (e.g. intermediate consumption, final consumption of households and
government, exports and capital formation);
(vi) international trade zone.
4.7 When creating databases using the above classification it must be possible to analyze different kinds of data drawn from different sources (i.e. not only output but also other data such as inputs, capital formation or utilization, labour force and producer or consumer prices of items of output and input). The data can be used to examine the development of a given economy and to get some idea of the main factors that determine such development. Further insight into the structural aspects of an economy can also be obtained from intra- and inter country comparisons. Apart from such general analysis, the following indicators are also relevant for policy-making:
(i) The ratio of the imputed value of output for own final use to total sales is of particular significance because it provides a measure of the degree of subsistence of the sector. The higher the ratio, the lower the share of output entering the market and the higher the degree of insulation of farmers from market forces and economic incentives.
(ii) The ratio of gross output to gross products (the difference between these two aggregates represents the goods and services purchased for intermediate consumption from other sectors) is an indicator of the organizational nature of the sector. As modernization of agricultural production takes place, the value of the above ratio will increase. However, the change may be comparatively slow as modernization may also result in an increasing trend in productivity.
(iii) The ratio of the prices of goods and services sold by the sector (producers) to the prices of goods and services purchased by the sector (producers) for final consumption, intermediate consumption and capital formation indicates changes in the purchasing power of agricultural producers; this is also known as the "terms of trade between agriculture and other sectors". Such changes are of particular significance in relation to incentives for agricultural production because, for instance, a shift of the terms of trade in favour of agriculture may encourage the use of new inputs and the adoption of more modern methods of production.
(iv) The share of agricultural commodities in total exports (or imports) shows its relative importance in foreign trade and the ratio of agricultural imports and/or net agricultural imports (i.e. imports - exports) to total exports shows the dependency of agriculture on external markets.
4.8 A set of similar indicators can be generated for, other economic activities included in SEAFA. Consider the case of the "Food and Nutrition" activity. In this case "food availability for human consumption" when expressed in terms of "calories (per caput per day), fats and proteins (grams per caput per day)" and compared over time shows the changing nutritional levels for a region or country. Similarly, a comparison of "average annual (percentage) rate of change" of per caput food availability for human consumption with the growth of the population gives a picture of the status of food availability which can be studied along with the food supply structure (domestic output, imports and exports) to study self-sufficiency in food production. A series of such statements can be prepared to meet various analytical needs. The role of SEAFA in this regard is to provide the basic data along with other databases such as the composition of food availability from different sources
e.g. domestic output versus imports or crops versus animal products versus fisheries.
(c) The System as the basis for quantity and price index numbers
4.9 The important aggregates of the economic accounts, such as output, input, household and government final consumption expenditure, together with gross fixed capital formation, are generally compiled at constant as well as current prices. The compilation of constant price aggregates utilizes the entire data available taking account of differences in quality, location, etc. The data provide weights for the construction of index number (Laspeyres, Paasche, Chain base type). Implicit quantity and price index numbers can also be derived using current price data. Estimates at constant prices can also be presented in the form of index numbers using the same base year for the constant price series to show the relative volume movements. Similarly, the price series derived by dividing the estimate at current prices by that at constant prices can be converted into index numbers of implicit prices. These index numbers can be constructed for different aggregates (as well as their
components) including gross domestic product.
Use of simulation and modelling
(a) Input-output
(b) Social Accounting Matrices (SAMs)
(c) Micro-macro linkages
(d) Simulation
(e) General equilibrium models
4.10 The role of economic accounts is not simply to provide economic indicators but to provide the empirical material for analysis and modelling for policy on developmental planning purposes. The structure of the economy can be seen more clearly from disaggregated information than from the aggregate accounts. Thus, to have a system of economic accounts with much analytical or modelling capability it is necessary to use appropriate classifications and to have sufficiently disaggregated data. A good primary database can serve a variety of users.
4.11 The first step in designing a system of economic accounts capable of supporting modelling and analytical needs is to identify minimum data requirements, including non monetized as well as monetized transactions. Lack of information (Richter, Josef, 1994) can lead to misuse of economic data. It is necessary to have adequate basic concepts and statistical units. Quite often theory rests on variables that cannot be directly observed and there may be a substantial discrepancy between the actual measure and the underlying theoretical concept. As a result of these difficulties proxy variables can be used whose behaviour may be entirely different. As an illustration take the case of establishing linkages between resource flows from non-agricultural to agricultural activities in developing countries. In developing countries agricultural activities are generally undertaken by unincorporated enterprises owned by households. Households, however, do not usually maintain accounts. A
clear picture of the resources involved is not available. Borrowed funds may be used for personal rather than agricultural activities. For the analysis of production and its impact on the environment one type of statistical unit may be needed while for a study of measurement of income by sector a different type of unit may be needed. The aim of the investigation determines which kind of unit or classification scheme should be adopted, which degree of disaggregation has to be achieved, etc.
4.12 When a comprehensive set of accounts is prepared using a variety of sources, certain discrepancies may emerge between the two sides of an account. These discrepancies may arise because of incompatible assumptions used in deriving the various structural ratios used for compilation purposes. The size of the discrepancies reflects the degree of consistency of economic accounts. Any modelling exercise using data sets with in-built inconsistencies is difficult. Thus, before undertaking the analysis it is necessary to have a fresh look at the various assumptions underlying the estimates. If other methods are not feasible, it may sometimes be worthwhile to use statistical techniques, such as generalized least square or the RAS technique to adjust the data. When using these methods it becomes essential to check whether the adjusted estimates are plausible and fall within acceptable limits. There are two main advantages of these methods. First, they allow the maximum use of a
wide range of available data to build consistent databases that serve a variety of purposes. Second, they provide systematic cross-checks which give users more confidence in the data.
4.13 The compilation of SEAFA is particularly important for developing countries because of the relatively large size of the agricultural sector and the dominant role it plays in achieving any growth target. The uses of SEAFA are discussed below under five broad headings.
(a) Input-output
4.14 Input-output is one of the most common methods regularly used for various policy and planning purposes. The data contained in the Economic Accounts for Agriculture may be used to prepare projections under alternative policy scenarios. Consider, for example, the case of a country whose population consumes food containing "x" calories with "a" amount of fat and "b" amount of protein. Now, suppose it is decided to raise the level of nutrition from "x" to "x1" calories which may contain "a1" and "b1" amounts of fat and protein respectively. The planner would be faced with the need to change the country's production to provide an optimum food basket, keeping in view the current status of domestic food production, the requirement of inputs, import and export of food, the cost of living of the population and also the likely financial burden on the country. The present SEAFA has been designed to answer such questions using input-output type analysis.
(b) Social Accounting Matrices (SAMs)
4.15 A SAM is a tool to analyze the structural features of an economy by establishing linkages between different flows in the economic accounts of institutional sectors SAMs are forms of accounts that focus on the role of people in the economy. Among other things, they require extra breakdowns of the household sector and a disaggregated presentation of labour markets (i.e. distinguishing various categories of employed persons). Key features of SAMs are integration and multiple classifications; in other words, conceptual and numerical linkages among all kinds of related monetary and non-monetary phenomena, which may be expressed in different measurement units. If, for instance, agricultural production is classified by agro-climatic zones, SEAFA can provide:
Cropping patterns in different zones,
A comparative picture of crop productivity for selecting suitable crops, Input requirements,
Thresholds for agro-environmental indicators,
Shares in national aggregates using flows that are consistent with other kinds of data in the system.
4.16 In a SAM it is desirable that the concepts, accounting structure and classifications should be tailored to the economy described, the specific purposes for which the SAM is constructed and the availability of data. A SAM provides a framework and consistent (base year) data for economy-wide models with detailed classifications of actors, such as industries, categories of employed persons and institutional sub-sectors, including various socioeconomic household groups. The abundance of data included in most SAMs may give the impression that they can only be constructed for countries with a wealth of statistical information. In practice, developing countries have taken the lead in compiling SAMs. Actually, it is in situations where the basic information and other statistical resources are very scarce that it is all the more important to make the best possible use of whatever data are available. Integrating the results from all kinds of costly censuses and surveys into a
consistent framework may increase both their relevance and their reliability. Integration of basic data enhances the possibility of more policy issues being monitored and analyzed inter-relatedly. Moreover, the linkage of employment and income distribution data (or productivity and size distribution of holdings) to more macro-oriented objectives such as NDP growth, balance of payments equilibrium and stable price levels, comes within the reach of SAM.
4.17 The relationship between SAMs and models has several aspects. It has already been noted that for each model there is a corresponding SAM. The converse does not hold, however. For any given SAM there are a variety of possible models. The choice of SAM restricts the choice of models, but it does not determine it uniquely. The process of designing a model can usefully be divided into three stages. The first stage concerns the choice of what the model is to be about; what institutions are to be recognized; are asset holdings or flows of funds to be modelled; and what disaggregation of factors, activities and commodities is needed'? It is this part of the model design that determines the SAM and is uniquely determined by it. Within the framework developed at this stage, there is complete flexibility to choose the data sets and structural identities (within the overall framework of macroeconomic theory) to define the model. A distinctive feature of all SAM-based models is
their reliance on complete balances, at a multi-sector level, of incomes and outlays of institutions and of supply and use of goods and services, usually including labour services. Another feature is that the structure of the model and the structure of the SAM are closely interlinked. To a lesser extent, this also applies to the parameter values. This means a departure from a model specification that hinges on associations between long runs of time-series. In turn, it implies that SAM-based models are less liable to the disadvantages of time series models, such as: (a) their use of proxy variables and independently estimated deflators for various transaction categories, which are not necessarily consistent; (b) their dependence on long time-series which often are not available at an intermediate level; and (c) their reliance on the constancy of structural relationships over a long period. Such relationships may change in response to various structural or external shocks
(energy crises) and continual institutional reforms (lifting trade barriers, large-scale privatizations, etc.).
(c) Micro-macro linkages
4.18 Microanalysis deals with the behaviour of individual units without necessarily linking them to the overall economic system. The data for micro-analysis are generally obtained from sample surveys, administrative records and pilot studies which are heterogeneous and often give conflicting results. The major reasons for this are that (a) these data are seldom matched with respect to concepts, definitions and statistical units used for the collection of data, and (b) the coverage of the activity may be undefined and far from complete. In such cases, aggregation of the data raises problems. Basic rules are often not followed when presenting micro behaviour. In contrast, the macro data are generally comprehensive and consistent with one another when compiled within an overall economic accounting framework. However, these data can not easily be disaggregated to examine structural or behaviourial relationships. The increasing interest of policy-makers has led to micro databases
becoming increasingly available. To understand the dynamic nature of the economic system in terms of the social, economic and demographic characteristics of the population it is essential to relate the micro data bases to the overall framework of economic accounts. This task requires adjustments on both sides. Some guiding principles follow:
(i) The domain for the collection of micro data should be the same as that for the macro economic accounts. The coverage of both should be examined and that of the macro data may be adjusted so that to match that of the micro data.
(ii) The collection of micro data should keep in view the need for uniformity with macro data.
(iii) The concepts and definitions used in the collection of micro data should be examined carefully and matched with those in the system of macro accounts. For example, values may have to be assigned to some activities or goods and services for which data are not available.
(iv) The macro data sets generally include some imputed values for non-market activities. The basic assumptions followed in these imputations should be examined and checked with corresponding micro data sets.
A system conceived in this way is well suited for the integration of micro and macro data sets for analytical purposes.
(d) Simulation
4.19 Simulation attempts to reproduce on a small scale the actual or essential features of an operating market, socio-economic system or other unit of inquiry. With increasing access to computers, simulation has become a powerful tool for policy analysis allowing the policy-maker to examine and investigate the impact of various policy measures on the economy. There are various types of simulation models but the following two are of particular interest:
(i) optimizing behaviour -- an optimizing model attempts to identify decisions that maximize profits, security or efficiency or that minimize costs, poverty, malnourishment or trade deficits; and
(ii) structural and predictive -- predictive models make it possible to forecast future outcomes while structural models emphasize causal relationships among the important variables of the system. These structural relationships are deduced using appropriate theory from disciplines such as economics and sociology. The structure of the model, once specified, determines what data and statistical analyses will be needed to estimate parameter values and test the model's validity.
4.20 With the increased use of simulation models microsimulation methods have been developed recently. The essence of microsimulation is to establish a link between the behaviour observed in various micro level data and macro aggregates in order to provide estimates of how various aggregates may change in response to policy innovation.
(e) General equilibrium models
4.21 The methodology underlying the formulation of General Equilibrium Models consists of three main elements; a preference function specifying the objectives of economic policy; a classification of variables useful for policy purposes; and a quantitative model reflecting the structure of the economy. The preference function is supposed to reflect the major policy objectives which the decision-maker is striving for as well as the relative importance of these objectives. The variables included in the model are divided into two classes: exogenous variables determined outside the system and endogenous variables whose value is determined by the model. The exogenous variables generally include policy instruments (i.e. exchange rate, interest rate, income tax rate, etc.) and data sets such as prices. The endogenous variables consist of target variables and other similar variables that reflect the impact of changes in target variables. The model is generally presented in the form
of a set of simultaneous equations which represent different types of relationships, such as production functions, consumption functions, import functions and tax functions, and a few identities to close the system. The models are solved using various statistical methods appropriate to the situation. The equation system (the model) is designed to answer the following questions:
a) Given a set of known or projected values of exogenous variables for the coming year, what values of the endogenous variables are likely to emerge?
b) Given the desired values of the target variables and forecasts of the non controllable factors, what values should the policy instruments take in order to achieve the desired predetermined values of the target variables'?
4.22 One of the important questions of economic policy concerns the choice of the objectives (targets) and the relative importance attached to them. This is particularly true when some of the objectives may be in conflict; for example, when policies leading to a higher gross national product (GNP) growth rate result in lower consumption and a less equal income distribution in the short run. In such cases, economists can play an important role in clarifying alternative values of the target variables for comparison within a policy-maker's preference function.
4.23 The construction of general equilibrium models has been closely associated with the development of economic accounts. However, the representation of the agriculture sector in macro-models is not adequate. One reason for this unsatisfactory situation is that the sector is not as important in developed countries. In developing countries, however, lack of basic data and the difficulty of dealing with the problem of institutional constraints on agricultural development makes the task difficult. The increasing awareness that economists and policy makers have developed in recent years with regard to the positive contribution of agriculture to the overall process of economic growth has stimulated research work on the interrelationships between agriculture and other sectors and has led to the formulation of more comprehensive planning and policy-making models for economies that are predominantly agricultural. It is not possible to discuss these models in detail, but a large
amount of literature is available on the subject. For example, FAO, 1982, contains four types of agricultural sector analyses (ASAs) and models: a) non-formal, general equilibrium consistency approaches; b) general, systems-simulation models; c) linear programming models; and, d) multi-level planning models. In addition, two Chapters are devoted to, respectively, issues in planning rural development and the operational usefulness of sector analysis and models to users. The final Chapter of the volume undertakes a critical evaluation of agricultural sector analysis.
References
1. FAO, 1982: Agricultural Sector Analysis and Models in Developing Countries, FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 5.
2. FAO, 1984: Socio-economic Indicators relating to the Agricultural Sector and Rural Development, FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 40.
3. FAO, 1986: Food and Agricultural Statistics in the context of a National Information System, FAO Statistical Development Series No. 1.
4. FAO, 1988: WCARRD - World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development -ten years of follow-up: Guidelines on Socio-Economic Indicators for Monitoring and Evaluating Agrarian Reform and Rural Development.
5. FAO, 1995: Report on Harmonization of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest
Management, FAO/ITTO Expert Consultation, Rome, Italy, 13-16 February.
6. OECD, 1994: OECD Agri-Environmental Indicators: The Measurement of a Proposed set of Indicators, Joint Working Party of the Committee for Agriculture and the Environmental Indicators, Meeting of Experts on Agri-Environmental Indicators, COM/AGR/CA/ENV/EPOC(94)93.
7. Pyatt, G., 1988: A SAM Approach to modelling, Journal of Policy Modelling, 10(3).
8. Pyatt, G., 1991: SAMs, the SNA and National Accounting capabilities, Review of Income and Wealth, Series 37, No. 2, June 1991.
9. Richter, J, 1994: Use and Misuse of National Accounts from a Modelling Perspective, The Review of Income and Wealth, Series No. 40, No.1, March 1994.
10. Ruggles, R & Ruggles, N.C., 1986: The integration of macro and micro data for the household sector, The Review of Income and Wealth, Series 32, No. 3, September 1986.
Table 4.1 An overview of SEAFA's linkage with the 1993 SNA
<section>8</section>
PART TWO: SOURCES AND METHODS
Chapter 5 Sources of data and methods of estimation
Sources of Data
Agricultural and livestock censuses
Crop production surveys
Cost of production surveys/farm management studies
General surveys and administrative records
Methods of estimation
Period of compilation
Output
Valuation of output
Intermediate consumption
Compensation of employees
Taxes on production
Subsidies
Gross fixed capital formation
Changes in inventories
Consumption of fixed capital
The goods and service account
Organization of the compilation of SEAFA
Sources of Data
5.1 The SEAFA comprises value aggregates relating to different economic activities covering the entire sector of food and agriculture. It is usually presented in the form of time series to reveal changes in the economy over time. Hence, it becomes more essential to examine carefully the coverage of the data on each item or transaction. This chapter deals with the estimation of various components using the data available from various sources.
5.2 The main sources of data for the compilation of SEAFA include censuses of agriculture and livestock, crop estimation surveys, farm management and cost of cultivation studies, household surveys and various returns collected by administrative agencies concerned with prices and production relating to agriculture. Data for compilation of SEAFA can also be derived from the population census, statistics relating to industrial production, balance of trade and balance of payment statistics, index numbers of wholesale and retail prices, quantum and value index numbers of imports and exports, government budget documents and reports available from specialized agencies or boards dealing with marketing of specific crops, fertilizer or pesticides, finances for agricultural activities, cooperative (agricultural) societies, etc. The data available from these sources can be divided into two broad categories. The first category consists of data with complete coverage of the agricultural
activity in the economy while the second relates to data from surveys with incomplete coverage which need to be adjusted by structural ratios derived as explained in footnote (number 19) to pare 4.12 of Chapter 4.23 A full documentation of the concepts, definitions, statistical units, samples, etc. is needed for each single piece of data. Access to the basic questionnaire is indispensable. Information on the coverage, the rate of response, the homogeneity of the sample, etc. is also essential. In most cases direct contact with the statisticians who have designed and elaborated a survey is the only way to avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation. It is necessary to collect the information that could be useful for compilation of SEAFA from both sources. The next step is to examine the coverage and concept of the data and decide how to adjust the information to suit the requirement of SEAFA. The point is illustrated with the help of a few examples in subsequent paragraphs.
Agricultural and livestock censuses
5.3 Agricultural censuses are organized by many countries on a periodic basis to collect basic quantitative information on the structure of agriculture which is needed in development planning, socio-economic policy formulation and the establishment of national priorities. Generally, the censuses are repeated every five or ten years, but some countries conduct a census every year to meet their specific requirements. The information is collected mostly by the method of complete enumeration but sample surveys are also sometimes used by some countries for completing part of the coverage (or the entire operation) to match the resources and needs. The statistical unit for data collection in the census is the holding defined in the programme for the 1980 World Census of Agriculture and is as follows:
"a holding, for agricultural purposes, is a techno-economic unit of agricultural production comprising all livestock kept and all land used wholly or partly for agricultural purposes and operated under the management of one person or more, without regard to title, legal form, size or location. The holding, as a techno-economic unit under a single management, generally uses throughout the same means of production, such as labour, farm structures, machinery or draught animals".
The information collected in the census relates to holding, holder, population and employment, land use, crops, livestock, machinery and equipment and selected practices and facilities.
5.4 It can be seen from the above that the concept of holding in the agricultural census is equivalent to the concept of establishment used in economic accounts. Thus the data collected on crops, livestock and machinery and equipment can be used for compilation of economic accounts. A critical review of country practices for data collection brings out the following important points:
 The coverage of the census differs from country to country. For practical reasons, many countries put a limit on the enumeration of holdings. The limit can be based on area, volume or value of output, number of livestock or trees or labour requirements.
Some countries also include establishments producing only forestry products.
 For crops, the data collected may relate to area sown, area under crops, area of compact plantations, area under crop mixtures, etc. The concept of area as well as the items on which data are collected also varies from country to country. Similarly, under livestock, it is generally recommended to collect data on numbers of livestock
(except bees) by age groups, sex and purpose (for important kinds of livestock).
Regarding machinery and equipment, stationary power-producing machinery, agricultural machinery and transport equipment are usually included although the coverage is again different in different countries.
5.5 The data collected in the census thus provide an overview of the important crops and livestock for any country, but this information cannot be used directly unless the areas or items that have not been covered by the basic frame are estimated and incorporated into the information collected. As discussed earlier, it is first necessary to have an idea about the magnitude of the component that has not been covered and the importance of taking it into account in formulating policies and development plans. For example, let us assume that subsistence cultivation, which may contribute about 10 percent of agricultural output, has not been covered in the census. In formulating policies or plans the omission may become significant if, for example, the 10 percent of output is produced by 30 percent of the labour force engaged in agricultural production. Thus, if plans for reduction in poverty are required, it is essential that more information about the subsistence sector is
gathered. It would therefore be necessary to estimate this component carefully, so that it is not overlooked, and present it with other data collected by the census or survey before preparing SEAFA. If this activity is not considered, however, significant a notional adjustment (which can be explained in a footnote) can be made for the sake of completeness.
5.6 The next step in the exercise would then be to obtain a factor with which the total activity can be estimated. This requires careful comparison of the definitions, the data, the reference point for which the data have been collected and the coverage of the census with those of different sources, such as population census. The desired adjustment factor may be built up either on the basis of existing information or special sample surveys. This aspect of data analysis is important not only for the compilation of SEAFA but also while the census is being planned. At the planning stage itself alternative uses of the information should be kept in view so that other required studies can be planned simultaneously.
5.7 The census of agriculture usually also collects data on numbers of livestock and agricultural machinery which are useful for the compilation of SEAFA and need similar detailed examination. Some countries conduct independent censuses for livestock covering all the livestock husbandry activity in the country. In these censuses the livestock holding is taken as the statistical unit (which is also defined as landholding in the agricultural census). In addition to covering the number of livestock by type, sex, age and purpose these censuses also include items such as breed of animals; dairy cattle subdivided into animals in milk and dry animals; numbers of eggs put in incubators; chicks hatched as laying hens separately from those hatched as broilers; facilities, such as fencing and buildings, watering and grazing grounds and machinery and equipment for livestock husbandry etc.
Crop production surveys
5.8 Reliable estimates of the total annual output of food and non-food producers can be obtained either from the final uses side or from the production side. From the final uses side, the estimates of the value of agricultural output obtained generally consist of:
 sales of crops, fruits and vegetables to marketing boards, cooperatives and processing factories;
 imputed values of seeds and feed produced for own intermediate consumption;
 other disposals, such as sales or barter in local markets, payments of wages in kind, and produce retained for own final consumption.
To secure complete coverage of annual production by this approach, it would be necessary to add to the above the value of growth of immature permanent and standing crops. Using this approach the estimates of the different components are generally based on different sources of varying degrees of reliability which can change over time. It is therefore necessary to monitor each component regularly. The total value obtained in this way may also include trade and transport margins and some products that are already processed. The values of the products may have to be adjusted to arrive at producer's value by making the relevant subtractions. The value of any by-products that are not included in the estimates have to be added. Quantities according to place of cultivation are not generally available with this method of information gathering.
5.9 From the production side the estimates of total output of the producers in question can be prepared following one of two approaches, i.e. either through data collected by mail questionnaire from farmers and other producing units or through crop estimation surveys that are organized for different crops grown in different seasons to estimate productivity (or yield) in a given area. One advantage of the latter method is that, apart from providing the estimates of productivity used to calculate output, it can also provide data on intermediate consumption (i.e. quantity, value and variety of seeds, fertilizers and pesticides used, amount of irrigation provided, etc.) which may not be available from any other reliable source.
5.10 For the compilation of SEAFA it is important to know all about the process of data collection. This is because, when using this data, it is necessary to understand what agricultural services, such as harvesting and threshing, have already been performed and what services are still left in order to get a clear idea of the estimate. It is also necessary to know exactly how much of the pre- or post-harvest losses have been taken into account. If crop cutting is made under laboratory type conditions then it is necessary to make an allowance for losses on the basis of information from independent surveys. Another interesting exercise would be to compile data on items such as seed and use of fertilizer or pesticides to get some idea about the inputs for each crop, if such information is not available from other sources.
Cost of production surveys/farm management studies
5.11 Generally production surveys or farm management studies are designed to collect information about costs incurred on material and labour at different stages of production. Thus the results of such surveys provide data on expenditure incurred or quantity used in producing a crop in terms of labour (cost or hours worked), seed, fertilizer input at different stages of crop development, diesel oil consumed for use of pump sets, tractors and other equipment, payment made for electricity and water bills (if any) and taxes paid to government along with the data on output (product and by-products). These surveys are a good source of data on compensation of employees, intermediate consumption, mixed income or operating surplus, rent, interest, etc. However, before using such information it is necessary to ensure that the design of the surveys takes into account the socio-economic conditions under which agriculture is being carried on.
General surveys and administrative records
5.12 For the compilation of SEAFA large amounts of data are required, not only on outputs and inputs but also on prices, by-products, external trade, final and intermediate consumption of agricultural products, details of secondary activities, etc. Regular Censuses and Surveys such as crop estimation or cost of production surveys, do not meet this demand. In addition, therefore, to meet various administrative or technical needs, countries organize sample surveys or type studies to collect information. A lot of information may also be generated as a by-product of other administrative activities. These sources provide much information that can be used for the compilation of SEAFA, but it is necessary to keep in mind that such surveys or studies do not always cover the whole country or region and they may not even cover the entire activity. For example, a consumption survey may cover only households (and sometimes not even all households, very rich or very poor households often
being excluded). Moreover, institutional units, such as hospitals, religious institutions, jails, hotels and restaurants, or units without fixed address, such as beggars, may also not be included. Likewise a survey covering manufacturing establishment which may provide data on the use of agricultural goods in intermediate consumption for agro-based industries, may restrict its coverage with respect to employment size or may be limited to a particular area only. Thus when using the results of such surveys or studies the frame and concepts adopted must be examined carefully. These sources are generally used to work out structural or technological ratios rather than global estimates.
5.13 From time to time FAO has issued a number of manuals covering details that require consideration in planning various censuses/surveys/studies on various of the aspects discussed above. The manuals or study series also give details of practices followed in some of the representative countries which can be helpful when planning new studies. In the discussion given below no effort has been made to list the requisites for planning and organizing the collection of basic data. Users interested in these aspects should consult the relevant FAO publications listed in Annex 5.1.
Methods of estimation
5.14 SEAFA contains five types of accounts of which the first two i.e. the production and the generation of income accounts, should be prepared for "institutional units" as well as for "establishment-type" units. In most countries, data for compilation of SEAFA are available either for establishments, whose production is meant to be as homogeneous as possible, or for institutional units. In the case of the former, data are collected through crop estimation type surveys while in the case of the latter data are collected through regular household surveys, (mail) questionnaires, tax enquiries, etc. Thus, generally it will be feasible for countries to prepare one or other set more conveniently, depending on the system data collection. However, given one set of accounts, i.e. either by institutional type of or establishment type of unit, it is recommended that countries should attempt to prepare the other set in order to obtain a complete picture of agricultural activity in the
country. This should be feasible if studies are conducted to estimate the main secondary activities carried out by agricultural households. Labour force data relating to secondary activities are generally collected in population censuses along with data on principal activities. Using such data the first step should be to estimate the quantum and nature of secondary activities. The two accounts should then be generated by imputing the remaining components utilising the input structure from data where these (i.e. secondary) activities are principal activities. This may require additional data to be collected as case-studies to provide benchmark estimates. In most developing countries lack of data makes it difficult to separate the principal and secondary activity of the farmer. In such cases household inquiries are required to estimate the size and complexity of the situation and make adjustments accordingly. Questions often arise concerning the inclusion of food processing
activities undertaken in households for their own use. These include activities such as the milling of maize, wheat and barley, the husking and polishing of rice, the drying of plantain and root crops, the extraction of vegetable oils and the preparation of drinks such as beer and arrack. It may be recalled (see Chapter 3) that the 1993 SNA made it clear that all activities producing goods that can be disposed of on the market should be included in the production boundary, but the production of personal or domestic services for own consumption by members of the households (including the cooking of food for immediate consumption) should not. A working rule can be prepared by looking at the quantum of the activity. Notes on methodology or footnotes should generally be given to make the coverage clear so that the users of the data can draw appropriate conclusions. In the following discussion, while giving the methods of estimation, the distinction between type of unit has not
been highlighted unless necessary.
Period of compilation
5.15 The period for compilation of SEAFA depends on the availability of various sets of data which are required to compile comprehensive national accounts so that SEAFA can be linked to the latter. The period can be different from the agricultural year in which case adjustments are required to convert the entire data from the agricultural to the accounting year. This is not much of a problem for livestock activity, but crop production activity requires special care. The 1993 SNA has already laid down some of the guiding principles (see Chapter 3). Generally, for most temporary crops, crop-production time is four to six months depending on the variety of the seed and type of crop. Thus, one of the following four situations may be encountered:
 TYPE 1: Crop is sown in the previous year (t-1) and harvested in the current year(t);
 TYPE 2: Crop is harvested in the same year in which it was sown;
 TYPE 3: Crop is harvested at the end of the year in which it was sown so that it does not reach the final users that year;
 TYPE 4: Crop is sown in the current year but harvested in the next year (t+1).
Figure
5.16 Type 1 and Type 4 situations are similar. In such cases, the part of the production carried out in the previous or current year should be recorded as work-in-progress and estimated on the basis of the allocation of actual and imputed costs incurred between two years. Thus, the output corresponding to the first two months for Type 1 situation does not form part of the output of the current year, whereas work done in the first two months for Type 4 situation is included. The two entries may be expected to cancel each other (except under conditions of high inflation), unless the pattern of production changes between the two crop years. However, if significant changes in productivity occur the net change in work-in-progress could be estimated as the portion of the cropping period x the area of the crop x the change in productivity. This can easily be derived mathematically. Thus, depending on the availability of data, countries should record work in progress for Type 1 and
Type 4 situations. In Type 2 situation there is no need to measure work-in-progress whereas in Type 3 situation the total output should be recorded as an increase in inventories of stocks of finished goods.
5.17 In the case of permanent crops including plantations (where the trees take much longer than a year to grow to maturity and provide repeat products over a number of years), the gross fixed capital formation by the agriculture sector. This capital formation includes agricultural services such as clearing and preparing the land for planting the crop. It may be estimated on the basis of the total costs incurred including actual as well as imputed costs of labour and items of intermediate consumption used.
Output
(a) Crop output
(b) Production of animals
(c) Animals sold for slaughter and animal products
(d) Agricultural services
5.18 Agriculture covers the production of goods and services meant for sale, payment of wages and salaries in kind, own account final use, addition to stock and for barter. For the compilation of economic accounts, it would be necessary to make estimates of output or production for all activities for which accounts are required to be prepared. The discussion which is of prime interest to the formulation of SEAFA has been divided into two parts -concepts and measurement.
5.19 The 1993 SNA does not recognize the concept of total farm output. In SNA output of goods and services, which are covered in one or other of the transactions recognized by the system, is the outcome of the production process that is sold or bartered, that enters the producer's inventories or is supplied to another establishment belonging to the same enterprise for use as intermediate input or that is retained for own use or given as a gift or charity.
5.20 However, agricultural activity is rather different from other production processes. Many agricultural production processes last less than a year, which is the normal accounting period for SEAFA. The same crop (and this is true also for chicks) is produced more than once and some of the output of the first cycle is taken as input into the second cycle. The preparation of production plans for improvement of production technology (such as the drafting of a seed replacement plan) therefore requires complete information on inputs. In addition, agricultural data collection systems, especially in developing countries, do not always permit purchased inputs to be distinguished from those provided by own account production. The preparation of an inter-industry transaction table also requires this information. Another important characteristic of agricultural production is the wastage that occurs at various stages of production related operations that form an integral part of the
production process. Examples are cereal grain threshing and winnowing, on-farm drying and moving and unloading of goods between fields, threshing area, drying area and farm granary or stockhouse. A number of factors affect the final output and are determined by technical constraints such as the type of product and the production process, the size of packing and storage installations, the conditions of the pick-up and transport system and the geographic proximity to processing units. Therefore, although SNA is only concerned with the output that is ready to leave the farm, for a good agricultural plan it is also necessary to monitor the wastage (as wastage reduction means increase in output) and intra-farm intermediate consumption. SEAFA needs to take these factors into account.
5.21 In the light of the foregoing discussion, four possible alternative measures of agricultural output may be distinguished:
Harvested Output
less losses (wastage) on producing farm between harvest and the use of or storage of the output. In such cases output covers both the principal product and by-products
equals Total Output
less intermediate uses of harvested output, principal product or by-products within the producing farm (establishment) itself
equals Output (SNA)
Less intermediate uses by a farm (establishment) other than the producing farm equals Output Available for Use Outside Agriculture
5.22 The harvested output represents quantities actually harvested in fields, orchards, vineyards and other plantations and animal products such as milk, eggs and honey. It does not include quantities lost during or after harvest. Total output (which in the past has sometimes been described as "gross-gross" output) consists of the total quantity of agricultural goods and services ready for storage by the producer, for intra-farm use or for removal from the farm for other uses or sale. If the harvested output is known total output can be calculated by deducting all losses (wastage) during "auxiliary operations" incurred between the time of harvest and the moment of delivery, use or storage on the farm. From total output, SNA output can be calculated by deducting the value of agricultural products used for intermediate consumption during the accounting period in question on the same farm that produces the commodities; for example, seeds, plants, plain fodder, milk consumed by
unweaned animals, manure and eggs for hatching. Finally, output available for use outside agriculture is obtained from SNA output by deducting the value of the agricultural products used for productive purposes during the accounting period on a farm other than the farm that produced them. This concept of output relates to the so-called "national farm".
5.23 The 1993 SNA, naturally recommends the use of the SNA concept of output in the production accounts of agricultural establishments. However, for SEAFA the concept of total output keeps the following facts in view:
 The good and/or service as an output of an industry is a product that is available for final or intermediate uses outside of the industry concerned. Thus the auxiliary operations listed as "agricultural and animal husbandry service activities, except for veterinary activities" are an integral part of agricultural activities. In fact, it is not always easy to measure the contribution of these "auxiliary operations" separately from the production of crops or animal husbandry products when these come from the same household establishment. Thus, when the operations are carried out by the farms themselves, they must be classified as auxiliary (i.e. secondary) activities and be included in the output of the establishment. However, when such services are purchased by the producer household, the output of such services is recorded separately under ISIC group 014 (agricultural and animal husbandry service activities except for veterinary activities).
 Losses (wastage) have to be deducted from harvested output. Of course, these losses would not be visible in the account unless clear provision is made to present them. As mentioned above, it is desirable to collect data on losses so that valid inter- or intra- country comparisons can be made with the aim of minimizing such losses. The data can be presented in the form of supporting statements, with the losses being valued at basic prices.
 From the above description it is also clear that the harvested output is only a provisional measure of the output of agricultural activity as it does not take into account post-harvest operations and related losses.
 It is not recommended to use the SNA concept of output for several reasons:
(i) it does not provide the information needed to prepare a seed replacement plan;
(ii) it is difficult to gather the requisite data, especially in developing countries where estimates of some components of intermediate consumption (i.e. seed, feed, etc.) are based on the cost of cultivation, production studies or norms derived from special studies -- the sources of procuring inputs are not recorded in such studies;
(iii) at the time the production takes place it may often be undecided whether or in what proportions the goods produced are destined for the market. In subsistence agriculture own produce is very often used as seed, but during times of shortage this produce is sometimes consumed instead.
 The estimate of output provided by crop-cutting experiments relates to harvested output and not SNA output.
5.24 In view of the arguments given above and the needs of planners it is recommended that SEAFA should use the concept of total output. To maintain closer links with SNA it would be possible to show the SNA concept of output in the accounts and also to show at the same time the intra-farm uses of own production under both "resources" and "uses" in the Production Account and also in the Goods and Services Accounts. In practice, however, this is almost impossible because of lack of data. It would mean amassing data on all the products consumed within the agriculture sector, i.e. seed, plants, manure, plain fodder, straw and pasture grasses grazed directly by animals, etc. In practice, this is not feasible. At best, it may only be possible to evaluate the most important products consumed within the sector.
5.25 For measurement of output, the agriculture sector may be divided into four sub-groups viz., crop production, production of live animals, animal products and production of agricultural services when these have not been covered under crop production. In the following discussion measurement of the quantities of each component is discussed first and their valuation taken up subsequently.
(a) Crop output
5.26 Crop production for analytical reasons can be decomposed into two components, viz. area and productivity. As mentioned earlier, after careful examination of the available data total crop production can be divided into three separate groups of crops depending on the reliability of the data. While processing the data a checklist may be prepared indicating:
 a list of all the crops grown in the country or region, divided into three groups, viz. crops for which data on both area and productivity are available; crops for which only data on area are available (i.e. productivity data are not available); and crops for which only production data are available, either directly through Marketing Boards etc. or indirectly in the form of processed or finished end products;
 the ancillary data, which can be used to prepare estimates of output for the crops, for which data on productivity are not available;
 whether the subsistence production has been covered;
 the stage of production to which the data for various crops relate (for example, whether the production of paddy is available or paddy rice) and whether these stages are covered under ISIC group 01;
 whether the production of by-products (according to stage of production) has been included. In the processing of crops by indigenous methods several by-products are also produced. However, for the estimation of production only those by-products that are readily identifiable and have some definite economic values are considered. The quantum and value of such by-products are generally available from farm management studies or cost of production surveys;
 whether, when certain non-agricultural activities has been included, they can be separated on the basis of structural ratios derived from data available from other sources, such as large-scale surveys of manufacturing establishment and case-studies.
5.27 The main sources of data on agricultural output have already been listed. However, for a few crops more reliable data are sometimes available from sources that are not meant to provide data for agricultural statistics. For example, for crops such as tea where a number of pickings are made during the year, it becomes costly to organize proper crop estimation surveys but information on the production of processed tea may sometimes be easily available from institutions such as marketing boards or cooperative societies that are involved in bulk trading in such commodities. It may then be more convenient to obtain an estimate of the production of the processed final product (such as processed tea) during the year and to adjust this figure using a structural ratio obtained from data collected in mail inquiries or from reliable producers. In certain other cases, such as the production of fodder crops and grasses where generally no data are being collected in developing
countries, the imputed value of the output could be prepared directly on the basis of a special survey listing the area under crop and the estimated value thus arriving at a benchmark estimate that can be extrapolated on the basis of either total area under crop or number of livestock. In some rare cases, estimates of total output for a few crops, such as fruits and vegetables, can be made from consumption data. In such cases, it is necessary to examine the consumption data carefully in order to establish how representative it is and also to convert quantities of processed products consumed into quantities of unprocessed ones produced. Adjustments would also be needed when the product has non-consumption uses and may be exported or imported.
5.28 The worksheet for preparing estimates of total output should carefully record losses that occur during and after harvesting (the latter being needed when preparing goods and services accounts) but during the same accounting period. The intra-farm uses of the goods (such as feedstuffs for animals, fuel for on-farm processing of the goods or seeds used in the same accounting period) produced and any losses during the harvesting operation should be subtracted from harvested production to arrive at SNA output. The post-harvest losses which occur during transportation of the crop produce by traders or manufacturers and losses during storage become part of intermediate consumption of the processing industry or the trade activity. Catastrophic losses caused by natural disasters, etc. should, however, not be treated as intermediate consumption. It may be possible to make approximate estimates of normal, recurrent losses on the basis of small-scale studies.
5.29 Generally (i.e. unless it is necessary to make adjustments for changes in inventories because of the switch from crop to reference year) it should be assumed that there are no change in inventories of finished products in the agricultural sector. This assumption excludes the activities of storage and trading (hoarding for trading) from the production of the agriculture sector.
(b) Production of animals
5.30 The production of live animals depends on changes in the numbers of animals in economic use. These changes are calculated after dividing the total population into different categories according to their economic uses. Classification is needed in order to obtain the production value attributable to the total cost of inputs incurred (water and feed, veterinary care, heating of stables, etc.), over the whole production period, real or imputed payments for factors of production (labour of the holder and employees) and other costs (wear tear and obsolescence of buildings and equipment used by animal husbandry farmers) during the year under consideration. For example, the production of bullocks for slaughter is spread over a number of years as it takes a long time for them to reach their optimum size and weight. Therefore, the value of the slaughtered animal does not reflect only the production costs incurred during the year in which it is slaughtered, but also the
accumulated cost of all inputs and factors of production over all the years from its birth. The same is true for other animals reared for slaughter, work, breeding or for producing other products such as milk, wool, fur and eggs. However, only the costs incurred during the year are recorded in the production account and thus only the corresponding changes in the composition of live animals become the output of the current year. To make a correct assessment of this component changes in the number of animals by different categories are evaluated.
5.31 Comprehensive data on number, type and age of animals are collected in Livestock or Agricultural Censuses which may be organized after every five to ten years or so. However, in some countries annual data on the more important types of live animals are also collected. If annual data on changes in the number of live animals classified by type of animals are not available, they can be estimated from periodic benchmark data collected in livestock censuses. Let us define PA as the total volume of output of live animals in any year (i.e. produced between the beginning and the end of the accounting year). By definition:
P[A] = SI + D C + E - I
where SI is the number of animals slaughtered inside the country for economic purposes (i.e. production of meat, leather, fur, etc.) or dying from natural causes during the year, AC is the annual change in the number of live animals obtained by interpolation or extrapolation of livestock census data, E is the export and I is the import of live animals by the country. In this case the term D C refers to the actual change in the total number of different categories of animals (i.e. classified according to sex, race, age, weight, etc., which are quantifiable characteristics for economic purposes) derived from the Livestock Census. Thus, to estimate the output of live animals it is required to estimate (P[A] - SI) from data available from the census and foreign trade statistics. However, it may be mentioned here that the data on number and end use of animals that have died from natural causes are generally not available in many countries where animals are used to obtain
by-products such as hides and skins. The SNA 1993 recommended that "Incidental losses of animals due to occasional deaths from natural causes form part of consumption of fixed capital" (paragraph 10.87). A more accurate treatment of this component depends on the availability of data and on country practices.
5.32 At this stage it is important to understand that although the total change (+/-) in the livestock population, excluding changes resulting from the slaughter of animals and deaths from natural causes, is part of agricultural production it is also capital formation. The true change in the livestock population after being adjusted for export or import is classified into two groups. The first group consists of changes in numbers of those animals that are treated as fixed assets, namely adult dairy animals, animals raised for their wool or breeding or as draught animals (used for work) that are more than one year old (i.e. when they become economically active). Changes in the population of these animals therefore constitute gross fixed capital formation. The remaining animals, including young stock, are not fixed assets and changes in their numbers are recorded under changes in inventories. This group consists of animals that are being reared for their future use (as fixed
assets or for slaughter). Changes in their numbers are recorded under changes in work-in-progress or changes in inventories in finished products (ready for slaughter), as the case may be. Thus the term /`C can be broken down into terms:
D C = D C[F] + D C[S]
where F and S represent fixed assets and inventories (stocks) respectively. Similarly the term I, representing import of livestock, can be decomposed as:
I = I[A] + I[F] + I[S]
where F and S have the same meaning and A denotes animals slaughtered immediately after entry into the country under consideration. Thus the above relation for PA can be written as:
P[A] = (A - I[A]) + E - (D C[F] - l[F]) + (D C[S ]- I[S])
5.33 Logically, the output from live animals in a country (PA) should not include animals imported for immediate slaughter on entry into the country since the output to be measured refers to domestic agricultural activity. For the same reason, the value of output does not cover the ax-customs value of imports IF, i.e. animals imported for use as fixed assets. But generally data collected in the Livestock Census do not distinguish between animals produced in the country and imported animals. Thus, while projecting (or interpolating) data available on numbers of livestock from sources such as censuses this aspect needs to be carefully examined. However, generally the necessary details are not available in the census data and in practice even an estimate that does not include such adjustments may give a good approximation to total production.
5.34 Another aspect requiring consideration is that exceptional losses of animals as a result of major outbreaks of disease, contamination, drought, famine or other disaster are recorded in the other changes in volume of assets account and not as disposals (SNA paragraph 10.87). In other words such losses (i.e. deaths without any economic use) should not be treated as output but as catastrophic losses that do not affect the production account of SEAFA or the 1993 SNA. However, such instances, which are rare in nature, could be shown as a memorandum to the gross capital formation figures.
5.35 An alternative estimate of the change in the number of each kind of live animal during a given year attributable to domestic production can also be estimated as the number of live births each year per head (the reproduction rate), times the total number of livestock at the end of the previous year, less the number of live animals exported and the number of domestically produced animals slaughtered or dead as a result of natural causes during the current year. The normal reproduction rate for each type of livestock can sometimes be obtained from offices such as the national Veterinary Department.
5.36 Data on animals slaughtered are generally obtained from slaughterhouses, marketing boards and veterinary inspectors and need to be adjusted to take account of the numbers of livestock slaughtered for own consumption using data obtained through special livestock surveys or other studies covering such activities. Where no information is available, the number of livestock slaughtered both for sale and for own consumption is sometimes assumed to be equal to the number of hides and skins produced which can be estimated from export statistics or from surveys dealing with the manufacture of products from hides and skins. Preferably, the use of such indirect methods should be minimized to reduce errors in the estimates. However, if direct data are not available, estimates of slaughtered animals should be cross-checked with data obtained from consumption surveys, although consumption surveys generally do not differentiate between types of meat. Thus, to make a cross-check, it
may be necessary to prepare a cattle equivalence table for output of meat per animal. Estimates for different animals can be combined taking into account the numbers of different types of animal recorded in livestock census that are used for meat purposes.
(c) Animals sold for slaughter and animal products
5.37 A third important category of agricultural output consists of animals sold for slaughter and animal products. The sources of data on animal products such as milk, eggs and wool clips are cost of production surveys, production or marketing surveys and reports of marketing boards. The production of meat, hides, skins, etc. is classified as manufacturing activity. Generally a structural ratio is derived either from current data available from the same sources or from information available from the veterinary department. The ratio is then applied to the total number of animals. For example, an estimate of the total output of cow milk can be made using the total number of cows, the proportion of cows in milk to total cows and the average yield of milk per cow (in milk). Similarly estimates of eggs, wool, fur, etc. can be prepared using the relevant structural ratios and the animal population. However, whenever possible a cross-check of such estimates should be made with data
available from consumption surveys duly adjusted for other uses of the product by agro-based industries, non-household (hotels, military, etc.) consumption, wastage and intra-farm own account consumption. Similarly, the number of animals sold for slaughter can be obtained from marketing boards, slaughterhouses or through surveys of manufacturing establishments covering such activities.
<section>9</section>
(d) Agricultural services
5.38 This sub-group includes activities such as preparation of fields for growing the crops and hiring of tractors with crew. The share of these services is usually quite small in the total production of agricultural output and data on the production of such services, whether they relate to establishments or agricultural products are not generally available. Where the cost of such services has already been included in the goods it need not be separated. In countries where such services are being produced on a large scale it may be necessary to conduct studies either to estimate the total quantum of such services sold or to get structural ratios. In case of the latter, it may also be necessary to get a multiplier to estimate the total activity in terms of the area covered. In such cases, it may be necessary to check if the estimated services have also been included as intermediate consumption of purchasing units to avoid double counting.
5.39 Estimation of the operation of irrigation systems, which is another service activity, needs special mention. Generally irrigation systems are either owned by cultivators themselves or operated by government. Government systems refer to the operation of canals and dams. The cost of a cultivator-owned system consists of the cost of labour, repairs and maintenance and the value of fuel and lubricants used for the operation of the system. Such inputs (repairs and maintenance and fuel and lubricants) should be included in the intermediate consumption of the cultivators so that it is not necessary to impute a value for the output of irrigation. When the system is run by the government, a detailed analysis of the expenditure of the irrigation department should be made to separate this activity from other activities related to the creation of assets. Water charges received by the government from cultivators become the receipt (or output) of the department which is very often
subsidized. When the supply of irrigation water is heavily subsidized (or made available free) the output is estimated on the basis of actual cost incurred, i.e. the sum of intermediate consumption, compensation of employees and consumption of fixed capital.
Valuation of output
5.40 The 1993 SNA recommends the use of basic prices or, if that is not possible, producer prices to value output. In principle, the basic prices received by farmers for their produce are the prices realized by them for that produce at the farmgate excluding any taxes payable on the products and including any subsidies. The costs of transporting agricultural produce from the farm to the market or to the first point of sale off-farm, and of selling it there (whether these activities are performed by the farmer himself or by specialized agents) are not, by definition, to be included in the farmgate price. The cost of such activities, if included in the purchasers' prices paid on the market or the first point of sale must, therefore, be deducted to arrive at the estimate of the basic farmgate price.
5.41 Conceptually, any activity outside the farm is not agricultural activity. Thus, the cost of transportation, storage charges and payments for market charges are excluded from the basic prices received by the farmer. Even when farmers have their own transport and storage facilities, the output of such facilities should be excluded from agricultural output and recorded under a different industry heading. If a farmer decides to hold his produce for a period to get the benefit of higher prices, then for that period he is acting like a trader (and not cultivator) and taking various risks from market fluctuations or losses during storage. He also pays rent for storage space, etc. Thus, the prices to be used are the average basic prices on representative primary markets during the peak marketing period which is the period of six to eight weeks (not necessarily at the beginning of the market campaign) when the major share of the harvested crops are disposed of in market. In this
period the bulk of the crop produce is usually transacted by the cultivators who do not have storage capacity. To obtain representative prices for the various crops, the price data should be collected on weekly basis, or at some other convenient time interval, and average prices calculated. If the area under crop is very large, it may also be divided into smaller segments taking into account the administrative structure and the organization of price collecting mechanisms.
5.42 When the total output is multiplied by the prices calculated in the above manner, crop output used for own-consumption, quantities used for transaction in kind or given as gifts (either free or at very subsidized prices) and quantities exported are all evaluated at basic prices. In developing countries the bulk of produce is very often transported by the cultivators themselves and sold on primary markets. In such cases, instead of adjusting each individual price quotation, the total value of all transportation and market charges should be estimated and allocated on a pro-rata basis.
5.43 In the case of live animal and animal products, there is no peak marketing season so simple or weighted averages of weekly or periodic prices may be used to value output at basic prices.
5.44 In some countries the prices of certain crops or products may not become available until years later because the crops are very minor or because of some other reason. In such cases, countries should adopt one of the following alternative techniques:
 Find out whether there is a marketing board or development Directorate for the produce that regularly compiles prices. If there is the procedure for the collection of data by the institution concerned should be examined and the price data suitably adjusted, if necessary, to arrive at basic prices.
 A benchmark study may have been carried out into the cultivation or production practices in selected areas for a specific product. In such studies data on prices may also have been collected. Such price data suitably adjusted to basic prices could be extrapolated to other years on the basis of the price behaviour of similar products.
 In the case of products that are not properly specified (e.g. small millet, other fruits, vegetables and pulses) the price can be expressed as a percentage of the prices of some specified crops or the weighted average of a group of crop grown in the same season or, depending on the local situation, observed in the areas where they are grown in bulk. For example, the average prices for other pulses can be taken as 85 percent of the weighted average prices of arhar, urd, moong, masoor, horsegram, etc., the weights being the outputs.
 When prices are available for processed goods (e.g. prices of sheet rubber instead of raw rubber), they should be reduced to eliminate the processing element using data available from manufacturing surveys.
 The prices of by-products should be calculated using data from cost of production studies or by comparing the prices of substitutes.
 Prices collected in consumption surveys can also be used after adjusting for trade and transport margins.
 In some countries the government announces procurement or support prices for some commodities either to protect farmers from sudden adverse trends is the market or to obtain food grains etc. for distribution through various plans and programs (poverty alleviation or rural development programmes). In such cases only the quantities procured by government should be evaluated at such prices. Trends in procurement prices should also not be used to extrapolate any other prices.
Intermediate consumption
5.45 Various items may enter into intermediate consumption, these are: seed and seedlings for agricultural products; feedstuffs for all types of livestock; manures and fertilizers; protective farm chemicals, e.g. insecticides, pesticides and others; electricity, light and fuel; other materials used in production, e.g. gasoline, oil, bags and rope; repair and maintenance charges; rental charges for the hire of farm machinery with or without a driver; and other services. Data for estimating the value of these items may be available either from sample surveys of farm income and expenditure or from cost of cultivation or farm management studies. When such data are collected from income and expenditure surveys, they can be distributed among the various crops grown on the farm with the help of information on cultivation practices and area sown under each crop using cost-accounting techniques. Estimates per unit of the quantity or value at constant prices may be used as
technological ratios, e.g. the quantity of seeds, insecticides or fertilizer used per unit of area sown in the different centres where data are being collected. Such information should be combined with information on the area under cultivation to obtain the value of intermediate consumption for total crop production. Those crops for which no area data are available should be included by combining them with crops having similar cultivation practices. This should be done taking into account local conditions and practices. Similarly, the quantity of animal feed used may be calculated on the basis of the quantity of animal feed used per head of livestock multiplied by the total number of livestock. However, in such cases, the livestock used by other sectors, e.g. transport and games, should, of course, be excluded. When data on animal feed are not available for all livestock, the total livestock population can be converted to a standard animal using livestock equivalence
factors. Similar kinds of estimates can be made for the quantity of fuel used, the cost of repairs and maintenance, electricity, etc. by establishing relationships to capital stock and applying them to data collected in agricultural or livestock censuses. While collecting data in such enquiries it is necessary to ensure that seed, fodder and other products produced and consumed on the same farm are included. The quantities of various items of intermediate consumption estimated in this way should be valued at current purchasers' prices.
5.46 As already discussed in the case of measurements of production, the cost of an input should be recorded at the time it is actually used on the farm and not at the time of its purchase. If necessary, the price may be adjusted to that at the time the input is used.
5.47 Data on intermediate consumption derived from cost of cultivation or farm management studies should be checked against information available from other sources. For example, information on standard cultivation practices available in the Ministry of Agriculture will provide recommended rates of seed, fertilizers, pesticides, etc. per unit of area along with an expected yield rate for the crop. In such cases the individual returns should be scrutinized from both sides, i.e. from the input as well as the output side. Usually, if data are being processed through computers it is possible to write standard scrutiny programs. An alternative check is also possible from the production side using the commodity flow approach. Such checks are generally applied either to test the reliability of the estimates or to prepare estimates for chemical fertilizer and pesticides. Furthermore, in the case of electricity, some countries provide electricity to cultivators at special
concessional rates and the estimate of total consumption of electricity can be obtained from the Electricity Board or Company. Likewise, in some countries estimates of total fertilizer consumed can be prepared using data on production, import and export of the fertilizer together with information on producer stocks.
5.48 The composition of the intermediate consumption of agriculture depends on the technical level of the production processes used. Mechanized agriculture uses tractors and other machinery to harvest, thresh, spray, pump, etc. and these require spare parts, repair and maintenance and fuel oil. The degree of mechanization depends partly on the size of the holding. Taking these factors into account checks can be made on the composition of intermediate consumption.
5.49 In countries where governments operate irrigation systems it may be necessary to calculate the irrigation charges actually paid by the farmers and include these in intermediate consumption. The values of output and intermediate consumption can be estimated from the income and expenditure statements of the government irrigation department.
Compensation of employees
5.50 Compensation of employees is payable to resident or non-resident workers out of value added. Data on salaries and wages paid in cash and kind are available either from sample surveys or farm management studies, in the same way as for items of intermediate consumption. Employers' contributions to social security, private pension, family allowance and similar welfare schemes are not usually made for agricultural workers in developing countries. When they are payable they can be estimated from government expenditure statements, insurance company accounts and other relevant sources. The data obtained from surveys or farm management studies should be processed in similar ways to data on intermediate consumption.
5.51 The coverage of this item, as indicated in Chapter 3, limited to paid labour. If possible, however, the quantum of work done (in terms of person hours) by unpaid family workers should also be recorded and compiled for different stages of production. The value of unpaid family labour could be imputed using this data together with a general wage rate prevailing at that time, if a suitable local wage rate can be found. Such information could be shown as a memorandum item in the income generation accounts.
Taxes on production
5.52 Taxes on production are unrequited compulsory payments by enterprises to Governments (or supranational agencies) on the production, sale, purchase or use of goods and services. Tax data are generally available from the Government offices responsible for collecting taxes but their distribution by kind of activity is very often not available. In the case of agriculture, taxes include:
 land taxes on agricultural land;
 the specific taxes on agricultural products based on their production or sale. These are usually proportionate to the quantity or value of the products sold;
 taxes of a general nature (such as VAT in the European Union) which are also based primarily on the sale of products but which may be totally or partially deductible or reimbursable. The amount of this deduction depends on the taxes paid on the intermediate goods or capital goods purchased by the enterprises;
 other taxes on production either directly on the activity or on the purchase or utilisation of goods, such as farm vehicles, or factors of production; fixed water and irrigation rates which are unrelated to the quantity of water consumed paid to
Government administration.
5.53 The allocation of such taxes to the agricultural activity may be difficult. Estimates may be made using different methods. For example, taxes on land and fixed irrigation or water charges can be estimated either by getting the relevant details from the tax office or from government income and expenditure statements. Taxes on farm vehicles can be estimated using the tax rate and the estimated number of tractors etc. in agricultural or livestock censuses. Similar procedures would be necessary for other items and small items might be omitted if not significant. Taxes on imports can be estimated on the basis of the volume of imports.
Subsidies
5.54 Subsidies are unrequited current transfers to producers which are a function of their production activities. The recording of a subsidy depends on the way it has been paid. For example, if the government pays subsidies to a fertilizer producer to reduce the purchaser's price of the fertilizer, the subsidy is recorded in the manufacturing and not the agricultural sector. In another case, if government is giving away certain chemical compounds to increase productivity or for demonstration purposes, they become either a subsidy to agriculture or part of the cost of extension services, depending upon the way in which they have been given. Similarly, in the case of an irrigation system, if Government charges for irrigation are nominal and the operation is running at a loss then the total loss may be treated as a subsidy in the agricultural sector. For the purpose of analysis, subsidies may be divided into the following three groups:
 subsidies on farm products;
 subsidies on intermediate consumption;
 other farm subsidies.
5.55 Subsidies on farm products are linked to production and given in the form of price support. For example, the government may decide to pay a certain amount per ton in addition to the payment received from the industrial user of certain cash crops such as sugar cane or sunflowers. Most of these subsidies are intended to encourage or improve production of the commodity in question.
5.57 The data sources for estimating subsidies are government income and expenditure statements. However, sometimes specific details of subsidies are not available from printed statements. Subsidies change very frequently and indirect estimates are also possible from details available in the Ministry responsible for the implementation of such schemes.
Gross fixed capital formation
5.58 Gross fixed capital formation consists of the acquisition of fixed assets by producer units less disposals of fixed assets. It can be measured either for enterprises (institutional units) or for establishments. The main source for estimating gross fixed capital formation is either the expenditure data available in the accounts of government units or enterprises or data collected through censuses or sample surveys. Although the estimates should be made at purchasers' prices they cannot be prepared by multiplying quantity data (collected in agricultural censuses, etc.) by average purchasers' prices because existing (second-hand) assets are involved as well as new assets. However, this approach can be made to work for estimates of net acquisitions of livestock classified as fixed assets.
5.59 Estimates based on expenditure statements are straightforward and are available in the form of time series. Estimates can be prepared from census data extrapolated to other years by means of sample surveys. For this purpose, the benchmark estimate must be disaggregated by type of assets, viz. farm buildings, land improvements, plantations, machinery and equipment and livestock. Estimates for farm buildings can be extrapolated on the basis of permits issued or, alternatively, a joint estimate for farm buildings and land improvements can be extrapolated to other years on the basis of agricultural incomes or indicators such as gross value added in agriculture at constant prices. The adjustment for changes in prices can be made on the basis of a specially prepared investment cost index (details of which are given in the next paragraph). The basic assumption in this case is that the resources available to farmers directly finance the capital formation. A number of
assumptions like this can be made to construct indicators and thus project benchmark estimates available from different sources. However, in such cases it is necessary to understand the basic assumptions used and their suitability. Benchmark estimates for plantations can be extrapolated to other years by using areas under new plantation. Similarly, to prepare yearly estimates of capital formation in machinery and equipment, the benchmark year estimate can be extrapolated on the basis of time series on the net availability of agricultural machinery (i.e. the total production of agricultural machinery plus import minus export of agricultural machinery) after adjusting for changes in inventories, trade and transport margins and taxes. These data are generally available from censuses or surveys of industrial production and foreign trade. If comprehensive data on domestic production of agricultural machinery are not available, benchmark estimates of domestic production can be
extrapolated with the help of an index of industrial production for the relevant group. Such estimates implicitly assume that the proportions of machinery and equipment used in the agricultural and non-agricultural sectors remain the same as in the base year. Thus, it is not generally advisable to prepare very long time series of capital formation using such indicators.
5.60 Investment cost index numbers are index numbers of purchasers' prices for fixed assets. Such index numbers can be prepared for different types of assets such as farm buildings, land improvements and machinery and equipment To prepare such an index for construction a weighting diagram is drawn up in which the shares of different construction costs, including wages, are shown for the base year. Using this weighting diagram and price and wage indices, a weighted index, known as an investment cost index, can be prepared. In the case of machinery and equipment, the price indices of various types of machinery are combined in proportion to their shares in the base year, including a wage index that represents installation costs, if any. The price indices for individual items can be taken from either wholesale or retail prices indices but the same source should be used for all items.
Changes in inventories
5.61 Stocks or inventories consist of supplies and materials purchased by cultivators but not used, goods produced for sale but not sold, work-in-progress and livestock (young stock and animals for slaughter). The subject has already been covered at length in earlier discussions. In the case of agriculture it may be assumed that the cultivator would be reluctant to hold stocks of materials and supplies because of the problem of storage and the risk of deterioration or damage. As discussed earlier, when the crop is harvested just before the end of the year, it is necessary to record the total output of the crop as additions inventories of finished goods and the run-down of those inventories in the subsequent year has to be taken into account in the production account for that year. The treatment of standing crops work-in-progress has already been discussed. Changes in inventories of agricultural goods held by traders do not form part of the capital formation of the
agriculture sector.
Consumption of fixed capital
5.62 Consumption of fixed capital is measured at current prices. It is a fraction of the current price of the fixed asset that reflects the part used by in the production process during the current year. It is necessary first to estimate the current replacement cost of farm buildings, other construction work and machinery and equipment; i.e. the current value of the capital stock. Estimates can be obtained for a benchmark year through a sample survey or census and updated using information on the average life span of the different capital goods, their prices and estimates of new gross fixed capital formation. An alternative way to estimate the value of capital stock and the consumption of fixed capital is known as Perpetual Inventory Method (PIM). The steps involved in PIM are as follows:
 Assumptions are made about the average length of life of each class of assets;
 Gross fixed capital formation at constant prices is estimated for each class of assets. If the average length of life of a class of asset is 't year' and the current year for which the estimate of capital stocks is being prepared is denoted as 'c', the series of gross fixed capital formation would be required for t years prior to the year c;
 A simple total of this series will give the value of the gross stock of fixed capital at constant prices at the end of the year;
 The gross capital stock so arrived is divided by 't' to obtain the estimate of consumption of fixed capital at constant prices which is then converted to the current year price level by multiplying the estimate by the change in prices between base and the current years.
5.63 This procedure obviously involves collecting a large amount of data and making assumptions about prices, length of life, etc. The reliability of the estimates depends on the judgements of lengths of lifes of various assets. These assumptions are generally made in consultation with cost accountants and engineers.
The goods and service account
5.64 The Goods and Services Accounts gives the uses of agricultural goods and services produced or imported during the year. Taking into account the wide variety of the transactions involved, a large amount of data are required from different sources. A simple way to prepare this account would be to use the commodity flow method which integrates the results of various surveys. The various steps along with sources of data for preparing this account follows:
 Prepare a detailed item-by-item list of goods and services produced during the year.
 Classify the data on import and export of agricultural goods under the same classification as used for domestic production.
 Add imports and subtract exports to domestic output to determine the net availability of goods and services for domestic uses.
 Deduct the intra- and inter-farm consumption from the net availability to obtain the net availability for other sectors and final uses.
 Identify the items that can be used for final consumption of household or government, intermediate consumption of other sectors and capital formation of agriculture and other sectors. Some of the items can be put to more than one use. Thus a workable solution would be to take out fixed capital formation and change in inventories first taking care to examine the definitions and composition of domestic output. For example, own account capital formation may only include those items that are included in output. Thus, if some standing crop has not been included, it should not be listed under capital formation but livestock going to another sector, such as transport or forestry, have to be classified as capital formation. The capital formation given in this account can therefore be different from that shown in the capital account for agricultural producers because here it represents that share of agricultural production that goes as capital formation irrespective of the
sector that acquires the assets. Capital formation recorded in the capital account consists of assets that are acquired by the agricultural sector irrespective of the source from which they have been obtained. Likewise, feed for those animals that are not used in the agriculture sector must be included as intermediate consumption of other sectors.
 To estimate the agricultural goods and services supplied to other sectors, analyze the data of industrial surveys (agro-industry group) that contain details of output and input. When such surveys are carried out at periodic intervals, the ratio of output to input for the benchmark year may be applied to the final output of agro-industries in subsequent years to estimate the share of agricultural products used as intermediate consumption in the manufacturing sector. Likewise, data for the transport sector
(value of feed for transport animals), other services (value of feed for livestock used in recreation) and food served by medical and educational institutions, religious and welfare bodies and hotels and restaurants may be analyzed and benchmark estimates prepared if regular data are not available. These benchmark estimates can be extrapolated to other years using suitable indicators which depend on the availability of data and the quantum of the products going to other sectors. For example, the share of goods going to manufacturing can either be extrapolated on the basis of the output of manufacturing establishments (assuming a fixed input-output relationship) or on the basis of net availability of goods going as input (assuming the distribution among various uses remains the same). The consumption of food in various institutions can be extrapolated to other years with the help of data such as the number of beds in a or patients going to hospital and the number of
students in schools where midday meals are served (or simply the total number of students). The food being served by religious and social institutions can be extrapolated to other years using the growth of the relevant population.
 Estimates of agricultural goods used by General Government can be made using information from selected departments such as the police, and the armed forces, for a benchmark year and then extrapolated to other years on the basis of their expenditures in those other years.
 Depending on their nature and source, data on purchases by other sectors and by government should be subtracted from the net availability so that the residual remaining is the share of agricultural goods and services that are used by the household as final consumption.
5.65 The estimates derived in the above manner should be checked with the help of per caput consumption calculated from the derived series and from the data available from consumption surveys. While checking the reliability of data it is necessary to take into account the way in which consumption surveys have been organized; for example, whether they take into account floating population, employment in defence services and expenditure of households in hotels and restaurants. Furthermore, the whole exercise described above has been formulated on the assumption that estimates of inventories of the agricultural goods held by traders and government are available. If such estimates are not available, an attempt should be made to prepare estimates of final consumption by households with the help of consumption surveys for the benchmark year extrapolated to other years on the basis of total population. Total consumption does not change often or significantly unless there has been
some natural calamity or war in the country concerned.
Organization of the compilation of SEAFA
5.66 Having gone through the sources of data and methods of estimation for the compilation of SEAFA, a final word is necessary on how best to organize the work. The compilation work of SEAFA should be organized on a personal computer using suitable spreadsheet software. Starting with area under crops and number of livestock data the work can be organized in the form of different data banks relating to area, productivity, production, prices, etc. The data available should first be systematically recorded. At the second stage the gaps may be filled with the help of techniques described in Chapter 6. Wherever necessary a separate worksheet should be prepared in order to estimate missing data and estimated data should always be shown with a star to indicate their provisional nature. It is a good practice to prepare an aggregated picture by aggregating goods and services into a few (generally eight to ten) groups (for example, foodgrains, oilseeds or sugar) and monitoring the
time series trend as well as ratios, such as yield rates, wastage, seed rate and input-output ratio, to check consistency. The spreadsheet may be organized in the form of a commodity-flow-approach calculation which is more or less similar to the input-output transaction table format.
<section>a</section>
Chapter 6 - Classification of available data and techniques of imputing missing data
Introduction
Planning for the compilation of SEAFA
Classification of basic data
Techniques for estimation of missing data
Commodity flow approach
Some remarks on the use of statistical tools
Introduction
6.1 The compilation of SEAFA, including its associated principal aggregates, presupposes an ideal situation in which the statistician is not only aware of all activities and transactions of the system but also that regular and comprehensive data on outputs, inputs, prices, taxes, subsidies, purchases of assets, inventories and uses of output are available on a continuing basis. This is however a situation that may never occur. In practice, not even the minimum desirable amount of data are always available for compilation of the main aggregates such as output and value added; partly because the collection of complete sets of data is a gigantic task and partly because of the costs involved. Whatever the situation, however, the compilation of SEAFA and its associated aggregates is a basic necessity for analysis, policymaking and planning. The job of the statistician is to make judicious use of the available information by manipulating it to obtain a picture of the economy. The
purpose of this chapter is to list some of the general techniques used in different situations and also their underlying assumptions. It is necessary to point out the underlying assumptions so that users may be sure that conclusions drawn from the data are not simply dependent on assumptions. For example, if data on consumption of fixed capital are not available and it is assumed that this constitutes "x" percent of gross value added any statement comparing gross and net value added has no real significance.
Planning for the compilation of SEAFA
6.2 The framework, concepts and definitions of SEAFA have been explained in previous chapters. However, the compilation of SEAFA is not a routine arithmetical exercise where various sets of data are simply pooled together and presented in the framework. The compilation of SEAFA requires: careful examination of the various databases available; processing of these databases to achieve complete coverage in a logically consistent way; and pooling them together, keeping in view their reliability and gaps. Work on the compilation of SEAFA can be divided into broad four stages as listed below:
Stage One
Study the production process of the economy, keeping in view the appropriate activities listed in ISIC. List the principal agricultural products (crop and livestock), the system for providing agricultural services, agro-based industries, etc., the dependence of the economy and agricultural activity on imports and the amount of agricultural goods being exported.
Stage Two
Prepare a detailed list of various sources of data on output, the production or import of inputs and their utilization, items used as inputs for agro-based industries along with their sources of supply (i.e. domestic or imported), etc. that are required for the compilation of SEAFA. The list may also indicate the coverage and periodicity of these elements. While doing this exercise the statistician might also note that such a list could also indicate which of the three approaches, (viz. production, income and expenditure approach) can be used for the measurement of value added.
6.3 The production approach takes into account the production process. In this approach, value added is derived by deducting from the total value of output the goods and services purchased from other producer units and used as intermediate inputs in the production process. In the income approach, the cost structure of the producer unit is studied from financial data on income and expenditure. The sum of the compensation paid to employees and the operating surplus or mixed income (plus any taxes less subsidies payable on production) is taken as the measure of value added. In the expenditure approach the final use of output, i.e. output being used as final consumption (by the population, general government and non-profit institutions serving households), gross fixed capital formation, export and changes in inventory, less imports are recorded to measure value added or GDP. This last approach may not be appropriate for SEAFA and is normally used to prepare estimates for the
economy as a whole.
Stage Three
A critical review of the listed data may be made to examine: reliability; areas for which no data are available; and areas for which more than one set of data are available.
6.4 For areas where more than one set of data are available, only one set of data, the more reliable, would be used to prepare estimates. It may be useful, however, to monitor the reliability of all sets continuously. For example, the output of some crops may be available from crop estimation surveys and from marketing boards dealing with trade of the crop concerned. In such cases depending on the coverage of the two data sources and the precision of the two sets of data, it may be decided to use only one of the sources to prepare the estimates, but the reliability of both sets of data should be compared every year.
6.5 Sometimes, the data may be such that the sector is divided into two sub-sectors and a different approach adopted for each of these sub-sectors. For example, for crop and animal husbandry, reliable data on output as well as intermediate consumption may be available through the production approach, but for the operation of irrigation systems, data may be available on income and expenditure, so that it is feasible to follow the income approach. Thus, the agriculture sector could be divided into two sub-sectors, one covering agricultural crop and livestock production and the other covering the operation of irrigation systems. However, in such a situation, payments made for using water from the irrigation system would have to be considered as intermediate consumption in crop and livestock production to avoid double counting.
Stage Four
Prepare the required breakdown of output, intermediate consumption, etc. using supplementary data and ad hoc studies and merge the data sets to get the final
SEAFA. The following discussion goes into details of the classification of basic data and explain techniques for imputing missing data.
Classification of basic data
6.6 The data for compilation of SEAFA are available either from statistical enquiries (census, survey or case-study) or as a by-product from administrative records. The data can be classified in two ways -- by their periodicity or by their purpose - and divided into three main groups according to the frequency with which they are collected, viz. regular (for each period), periodic (at fixed intervals e.g. every five or ten years) or ad hoc (i.e. only once in a while). The data can also be divided into three groups according to the purpose for which they have been collected, viz. primary (where data are collected directly for the purpose for which they are to be used through statistically designed censuses, surveys or case-studies), secondary (where data are collected for some other purpose but can also be used for the purpose under consideration) and tertiary (where the data are not directly relevant but, by making certain assumptions, can be used for the purpose under
consideration). Taking the two criteria of periodicity and purpose together, sets of data that can be used to compile the SEAFA can be divided into nine groups as shown in Table 6.1.
6.7 In Table 6.1, as the cell identification number (calculated by numbering the rows consecutively from left to right and the columns from top to bottom and then multiplying the row number by the column number of the cell) increases from unity the reliability and representativeness of the estimate derived from the data in the cell decreases and progressively more care is required when using the data for the compilation of SEAFA. This implies that countries tend to have more reliable data for the compilation of SEAFA in the years in which they take censuses and similar surveys than in other years. Therefore one of the guiding principles for conducting censuses and surveys is that activities that change frequently and have a significant share in the total should be covered regularly in the scheme of data collection. Another important conclusion to be drawn from the table is that the reliability of the estimate of an aggregate could be worked out by classifying the basic data
in the above groups and combining them according to the contribution they make to the calculation of the aggregate. Using this method it can be stated that a particular share of the data used to prepare the estimate is available directly and regularly and so a specified share of the estimate is based on direct data. Sometimes it is also possible to give margins of error for data that falls under different headings thus allowing the margin of error in the 'estimate' to be calculated using the share of such data in the total value. For example, let us say that 80 percent of the estimate of the value of output is based on (1,1)-type data with an error of +/- 5 percent, 15 percent comes from (2,1)-type data where the error is +/- 10 percent and the remaining 5 percent belongs to the (2,3)-type with an error of +/- 15 percent. Thus the combined margin of error in total value of output would be: 6.25
Table 6.1 Classification of Data
TYPE OF PURPOSE
PRIMARY SECONDARY TERTIARY.
P
E
R
I
O
D
I
C
I
T
Y
R
E
G
U
L
A
R
Direct data on crop Production, producer's prices Yield on cost structure of a crop from neighbouring areas Price data of Machinery and equipment (general) applied to agricultural machinery
P
E
R
I
O
D
I
C
Agricultural or Livestock census Cost of production study done at regular intervals for one rop used on other crop Consumer expenditure surveys to estimate final expenditure on agricultural products
A
D
H
O
C
Census/survey of age of fixed assets used in agriculture purchases of agricultural Tabulation of government purchases to find out allocate draught animal goods by government Use of result of transport survey to between agricultural and non-agricultural sector
Techniques for estimation of missing data
6.8 Once the basic data has been classified one of the following four alternative types of situation generally arises:
 Type A situations occur when direct data are available on a regular basis according to the period for which estimates are required. Examples of this type include data on the production and prices of major crops.
 Type B situations include cases where direct data are available at different points of time or at a single point. In such cases techniques of interpolation or extrapolation may be applied.
 Type C situations occur when only partial data are available on a regular basis. In such cases, imputations have to be made for the remaining data.
 Type D situations occur when no data are available and the whole item needs to be estimated.
6.9 The compilation of aggregates or items of SEAFA in the last three types of situation require special care and methods. In a Type B situation detailed benchmark estimates are generally prepared for the year(s) for which data are available. The benchmark estimates are extrapolated to other years until data for another point of time become available. While extrapolating the benchmark estimate, it should be disaggregated into its different components when these are known to have different growth patterns. For example, values are disaggregated into their quantity and price components. Livestock are disaggregated by type, sex, age and variety (indigenous or improved). The different components of the estimates are extrapolated independently and checked against new data for another point of time when those become available. If necessary, data for previous years are revised after getting new data for the next point of time.
6.10 There are two ways of extrapolating benchmark estimates. The first, and preferred, technique is to use information (data) on some other variable that is highly correlated with the variable under consideration. In this method, the true movements (i.e. ups and downs) can be seen in the projected time series. However, needless to say, it is necessary to have direct evidence on the correlation between the two series. When fresh data for any other point of time become available, a critical analysis should be undertaken to explain the difference between the projected and actual estimates. For example, to project the price of machinery and equipment used in the agricultural sector, general wholesale, retail or import prices, of machinery and equipment can be used, depending on the local situation and availability of data. However, when new data for the projected time point become available and a significant difference is observed between the actual and projected prices, it is
necessary to determine the reason for this. It may be caused by any of the following factors: the general price level of machinery and equipment might have been influenced by some special type of machinery that was not included before; the agricultural machinery industry itself might have changed with the arrival of a new factory or new type of machinery; and/or a substantial inflow of machinery from abroad might have influenced the market. In such cases, it would be necessary to identify the year when the change has occurred, to correct the independent variable and to revise estimates for previous years. However, such a situation would not occur if the system is constantly reviewed and data on those items that are sensitive for the compilation of SEAFA are collected regularly.
6.11 The second approach is either to fit a trend line to the data (assuming that the data are available for more than one point of time) or to express the variable as a ratio of another variable to which it is known to have a direct relation and for which regular data are available. Numbers of livestock from livestock censuses are an example where the trend line approach is applicable. An example of the second approach occurs when the quantity of seed can be expressed as a ratio to the area sown under the crop. In such cases it is also necessary to establish that the two series are directly related. For example, in estimating the value of seed through area under the crop it is necessary to see that the relationship is expressed in constant prices or in quantity terms rather than in current values. The derived series will have to be adjusted independently for changes in the price level.
6.12 In a Type C situation where partial data are available, it is necessary to compute the component for which information is not available. Consider, for example, the estimation of production of a crop that is either new or relatively unimportant for the area and so is not covered in the scheme of crop cutting experiments. However, data on the area under crop are available from sources such as land records, crop insurance records and government extension schemes. In such a case, it is necessary to impute the crop yield to get an estimate of the production. There are usually two choices available; to impute either the yield of the crop from data for neighbouring areas, keeping in view the seed variety and agro-climatic conditions or the yield of some other crop which is similar to the crop under consideration and grown in the same area is taken as the imputed value of yield. Examples of the latter type of situation arises when area is available for 'other coarse cereals' or
'other fruits and vegetables' that are not explicitly recognized. In such cases, either the yield of a known crop, which is a close substitute, or the weighted or simple avenge of the yield of a group of crops is taken.
6.13 The Type D situation, where no direct data are available, presents a real challenge for the statisticians' ability to impute the value of a missing observation. The following factors may be borne in mind: what is the practice in other countries in the same part of the world where the situation is the same? if relevant data are available, what method and database were used in the past either to prepare estimates for this particular item or in macroeconomic or economic studies of such aggregates? what is the likely size of the activity? and what cross-checks are available to test the reliability of the imputation? For example, if no estimate of own consumption of agricultural goods is available, the estimate for the benchmark year could be made by multiplying the per caput consumption norm from a survey covering the rural areas by the total population dependent on agriculture. The benchmark estimate can be extrapolated to other years on the basis of total annual output
and growth of the population. However, allowance would have to be made for relative movements of the prices of different commodities that enter into the consumption basket, changes in consumption habits (if the series is sufficiently long) etc. A consistency check with total population, size of the population that is not dependent on agriculture, domestic production, imports and exports, etc. would have to be repeated every year until direct data become available.
6.14 The kind of manipulation of available information described above is a necessary evil for any exercise in which official statistics are used to compile a secondary database such as SEAFA. At the same time, it must be remembered that the application of checks of the type discussed above do not guarantee the accuracy of any particular estimate but can only ensure that a relatively consistent picture is provided by the set of data as a whole. Checks of the type discussed above (own account consumption) are based on total utilization of the goods produced. Accuracy of the estimate depends on the imagined picture created and the contents of the data available. No statistician should hesitate to use such techniques when necessary, but constant monitoring is required.
Commodity flow approach
6.15 The commodity flow approach was developed in the 1930s to prepare estimates of private consumption expenditure but is also widely used to prepare estimates of fixed capital formation. The logic of the approach is based on calculating the total availability of each good or service (or group of goods or services) by adding domestic output, imports and opening inventories and subtracting closing inventories to obtain the goods and services that are available for intermediate and final uses. The net availability calculated in this manner is further adjusted for trade and transport margins and taxes or subsidies on products to arrive at values at purchasers' prices. The goods and services available are allocated to different uses in the form of government purchases, gross fixed capital formation, exports and intermediate consumption. The balance of goods and services remaining, after adjusting for wastage, would be available for final household consumption. A similar
procedure can followed to prepare estimates of gross fixed capital formation.
Some remarks on the use of statistical tools
6.16 As already mentioned, the use of statistical tools such as averaging and ratio or regression techniques is unavoidable while processing the data. However, some judgement and caution are required while using these techniques to obtain SEAFA aggregates from official statistics. Some of the more important points are mentioned below for ready reference.
(a) Average: Averaging of primary data is essential in order to present the main features of the data. The use of either simple or weighted averages is prevalent and the decision as to whether to use one or the other does not depend entirely on the availability of data. The homogeneity of the data is one of the important criteria used to decide whether a simple or weighted average of a given data set should be taken. Before processing the data it is necessary to analyze the sources of variation in the observations. Variation may be caused by either the geographical conditions prevailing in the area where the data are being collected or by other factors, e.g., the intervention of external economic forces such as changes in the quantum of import or export, varietal differences, consumer preferences and season. The next question that requires examination is whether the volume of the activity that is effected by the variation is the same or evenly distributed over the total
period. If not, it is necessary to give due weight by stratifying the sources from which the data emerge and estimating their shares. Even if no quantitative character is readily available, it is necessary to impute a weight (i.e. to give more weight to places that cover larger volumes) to represent the true situation. Consider the example of a good (fruit or vegetable) that is sold throughout the year but that has high prices during its off-season of about ten months. A simple average to represent the annual price level of the good would give an equal weight to all the prices throughout the year. In actual practice more than 60 percent of the output may be sold in the first two months, higher prices in successive months being caused by storage charges, wastage in storage and trade margins. Thus, in the succeeding months the observations do not represent only the "pure" good but "the good" plus "some services". Even if consumer or purchasers' prices are being estimated,
equal weighting of the prices recorded in different months is not justified. If weights representing sales in different months are not available, they may be imputed on the basis of the consumer population belonging either to different income or consumption classes or living in different agglomerations, e.g. city, town, village, rural or urban areas.
6.17 Another important aspect of averaging relates to the treatment of missing observations. Missing observations play a vital role in time series. If proper estimates of missing observations are not made before averaging the data, the average may present a completely false picture. Consider the example of a price or wage series where data are regularly collected from 100 sites (say). At a particular point it is noted that returns from only 80 out of the 100 sites have arrived by the date when results have to be presented. In such a situation, a simple average of the available observations if taken as representing the level in the current year vis--vis last year's level may present a misleading picture. The statistician has two alternatives to estimate the true situation. The first alternative selects those sites for which returns are available for both years, calculates the average growth rate for these sites and applies this growth to the overall level reported for the
previous year. In this case, the growth rate in the selected sites is assumed to be the same as that for the excluded sites. The second alternative requires that the statistician be aware of the local conditions of the total population (universe), in which case the missing observations can be estimated with the help of available data for each of the 20 sites averaged out. In this case, the variation in the individual site has been taken into account. However, whichever alternative is used the calculated average should be revised after more data are received.
6.18 In either of the two situations (i.e. choice of weights or estimation of missing observations) a better judgement can be made if the coefficient of variation of the cross-sectional data is calculated.
(b) Ratio or regression techniques: Ratio or regression techniques may be used to extrapolate data. Obviously a choice has to be made between the two methods when data are available in the form of a time series. The situation can be illustrated with the help of an example. Consider the time series of goat and cattle meat prices that are available for a country or region for a long period although data for one of the series are not available for the latest year. In such a case, either the ratio or the regression method can be used to estimate the missing observation(s). When the ratio method is chosen the implicit assumption is that the rate of inflation for 'goat' and 'cattle' meat in the period with missing data is the same as for the last year in which the ratio has been worked out. On the other hand, if the regression technique is chosen the fitted regression equation would also take into account the differential rate (trend) of inflation. Another possibility in such a
situation is to include some other explanatory variable, such as animal imports, in the regression equation in order to improve the estimate. Use of these methods depends on the length of the series (since at least 12 degrees of freedom are necessary to estimate the error component), the time available to prepare the estimate and the availability of explanatory data.
<section>b</section>
Annexes
Annex 1.1 - Improvements/changes incorporated in the 1993 revision of the system of national accounts
Annex 2.1 - The historical developments
Annex 2.2 coverage of agricultural activity in SEAFA
Annex 2.3 Sub-division of the households sector
Annex 2.4 Entrepreneurial income
Annex 2.5 Food balance sheets
Annex 2.6 Framework for satellite accounts for food balances
Annex 2.7 Reflecting the full value of forests in SEAFA
Annex 2.8 Fisheries in SEAFA
Annex 2.9 List of supporting statements
Annex 4.1 An overview of sector models appearing in the FAO's publication agricultural sector analysis and models in developing countries
Annex 5.1 List of important FAO publications
Annex 1.1 - Improvements/changes incorporated in the 1993 revision of the system of national accounts
(with special reference to Agriculture Sector)
The 1993 revision of the System of National Accounts (called the 1993 SNA) retains the basic theoretical framework of the 1968 SNA. The revision contains:
 clarifications of the concepts presented;
 harmonization with other supporting statistical systems, such as balance sheets and reconciliation accounts, tangible assets and income distribution, that were finalized after 1968;
 establishment of clear links with other related statistical systems such as Balance of Payments, Government Finance Statistics and Money and Banking Statistics prepared by IMF;
 added features that reflect the new analytical and policy concerns of countries and international organizations.
Apart from all of the above, which enhance the usefulness of the 1993 SNA in the day-to-day work of planners and policy-makers in all fields, the 1993 SNA has also given particular attention to the delineation of production boundaries, explicit coverage of own account production and modified presentation of accounts to make them more compatible with analytical requirements. Some of the features of the 1993 SNA that are directly relevant to the compilation of SEAFA follows:
(a) The 1993 SNA partitions the production account of the 1968 SNA into two accounts: a Production Account, where the balancing item is "value added" and a Generation of Income Account, with "operating surplus/mixed income" as the balancing item.
(b) The 1993 SNA includes production accounts for all institutional sectors in addition to a production account for establishment-based industries of the 1968 SNA. In order to link these two types of production accounts, the 1993 SNA recommends a cross-classifcation of output, intermediate consumption, gross value added and its components by type of sector and industry.
(c) The 1993 SNA introduces a distinction not made in the 1968 SNA, between the operating surplus of certain unincorporated enterprises owned by households and the operating surplus of other enterprises. For this purpose, it introduces a new name for the net operating surplus arising from the production activities of unincorporated enterprises owned by households (except for the surplus arising from the production of housing services for own consumption by owner occupiers) which is called "mixed income" and represents a mixture of two very different kinds of value added components i.e. compensation of employees and operating surplus.
(d) The 1993 SNA introduces a distinction between an analytical unit and an observable unit, when referring to the unit of classification in the production account, in the supply use and in input output tables. An analytical unit is defined by the 1968 SNA in reference to one activity and one location, but for practical reasons the 1993 SNA introduces an observable unit version of the analytical unit which, in addition to its main activity, may also cover secondary activities of different types.
(e) The 1993 SNA recommends that in agriculture the statistical unit and the definition of output should be the same as those proposed for other market producers. The establishment in agricultural activities refers to the agricultural holding. As in the case of other activities, the output includes transactions among agricultural holdings but excludes products for intermediate consumption within the same agricultural holding. (Statistical information in agriculture is often not available in this form and it may be necessary to use either the gross-gross measurement of output, which includes products used for intermediate consumption in the same agricultural holding, or the concept of the "national farm", in which agricultural products used in either the same or other agricultural holdings are entirely omitted.).
(f) The output of agricultural, forestry and fishery sectors includes the growth of so called cultivated assets including the growth of livestock and fish stocks, vineyards, orchards, plantations and timber tracts, as well as the growth of agricultural crops and fruits that are products of plantations and the like. The 1968 SNA included only the natural growth of livestock and fish stocks as output (and subsequently as gross capital formation). Output of agricultural products, orchards and timber tracts were recorded at the time of harvest. In the 1993 SNA, the growth of agricultural crops, orchards and timber tracts, prior to the use of products, is recorded as work-in-progress during growth if this exceeds more than one period/year.
(g) The 1993 SNA recognizes the distinction between formal and informal sectors of the economy, although clear criteria for distinguishing one from the other have not been described yet. It has been recommended, however, that this distinction be used for presenting data for analysis and policy making in specific country circumstances.
(h) The production boundary in the 1993 SNA is slightly different from the 1968 SNA. The 1993 SNA distinguishes between goods and services and includes the production of all goods in its production boundary, while only those services that are exchanged in the market and/or generate income for economic units are included as production. The 1993 SNA clearly indicates the coverage of own-account production has been clearly indicated, such as the storage of agricultural goods produced by the household, and includes it in the production boundary.
(i) The 1993 SNA has also suggested that for more refined analysis of the production process, use may be made of an analytical unit of production which is not always observable. The production unit is termed the "unit of homogeneous production" and covers no secondary activities. (Agricultural commodities for which data are collected directly from the field come under this category, and the production account, similar to that prepared for agricultural establishments, can also be prepared for this group of "homogeneous industries" for the formulation of economic plans on the pattern of input-output tables.)
Annex 2.1 - The historical developments
The need for a coherent accounting system for agriculture has long been recognised by the FAO. Work on the creation of the system started in 1949 with the publication of food balance sheets. Food balance sheets present comprehensive pictures of the patterns of individual country's food supply during specified reference periods and are the main source of data used in the assessment and appraisal of the world food situation made by FAO from time to time. The preparation of food balance sheets required the organisation of data on production, consumption (both intermediate and final), stocks and foreign trade of food which in turn became a starting point for establishing a system of agricultural statistics. Basic work in this direction was started in 1956 when the first international standards for agricultural sector accounting were released in the publication" Agricultural sector accounts and tables. a handbook of definition and methods" by the Joint ECE/FAO Agriculture
Division for European countries. This handbook was based on the experiences gained in producing the recurring publication "Output, expenses and income of agriculture in European Countries which was first issued in 1953.
Although the initial efforts were directed towards countries in Europe, the importance of improving the agricultural sector accounts for developing countries has gradually been recognized and at the Twelfth Session of the Conference of FAO, special attention was drawn to "the benefits that developing countries would derive from the standardization of accounts data in the formulation of economic policy". Similar recommendations were made at the subsequent FAO Conferences in 1966 and 1968.
In 1969 the FAO Statistics Advisory Committee of Experts recommended that the preparation of a world version of the Handbook on Economic Accounts for Agriculture should be accelerated and gave the following specific recommendations on its contents:
 it should include adequate exposition of the system consisting of three essential accounts -- production, income and outlay and capital formation;
 it should be in a form suitable for use by statisticians not necessarily specialized in this field;
 it should emphasize the need of developing a system suitable to the conditions of developing countries, including those countries with predominantly subsistence agriculture;
 it should deal with the practical problems of estimating economic accounts for agriculture from limited basic statistics.
Considering the recommendations and suggestions of the Advisory Committee FAO released a provisional Handbook of Economic Accounts for Agriculture (EAA) in 1974.3 This handbook was jointly prepared by Statistics Division of FAO and the Statistical Office of the United Nations. The economic accounts for agriculture discussed in the handbook cover the agricultural activity of a country as a whole. EAA in this case included only production, commodity and capital formation accounts. EAA basically followed the concepts and format recommended by SNA. Some of the special features of EAA (1974) follow:
 Statistical units for the purpose of EAA are the agricultural holdings which can be classified into: agricultural households; corporate units with large farms, which generally deal with cash crops such as sugarcane, tea, coffee and rubber; producers of government services, i.e. government experimental farms attached to the ministry of agriculture, research organisations or universities or to institutions such as prisons; and producers of private non-profit services serving households, such as agricultural holdings in hospitals and religious places. As the last three categories are usually very small and the purposes of production activity by these institutional units are different one production account was recommended for the first unit only.
 Other products of the agricultural holding include forestry and fishery production when these are carried out as ancillary activities on a holding and do not form part of own account capital formation such as land improvements. Any other production activities, such as wine, cheese and sugar extraction, that may be carried out on farms, are not considered except when it is impossible to separate such activities from agricultural production.
 The concept of gross output of SNA does not include the seed and feed that are used in production on the holding if these items are produced during the same accounting period by the same establishment. Since the usual statistics measure total production or harvest, including seed and feed, the EAA worksheet for estimating the gross output of agriculture starts with total production.
 In national accounts, an accounting period is usually taken as a calendar year or financial year, which is different from a crop year. EAA recommended that the total production of a crop may be counted in the accounting period in which the majority of that crop is harvested. This method ensures correspondence between inputs and outputs if all the inputs have also been used in the same accounting year. However, EAA has also suggested that if such correspondences do not exist footnotes may be given showing the relevant data for the benefit of users.
 The capital formation account of the 1968 SNA (on which the handbook was based) covers reproducible tangible assets along with transfer costs on purchase of land. For agricultural holdings, it is also important to have information on the changes in the agricultural land owned by the holding. Therefore an item of net purchases of agricultural land by holdings, excluding transfer costs, has been added in EAA to the capital formation account of SNA.
The EAA Handbook released in 1974 consisted of two parts. Part one gave the conceptual framework while part two presented the steps involved in compiling accounts with the aid of basic agricultural statistics. Since that time, the Statistics Division of FAO has been actively involved in assisting developing countries in the improvement of their statistical database used for the compilation of economic accounts. FAO issued precoded computerized questionnaires and approached other international organizations to obtain data on Production Account and Capital Formation Account at both current and constant prices. The data were published in three volumes released in 1974, 1979 and 1986.5 The latest issue covered about 60 countries for the period 1976 to 1985.
The 1974 draft of the EAA Handbook was considered at a meeting of the FAO/ECE/CES Study Group held in May 1974. The Study Group recommended that a European variant of this handbook should be prepared explicitly to take care of the specific requirements of the region vis--vis the system for data collection. This European handbook was also to take into account the different national accounting systems in use across the region. Accordingly the work was taken up by the Secretariat of ECE as well as the Statistical Office of the European Community (SOEC).
The SOEC started preparing EAA in 1964 (cf. "Agricultural Statistics 1963/64"). The concepts, definitions and rules of accounting in this publication were not uniform for the first few years. However, in 1969 the original Member States started using the European System of Integrated Economic Accounts (ESA) which was formulated on the pattern of SNA and, at the same time, the framework for EAA supplemented by the System of Economic Accounts for Forestry (EAF), which was based on ESA, was introduced. The work was subsequently expanded and the latest manual of SOEC was released in 1992.
The ECE Secretariat in cooperation with FAO also initiated work to develop a European Handbook of Economic Accounts for Agriculture which was released in 1983 at the Conference of European Statisticians. This handbook is directly based on the framework recommended by SNA and the latest version was released in 1989.9
The conceptual framework for both these European handbooks is basically the same as that of FAO (1974), but for the inclusion of an additional account relating to income and outlay in the ECE system. However, the fundamental difference between the two handbooks concerns the statistical unit applied. In the ECE handbook, similar to FAO (1974), the concept of the production holding has been used. The latter includes the total activities of the holding related to agriculture as per ISIC/CBNE". SOEC, on the other hand, used the production branch concept, in which units of homogenous production (i.e. units producing goods of a similar type) are grouped together. This concept is based on an evaluation of "final production of all agricultural products, as per NACE, no matter where or in what type of unit they are produced, but only those products".
Work on the revision of the 1974 handbook started in 1983. To learn more about the problems confronted by developing countries during the preparation of economic accounts for agriculture, a number of country case-studies were commissioned in 1984 from national institutions in selected Member Countries. These countries were provided with adequate instructions and were requested to fill in a questionnaire on production and capital formation accounts for the years 1978 to 1982 and then to state the use and problems encountered during the exercise. Simultaneously, United Nations Statistical Office initiated work on revision of the 1968 version of SNA. The draft of the revised version of SNA was approved by UNSO in 1993. In April 1993 FAO organized a regional expert consultation on Economic Accounts for Agriculture at Bangkok. The present version of the handbook draws heavily on all the work done and efforts made in the Statistics Division since 1974, numerous comments and
suggestions received from the national statistical offices of the member countries and the recommendations of the revised SNA.
Annex 2.2 coverage of agricultural activity in SEAFA
C O D E DESCRIPTION
10 000: Agriculture/Forestry/Fishing/Food
11 000 Agriculture
11 100 Agricultural Production
l l 110 Crop Production
11 120 Livestocks
11 130 Livestock Products
11 140 Agricultural Services
11 200 Intermediate Consumption, Supply of
11 300 Agricultural Research
11 310 Crop Related Research
11 320 Livestock Research
11 400 Agricultural Development
11 500 Hunting and Trapping
12 000 Forestry and Logging
12 100 Forestry Production
12 110 Wood Production
12 120 Non-wood Production
12 130 Forestry and Logging Services
12 140 Forestation
12 200 Intermediate Consumption, Supply of
12 300 Forestry and Logging Research
12 400 Forestry and Logging Development
13 000 Fishery
13 100 Fishery Production
13 110 Inland Fishery
13 120 Ocean and Coastal Fishery
13 130 Products, Other than Fish
13 140 Fishery Services
13 150 Aquaculture
13 200 Intermediate Consumption, Supply of
13 300 Fishery Research
13 400 Fishery Development
000 Food and Nutrition
14 100 Food Production by Manufacturing Establishments
14 110 Food Products
14 120 Beverages
14 130 Tobacco
14 140 Other Food Products, nes
14 200 Intermediate Consumption, Supply of
14 210 Food Products
14 220 Beverages
14 230 Tobacco
14 240 Other Food Products, nes
15 000 Agro-industries, Other than Food
15 100 Production
15 200 Intermediate Consumption, Supply of
16 000 Production of Inputs and Machinery
16 100 Fertilizer
16 200 Pesticides
16 300 Machinery and Equipments
17 000 Infrastructural Developments
17 100 Rural Credit/Cooperatives
17 200 Wholesale/Retail Markets/Storage
17 300 Rural Roads
17 400 Rural Electrification
17 500 Rural Housing and Water Supply
17 600 Rural Health
17 700 Rural Industrial Development
17 800 Rural Education
18 000 Other Activities, nes
18 100 Extension and Training
18 200 Pollution Control
Annex 2.3 Sub-division of the households sector
The 1993 SNA suggested that the households sector be divided into sub-sectors on the basis of different criteria such as type of income, economic or socio-economic status or geographical area depending on the needs of different users, analysts and policy-makers. Two of the criteria are important for SEAFA. They relate to geographical area classification, i.e. to subdivide larger countries into smaller regional units depending on administrative/agro-climatic/ecological boundaries, and formal and informal sectors for arranging production activity into strata of uniform production technologies.
The informal sector' may broadly be characterized as consisting of units engaged in the production of goods or services with the primary objective of generating employment and incomes for the persons concerned. These units typically operate at a low level of organisation, with little or no division between labour and capital as factors of production and on a small scale. The fixed and other assets used do not belong to the production units as such but to their owners. The informal sector is defined irrespective of the kind of workplace where the production activities are carried out, the extent of fixed capital used, the duration of the operation of the enterprise (perennial, seasonal or casual), and its operation as a main or secondary activity of the owner. The informal sector is comprised of informal own-account enterprises, and enterprises of informal employers. The former are owned and operated by own-account workers, either alone or in partnership with members of the
same or other households. These enterprises may employ contributing family workers and employees on an occasional basis, but do not employ employees on a continuing basis. Enterprises of informal employers, on the other hand, employ one or more employees on a continuing basis. For particular analytical purposes, more specific definitions of the informal sector may be developed at the national level depending on needs.
The geographical sub-division of the country may generally be adopted either to meet the need of regional plan formulation or to adopt new techniques. For regional planning the most common approach is to adopt administrative sub-division for the easy monitoring of programmes and funds. In the case of needs such as technological up-grading of crop production programmes dealing with irrigation, pest and disease control or use of improved seeds, it is useful to divide the country into homogeneous areas based on agro-climatic factors (namely, soil type, climate -- particularly temperature and rainfall and their variations, water demand and supply characteristics including quality of water and aquifer conditions) which are also known as ecological zones.
Annex 2.4 Entrepreneurial income
Entrepreneurial income is defined in paragraphs 7.18 to 7.20 of the 1993 SNA, where it is stressed that it may be difficult, if not impossible, to calculate such income for an unincorporated enterprise owned by a household because of the difficulty of separating property incomes payable and receivable by the owners in a personal capacity from those attributable to the enterprise. Nevertheless, in the case of agricultural households it could be assumed that property incomes receivable on assets owned by the enterprise are non-existent, or at least negligible in most cases, and that most or all of the interest payable is attributable to liabilities incurred as a result of engaging in production. On these assumptions, the household's entrepreneurial income would be approximately equal to: mixed income minus rent on land and interest payable by the household.
The concept of entrepreneurial income is a better measure than mixed income of the return from production because it allows for rents and capital (or financing) costs as well as for the intermediate and labour costs recorded in the production and generation of income account. Of course, if it is possible to separate interest payments into those attributable to production and those attributable to household consumption, it should be possible to measure entrepreneurial income correctly, but even the approximate measure in which total interest is deducted provides useful information about the profitability of household agricultural production. It should be noted, however, that entrepreneurial income does not allow for the implicit rent and interest charges incurred when the land and fixed assets used in production are purchased by the owners of unincorporated enterprises out of their own funds. The derivation of entrepreneurial income is given in a sub-account shown in the
table below. Entrepreneurial income, whether exact or approximate, can be shown as a memorandum item with the allocation of income account.
ENTREPRENEURIAL INCOME SUB-ACCOUNT FOR THE AGRICULTURAL HOUSEHOLDS SUB-SECTOR
USES RESOURCES
SNA Code SNA Code
D.4 Property Income' B.3g Mixed Income, gross
D.41 Interest B.2g Operating surplus, gross
D.45 Rent D.4 Property income'
D.41 Interest
D.45 Rent
D.42-44 Other
B.4 Entrepreneurial income, gross
Total Uses Total resources
Annex 2.5 Food balance sheets
Introduction
A Food Balance Sheet is a system of presenting a comprehensive view of a country's food supply for human consumption at national level. The food balance sheet shows for each food item -- i.e. for each primary commodity and for a number of processed commodities potentially available for human consumption -- the sources of its supply and its utilization. Thus it employs a supply and utilization account framework to arrive at apparent consumption (of food) of the population of the country defined in the following manner:
Apparent Consumption = (commercial production + estimated own account production for self consumption + import + opening stocks) minus (exports + usage input for processed food + seed + feed + non-food usage + wastage + closing stocks) where:
COMMERCIAL PRODUCTION (OF FOOD) is the total supply of food products (including derived products) available for human consumption. Food can be reported in terms of primary product equivalents, such as wheat and milk, or in the form in which the products will actually be consumed, such as flour and cheese.
OWN-ACCOUNT PRODUCTION FOR OWN-CONSUMPTION includes noncommercial production, production from kitchen gardens, food gathered from forest areas etc.
IMPORT and EXPORT include recorded as well as unrecorded foreign trade including food aid.
OPENING and CLOSING STOCKS include governmental, commercial and farm held stocks.
USAGE OF PROCESSED FOOD includes quantities of primary agricultural commodities used for production of processed food products such as cheese, alcoholic beverages, flour, pasta or pastry.
SEED is an estimate of the amount of the agricultural product set aside for reproductive purposes, such as seed and sugar-cane for planting, eggs for hatching and fish for bait, whether domestically produced or imported.
FEED is the amount of a commodity fed to livestock during the reference period, whether domestically produced or imported.
NON-FOOD USAGE is a miscellaneous category of utilization of food products that are neither identified nor used as food for the population of the country. This includes items such as use of oils and fats to produce soap and food used to feed tourists or refugees. This item is also sometimes used to record suspected statistical discrepancies arising from unrecorded exports.
WASTE is an estimate of what is wasted at all stages of food production and distribution from the point at which production is first recorded. It includes waste in processing, storage and transportation. Waste from losses occurring before and during harvest as well as wastage by ultimate consumer household are excluded. Losses identified as waste normally occur as a result of inadequate storage practices, but also in cases where food remains unsold or there is wilful destruction of a product because of an imbalance between supply and demand. This is particularly true of perishable foods such as fresh fruits and vegetables.
The food balance sheet presents data on: selected food product items in quantity terms, giving distribution of domestic supply and domestic utilization by broad categories as listed above; total per caput supply per year in quantity terms; and per caput per day supply in terms of quantity and also in terms of caloric value, protein and fat content (calculated by applying appropriate food composition factors for all primary and processed products).
Limitations of Food Balance Sheets
Food balance sheets are a method of measuring food consumption from the food supply perspective. The data used for preparing food balance sheets are assembled from a variety of official and unofficial sources and, their quality and coverage varies considerably among countries and commodities. Thus while interpreting the results of food balance sheet data, it is necessary to pay due attention to the inaccuracies and errors that may have occurred at each stage of the balance sheet construction. The sources of errors follow:
First, the total food supply is difficult to measure especially in countries where people (in order to be more self-sufficient), grow, gather or hunt for a portion of their food. In addition, data on fruit, vegetables and root crops, which are often grown on small subsistence holdings, tend to be incomplete.
Second, estimates of agricultural products that are in storage, wasted or used as animal feed as well as data on stocks are very often imprecise. Similarly the end uses of animal offal are difficult to identify as some is used for food, some processed as pet food and some left as waste. The proportions can vary from year to year and depend on demand, quality and relative prices.
Third, the conversion of the food supply into an estimate of energy, protein, fats and micronutrients is based on food composition information from various sources and the results need to be treated with caution. The energy and nutrients available from foods depends on a number of factors such as storage, processing, preparation and cooking methods.
Fourth, food balance sheets cannot keep track of developments in consumer behaviour. For example, in the case of milk products it is impossible to fully capture the ever-increasing number of derived products (such as low-fat yoghurts and mixed drinks) and to derive meaningful intake figures. Similarly the application of conversion rates to express a primary product in an "edible" equivalent is difficult because the old factors are approximate in nature and new technologies are being introduced to improve the extraction rates.
Additional limitations which must be kept in mind by the users of food balance sheets follow:
(i) The balance sheets cannot provide information on who is eating the food and are unable to help answer questions on the distribution of food among various segments of the population or as to whether the elderly, the poor or children are receiving enough food. Moreover, food balance sheets cannot help determine whether people are receiving the type of food necessary to meet their dietary requirements.
(ii) Food balance sheets provide estimates of food supply. Food supply is not an estimate of the food actually consumed but of the amount of food apparently available for consumption. Household budget and food consumption surveys are more appropriate methods for obtaining estimates of the amount of food acquired or actually consumed.
Uses of Food Balance Sheets
In spite of their limitations, food balance sheets represent the only comprehensive source of worldwide information on food supplies. Their primary contribution is to provide statistical information quantifying world supplies, as well as to reflect changes that have occurred in per caput dietary energy supplies and food supplies patterns. The estimates of national aggregate are suitable for assessing the overall shortages and surpluses in the food supply of the country.
FAO's food balance sheets: are based on a series of Supply and Utilization Accounts (SUAs) which are prepared on a calendar year basis. Annual food balance sheets tabulated regularly over a period of years will show the trends in overall national food supply, disclose changes that may have taken place in the type of food consumed, i.e. the pattern of diet, and reveal the extent to which the food supply of the country, as a whole, is adequate in relation to national requirements.
By bringing together the major part of the food and agricultural data in each country, food balance sheets also serve for the detailed examination and appraisal of the food and agricultural situation in a country. A comparison of the quantities of food available for human consumption with those imported will indicate the extent to which a country depends on imports (the import dependency ratio). The amount of food crops used for feeding livestock in relation to total crop production indicates the degree to which primary food resources are used to produce animal feed which is in turn a useful indicator to formulate crop and animal husbandry policies. Data on per caput food supplies serve as a major element for the projection of food demand, together with other elements such as income elasticity coefficients, and the projection of private consumption expenditure of the population.
International organisations, governments, planners and researchers concerned with the assessment of food supplies and the nutritive value of food, use the food balance sheets to evaluate the ability of the food supply to provide the essential elements for the national diet and to identify changes in the food supply over time as well as the relationships between national food supplies and famine and malnutrition.
References
1. Australian Bureau of Statistics - Apparent Consumption of Foodstuffs and Nutrients, Australia, 1990-91, ABS Catalogue No.4306.0
2. FAO - Handbook for the preparation of Food Balance Sheets, Washington, D.C., U.S.A., April 1949
3. - Food Balance Sheets, Asia and Pacific Commission on Agricultural Statistics,
Thirteenth Session, Bangkok, Thailand, 29 October -2 November 1990
4. - The ICS: The Interlinked Computerized Storage and Processing System of Food and Agricultural commodity data, Users' Manual, Statistics Division, 1985
5. - Food Balance Sheets, 1984-86 average, 1991
6. Trant, M. - Food Balance Sheets: Their Strengths and Limitations, Proceedings of the workshop hosted by the State Committee on Statistics and the Ministry of Agriculture and Food of Belarus, organised by the Centre for Co-operation with Economies in Transition, financed by the OECD and EUROSTAT (TACIS), FAO and ECE, 25 to 29 April 1994
7. Lindner, A - OECD's Work on Supply Balance Sheets (SBS) and Their Use, details of reference- same as 6
Annex 2.6 Framework for satellite accounts for food balances
Account 1: Food Producing Establishments
Account 1.1: Production Account
USES RESOURCES
1. lntermediate consumption for 4. Gross output
1.1 agriculture 4.1 primary (food) production of
1.2 forestry and logging 4.1.1 agriculture
1.3 fishing 4.1.2 forestry and logging
1.4 manufacturing 4.1.3 fishing
2. Value added, gross 4.1.4 manufacturing
4.2 secondary (non-food) production of
4.2.1 agriculture
4.2.2 forestry and logging
4.2.3 fishing
4.2.4 manufacturing
5. Other products
3. Total uses 6. Total resources
Account 1.2: Generation of Income Account
USES RESOURCES
1. Compensation of employees 8. Value added, gross
2. Taxes on production 
3. Taxes on imports 
4. Subsidies (less) 
5. Operating surplus 
6. Mixed income 
7. Total uses 9. Total resources
Account 1.3: Capital Account
CHANGES IN ASSETS FINANCING FOR CHANGES IN ASSETS
1. Gross fixed capital formation 4. Finances for gross capital formation
1.1 agriculture 
1.2 forestry and logging 
1.3 fishing 
1.4 manufacturing 
2. Changes in inventories 
2.1 agriculture 
2.2 forestry and logging 
2.3 fishing 
2.4 manufacturing 
3. Gross capital formation 5. Finances for gross capital formation
Account 2: Goods and Services Account for food products
RESOURCES USES
1. Gross output of primary food products 7. Output going to food production
8. Output going to non-food uses
2. Import of food products 9. Export of food products
3. Food aids 10. Consumption waste
4. Taxes on food products 11. Food for consumption
5. Subsidies (less) 12. Changes in inventories
6. Total supply 13. Total uses
<section>c</section>
Annex 2.7 Reflecting the full value of forests in SEAFA
1. Under the ISIC system, forestry, logging and related service activities belong to Division 02: "Growing of standing timber, logging, gathering of wild growing forest materials and service activities". As currently presented in the national accounts of many countries, information does not convey to policy-makers the full importance of forests in economic life. Forests offer a wide range of both material and non-material benefits, the value of which must be considered in making decisions on natural resource use, including land use.
2. Unlike agriculture, the value of forests is marked by the particularly high significance of intangible services and functions, many of them environmental, which do not enter the marketplace and therefore are not readily presented in monetary terms. Forests are also characterized by being a resource whose capital depletion is often ignored in calculations of the benefits of their exploitation. With little or no value being placed on forest stocks, decisions are often made in related sectors (such as agriculture) to displace forest cover in favour of alternative land uses without appreciation of the full costs of such actions. These and related considerations associated with forest values and how to reflect them adequately in national accounts are presented in greater detail in a companion booklet to this one. That booklet focuses on national accounting for forestry and presents techniques for more fully accounting for the value of forests and trees.
3. Forests are a standing resource that offer important benefits. For forest dwellers worldwide, a wide variety of nuts, berries, game, meat, fish, honey, other foodstuffs, medicines, green manure, biomass fuel, thatching materials, fodder for cattle, etc. are available. The values of these outputs are often severely underestimated, since they hardly ever register as market transactions and for the most part benefit cultural minorities or economically weak strata of society. But some resins, essential oils, medicinal substances, rattan, flowers and a wide variety of other products that flow from forests enter commercial channels. The aggregate value of these so called "minor products" is substantial but is often under-estimated or left unrecorded. More often, all that is reported is the value of commercially exploited timber.
4. In their search for both timber and non-timber goods and services, local populations increasingly face conflictual interaction with industrialists, loggers, naturalists, hikers and hunters who have divergent interests. Decisions on the management of forests and the use of their many products and services are driven by many different values. In many developing countries rural populations invade forests in search of land for their crops, fuel for cooking and fodder for their animals. Governments impelled to raise foreign exchange earnings and employment, and to finance economic development programmes, turn to forests as a resource that can readily be exploited. Private investors seeking profits also look to forests as an investment opportunity. Forests are thus often cleared and displaced by alternative land uses to meet a variety of pressing needs.
5. In richer countries, there is a high demand for timber and wood-based fibre products from both local and tropical forests. In these same countries, there is also a major increase in demands for a greener environment and for the amenity and recreation values of forests to be exploited. This has coincided with a desire to reduce farm surpluses in many wealthier countries and, accordingly, many of these countries are extending forest cover onto land formerly used for agriculture.
6. In both developing and developed countries, decisions on whether land should remain under forest or go to alternative uses need to take into consideration, among other aspects, the following:
 The yields of alternative uses of lands covered by forests have often been greatly overestimated and the sustainability of such land use options is often poor. For example, the soils underlying many humid tropical forests are infertile and, once opened up, are soon degraded through erosion, laterization or other processes. The value of forests relative to alternatives should be more carefully ascertained and the impact of change in use should be reflected in natural resource accounts.
 In situations such as those in many industrialised countries where much original forest has already been lost, residual primary forests are practically irreplaceable in terms of their ecological quality. Yet the value placed on them in land use or industrial conversion decisions is often too low and the more accessible among them continue to face the risk of being cleared.
 Forests are the origin of many of today's domesticated crops and livestock and they can contribute genetic material to plant and livestock breeders that confers disease and pest resistance, as well as other desirable properties, to important agricultural crops or animal breeds. Forests also contribute entirely new foods, such as mangosteen and the winged bean.
 Pyrethrin, retinitis and other insecticides and insect repellents evolved in tropical plants as a sort of self-defence, while insect predators and parasites that control at least 250 different agricultural pests have been found in forests. The pharmaceutical products from forests include alkaloids such as quinine and others used in drugs to treat malaria, hypertension, childhood leukaemia and Hodgkin's disease. Plant steroids, such as diosgenin (which comes from Mexican yams and West African calabar beans), are used in oral contraceptives. In certain cases, the economic benefits from genetic resources, medicinal and food products would, if fully counted, exceed those from timber harvests.
 Forests also have environmental protection functions: they reduce soil erosion which would soon lead to sedimentation of high-profile downstream hydroelectric schemes; they protect soils for agriculture in critical watersheds and water supply for downstream users; mangrove forests provide breeding and nesting grounds for many forms of marine life; and forest trees offer windbreak protection to crops. Forests are known to influence and stabilize the climate and recently the role of forests in sequestration of atmospheric carbon, thereby helping to avert global warming, has received growing attention.
 Apart from their direct values, forests and trees often have values transmitted through other sectors into which they provide essential inputs. Examples of this related to agriculture (other than their soil, water and nutrient roles) include: the supply of fuelwood for energy to cure or otherwise process many crops; the supply of rural construction materials for farm communities and livestock; and the provision of timber or paper/cardboard packaging for agricultural commodities. The value of these benefits is rarely adequately credited to the forestry sector.
7. Governments adopt policies for worthy objectives, such as industrial or agricultural growth, regional development, job creation or poverty alleviation. It is recognized that such objectives, even when realized, may attained only at excessive cost and sometimes the adverse impacts of land use conversion outweigh the benefits of retaining the forests.
Government policies, whether directly for forestry or impinging on the forestry sector from outside, may result in financial profits, but the cost in terms of value of depleted forest resources is often ignored or underestimated. Very often, valuation overemphasizes the timber harvest at the expense of other potential benefits. In managing forests on public lands and in creating incentives for the use of private forests, policies often sacrifice a broader range of benefits and potential long-term gains from forests in favour of the lesser, transitory gains derived from timber or wood fibre.
8. Threats to the world's forests are evoking responses at all levels, from villagers organizing to protect their woods to international summit meetings of world leaders. Increased attention, investment and research are being directed or advocated for the solution of forest problems. Two underlying areas of research that deserve effective support are: the identification of policies that can encourage the sustainable management of forests without sacrificing economic or livelihood objectives; and the development of valuation methodologies that can adequately reflect not only the goods and services (marketed and non marketed) produced by forests but also the economic worth of stock depletion when forest resources are destroyed or qualitatively degraded.
9. A proper system of national accounts should provide policy-makers with information that gives a more complete picture of the net benefits derived from forests than is the case at present. Such information should include wood as well as non-wood products; goods as well as services or functions; and benefits from marketed as well as non-marketed goods and services. While developing the system it may be kept in mind that a clear boundary line between forestry practices and agricultural or horticultural practices is essential in accounting, while the value of forests to agriculture should be adequately credited to the proper sector.
10. With regard to forest-based industries, decisions will need to be made on whether they are to be reported under agro-processing ISIC categories or elsewhere. In any case, it will be essential that forest-based industries and artisanal manufacturing activities are not allowed to fall into a grey area where they are not recorded under either agro-industry or some other appropriate category and where their economic contribution is thereby undervalued.
11. In the accounts for forestry, output of both natural and plantation forests and trees may include all the basic amenities relating to food, fuel, fodder, shelter, fibre, medicines and recreation, in value terms along with prices used for valuation of the product, area under forest, royalties collected, taxes, the expenditure incurred on maintenance and research, etc. It is also essential in maintaining such data to classify the forest areas by type of management practices required for their maintenance. The information system may also include some imputed outputs on the basis of shadow prices, such information to be shown separately along with the underlying assumptions. The creation of data banks of this nature will have some overlap with the agriculture sector and, therefore, it is proposed to prepare Satellite Accounts for the forestry sector also. These Satellite Accounts would be in addition to the Satellite Accounts recommended by SNA for monitoring environmental
aspects.
References:
1. FAO, 1994 - Forest development and policy dilemmas. Special chapter of The State of Food and Agriculture, Rome.
2. Gregersen, H.M, 1995 et. al. - Valuing forests: context, issues and guidelines. FAO Forestry Paper 127, Rome.
3. Repetto, R.,, 1988 - The Forest for the Trees? Government Policies and the misuse of forest resources, World Resources Institute.
4. Repetto, R., 1988 - Public Policies and the Misuse of Forest Resources, A World Resources Institute Book edited by Robert Repetto and Malcolm Gillis.
Annex 2.8 Fisheries in SEAFA
1. A proper system of accounts should provide policy-makers with a reliable measure of the contribution of the fisheries industry to the national well-being. Thus accounts should value the cost of the efforts put into the fisheries sector (vessels and other fishing inputs, government administration including resource management and research, land and water, the workforce, establishments etc.) and the value of what is obtained in exchange for the resources spent (fish for human consumption and other uses, employment, export earnings, fees collected from a foreign country for the granting of fishing rights in the home country's Exclusive Economic Zone, etc.).
2. There is a range of social factors that should also be considered in policy-making. Some governments regard the fisheries sector as providing other services, in addition to making a contribution to economic growth. Fisheries may provide employment in rural areas or may play a strategic role especially if the industry is located in border or remote areas; it may provide employment for a particular religious or cultural group, be an important source of female income and employment and an important food source for indigenous people. The role of the sector in providing food and food security may be an important concern to some Governments.
3. A major concern is overfishing. There is already evidence of declining stocks in many of the traditional marine fishing grounds and declines of freshwater fish catches caused by the loss of viable habitats, environmental degradation, pollution of water resources and overfishing. Additional fishing effort may result in longer-term damage to the capacity of the sector to contribute sustainability to economic welfare.
4. In a country that grant other countries fishing rights in its Exclusive Economic Zone, it may be relevant for perspective planning to find out what would be the costs and benefits if all fishing activity in the zone were undertaken entirely by the home country itself.
5. For the fisheries sector SEAFA may be regarded as a framework for analyzing the mutual relationship among production activity, income originating from production and the use of income for consumption and capital accumulation. SEAFA, while including this sector, should address all such issues listed above. While doing so it is necessary to look into the special characteristics of the sector and this Annex presents a summary view of these characteristics .
6. Under the ISIC system, the fisheries sector includes all activities related to fishing and service activities that support fishing activities, as well as the operation of fish hatcheries and fish farms (often referred to as aquaculture, Division 05). ISIC stipulates some exclusions from fishing activity including those operations that are more akin to hunting, etc. such as the capture of sea mammals, except whales (included in ISIC class 0150: Hunting, trapping and game propagation including related service activities); frog farming which is classified in class 0122 (Other animal farming, production of animal products n.e.c.); processing of fish, crustaceans and molluscs not connected to fishing, i.e. on vessels or in factories ashore, which is classified in class 1512 (processing and preserving of fish and fish products); net making and mending, classified in class 1723 (Manufacturing of cordage, rope, twine and netting); fishing boat repairing, classified in class 3511
(Building and repair of ships); service activities related to fishing practiced for sport or recreation (classified in class 9249 'Other recreational activities').
7. Any definition of the fisheries sector is arbitrary as the industry may be fragmented in many ways. While the fishing activity itself is the essence of the industry, it is possible to justify the inclusion in the accounts of various onshore processes. Fish go through many processes before being consumed and to place the boundary of the industry at the point of any one transaction is difficult. The operations may be divided into major categories, for instance catching/exploitation, processing, distribution and final consumption, but these divisions cannot always be precise. They can only indicate a possible boundary of vertical division between fisheries and other industries. Although it is statistically more convenient to adopt an industry definition (e.g. all operations directly connected with the actual catching/exploitation process), it is less useful for policy purposes than would be a more disaggregated approach.
8. Capture fisheries are essentially different from farming in that for much of the output the individual farming household may still be considered as one productive unit, whereas this is not generally true of fishing. The household is important in some types of fishing in certain countries, but generally some members of fishing households have other occupations while not all members of fishing unit belong to one household. The characteristic fishing unit may catch more than one species of fish but does not catch anything other then fish. Hence, in this sector, it is essential to investigate all types of institutional units.
9. In fishing there may be differences at the regional level; inshore and distant waters fishing are very different from one another in their techniques and in the economic and social benefits each may generate. It would be desirable to disaggregate the accounts by classifying fishing establishments by type of water bodies at all levels for planning purposes.
10. The seasonal nature of fishing can result in a dual use of resources; it is not uncommon for inshore boats to substitute pleasure trips for fishing at certain times of year. Ideally items such as capital depreciation should be reduced to exclude the time spent in non-fishing activities, but the statistical assessment of such minor items is difficult.
11. The international character of fishing industries throughout the world presents certain problems when ensuring that accounts are comparable. For many countries direct foreign landings from their fishing vessels and inputs from foreign ports are difficult to identify. When a fishing fleet is multinational the treatment of inputs and outputs in the economic accounts poses additional problems.
12. Some of the fishing activity is carried out outside the zone of national jurisdiction where there are no property rights. In such cases the basic resource has no price. It may also happen that the fisheries management practices of one country or region benefit another country or region. In such instances it is not easy either to impute a true cost or prepare an information base for perspective planning. Thus, this class also requires a separate presentation.
13. The industry approach reduces the statistical problems of recording the transactions for an industry that is disaggregated horizontally at all levels. The commercial structure of the fisheries sector ranges from commercial to private non-commercial activity. The contribution of the non-commercial (i.e. subsistence fisheries) or quasi-commercial sector is of some importance in parts of the industry, but to adopt an industry approach and exclude such activity is not likely to alter significantly the commodity product.
14. For recreational fisheries there is a need to quantify their value including the real value of angling and "angling tourism". Their economic importance and value, both absolute and relative to local communities, and their linkage to other sectors should form an integral part of decision-making in freshwater and marine catchment or river basin development plans.
15. SEAFA presents the different parts of the economic process in a form appropriate to the specific sector or economic activity, without losing a clear view of the macro-economic relationships and without imposing special rules on parts of the system. These advantages are secured by placing the detailed sub-accounts, with their varying systems of classification, into a general macro-framework. Hence the accounts for fisheries may be designed according to the particular economic features of the industry while being compatible with the national accounts.
16. In order to evaluate appropriately all the externalities originating from within the sector and those originating outside that have an impact on the sector, it may also be desirable to construct Satellite Accounts in addition to the usual set of accounts.
17. For capture fisheries the establishment of environmental accounting is highly desirable. Ideally the natural resource -- the fish stock -- should have a value attached to it according to the catches it can sustain. Overfishing reduces the capability of the stocks and, consequently, the sustainable catch to regenerate themselves and depletes the value of the resource. This should be considered as a cost of production in the national account. Theoretically a "global community" environmental account may also be established for high seas fisheries. The value of the natural resource will have to be recalculated annually because of the natural changes in recruitment of juveniles to the stock and in market value, but, since this stock level should be calculated for management purposes anyway, this requirement should not present any problems.
Annex 2.9 List of supporting statements
A. Illustrative List for Agriculture and Hunting
I. IN PHYSICAL UNITS
1. Area, Production and Productivity for principal crops;
2. Number of Livestock by category;
3. Domestic Production of Fertilizers by Product;
4. Rate of Fertilizer Use by Season and Crop;
II. AT CURRENT PRICES
1. Total Crop Production (including by-products)
(a) by crop
(b) by principal crops and region
(c) by principal crops and agro-climatic zones
2. Livestock Products
(a) Livestock products (including animals sold for slaughter, transport industry, etc.)
(b) Increment in livestock (total, fixed capital formation and changes in inventories) by categories
3. Other Production
(a) Agricultural Services
(b) Output of secondary activities
4. Intermediate Consumption
(a) For crop production
(b) For livestock production
(c) Others for agricultural services and secondary activities
(d) By regions (total and main items only)
5. External Trade
(a) Import of agricultural goods (total and principal) (b) Import of intermediate goods for agriculture (c) Export of agricultural goods (total and principal)
6. Capital Formation for Agriculture
(a) Gross fixed capital formation by type of assets
(b) Increase in inventories by type (finished products, work-in-progress and others)
(c) Gross capital formation in the Public Sector by type of assets
7. Prices
(a) Producer prices of principal agricultural goods
(b) Purchaser prices of fertilizer, feed, pesticide, agricultural machinery, etc.
8. Others
(a) Total agricultural production by end use (intra-farm, inter-farm, own account consumption, sale for final consumption, sale for intermediate consumption and capital formation) by principal goods
(b) Distribution of total production by size of landholding
(c) Key economic indicators for the country (such as total GDP at current and constant prices, population, etc.)
III. AT CONSTANT (BASE YEAR) PRICES
1. Total Crop Production (including by-products)
(a) by crop
(b) by principal crop and region
(c) by principal crop and agro-climatic zones
2. Livestock and Livestock Products
(a) Livestock (including animals sold for slaughter, transport industry, etc.) and livestock products
(b) Increment in livestock (total, fixed capital formation and changes in inventories) by categories
3. Other Production
(a) Agricultural Services
(b) Output of secondary activities
4. Intermediate Consumption
(a) For crop production
(b) For livestock production
(c) Others for agricultural services and secondary activities
(d) By regions (total and main items only)
5. External Trade
(a) Import of agricultural goods (total and principal)
(b) Import of intermediate goods for agriculture
(c) Export of agricultural goods (total and principal)
6. Capital Formation for Agriculture
(a) Gross fixed capital formation by type of assets
(b) Increase in inventories by type (finished products, work-in-progress and others)
B. Illustrative List for Food and Nutrition
1. Total and per caput domestic food supply and utilization by products and by type of flow in quantity terms
2. Per caput per day domestic food utilization by products in terms of calories (number), protein (grams) and fats (grams)
3. Total domestic food supply and utilization by products at current prices
4. Total domestic food supply and utilization by products at constant prices
5. Producer or consumer prices of selected items of food products
6. Content in calories (number), protein (grams) and fats (grams) of selected food products.
Annex 4.1 An overview of sector models appearing in the FAO's publication agricultural sector analysis and models in developing countries
FAO's Agricultural sector analysis and models in developing contains four types of agricultural sector analyses (ASAs) and models: non-formal, general equilibrium consistency approaches (Chapter II); general, system-simulation models (Chapter III); linear programming models (Chapter IV); and, multi-level planning models (Chapter V). In addition, two Chapters are devoted to, respectively, issues in planning rural development (Chapter VI) and the operational usefulness of sector analysis and models to users (Chapter VII). The final Chapter (VIII) undertakes a critical evaluation of agricultural sector analysis.
The first type of ASA appearing in the volume is of a qualitative and multidisciplinary nature and consists of the non-formal, general equilibrium consistency frameworks represented in the papers by Vercueil, Fletcher and Alexandratos, et. al. The methodology employed relies on undertaking a consistent set of projections for key variables of policy interest, such as the supply and demand of agricultural commodities, within a general equilibrium context. The long-term trends of agricultural development and the determinants of these trends are analyzed. On this basis, development targets, options and possible bottlenecks can be formulated.
The consistency analyses are often designed to address policy questions of immediate interest to planners and questions of priorities for government investment programmes and projects, and have been most heavily used by organizations such as the World Bank, FAO and the Agency for International Development (AID) for short-term aid and lending programme needs as well as for the purpose of improving a country's long-term agricultural planning capacity. Vercueil (Chapter II. D' describes the general methodology employed by FAO for its perspective agricultural development country studies, using as examples those developed for Egypt and the Sudan. Fletcher (Chapter II.2) discusses sector studies applied to Guatemala and Panama, which attempted to determine agriculture's contribution to economic development and the priority policies and programmes that would enhance this contribution, particularly on the part of traditional agriculture. The last study that is included as a
consistency framework is a forestry sector planning model developed for Peninsular Malaysia and described by Alexandratos, et. al. (Chapter II.3). Alternative forestry sector development strategies are analyzed by simulation of forestry output, location, revenues and costs consistent with alternative land conversion, cutting and harvesting variables.
The general, systems science simulation approach developed by analysts at Michigan State University, United States, formalizes and quantifies many aspects of consistency framework; while retaining their multidisciplinary content. By doing so, a variety of policy instruments are defined and simulation techniques utilized for forecasting and policy planning purposes, exploring the sectoral and economywide impacts of changes in the policy instruments.
The conceptual problems involved in the development and use of the systems science methodology, including problem-definition, the generality of approach and the importance of interaction and credibility with decision-makers, are discussed by Johnson (Chapter III. 1). The paper by Rossmiller (Chapter III.2) describes the Korean agricultural sector study, perhaps the prototype for the systems simulation approach, in terms of specific model characteristics and the Korean experience of the institutionalization of a sector analytical capacity.
The linear programming (LP) approaches to modelling the agricultural sector, which form the next organizational category, perhaps need less introduction for social scientists. The underlying specifications and solution algorithms of this type of model are well-known and their capacity for testing hypotheses well-developed. The models discussed in the FAO publications, however, expand on the well-known linear programming methodology through their more extensive disaggregation -- of labour, land, regions, consumption groups and technologies -- in order better to determine the impact of various policies, and through their development of the important linkages within the agricultural sector and other sectors of the economy. Three country case-studies are presented as examples of LP models in Chapter IV. Condos (Chapter IV. 1) reports on the formulation and results of a linear programming model for the Tunisian agricultural sector. The model was built under FAO's direction and
used to investigate the optimality of government investment programmes and development plans. A model of the Thai agricultural sector is reviewed and discussed by Stoecker, et. al. (Chapter IV.2) who focus on and compare the effects of alternative development scenarios by region and by land zone to yield alternative income distributional implications. Finally, the linear programming methodology forms the basis of a highly disaggregated (set of) studies of the Colombian agricultural sector and its interrelationship with the general economy by Daines, et. al. (Chapter IV.3). Among others, an analysis of nutrition is undertaken in that chapter.
Multilevel planning models emphasize the upward linkages between agriculture and the overall economy and the downward linkages within agriculture. The methodology consists of constructing a system of connected models at different levels of aggregation and solving iteratively with a large-scale optimizing model. In this way, alternative policies can be traced and their impact assessed at different levels in the system. More specifically the effects of certain types of policy instruments can be estimated. While being relatively complex and quantitative multilevel models are able to utilize a priori knowledge of the specific nature of the decision-making process (which varies from country to country) in establishing the linkages between the models.
The multilevel approach has been developed mainly under the sponsorship of the World Bank and used to some extent for policy planning in Mexico and the Cte d'Ivoire. The specification, results and operational usefulness of the model developed for Mexico (CHAC) are described in the papers by Duloy and Norton (Chapter V.1) and Bassoco and Norton (Chapter V.2). Goreux (Chapter V.3) discusses a model applied to the Cte d'Ivoire and compares it with CHAC as to linkage formulation and submodel specification.
The final example of an agricultural sector model relying on the multilevel approach is the model of agricultural production and trade in Central America (MOCA), described in the paper by Cappi, et. al. (Chapter V.4). MOCA is a spatial equilibrium model, the central focus of which is the linkage of five national agricultural sector models through international trade to assess the effects of national policies on the Central American Common Market.
A last issue is to be examined in this volume is that of the operational usefulness of the sector analytic capacities that have so far been built. The question is addressed in the papers by McGaughey (Chapter VI.1) and Fletcher (Chapter VI.2), the former reporting from the perspective of the Inter-American Development Bank and the latter from the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). In both papers, the strengths and limitations of agricultural sector analysis are brought out and the importance of an analysis being broad enough to answer questions relating to rural development reiterated.
The trade-offs between the more qualitative and less formal analyses and those that are more formal and quantitative are discussed; the more qualitative analyses being perhaps more immediately applicable and less of a drain on local resources and talent, and the more formal analyses offering the basis for a stronger, long-term decision-making and planning capacity.
The last chapter, by Thorbecke and Hall (Chapter VII), undertakes a critical evaluation of agricultural sector analyses and models with special reference to those appearing in the volume. Three sets of evaluation criteria are used in comparing the various ASAs: coverage and complexity; explanatory power and realism; and, comprehensibility and operational usefulness.
Annex 5.1 List of important FAO publications
"Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000", FAO Statistical Development Series, 5, Rome, 1995.
Definition and Classification of Commodities (Draft) FAO, 1994.
"Collecting Data on Livestock", FAO Statistical Development Series 4, Rome, 1992.
"Methodological Review" 1980 World Census of Agriculture, Rome, 1992.
"Food Balance Sheets - 1984-86 Average", Rome, 1991.
"Manual on Fertilizer Statistics", FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 102, Rome, 1991.
"Sampling Methods for Agricultural Surveys", FAO Statistical Development Series, 3, Rome, 1989.
"Manual on Agricultural Price Index Numbers" FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 74, Rome, 1988.
"Food and Agricultural Statistics in the Context of a National Information System, FAO Statistical Development Series, 1, Rome, 1986.
"National Methods of Agricultural Price Data Collection" FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 58, Rome, 1986.
"Socio-Economic Indicators relating to Agricultural Sector and Rural Development" FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 40, Rome, 1984.
"Use of Household Surveys for Collection of Food and Agricultural Statistics" FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 35/Prov., Rome, 1983.
"Estimation of Crop Areas and Yields in Agricultural Statistics" FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 22, Rome, 1982.
"Farm and Input Prices: Collection and Compilation" FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 16, Rome, 1980.
"Assessment and Collection of Data on post-harvest Foodgrain Losses" FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 13, Rome, 1980.
"Taking Agricultural Censuses" FAO Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 1, Rome, 1978.
