<title>Guidelines for the improvement of statistics on women: obtaining statistics </title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Characteristics of the agricultural survey programme
Introduction
The aim of these guidelines is to provide National Statistical Offices with a practical guide of possible modifications to the main aspects of their regular national agricultural survey programmes leading to the collection and dissemination of more adequate gender-disaggregated data.
National agricultural censuses and sample surveys constitute the most important source of basic data in the agricultural sector. They are, in particular, a source of information on the agriculture-related population. For these reasons, and in view of FAO's objective to cooperate with member countries to obtain better data on women in agriculture, these guidelines suggest possible improvements to the national agricultural survey programmes in order to obtain and disseminate more adequate gender-disaggregated statistics.
The terms agricultural holding, holding parcel and agricultural holder, which are basic for an agricultural survey programme, are defined in the next chapter which also includes a number of comments in relation to their use and possible gender biases.
The national agricultural census and sample survey programmes considered in these guidelines are assumed to be the regular periodic agricultural production surveys which are conducted in order to obtain the basic data on the agricultural sector. The agricultural surveys are conducted in order to obtain estimates of a given group of agricultural items (which are numbers) from the totality or a sample of reporting units. A reporting unit is a unit for which a numerical value of each agricultural characteristic considered is defined. The survey population (or sampled population) is the set of survey units that are actually sampled (or it may involve 100 percent of the units) and are called sampling units or enumeration units. A sampling unit must either be associated with one, and only one, reporting unit, or there must be known rules to associate sampling units with reporting units of the survey.
Characteristics of the agricultural survey programme
The main objective of the agricultural production survey is to obtain estimates for all or some of the following items:
 planted and harvested areas, areas intended for harvest, potential and actual crop yields; crop production and number of trees;
 livestock and poultry inventories (e.g. type, age, sex, breed and use); production of milk, eggs, honey and seeds;
 characteristics of the holdings (e.g. number, location, legal status, land tenure) and characteristics of the holder (e.g. age, sex, marital status, level of education, whether worked on the holding, amount of time worked on the holding, whether received any payment in cash or kind, main activity and secondary activity);
 population involved in agriculture (e.g. basic demographic characteristics of the holder, holder's household members working on the holding, hired workers on the holding, days of work, etc.);
 farming practices and agricultural inputs: labour involved, amount and type of seeds, fertilizers and pesticides, source of irrigation, drainage, shifting cultivation, grain stocks; machinery, equipment and agricultural buildings; costs of production and value of sales.
The agricultural survey items are defined in each reporting unit. The most common type of reporting unit is the agricultural holding, since agricultural items are naturally defined for the holdings. But the holdings are not the only possible reporting units.
The agricultural population studied in the agricultural surveys consists of.
 holders and members of the holder's household engaged in agricultural activities;
 agricultural workers other than members of the holder's household.
The population variables generally studied are age, sex, days of work, family and hired workers, and access to credit.
The survey field data collection may cover all agricultural holdings (in which case the survey is called agricultural census) or only a sample (called agricultural sample survey). A sample survey could be based on a selection of holdings (list sample survey), or could be based on the selection of a sample of segments that are land areas (area sample survey), or a sample survey could be based on a combination of an area sample and a list sample survey, in which case it is called a multiple frame survey.
For agricultural censuses and list sample surveys:
 the enumeration unit and the reporting unit of the survey will be the agricultural holding;
 the survey data collection will be accomplished by enumerators through direct interviews with the holders or with the hired managers using a questionnaire for each agricultural holding.
For agricultural area sample surveys:
 the reporting unit of the survey is the agricultural holding or the tract, which is the part(s) of holdings (or non-agricultural areas) included in the segments;
 the survey data collection will be accomplished by enumerators through direct interviews with the holders or with the hired managers using a questionnaire for each tract.
A general-purpose agricultural sample survey may cover all the above-mentioned variables. An agricultural census might not include, for example, crop yields and/or livestock estimates. In any case, a general-purpose agricultural survey usually covers only the basic characteristics of the population concerned with agricultural activities on the holdings.
The suggestions contained in these guidelines for such national agricultural census and sample survey programmes refer specifically to the collection and dissemination of data on the agriculture-related population.
The improvements suggested consider the different aspects of such national agricultural survey programmes and relate to the production of more adequate gender-disaggregated data, such as concepts, definitions and classifications used, questionnaire items, questionnaire construction, instruction manuals, selection and training of field staff, pilot surveys, field work, tabulation and dissemination of results and postenumeration survey and publicity campaigns.
<section>2</section>
Concepts and definitions in population-related agricultural surveys
Household
Head of household
Relationship with head of household
Age
Education
Marital status
Agricultural holding and holding parcel
Holder, hired manager and respondent
Legal status of holder
Usually economically active population
Not usually economically active persons
Main and secondary occupations
Industry
Status in employment
Permanent agricultural workers on the holding
Occasional agricultural workers on the holding
Time reference
Concepts and definitions in population-related agricultural surveys
This chapter presents comments and suggestions, including possible gender biases, on the concepts, definitions and classifications used in the national agricultural survey programmes. The comments and suggestions, therefore, focus on how to obtain more adequate gender-disaggregated data.
The agricultural survey concepts, definitions and classifications concerning the agriculture-related population refer to those included in the FAO Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000 (FAO, 1995).
The section on economic characteristics incorporates the international standards adopted by the International Labour Organisation (ILO) concerning statistics of the economically active population. It also takes into account the revised International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88) and the revised International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities (ISIC), Rev. 3.
The concepts and definitions used in the national agricultural census or survey programmes for studying the agriculture-related population should be based on those used for the population and housing census. This is one of the reasons why it is of fundamental importance to coordinate adequately the national population and agricultural surveys.
Household
The household concept is one of the basic elements of a national statistical system. It is extensively used and quoted in this paper for ease of reference and comparison with other definitions used in agricultural and population censuses or surveys.
The definition of household is used in several aspects of an agricultural survey programme. In particular, for the following purposes:
 to construct the survey frame;
 to define the agricultural holdings and holders;
 to identify the holder's household members.
"The concept of 'household' is based on the arrangements made by persons, individually or in groups, for providing themselves with food or other essentials for living. A household may be either (a) a one-person household, that is, a person who makes provision for his or her own food or other essentials for living without combining with any other person to form part of a multiperson household, or (b) a multiperson household, that is, a group of two or more persons living together who make common provision for food or other essentials for living. The persons in the group may pool their incomes and have a common budget to a greater or lesser extent; they may be related or unrelated persons or a combination of both....
"Households usually occupy the whole, part of or more than one housing unit but they may also be found living in camps, boarding houses or hotels or as administrative personnel in institutions, or they may be homeless. Households consisting of extended families that make common provision for food or of potentially separate households with a common head, resulting from polygamous unions, or households with vacation or other second homes may occupy more than one housing unit.
Homeless households are defined as those households without a shelter that would fall within the scope of living quarters...." (UN, 1980, p. 50; FAO, 1995).
Various household types must be explained, particularly the extended household, because of the possibility of more than one holding per household. The United Nations recommends a household classification based on the family nucleus. The family refers to "those members of the household who are related, to a specified degree, through blood, adoption or marriage." (UN, 1980, p. 72).
A household may contain more than one family. A family nucleus consists of one of the following types (each of which must consist of persons living in the same household):
 a married couple without children;
 a married couple with one or more never-married children;
 a father with one or more never-married children;
 a mother with one or more never-married children.
The following household types are identified:
 one-person household;
 nuclear household, defined as a household consisting entirely of a single family nucleus;
 extended household, defined as a household consisting of either:
- a single family nucleus and other persons related to the nucleus;
- two or more family nuclei related to each other, without any other persons;
- two or more family nuclei related to each other plus other persons related to at least one of the nuclei; or
- two or more persons related to each other but none of whom comprises a family nucleus.
 composite household, defined as a household consisting of either:
- a single family nucleus plus other persons, some of whom are related to the nucleus and some of whom are not;
- a single family nucleus plus other persons, none of whom is related to the nucleus;
- two or more family nuclei related to each other plus other persons, some of whom are related to at least one of the nuclei;
- two or more family nuclei related to each other plus other persons, none of whom is related to any of the nuclei;
- two or more family nuclei not related to each other, with or without any other persons;
- two or more persons related to each other but none of whom comprises a family nucleus, plus other unrelated persons; or,
- non-related persons only (UN, 1980, p. 73-74).
Head of household
The head of household is the person in the household acknowledged as head by the other members. The head has primary authority and responsibility for household affairs. However, in cases where such authority and responsibility are not vested in one person, special rules may be needed to identify the head of household (UN, 1980, p. 70; FAO, 1995).
The definitions used to identify the head of the household are subject to a certain ambiguity and in some cases tend to exclude women. Precise criteria should be set to avoid arbitrary interpretation on the part of the enumerators and subjective perception on the part of the respondents. In those countries where male migration is relevant, the absence of the head of the household (at the time of the enumeration or within a specified period should also be considered.
Relationship with head of household
It may be necessary to distinguish the household members in relation to the head or other reference member of the household (UN, 1980, p. 71):
 spouse;
 child;
 spouse of child;
 grandchild or great-grandchild;
 other relative;
 other persons not related to the head, including domestic employees.
The analysis of household composition could be useful to complement the simple tabulation of heads of household by sex and allow a deeper investigation on the roles men and women play in the family and their social and economic responsibilities.
Information collected on the members of the household within specified age limits may include the following:
 age and sex;
 marital status;
 level of education;
 whether worked on the holding;
 amount of time worked on the holding;
 whether received any payment in cash or kind;
 main or secondary activity.
Age
Age is normally expressed in completed calendar years. An age limit should be set in order to identify the children of the household. Similarly, another age limit should be set in order to identify all elderly and retired persons of the household. These age limits should coincide with those adopted for the population and housing census.
Education
Level of education can be classified as follows:
 illiterate;
 literate with no regular schooling;
 elementary school;
 secondary school;
 high school;
 university;
 agricultural vocational training;
 other vocational training.
It should be recalled that in most countries in the region women receive less education than men. Thus, the education level of the agriculture-related population is likely to be distorted if the proportion of women in the survey does not reflect the actual distribution of the population.
Marital status
Marital status can be classified as follows.
 single (never married);
 married;
 in consensual union;
 in polygamous union;
 separated;
 divorced;
 widowed.
The distinction between monogamous and polygamous unions is particularly important in the analysis of the agricultural sector. Polygamous unions affect the way agricultural holdings are organized between husbands and wives, the responsibilities of the members of the household(s) and the general economic conditions.
Agricultural holding and holding parcel
An agricultural holding is an economic unit of agricultural production under single management comprising all livestock kept and all land used wholly or partly for agricultural production purposes, without having regard to title, legal form or size. It includes land rented, land owned and land being effectively used by the management under whatever type of other arrangement. Single management may be exercised by an individual, jointly by two or more individuals, or by a household, clan or tribe, or by a juridical person such as a corporation, religious organization, cooperative or government agency. The holding's land may consist of one or more separated parcels (simple compact blocks of land) located in one or more separate areas or in one or more territorial or administrative divisions, providing the parcels share the same production means utilized by the holding, such as labour, farm buildings, machinery or draught animals.
A holding parcel is any piece of land entirely surrounded by other land, water, road, forest, etc. not forming part of the holding.
Economic units engaged solely in the following economic activities are not considered agricultural holdings because these economic activities are outside agriculture:
 hunting, trapping and game propagation;
 forestry and logging;
 fishing;
 agricultural services.
Economic units engaged in agricultural services are not considered agricultural holdings. The following additional points relate to the identification of a holding:
 Holdings may have no significant land area, e.g. poultry hatcheries or holdings keeping livestock for which land is not an indispensable input for production.
 Holdings may be operated by persons who do not have any rights to agricultural use of the land on which the trees are grown, their produce being the only agricultural production.
 Various economic agricultural production units under the same ownership, or under the same general direction, may be considered separate holdings if they are operated by different persons.
 There may be more than one holding in a household.
 There may be holdings operated jointly by two or more individuals.
 If a member of a cooperative, religious organization, government agency, clan or tribe is assigned a separate unit for agricultural production that is operated under the member's management, and for which he or she has general, technical and economic responsibility, then this unit represents a holding.
 There may be holdings operated by holders having other occupation(s) in addition to being a holder.
 Open rangeland (such as land open to communal grazing) is not considered a holding. However, if a specified area is delimited by fencing, or any other form of boundary demarcation, and if its use is supervised, such land qualifies as a "communal grazing land holding" and could be included as a special category. Common grazing land not conforming to these criteria should not be considered a holding. If a decision has been made to distinguish communal grazing land from open rangeland, however, the criteria used should be indicated. For census purposes, data collected for communal grazing land holdings may include only the following items: location and holding area; holder's legal status (government, tribe and/or clan, etc.); and, if possible, the number of livestock holders having access to this holding. This information should be tabulated separately from the tabulations regarding other holdings.
Agricultural holdings considered in a survey are defined as those with a minimum size of area, volume or value of production, number of trees, livestock, etc. Such minimum thresholds are established to detect most of the agricultural production of the country, and are determined by operational reasons in order to exclude a large number of "small" holdings.
Holder, hired manager and respondent
The holder is a civil or juridical person who makes major decisions regarding resources use and exercises management control over the agricultural holding operation. The holder decides which crops to plant; when to plant; when to harvest; when to sell livestock; where to sell livestock; and how many to sell, etc. The holder has technical and economic responsibility for the holding and may undertake all responsibilities directly or delegate responsibilities related to day-to-day work management to a hired manager.
A hired manager is a civil or juridical person who takes technical and administrative responsibility to manage a holding on a holder's behalf. Responsibilities are limited to making day-to-day decisions to operate the holding, including managing and supervising hired labour. Payment is generally made in cash and/or kind. Where the hired manager shares economic and financial responsibilities in addition to managing the holding, he or she is usually considered a holder or a joint holder.
The respondent is the person from whom data are collected about the holding. The respondent for an agricultural survey should be the holder or the manager. In cases where the holder may not be available or delegated responsibilities to a hired manager, the hired manager may teethe respondent. When the hired manager is not available, then a person knowledgeable about the holding operations may be a respondent. In this case, the relation of this person to the holder (or household head) may be recorded for further evaluation purposes.
Identification of agricultural holders. Countries should make enumerators aware, especially in households, that the holder is not always the legal owner of the land or the eldest male. The person making the major decisions regarding resource use - deciding what and when to plant, what animals to breed, when to cultivate crops and when to harvest crop or livestock items - may very well be a junior or female member of the household. Identifying the holder on the basis of custom, administrative records or age and sex may distort the final results and lead to an incorrect analysis. Concerning this problem, the different types of holders should be considered: joint holders, joint holders of different sexes, joint households, etc.
Minimum size of holdings. For practical survey purposes, a minimum size limit is adopted to define the holdings. For this reason, in countries in which small holdings have a significant contribution to the total agricultural production, the minimum size for a holding should be carefully defined. In addition, it has been observed in recent agricultural surveys in many countries in the Near East region that most of the holders of small holdings are women, so their exclusion from the surveys creates a gender bias. To overcome this problem, the minimum size limit for a holding should be set as low as practically feasible. In addition, it might be convenient to define, without modifying the established minimum size limits, a second set of agricultural holdings with lower minimum sizes. Such groups of agricultural holdings, which would be excluded from the survey, could be studied through special surveys. This may capture, in particular, a significant percentage of women's
participation in agriculture not provided at present by the regular survey.
Rural households and agricultural holdings. The number of households whose members operate separate holdings, or the number of holdings operated by two or more persons belonging to different households, is small but nevertheless exists. When considering the relationship between a household and a holding, it is important to remember that the former is a complex socio-economic unit, while the latter is a simple economic unit. For this reason, when studying the holding related to a rural household, whose head is the holder with some household members participating in the work of this holding, it is recommended to consider:
 the holding as the economic unit engaged in agricultural production;
 household members participating in the work of the holding as members of the labour force used by the holding; and
 members of the household not participating in the work of the holding as not directly related to the holding.
In some countries there is a close relationship between rural households and agricultural holdings, which can lead to some confusion between the two units. For this reason, the households have often been used to identify the holders and the holdings and, in particular, to identify the holdings without land. The procedure of defining the head of the household as the head of the holding has resulted in the omission of agricultural holdings operated by individuals of the same household and therefore this procedure should not be used. Moreover, such procedures may underestimate the number of women holders because all the holdings operated by members of the same household might be considered as a single agricultural holding, generally held by a man.
Legal status of holder
The term "legal status" is not necessarily confined to the holder's legal characteristics, as it concerns broader aspects for the identification of specific types of holdings. Two types are first differentiated: private and government, and then a further disaggregation of private holders is given. In most cases, the private holder is an individual but there may be more than one holder in a given household, each operating a separate holding. If the agricultural operations carried out and commodities produced by different household members are pooled, it is more practical to treat them as one holding. This condition prevails in some regions as a kind of traditional agriculture. In extended households and composite households it is more convenient to identify several holders. The pooling of various holdings, operated by members of the same household, or the splitting of a household into separate households (each corresponding to one holding), avoids double counting of household
members for data collected on the holder's household.
A usual classification for the legal status of the holder is the following:
Private
 an individual;
 a household;
 two or more individuals of different households;
 two or more households;
 a corporation;
 a cooperative;
 other (specify).
It is possible that a household member who jointly operates such a holding may also have another holding operated by himself or herself alone.
When two or more individuals of different households jointly operate a holding, they should each be recorded as a joint holder but separate data should be collected for the household of each joint holder.
Juridical persons, such as a corporation or a cooperative, are entities separate from the real persons who form them and they should be defined within the context of national laws and customs. In most countries, joint stock companies constitute typical examples of corporations. Cooperatives include several kinds of organizations in which the principles of individual or joint ownership, or leasehold, are combined to various degrees.
Private holders not specified in any of the classes mentioned should be identified separately. Examples are tribes, clans, private schools and religious institutions other than collective monastic orders or their equivalent.
Government. Government holdings are operated by a central or local government directly or through a special body.
Usually economically active population
The agricultural survey topics on the economic characteristics of the population discussed below concentrate on the population working in the agricultural holdings and take into account the definition of economically active population adopted by the International Labour Organisation (ILO, 1983, pares 14-20).
Conceptually, the "economically active population" comprises all persons of either sex who provide the supply of labour for the production of economic goods and services, as defined by the United Nations systems of national accounts and balances, during a specified time reference period (UN, I 993). According to these systems, the production of economic goods and services includes:
 all production and processing of primary products, whether for the market, for barter or for own consumption;
 the production of all other goods and services for the market; and
 in the case of households that produce such goods and services for the market, the corresponding production for own consumption.
Production of economic goods and services also includes "own-account construction".
Conforming to the above enlarged concept of production of economic goods and services, to measure the economically active population the concept of "usually economically active population" will be used, measured in relation to the agricultural year (UN, 1990a, p. 9).
The usually economically active population comprises all persons above a specified age whose main activity status, as determined in terms of number of weeks or days during the agricultural year, was "employed" or "unemployed". The employed and unemployed are defined in respect of current activity during the day of enumeration.
The "minimum age limit" for usually economically active persons should be set in accordance with conditions in each country, but never actually higher than 15 years. A lower minimum age limit will normally be desirable in developing countries where younger children usually participate in agricultural work. To facilitate international statistical comparisons, tabulations should distinguish between persons under 15 years of age and those aged 15 years and over. A separate tabulation for persons under ten years of age is recommended in countries where the minimum age limit is below ten years.
In applying the above definitions of "employed" and "unemployed" in respect of the usual activity during the agricultural year, it is necessary to determine the "main activity status" of a person above a specified minimum age.
Two procedures may be followed at the day of enumeration to determine the main activity status of each person. One is to interpret it as the status that prevailed over most of the 365 days of the agricultural year. Another is to set a specific number of days as the cut-off point and classify anyone with at least that many days of economic activity as the "usually active population".
Particular attention should be given to special groups for which the determination of an activity status may be difficult, for example youth, women, especially unpaid family workers, and the elderly. The common notion that women are generally engaged in home-making duties can result in a serious omission with respect to measuring their activity status. Unless enumerators are explicitly instructed or the questionnaires are explicitly designed to ask about the possible economic activity of women, as they do for men, they may tend to classify women automatically as home-makers, particularly if the women are married. This tendency seems to be most pronounced in rural areas where most men are engaged in agriculture and the participation of their wives and daughters as unpaid family workers in agriculture is often overlooked. It can also happen in urban areas where modern economic conditions are rapidly changing the traditional economic role of women (UN, 1990a, p. 9-10).
Employed persons including unpaid family workers
The "employed" comprise all persons above a specified age who, during the day of enumeration, were in the following categories:
 Paid employment
At work. Persons who during the day of enumeration pet-formed some work for wage or salary, in cash or in kind.
With a job but not at work. Persons who, having already worked in their present job, were temporarily not at work during the day of enumeration and had a formal attachment to their job as evidenced by, for example, a continued receipt of wage/salary, an assurance of return to work following the end of the contingency, an agreement on the date of return following the short duration of absence from the job, etc.
 Self-employment
At work. Persons who during the day of enumeration performed some work for profit or family gain, in cash or in kind. This category includes unpaid family workers.
With an enterprise but not at work. Persons with an enterprise, which may be a business enterprise, a holding or a service undertaking, who were temporarily not at work during the day of enumeration for any specific reason.
The notion of "some work" may be interpreted as work for at least one hour during the day of enumeration.
The following treatment of certain groups of individuals in paid employment or self-employment is recommended:
 Persons temporarily not at work because of illness or injury, holiday or vacation, strike or lock-out, educational or training leave, maternity or parental leave, reduction in economic activity, temporary disorganization or suspension of work owing to such reasons as bad weather, mechanical or electrical breakdown, or shortage of raw materials or fuels or other temporary absence with or without leave should be considered as in paid employment provided they had a formal job attachment.
 Employers, own-account workers and members of producers' cooperatives should be considered as in self-employment and classified as "at work" or "not at work", as the case may be.
 Unpaid family workers at work should be considered as in self-employment irrespective of the number of hours worked during the day of enumeration. Countries that prefer to set a minimum time criterion for the inclusion of unpaid family workers among the employed should identify and separately classify those who worked less than the prescribed time (UN, 1990a, p. 11-12).
Unpaid family workers who constitute a subset of employed persons require special mention. The United Nations defines an unpaid family worker as "usually a person who works without pay in an economic enterprise operated by a related person living in the same household. Where it is customary for young persons, in particular, to work without pay in an economic enterprise operated by a related person who does not live in the same household, the requirement of 'living in the same household' may be eliminated" (UN, I 990a, p. 19). Strict application of the minimum working requirement ("at least one third of the normal working hours") for unpaid family workers in agriculture is not recommended; otherwise a large number of people, including many female workers, dividing their working time between study or housework and work on the holding, may be excluded from the economically active population.
Workers on the holding who are members of the holder's household should be included. Each country should determine the minimum requirement for the amount of time worked on the holding by a member of the holder's household during the reference period to determine whether the member should be considered to have "worked on the holding" or not.
Members who worked on the holding are part of the economically active population.
Unemployed persons
The unemployed comprise all persons above a specified age who during the day of enumeration were:
 "Without work", i.e. were not in paid employment or self-employment, as defined above.
 "Currently available for work", i.e. were available for paid employment or self-employment during the day of enumeration.
 "Seeking work", i.e. had taken specific steps in a specified recent period to seek paid employment or self-employment (UN, 1990a, p. 12).
It is consistent with international standards to include as unemployed those persons who are available for work but who are not actively seeking work because they believe no jobs are available.
Not usually economically active persons
The population not usually economically active includes all persons whose main activity status during the agricultural year was neither employed nor unemployed. It comprises the following functional categories:
 Home-makers. Persons of either sex, not economically active, who are engaged in household duties in their own home, for example, housewives and other relatives responsible for the care of the home and children (domestic employees working for pay, however, are classified as usually active).
 Students. Persons of either sex, not economically active, who attend any regular educational institution, whether public or private, for systematic instruction at any level of education.
 Income recipients. Persons of either sex, not economically active, who receive income from property or investments, interest, rent, royalties or pensions from former activities.
 Others. Persons of either sex, not economically active, who are receiving public aid or private support, and all other persons not falling into any of the above categories, such as disabled persons or children not attending school (UN, 1990a, p. 14).
According to the definition recommended by ILO, an individual should be considered economically active when he or she has worked at least one hour during the reference week. The only "domestic" activities that should not be considered "economic" and therefore identify a home-maker are:
 maintenance of dwellings (cleaning and repair);
 preparing meals, washing clothes, shopping for the household;
 caring for children and other family members.
Activities such as gathering wild foods, gathering fuel or fodder, processing crops for preservation or storage, kitchen gardening and collecting water for household use are economic and preclude the individual from being classified as not economically active. In many cases, these activities are not considered as work and this produces distorted results on the role of women in agricultural activities.
To classify a holder's household members into economically active and not economically active, the general principle is that participation in an economic activity should always take precedence over participation in a non-economic activity. For example, students or home-makers are classified as economically active if they participate in an economic activity during the reference period. Similarly, persons receiving pensions consequent to retirement, but who continue working, should be considered economically active.
Whether worked on the holding. The critical issue here is how to formulate the question in such a way that women be recorded as workers. The question (or sequence of questions) should be designed to discourage any tendency to record women as housewives, ignoring their economic activities. Rather than simply asking "did you work on the holding in the past season/year?", the interviewer could give a list of specific activities, tailored to local circumstances.
Whether received any payment in cash or kind. In many countries there are wage differentials between women and men. The problem is especially relevant in agriculture where many women work as unpaid family workers. Information on forms of payment - wages or payment in kind - could help shed light on this aspect of women's work.
Main and secondary occupations
"Occupation" refers to the type of work done during the reference period by the person employed (or the type of work done previously, if unemployed), irrespective of the industry or the status in employment. Occupation normally applies to economically active persons only.
Occupational statistics should be compiled in accordance with the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-88) as revised by ILO in 1988 (ILO, 1990).
Where the usually active measure is applied, information on occupation should refer to the type of work done or the job held for the longest time during the agricultural year.
For persons reporting more than one occupation, criteria will have to be established for determining the "main occupation". The decision can, for example, be based on the occupation on which most time was spent during the period or it can be based on the most remunerative occupation.
Main occupation and secondary occupation. A question on the secondary occupation has a twofold objective: it records those situations where the individual is only employed part-time on the holding and has another activity in agriculture or in a different sector; and it helps capture those situations where the woman identifies herself as a housewife (main occupation) and indicates working on the holding as "secondary occupation". This second aspect is particularly relevant to the adequate measurement of women's work. Studies have shown the tendency of women working in agriculture to consider themselves as housewives and to regard activities such as planting and harvesting as housework. Asking specifically about the secondary occupation would probably encourage the respondent to indicate her work other than housework. In the case of a woman working part-time or seasonally on her husband's holding and managing her own holding, she would be recorded as holder (main occupation)
and unpaid family worker (secondary occupation) in her husband's holding.
Occupations are classified in ISCO-88 into the following major groups:
1. Legislators, senior officials and managers
2. Professionals
3. Technicians and associate professionals
4. Clerks
5. Service workers and shop and market sales workers
6. Skilled agricultural and fishery workers
7. Craft and related trades workers
8. Plant and machine operators and assemblers
9. Elementary occupations
10. Armed forces
Work in agricultural activities is included in major groups 1, 2, 3, 6 and 9 but most persons in rural areas report occupations belonging to major groups 6 and 9. The major groups are divided into minor groups, described in detail in ISCO-88 (ILO, 1990). While assigning detailed occupation coding for occupations according to local conditions, countries are urged to use the minor groups (or subsets of them) in order to provide internationally comparable classifications on agricultural work.
Group 6, Skilled agricultural and fishery workers, includes workers whose "tasks require the knowledge and experience necessary to produce farm, forestry and fishery products" (ILO, 1990, p. 6). These may be further subdivided into minor groups relating to their type of activity.
Group 9, Elementary occupations, covers workers whose occupations require the limited knowledge and experience necessary to perform mostly simple and routine tasks, involving the use of hand-held tools and, in some cases, considerable physical effort and, with few exceptions, only limited personal initiative or judgement. Tasks include: digging and shovelling; loading and unloading; raking, pitching and stocking hay; watering and weeding; picking fruit and other crops; feeding, watering and cleaning animals (ILO, 1990, p. 258).
Industry
Industry refers to the activity of the establishment in which an employed person worked during the time reference period established for data on economic characteristics (or last worked, if unemployed).
It is recommended that countries compile the industrial characteristics of active persons according to the International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities, Rev. 3 (UN, 1990b).
Status in employment
Status in employment refers to the status of an economically active person with respect to his or her employment, that is, whether he or she is employed (or was, if unemployed) as an employer, own-account worker, employee, unpaid family worker or a member of a producers' cooperative, etc., during the time reference period.
For purposes of international comparability, it is recommended that countries compile the data in accordance with the following status in employment classification:
 Employer. A person who operates his or her own economic enterprise or engages independently in a profession or trade, and hires one or more employees.
 Own-account worker. A person who operates his or her own economic enterprise or engages independently in a profession or trade, and hires no employees.
 Employee. A person who works for a public or private employer and receives remuneration in wages, salary, commission, tips, piece-rates or pay in kind.
 Unpaid family worker. Usually a person who works without pay in an economic enterprise operated by a related person living in the same household. Where it is customary for young persons, in particular, to work without pay in an economic enterprise operated by a related person who does not live in the same household, the requirement of living in the same household may be eliminated.
 Member of producers' cooperative. A person who is an active member of a producers' cooperative, regardless of the industry in which it is established.
 Persons not classifiable by status. Experienced workers whose status is unknown or inadequately described and unemployed persons not previously employed (UN, 1990a, p. 18-19).
Gender biases have been observed in the estimates of hired agricultural workers.
Permanent agricultural workers on the holding
A permanent agricultural worker is a person whose services are utilized regularly and continuously during the agricultural year for agricultural work on the holding. The total number of days worked during the agricultural year (normally six months or more) distinguishes a permanent worker from an occasional worker in some countries. However, a permanent worker may actually work less than six months during the agricultural year, especially in crop production in countries with one crop season. Countries should determine the minimum number of working days or months in accordance with their particular agricultural and other relevant conditions. Permanent agricultural workers on the holding may engage in other work, especially during periods when no significant agricultural work is undertaken.
Occasional agricultural workers on the holding
An occasional agricultural worker is a person working once or more times during the agricultural year and is not expected to work regularly or continuously on the holding.
Time reference
A time reference is provided for each questionnaire item. The time reference is either the day of enumeration (for inventory items) or the agricultural year (continuing activities). The term "day of enumeration" should be interpreted as the date of the actual interview with the respondent.
The time reference for questionnaire items referring to the number of permanent agricultural workers is the day of enumeration. The time reference for all other questionnaire items related to agricultural workers or employment is normally the agricultural year.
In many countries, sample surveys have identified strong seasonal fluctuations in the amount of time people spend in agricultural activities and have also marked differences by gender. A short reference period is likely to exclude many women from the economically active population, especially where their work is more seasonal than that of men. In order to consider the entire agricultural cycle, the reference period should be one year.
<section>3</section>
Questionnaires and instruction manuals
Questionnaires and instruction manuals
Since it is not the main objective of a general-purpose agricultural production census or sample survey to study in detail the structure of the population in agriculture, the questionnaire items should be limited in this respect. The FAO Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000 includes specific proposals for agricultural census questionnaire items (FAO, 1995).
As a general rule, data on the agriculture-related population should be collected through the regular agricultural surveys only if such data cannot be obtained through the population census, through a periodic population sample survey or through a special agricultural sample survey. In other words, the selection of the agricultural survey questionnaire items on the population concerned with agriculture should always consider and be a function of the following factors:
 The availability of such data from the population and housing census or periodic population sample surveys.
 The possibility of including these items in a population survey or census questionnaire.
As has already been mentioned, it is important that countries coordinate adequately their agricultural census and survey programmes with the population and housing census and survey programmes which are generally organized by different government institutions.
The language used in the survey questionnaires and in the instruction manuals should be as simple as possible. Words that are not common to the agricultural population of the country should not be used. The use of uncommon words or expressions might place female respondents at a disadvantage since women are generally less exposed to public contact and training than men and frequently have a lower level of education.
In particular, the word "gender", or other words that are not common to the agricultural population in developing countries, should not be used in the questionnaires and instruction manuals in place of the word "sex". In fact, they are for use by farmers or enumerators in developing countries, a large percentage of whom may not know the word. In the future, if "gender" becomes universally known, then it may be used, as is now recommended by some data users and analysts.
The use of words or expressions in the official language that may be gender biased should be avoided.
Special attention should be given to the translation of the questionnaires and manuals from the official language into the spoken dialect. Words that are not gender biased in the official language may become biased in the translation.
The way questions are asked affects the answers. This is particularly true for women respondents and for questions regarding economic activities. Studies on this problem have shown that by providing examples of what is meant by "activities", women's work is more likely to be captured. The order in which questions are asked also affects the answers, particularly on gender issues, for several reasons - for example, respondent fatigue.
Instruction manuals should be adequately balanced with male and female examples and illustrations.
Qualified staff of both sexes on the subject matter should be available during the preparation of the instruction manuals. Gender neutrality is very important and should be maintained while preparing the manuals.
<section>4</section>
Frames for agricultural censuses and sample surveys
Agricultural census frame
Agricultural list sample survey frames
Agricultural area sample survey frames
Frames for agricultural censuses and sample surveys
An agricultural census is an agricultural survey in which the estimates are based on the complete enumeration (100 percent) of all holdings. A questionnaire would be completed for each holding.
Agricultural sample surveys are those agricultural surveys that are not censuses. Thus, the estimates of the specified variables are obtained by inferences based on a sample of all reporting units (holdings or land areas). Questionnaires would be completed for a sample of reporting units.
A non-probability or subjective sample survey is an agricultural sample survey for which the inference procedure to obtain the estimates of the desired variables is not based on probability sampling and estimation methods. A subjective agricultural sample survey is, therefore, a survey in which the statistical precision of the estimates cannot be established.
Conversely, an agricultural sample survey for which the inference procedure to obtain the estimates of the desired variables is based on probability sampling and estimation methods is called a probability sample survey. For a probability sample survey, the statistical precision of the estimates has a clear mathematical meaning and can be established.
The overall survey design of an agricultural probability sample survey refers to the definitions and the established methods and procedures concerning all phases needed for conducting the survey: the sample design, the selection and training of personnel in charge of the specified data-collection procedures, the organization of the logistics involved in the distribution and receipt of survey forms and questionnaires, the data-processing procedures and the analysis of survey data needed for the release of the final results.
The sampling design of an agricultural probability sample survey refers to the definitions and the established methods of sampling selection and estimation. There is a variety of agricultural sampling designs involving different types of sampling unit, probability functions, sampling fractions, stratification and clustering procedures and estimators. There are also designs that involve several sampling stages, in which case for each sampling stage the sampling units, probability functions and sampling methods have to be established and combined to obtain the last-stage survey estimates.
The agricultural survey can have a variety of sampling designs and can be carried out in a number of ways with different enumeration procedures (by personal field interview, by expert observation, self-administered questionnaires, by mail or, perhaps, by telephone), which may or may not include the identification and objective measurement of agricultural areas or other agricultural commodities in the selected enumeration units.
As has already been mentioned, the national periodic agricultural surveys considered can be agricultural censuses or agricultural sample surveys.
There are two basic types of agricultural probability sample survey: area sample survey and list sample survey.
An area sample survey is a probability sample survey in which the final stage sampling units are land areas known as segments, and the selection probabilities are proportional to their area measures. For an agricultural area sample survey the entire survey area is completely subdivided into non-overlapping land areas, or segments, that are the sampling units.
For probability area sample surveys, the most common types of segment (last-stage sampling units) used are: segments with recognizable physical boundaries, square segments or segments that coincide with agricultural holdings.
A tract is a portion(s) or subdivision of a segment that is included in a holding. It is either (a) an entire holding; (b) part(s) of a holding; or (c) an area of land not part of any agricultural holding.
A tract is therefore determined by the definition of a holding and by the boundaries of a segment.
A holding is composed of one or more tracts. All land under the operating arrangement - non-agricultural land, farmstead, barns, corrals, pasture, ponds, etc. - is included in the tract. A questionnaire should be completed for each tract, except for those tracts that consist of wasteland, water and non-agricultural land that will usually be listed only on a control sheet and not subjected to a questionnaire.
The reporting units of an area sample survey are usually the holdings or the tracts.
Three main methods have been used in area sample surveys to associate reporting units (holdings or tracts) to the sampling units (segments) for estimating survey variables: the closed segment, the open segment and the weighted segment methods. The weighted segment method and also the open segment method correspond to surveys and estimates for which the reporting units are the holdings. The tract is the reporting unit for area sample surveys with a closed segment procedure.
A list sample survey is an agricultural probability sample survey that is not an area sample survey. The usual reporting units of agricultural list sample surveys are the holdings and the commonly used final-stage sampling units are the holdings' addresses or the holders' (farmers') addresses.
Finally, multiple-frame agricultural surveys are the agricultural surveys that combine the two basic types of probability sample design (area and list samples).
The frame for an agricultural census is a set of physical materials (lists, directories, records, maps, statistics) that covers the universe of reporting units and allows the provision of suitable enumeration units.
For a probability survey, the term "frame" has two different meanings. In probability sample design, the frame for each sampling stage is simply the list of sampling units from which the sample is selected together with their probabilities of selection.
On the other hand, for applied survey sampling, the frame for each sampling stage of an agricultural sample survey is a set of physical materials (lists, directories, records, maps, statistics) that covers the universe of reporting units and allows the provision of suitable sampling units.
The agricultural census frame and the agricultural sample survey frames are discussed separately in the following sections in relation to the improvement of population data that can be obtained from agricultural data collection programmes.
Agricultural census frame
The reporting units and the enumeration units of an agricultural census are the agricultural holdings. In order to organize the agricultural census data collection, it is indispensable to estimate in advance the approximate location of the agricultural holdings or the holders' housing units and to assign to census enumerators well-defined areas of work, known as enumeration areas (EAs).
The enumeration areas are non-overlapping geographic areas (or groups of enumeration units) with the following characteristics:
 They cover all the enumeration units (agricultural holdings or holders' households).
 If the EAs are geographic areas, their boundaries should preferably not cross urban, rural or political subdivisions of the country.
 The area (or number of enumeration units) of the EAs should correspond to approximately equivalent required workloads. They can be estimated by: the approximate number of holdings or holders' households; the distances and difficulties of access to the holdings or holders' housing units; and the average time needed for each interview and the established length of the census enumeration period.
An agricultural census frame is defined as an ordered list of enumeration areas with the estimated number or addresses of holdings, or holders' households or holders' housing units in each EA.
National population and housing census data and cartographic materials often provide an important source to construct the frames for the agricultural census. This is one of the reasons why it is of fundamental importance to coordinate adequately the population and the agricultural censuses which, in most countries, are the largest, most expensive and most complex statistical data collection programmes.
It is important to coordinate the designs of the population and the agricultural census cartography or lists of EAs, or to elaborate them jointly, because this will save a considerable amount of time and resources. This is particularly significant for countries that can devote only very limited resources to national statistical data collection programmes. and to countries with a high proportion of population in the agricultural/rural sector.
The enumeration unit of the population and housing census is the household and not the agricultural holding, which is the enumeration unit of the agricultural census.
Population census questionnaires, in most cases, do not allow a direct link to be established between holdings and holders. However, the population census questionnaires identify the population whose main activity is agriculture within the context of a fairly short reference period.
The universe of study of the population and housing census, i.e. the total number of households/housing units in the country, is larger than that of the agricultural census since the latter covers, in particular, only a small proportion of urban households.
In urban areas in which the proportion of holders' households is generally low, in order to construct the agricultural census frame a field screening is often organized to permit the identification of the holders' households and of the agricultural census EAs by grouping contiguous population census EAs.
In rural areas, if the number of holders' housing units can be estimated from the total number of occupied housing units by EA, then suitable groups of contiguous population census EAs can be used to define the agricultural census EAs.
Consideration should be given to the following aspects of the population census questionnaires with relation to the construction of the frame for the agricultural census:
 The inclusion of questions aimed at identifying holders' households, such as obtaining the main and secondary occupation of the population during the agricultural year. And questions which differentiate between work performed on the respondents' holding and work performed on other holdings.
 The inclusion of questions designed to provide information about some basic characteristics of holdings.
The definition of work performed by men and women on the holding, as has already been mentioned, should be carefully applied since women's activities on the holding may be more difficult to detect for cultural reasons.
The population census questions that distinguish between work performed on the respondents' holding and work performed on other holdings and those questions that allow the identification of holders' households are generally essential for constructing the agricultural census frame.
The construction of an agricultural census frame must also cover the holdings related to agriculture that are not directly associated with holders' households, such as large plantations or cooperatives. Although the population census may provide very useful data, it should not constitute the sole source of information for the construction of an agricultural census frame.
Agricultural list sample survey frames
The frame for each stage of selection of an agricultural survey is defined as an ordered list of sampling units, together with their assigned measures of size. The enumeration units and the ultimate sampling units are the holdings, the holders' households, the households or the housing units.
The frames for the last stage of selection of an agricultural list sample survey generally involve the screening of agricultural holders from a list of households in selected areas. Therefore, the same considerations that are taken into account in the construction of a frame of an agricultural census are valid, in particular those intended to minimize gender biases.
Population and housing census data, enumeration areas and maps often constitute an important component in the construction of agricultural list sample survey frames. In addition, in most cases the population census information is the best tool for detecting inconsistencies and verifying the validity of agricultural sample survey and census frames.
In view of the above, the proper identification of holders' households using the population and housing census is often used for the construction of an agricultural list sample survey frame. For that purpose, the application of an adequate definition of work in agriculture performed by men and women should be considered.
As in the case of an agricultural census, the construction of an agricultural list sample survey frame must also cover the holdings related to agriculture that are not directly associated with holders' households.
Agricultural area sample survey frames
A sampling frame for each sampling selection stage of an agricultural area sample survey is an ordered list of land areas, called "frame units", with their assigned measures of size which are the number of segments in each frame unit, with the following characteristics: (a) the frame units form a complete subdivision of the total land area with no overlap; (b) the frame units provide a clear-cut means of identifying each sample unit; and (c) the measure of size assigned to each frame unit facilitates the probability sampling of sampling units.
Hence, except for the case in which the segments are the holdings, the area sample survey frame construction is usually unrelated to the holdings.
For area sample surveys, the annual or seasonal data collection in the sample segments is done by enumerators who apply a questionnaire through direct personal interviews with the selected holders or respondents. The area sample surveys generally involve, in addition, the objective measurement of agricultural areas. The enumerator, during data collection, identifies and delineates on aerial photographs (or scale maps) the parcels of land of each tract in the segment, which are later measured in the office.
A tract within a segment is often divided into a number of fields in which the land use is different. On the photo enlargement or scale drawing of the segment, tracts are given letters and fields are given numbers consecutively within each tract.
A field is a block of land, recognized by the farmer, that is usually treated as a unit. It may be all planted to the same crop or the same mix of crops in any one season or it may be subdivided into different crops, but the boundaries are not changed. The crops may be changed for the next planting but the outermost boundaries or "edges" are maintained. This is a useful concept where the farmers think and work along these lines. Fields are usually recognizable on photography and even on imagery where fields are large.
<section>5</section>
Selection and training of field and office staff
Selection
Training
Selection and training of field and office staff
The recruitment of staff for the agricultural survey generally involves an initial selection of the candidates who are then trained and undertake a final examination.
Selection
The most qualified persons, of either sex, should be encouraged to participate as office staff, supervisors and enumerators for the agricultural census or survey programme.
In countries where cultural and religious factors prevent women from talking freely to men, women should not be recruited as field staff or, particularly, as enumerators. However, women office staff may be recommended.
On the other hand, in some countries women enumerators may be more accepted by the respondent and by the families and should then constitute the majority of the field staff, other qualifications being equal. A team including both male and female enumerators may also be considered.
The selection of supervisors involves other considerations. Supervisors can be assigned from the permanent staff of the institution or they can be selected from among the candidates who have the required skills and leadership for the job.
Training
Special emphasis should be given to the adequate training of the enumerators so that they are aware of the problems related to the collection of gender-disaggregated data.
If necessary, additional training should be given to women who have generally received less education than men. But different standards of qualifications for the job should not be accepted.
Training modules dealing with the existence of prejudices and stereotypes, language problems and cultural and customary gender discriminations should be developed.
The effect of the gender of the interviewer and the respondent in relation to the specific cultural and religious context should be clearly explained to the enumerators.
The following aspects related to the collection of data disaggregated by gender should be considered for the training of field personnel:
 The use of simple language and, whenever possible, use of words that are non-gender specific (e.g. in English words such as "man-week", "fisherman" and phrases referring to the holder or the head of household as "he" should be avoided).
 The concepts and definitions that create special problems in terms of eliciting gender-specific information should be indicated (e.g. "economic activity", "unemployed", "head of household", etc.).
 The main difficulties that arise concerning the measurement of women's work should be explained.
 Women's participation in extension programmes (if appropriate) is generally low. The majority of these programmes. are focused on export crops and tend to overlook food production and livestock, where women farmers predominate. In some countries, there is an additional constraint owing to the fact that women are not allowed to speak to male extensionists. In the case of a census, the reference period could be extended to more than a year in order to capture programmes with a low frequency in time.
 Manuals should be carefully balanced with male and female examples (and drawings, when they are used) and should give examples of women in unconventional roles.
<section>6</section>
Field data collection
Pilot surveys
Field data collection
Field enumeration is an interactive process between an enumerator and a respondent. It is prone to many sorts of non-sampling errors. Some of these errors may be related to the sex of the interviewer, errors occurring owing to the presence of outsiders at the interview and to other factors. The "contamination effect" occurs when neighbours are present and are influenced by the survey topics and the responses given during the interview. Later, if they are interviewed, they will naturally be affected by the previous experience and their responses may be biased.
Another important error concerning third persons is called the "presence of others effect". The presence of other persons during the interview will affect the responses given by the respondent, compared with interviews carried out in the absence of others.
The "response distortion" will vary according to different survey topics. For example, in some countries it has been found that in the presence of others livestock numbers are generally overreported while the agricultural production is underreported.
In order to avoid such errors occurring during the interviews, it is recommended that interviewers be trained to insist that the interviews should not be carried out in the presence of others.
Depending on the topic of the survey and the specific questions, a gender bias may occur for both sexes, relating to the gender of all parties (respondent, interviewer and other persons present) involved during the interview.
Pilot surveys
Pilot surveys should be designed, in particular, to detect possible gender biases corresponding to the questionnaire items and the variability of survey data by sex, as well as for estimating the cost, timing, coverage, non-response, and enumeration workload of the survey operation. Possible gender biases should be taken into consideration to test these operations.
In the light of the information collected during the pilot surveys, gender-related biases concerning those aspects of the data collection operation should be recognized and controlled.
<section>7</section>
Tabulations and dissemination of results
Publicity campaign
Tabulations and dissemination of results
The tabulation of results by sex, whenever useful, should be recommended. For an agricultural census, the FAO Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000 recommends the use of a number of tabulation headings, for example:
 Holdings by size of holder's household and sex of holder
 Holders and members of their households working on the holding by age and sex
 Holders and members of their households working on the holding by education level and sex
 Holders and members of their households working on the holding by marital status and sex
 Holdings by number of permanent/occasional workers (skilled or unskilled) and by sex
 Holdings hiring permanent and occasional workers
 Hired permanent workers by sex and skilled or unskilled
Special efforts should be made to make existing gender-specific statistics more useful. In some cases, data by gender on important topics are collected but not tabulated and remain unused. The availability of gender-specific data produced through national surveys should be extended to as many users as possible with easier access to existing data from official sources.
The dissemination of survey information through the publication of tables, the facilitation of access to non-confidential data in the official data banks, the release of information in the form of public use samples, summary tapes, computer print-outs, diskettes or tapes should include, whenever useful, gender-disaggregated data. The use of modern methods of data dissemination will imply, in particular, the better dissemination of statistics on women in agriculture.
Publicity campaign
The survey publicity campaign should stress, in particular, that agricultural production requires the labour of both men and women farmers. Thus, both men and women need to be addressed in publicity campaigns.
It is important to emphasize that women can also be holders or respondents and therefore the publicity campaign should reach women engaged in agricultural work and explain to the population the importance of women's activities in agriculture.
<section>8</section>
Bibliography
National case-study reports
Bibliography
FAO. 1992. Improving gender disaggregated data on human resources through agricultural censuses. Rome. 43 pp.
FAO. 1994a. Statistics on women obtained through national agricultural censuses and sample surveys. Paper presented at the Regional Meeting of the Asia and Pacific Commission on Agricultural Statistics (APCAS), held in Manila, the Philippines, 24-28 October 1994.
FAO. 1994b. Guidelines on improvements for the production of gender disaggregated data in agricultural surveys for Near East countries. Consultant report for FAO Statistics Division, Rome. (unpublished)
FAO. 1995. Programme for the World Census of Agriculture 2000. FAO Statistical Development Series No. 5, Rome. 85 pp.
ILO. 1983. International Labour Organisation 13th International Conference of Labour Statisticians. Resolution 1: Resolution concerning statistics of the economically active population, employment, unemployment and underemployment, pares 14-20. Geneva.
ILO. 1990. International Standard Classification of Occupations: ISCO-88. Geneva.
UN. 1980. Principles and recommendations for population and housing censuses. United Nations Statistical Papers, Series M, No. 67, New York.
UN. 1990a. Supplementary principles and recommendations for population and housing censuses. United Nations Statistical Papers, Series M, No. 67/Add. 1, New York.
UN. 1990b. International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities. ISIC-90. United Nations Statistical Papers, Series M, No. 4, Rev.3, New York.
UN. 1993. System of national accounts 1993. United Nations document ST/ESA/STAT/SER.F/2/Rev.4, New York.
National case-study reports
Egypt
Some suggestions for improving the production of data disaggregated by gender obtained through the agricultural census and the current agricultural surveys of Egypt, by M.S.M. Nazif and S. Nassar, Cairo, March 1994.
Islamic Republic of Iran
Some suggestions for improving the production of data disaggregated by gender obtained through the agricultural census and the current agricultural survey in Iran, by S. Hassan Shamsi, Teheran, September 1994.
Pakistan
Gender disaggregated data and statistics on human resources in Pakistan's agriculture. An appraisal report by S.M. Aslam Jafri, Islamabad, March 1994.
Gender disaggregated national population statistics in Pakistan, by N.M. Larik, Islamabad, March 1994.
The Sudan
Suggestions for the improvement of gender disaggregated agricultural statistics in Sudan, by Hassan Elsheikh Elbashir, Khartoum, May 1994.
Determination of improvements of gender-disaggregated national demographic statistics in Sudan, by A.W. Ali Modawi, Khartoum, June 1994.
Syrian Arab Republic
Description and evaluation of the Syrian population and agricultural censuses and surveys. Proposals for improving gender disaggregated statistics, by Ibrahim Ali, Damascus, April 1994.
Tunisia
Evaluation et identification des amliorations du systme d'information tunisien pour la production de donnes statistiques ventilles par sexe, by Abdessalem
Kamoun, Tunis, June 1994.
Turkey
Determination of improvements for the production of gender disaggregated agricultural and rural statistics in Turkey, by H.O. Ayhan, Ankara, January 1994.
<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
The FAO Statistics Division, in cooperation with the Women and Population Division, has undertaken a number of activities for improving statistics on women that can be obtained through modifications to regular national agricultural data collection programmes.
For the Near East region, such activities were initiated in 1993 in cooperation with the FAO Regional Office for the Near East which led to the organization of a Regional Expert Consultation for Women in Agriculture.
Country case-studies were prepared for Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Turkey. The case-studies were commissioned by FAO to the following national consultants: Mahmoud S.M. Nazif and Saad Nassar (Egypt); S. Hassan Shamsi (Iran); S.M. Aslam Jafri and Noor Mohammad Larik (Pakistan); Hassan Elsheikh Elbashir and A.W. Ali Modawi (the Sudan); Ibrahim Ali (Syrian Arab Republic); Abdessalem Kamoun (Tunisia); and H. Oztas Ayhan (Turkey).
The national reports analyse the situation of data disaggregated by gender in the respective countries and give practical suggestions for improvements in data collection and dissemination for the regular national agricultural and population censuses and surveys.
Following the completion of these national case-studies, a workshop was organized in July 1994 at the FAO Regional Office for the Near East in Cairo to analyse the national consultants' reports and to provide the technical groundwork for the preparation of guidelines for the region.
These guidelines have taken into consideration the national case-studies, the conclusions of the Cairo workshop and, particularly, the summary report of the national case-studies prepared by Professor H. Oztas Ayhan as an FAO consultant.
The guidelines have been prepared with a view to providing National Statistical Offices in countries of the Near East region with suggestions for improving the collection and dissemination of statistics on women by introducing suitable modifications in their regular national agricultural censuses and sample surveys.
