<title>Agriculture food and nutrition for Africa - A resource book for teachers of agriculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Preface
OBJECTIVE AND RATIONALE FOR THIS RESOURCE BOOK
This is a resource book for use in sub-Saharan Africa^1 by teachers of agriculture who wish to introduce into their training programmes aspects of the food chain that are related to food consumption and to nutrition. It has been produced as a contribution to the FAO programme on introducing a food and nutrition component into agricultural training curricula in Africa, in response to numerous requests from participants in workshops and seminars.
^1 For ease of reference, sub-Saharan Africa (which excludes South Africa) is often simply referred to as Africa in the text. The grouping of countries in sub-Saharan Africa is given in Annex 2. Whenever possible, data are provided for individual countries or aggregated for sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. In cases where data are available only in aggregated form for continental Africa as a whose (as is the case with statistics on the prevalence of malnutrition derived from the WHO Global Database on Child Growth), this is indicated in the text. The WHO grouping of countries in Africa is also included in Annex 2.
The resource book is designed for use by trainers in preparing their teaching material; it is not intended for direct use by students. It contains both resource material, in the form of tables, figures and boxes, and text linking the resource material under a number of topics. It is not expected that this text will be transcribed directly as teaching handouts; its purpose is to provide the trainer with information relevant to sub-Saharan Africa, based on which specific, locally based examples can be identified and developed to illustrate the concepts.
The resource material has been selected from the widest possible range of different African countries (mainly English-speaking) and ecological regions. However, it is inevitable that some countries are better represented than others because of the inequitable distribution of nutritional information and activities in the different regions. Thus it is essential that this material be supplemented, wherever possible, by local examples. The collection and collation of such examples can often serve as a useful training exercise for students. A list of addresses for international organizations and sources of material is provided in Annex 1.
The book is divided into nine chapters, whose topics are integrated through extensive cross-referencing. The sequence of presentation is such that a group of topics may be taught together as a complete course, or topics may be taught independently of the given sequence, in any logical order that suits the curriculum requirements of the educator. The book is intended to be used flexibly.
INTENDED USERS AND LEVELS OF PRESENTATION
To meet all of the resource needs for different academic levels and types of programmes in one volume, for the whole of Africa, is clearly impractical. Compromise was needed. Thus, topics related to policies and economic issues at the national and international levels are presented in a format appropriate to the responsibilities and level of understanding of policy-makers; accordingly, these chapters could form the basis for the development of an in-service seminar or workshop for participants from the highest levels of government. However, if the same concepts are deemed essential for rural development workers with lower educational qualifications, then some simplification and adaptation of the training material will be necessary.
Conversely, other topics of a more practical nature, such as the promotion of home gardens, are presented using a field-based approach, as this appears to be more relevant to the tasks and therefore to the training content of courses designed for agricultural extension agents. It is not intended that all chapters be taught in all programmes. This resource book is a menu, not a syllabus. However, it is advised that all teachers study Chapters 1 and 2, as these provide definitions of technical terms such as nutrition, introduce concepts such as household food security, and form the background to the chapters that follow.
The resource book may be used in the following range of programmes:
· pre-service education of agriculturists at diploma and bachelor's degree levels in fields such as general agriculture, agricultural extension and agricultural education;
· in-service training courses, workshops and seminars for agricultural extension agents, rural development workers, administrators of agriculture and rural development programmes and government policy-makers in food, nutrition and agriculture;
· in-service education of secondary-school teachers of agriculture;
· in-service education of members of the faculty of agriculture in colleges and universities.
SELECTING AND ADAPTING MATERIAL TO MEET SPECIFIC EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES
The educational objectives of the trainer should be based on the needs of the course participants. The following are some examples of how the resource book can be used in developing various programmes.
A short in-service training programme for agricultural extension officers in general agriculture
Objective: To integrate some nutritional considerations into the normal tasks of the extension officer at community level.
Resource selection: Material from the following sections may be selected, depending on the identified tasks of the extension officers and the length of the training programme.
Chapter 5
· Food diversification for stable access and a sustainable food supply
· Gardening for food
· Small livestock and poultry keeping
Chapter 6
· Post-harvest practices at household level
· Post-harvest handling and storage
· Home- and village-based food preservation
Chapter 7
· Planning a diet and feeding a family
Chapter 5
· Promoting diversification of diets
It will also be necessary to supplement such skill-oriented topics with some basic information on human nutrition and malnutrition from Chapters 7 and 8, depending on the background of the trainees. However, it will often be more effective to integrate this information into the skill-oriented topics where it will be seen as relevant, rather than to teach it as separate blocks. For example, information on requirements for vitamin A and symptoms of its deficiency could conveniently be discussed under the topic "Gardening for food".
An in-service education programme for secondary-school teachers of agriculture
Objective: To enable teachers of agriculture in schools to integrate nutrition in agricultural topics and encourage food- and agriculture-related community nutrition activities.
Resource selection: The following sections may be appropriate.
Chapter 7
· Vulnerable periods in the life cycle and special energy and nutrient needs
· African diets and diet composition
Chapter 5
· Food diversification for stable access and a sustainable food supply
· Gardening for food
Chapter 6
· Post-harvest handling and storage
· Home- and village-based food preservation
Chapter 5
· Promoting diversification of diets
Chapter 9
· Nutrition education in schools
A seminar for policy-makers considering the merits of drawing up a national food and nutrition plan of action for inclusion in the next development plan
Objective: To enable policy-makers to assess the nutritional consequences of decisions taken in their spheres of influence.
Resource selection: Relevant material may be taken from the following sections. Care should be taken to ensure that up-to-date national statistics are used to illustrate the major concepts.
Chapter 2
· National policies affecting food security and nutrition
Chapter 3
· Concepts in household food security
Chapter 4
· Agriculture in transition: factors affecting food security
· Food industries and small-scale processing
· Urbanization and changing patterns of food demand
Chapter 5
· Food diversification for stable access and a sustainable food supply
Chapter 8
· Micronutrient malnutrition: mineral and vitamin deficiency disorders
· Preventing and combating micronutrient malnutrition through a comprehensive approach
Some options for members of the faculty of agriculture in colleges and universities who wish to introduce some nutrition topics into their curricula
Specific topics may be introduced as part of existing undergraduate options.
In a curriculum on plant production, the inclusion of one or more of the following sections could be included.
Chapter 4
· Production potentials and crop selection
· Crop specialization and food security
· Commercialization of agriculture: potential effects on household food security
Teachers of horticulture might wish to include the following.
Chapter 5
· Improving mixed cropping technologies through farming systems studies and adaptive research
· Support services and advocacy for mixed cropping
· Promotion of underexploited traditional food crops
· Gardening for food
· Urban agriculture
A curriculum in agricultural economics might also encompass the following factors related to the nutrition security of families at household level.
Chapter 3
· The food system and household food security
· Concepts in household food security
· Health factors and their impact on nutrition
Chapter 2
· HIV/AIDS and its impact on household food security and nutrition
Chapter 3
· Women's work load and the consequences for nutrition
The possibilities for integrating nutritional considerations into the productive aspects of agriculture are extensive. Effectiveness depends on approach and attitude, rather than simply adding more academic subjects to the training. Regardless of the approach adopted, the work will be more challenging, but also exciting, for both the teaching staff and the students.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction
Chapter 1 - Introduction
This resource book on agriculture, food security and nutrition is intended for use by teachers of agriculture in Africa. The book adopts a "food systems" approach, following the path from producer to consumer to examine the role of agriculture in human development in Africa. The book emphasizes the importance of linkages between agriculture and nutrition in the development of the continent and stresses the need for sub-Saharan Africa to develop its greatest assets: the productive capacities of its land and its people.
In sub-Saharan Africa, agriculture constitutes the livelihood of 69 percent of the economically active population (FAO, 1995f). The productive capacities of natural resources on the continent depend on the productive capacities of its people. In rural communities producers and consumers live in the same household and are often the same people. The way rural households function and make decisions and their visions of the future have long been recognized as essential information for planners and policy-makers in the agricultural sector. What is less frequently recognized among agriculturists is the significance of the consequences of different levels and patterns of consumption and the effects of agricultural decisions on the household food security and nutritional status of both the producers and the consumers in rural and urban areas.
Such consequences may run right through the food chain or involve only part of it. Agricultural decisions may result in a direct change in diet or in the quantity, quality, variety and safety of food available in a particular community. Frequently, the effect is a change in access to food for a particular sector of society or community because of fluctuations in food prices or in household income. All of these changes affect consumption of food and the health and productivity of the consumer. Especially affected by these changes are the poor, who do not have the resources or adequate buffer stocks to withstand a crisis and to maintain household food security on a sustainable basis.
A sudden breakdown in household food security or a prolonged lack of availability of adequate food for consumption in the home will result in deterioration in nutritional status and malnutrition. Malnutrition in this resource book is understood to mean undernutrition, i.e. a lack of adequate energy, protein and micronutrients to meet basic requirements for body maintenance, growth and development. However, the fact that malnutrition is not only a food-related problem has been appreciated for some time. Other important factors include lack of access to health services, sanitation, knowledge, education and care.
The consequences of malnutrition for human well-being and for socio-economic development are far-reaching. In infants and young children, undernutrition and growth retardation are associated with reduced physical activity, impaired resistance to infection, impairment of mental development and reduced educational capacity, and increased morbidity and mortality. In adults, undernourishment can lead to poor health and diminished productivity through reduced physical performance and can hinder community and national development. Improvement of the nutritional conditions of the poor and undernourished is an investment which can help raise the productive capacity of both present and future generations (FAO/ WHO, 1992g).
The extent of the problem of malnutrition in Africa as compared with developing countries as a whole is shown in Tables 1 to 3. Although the proportion of the total developing-country population classified as undernourished dropped substantially (from 35 to 21 percent) between 1969-1971 and 1990-1992, progress has not been even on all continents. In sub-Saharan Africa, for instance, the proportion of the population without adequate access to food rose in this period from 38 to 43 percent. In addition, problems related to micronutrient deficiencies are extensive and are receiving significant attention.
Table 1 - Chronic undernutrition^a in sub-Saharan Africa and developing countries, all ages
Countries
Percent affected
Number
(millions)
Total, developing countries
Sub-Saharan Africa
Source: FAO, 1996b.
^a Population with energy intake (kcal/caput/day) on average below 1.54 times the basal metabolic rate (BMR) over one year. The estimates are averages for sub-Saharan Africa.
Table 2 - Underweight children^a in Africa and developing countries
Countries
Percent affected
Number
(millions)
Total, developing countries
Continental Africa
Sources: WHO, 1995b; WHO Global Database on Child Growth.
^a Children aged 0 through 60 months with weight for age below -2 SD of the median United States National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) reference (for continental Africa and sub-Saharan Africa).
Table 3 - Micronutrient malnutrition in Africa and developing countries, 1990s
Form of malnutrition
At risk
(millions)
Affected
(millions)
Iron deficiency or anaemia
Iodine deficiency disorders (IDD)
Vitamin A deficiency (children under five years)
Sources: WHO, 1994; WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD, 1993; WHO/UNICEF, 1995.
The joint FAO/WHO International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) was held in Rome in December 1992 to raise global awareness of the causes of malnutrition and to encourage action to promote and protect the nutritional well-being of vulnerable populations. The conference's World Declaration on Nutrition and Plan of Action for Nutrition, unanimously adopted by delegates from 159 countries, emphasize that improvements in human welfare, including nutritional well-being, must be at the centre of social and economic development efforts. The documents call for concerted action to direct resources to those most in need in order to raise their productive capacities, improve their social opportunities and increase their access to food in a sustainable way. They also stress the need to protect the nutritional well-being of vulnerable groups through specific short-term nutrition programmes as needed, together with continuous work towards long-term solutions.
The World Food Summit, held in Rome in November 1996, reaffirmed the right of all people to be free from hunger through the recognition that the long-term answer to the problems of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition is sustainable economic growth coupled with equitable distribution of that growth throughout society. In sub-Saharan Africa, agriculture is the key to equitable economic growth, and the future health and nutrition of the African people clearly depend on its development.
This resource book was prepared not simply to introduce nutrition into agricultural training, but also to reinforce the aims of the ICN and the World Food Summit. It was also prepared in the recognition and acknowledgment that in Africa, the solution to current problems of poverty and malnutrition lies in the empowerment of rural communities, which can be brought about by assisting them in identifying and overcoming constraints to their fuller participation in the process of development.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2 - Agriculture, food security and nutrition
Definitions
The food chain: Production-to-consumption linkages
Food production, food supply and nutritional status trends in Sub-Saharan Africa
National policies affecting food security and nutrition
Other factors affecting food security and nutrition
Policies and actions needed to improve household food security and nutrition
Chapter 2 - Agriculture, food security and nutrition
This chapter is concerned with the interactions among agriculture, food security and nutrition in sub-Saharan Africa. It starts with the definition of basic terms that will be used throughout the book and goes on to look at the various forms of malnutrition and their causes. An overview is then given of food production, food supply and nutritional status trends in sub-Saharan Africa over the past 25 to 30 years. To put these trends into context, different macro- and national-level factors, including policies, that have influenced and will continue to influence the achievement of national food security and individual nutritional well-being are examined. Among the most pressing problems facing sub-Saharan African countries are the effects of rapid population growth, environmental degradation, civil conflict and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Understanding these problems and how they affect a country's productive capacity and its ability to feed future generations
is the first step towards overcoming them.
Definitions
Food security
Food security may have different meanings for different people. The International Conference on Nutrition (ICN), held in Rome in 1992, defined food security as "access by all people at all times to the food needed for a healthy life" (FAO/WHO, 1992a). Essentially, in order to achieve food security a country must achieve three basic aims. It must:
· ensure adequacy of food supplies in terms of quantity, quality and variety of food;
· optimize stability in the flow of supplies;
· secure sustainable access to available supplies by all who need them.
Adequate food availability at the national, regional and household levels, obtained through markets and other channels, is the cornerstone of nutritional well-being. At the household level, food security implies physical and economic access to foods that are adequate in terms of quantity, nutritional quality, safety and cultural acceptability to meet each person's needs. Household food security depends on an adequate income and assets, including land and other productive resources owned. Food security is ultimately associated with access to nutritionally adequate food at household level, i.e. the ability of households or individuals to acquire a nutritionally adequate diet at all times. The normative dimensions of household food security, defining household food security in ideal terms, are graphically presented in Figure 1. The conditions necessary for achieving and maintaining household food security are discussed in detail in Chapter 3.
It is important to note at this stage that the achievement of household food security may not necessarily result in improvements in the nutritional status of all household members. Access to nutritionally adequate food guarantees neither adequate consumption by all individuals within the household nor the appropriate biological utilization of the food consumed. How does household food security then relate to human nutritional status, as expressed in biological or physiological terms?
The answer is that household food security can be translated into good nutritional status if household members have nutrition security, a condition that combines:
· access to nutritionally adequate and safe food;
· sufficient knowledge and skills to acquire, prepare and consume a nutritionally adequate diet, including those to meet the special needs of young children;
· access to health services and a healthy environment to ensure effective biological utilization of foods consumed.
Actual nutritional well-being is then determined by a number of interrelated factors, which besides food security include health and sanitation, adequate supplies of safe water, parents' education, time to prepare food and care of vulnerable individuals within the household. Household food security is thus one of the prerequisites for good nutritional status. For a model of the factors that determine nutritional outcome see Figure 2.
FIGURE 1 - The normative dimensions of household food security
Source: Adapted from Frankenberger et al, 1993.
Nutrition and nutritional status
Nutrition is the science that explains the role of food and nutrients in the human body during growth, development and maintenance of life. In its broader context, nutrition has also been defined as being concerned with "... how food is produced, processed, handled, sold, prepared, shared, and eaten and what happens to food in the body - how it is digested, absorbed, and used" (King and Burgess, 1993). Nutritional status refers to the nutritional state of the body, as expressed according to scientifically tested parameters such as weight, height, age or combinations of these. Using these parameters, an individual can be assessed as having good or poor nutritional status.
FIGURE 2 - Determinants of nutrition security: basic causes and links
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1996c.
Note: 1. Basic causes; 2. Structural/institutional conditions, areas of public action; 3. Market conditions;
4. Micro-level conditions (household, intrahousehold, gender).
Factors influencing nutritional status
Nutrition security is influenced by a wide range of factors that may lead to inadequate or excessive nutrient intakes or may impair nutrient utilization. The factors most directly influencing nutritional status are analysed under the categories of food security, health, and knowledge and care (see Figure 2). Each of these is essential to attain good nutritional status, and they often interact with each other. To ensure optimal nutritional outcome, simultaneous action in all three areas is needed, requiring not only well-coordinated efforts at household and community levels, but also appropriate national development policies and strategies to support local efforts. National development policies, including macroeconomic and agricultural policies, though usually not included in the domain of nutrition, can also affect nutritional well-being.
It is well recognized that poverty is the principal cause of malnutrition (FAO/WHO, 1992g). Acute and chronic undernutrition and most micronutrient deficiencies primarily affect the poor and deprived people who do not have access to adequate food, live in unsanitary environments without access to sufficient and clean water and basic services and lack access to appropriate education and information.
Household food security and nutrition. In sub-Saharan Africa, where approximately 70 percent of the population live in rural areas, crop and animal production, fisheries and forestry activities are direct sources of food and provide income with which to buy food. Increased and diversified production of food for family consumption or as a source of income is a basic prerequisite for improved household food security. Better home and community food processing, preservation and storage and access to marketing facilities can also contribute to household food security by alleviating seasonal shortages in food supply and stabilizing market prices. Agricultural practices and technology as well as the establishment of small-scale agro-processing industries can significantly increase employment and income-generating opportunities and thus positively affect household access to food. Food safety and quality, secured through effective food quality control at all stages of production,
processing and handling, also influence nutritional well-being. With regard to infant nutrition, the extent of breastfeeding is important, and hygienic preparation and handling of food are crucial for disease prevention and proper child growth.
Health and nutrition. Various infections, notably diarrhoeal and respiratory diseases, measles, malaria, intestinal parasites and infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/AIDS have a major impact on nutritional status. The interaction of infection and inadequate food consumption causing growth retardation in children leads to a vicious circle, the malnutrition-infection complex. To break the circle it is necessary to improve environmental health conditions by addressing problems of contaminated water, insanitary disposal of human excrete and household wastes, and poor food and personal hygiene in homes and places of food processing and marketing.
Access to health services is vital, especially in rural areas, where the prevention, timely treatment and proper management of infectious diseases can make an important contribution towards improving nutritional levels. Immunization programmes to prevent disease, curative and antenatal services, oral rehydration, the effective promotion of breastfeeding and proper weaning practices, the feeding of sick children and nutrition education are important in minimizing the risk of undernutrition.
Knowledge, care and nutrition. Malnutrition can occur even when a household has access to adequate amounts of nutritious foods as well as access to sanitation and health services. While adequate incomes, greater food availability and expanded health services are necessary for adequate nutrition, they will not bring about improvements unless households are able to take advantage of them. In this context, sufficient knowledge and the ability to care for vulnerable individuals are of critical importance. Care consists of the time, attention and support provided in the household (mainly by the mother and daughters and to a much lesser extent by the father) and in the community to meet the physical, mental and social needs of growing children and other family members.
In many instances it is especially important to ensure that women have access to the resources (e.g. income-generating opportunities), labour-saving technology (e.g. appropriate farming practices, extension and credit), infrastructure (e.g. water wells and flour mills) and knowledge and education they need in order to care better for themselves and their families. In addition, legislation to improve women's status in society and legal access to land and other productive resources is essential for the future nutritional well-being of family members. Men should also be encouraged to strengthen their role as providers of care. In addition, it is necessary to devote increasing attention to development of community care structures such as day-care centres for young children and for the sick and dying (e.g. people with HIV/AIDS), especially as urbanization and other social forces weaken traditional patterns of family care.
The food chain: Production-to-consumption linkages
To nourish is "to sustain with food"; food is a necessity of life, and all creatures must eat to live. Food acquisition is therefore a major preoccupation of all animals. Humans are virtually unique among animals in the practice of agriculture. Cultivation of the soil and domestication of plants and animals are widely recognized as major developments in the progress of human societies that have diversified their food acquisition strategies. Today, however, many individuals and many human societies suffer from lack of food. On any given day perhaps 1 000 million individuals eat less than they need. In any given year several million people die from hunger-related causes, and hundreds of millions experience retarded growth and reduction in their physical and mental abilities because of faulty or inadequate nutrition. Why should this be so? Is global food production inadequate to meet the needs of the world population?
Clearly this is not the case. If the world's grain production that is available for human consumption were converted into energy and protein, the total would be significantly greater than the amount of these nutrients needed for human survival. During the past three decades the growth of global food production has been faster than the increase in the world's population, yet hundreds of millions of poor people do not share in this abundance. Food production at the macro level is linked to food consumption and nutritional status at the micro level (i.e. the household and the individual) by a complex network of interactions. Understanding how these interactions work can be an important stage in addressing the problems of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition and identifying actions to attain nutritional wellbeing.
Food insecurity or lack of access to a nutritionally adequate diet in a household or community can take various forms. For example, chronic food insecurity exists when food supplies are persistently insufficient to supply adequate nutrition for all individuals. Low-income groups, such as the urban poor, rural landless and smallholder farmers and pastoralists, are the most vulnerable to food insecurity. Such groups often lack sufficient income and/or cannot produce enough food for adequate nutrition. Transitory food insecurity occurs when there is a temporary decline in access to adequate food because of instability in food production, food prices or incomes, as occurred, for example, during the serious droughts in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa from 1983 to 1985 and in southern Africa in the early 1990s. Transitory food insecurity is not necessarily a one-off event, as witnessed in the Horn of Africa, which has been threatened by recurrent droughts since the early 1980s.
Famine in this and other parts of Africa has largely been averted since the mid- 1980s through efforts such as the strengthening of early warning of impending food shortages and more rapid responses to such warnings through disaster prevention and preparedness measures (e.g. seed distribution), including food aid interventions.
The distinction between chronic and transitory food insecurity refers to the time dimension of the food problem, i.e. whether it is persistent or short-term. A further distinction between national and individual insecurity can be made, which refers to the macro and micro dimensions of the problem. National food insecurity exists when a country is unable to meet its domestic food requirements through production, imports or run-down of stocks and reserves. National food security is not the same as national self-sufficiency. Although supply security can be achieved through a policy of self-sufficiency, it can also be achieved through food imports or by a combination of imports and domestic production. Few countries are entirely self-sufficient with regard to food. The degree to which staple food supply needs should be met through imports rather than domestic production remains a key policy issue in African countries. Discussion of this issue is, however, beyond the scope of
this book.
Even though total food supply may be secure in a country or a region, households or individuals may not have access to adequate food. In other words, sufficient supply at the national level does not necessarily guarantee access at the household level. Household food security, however, is only possible in a situation that ensures adequate national or local food supplies. This relationship shows that it is very important for policy-makers to distinguish food security at the national, regional and household levels. The next section demonstrates the relationship between macro- and micro-level food security by looking at national food production, food supply and nutritional status trends in Africa over the past three decades.
Food production, food supply and nutritional status trends in Sub-Saharan Africa
Agriculture is the backbone of the economies of most sub-Saharan African countries. In 1994, 69 percent of the economically active population in sub-Saharan Africa were engaged in agriculture, as compared with 84 percent in 1961 (FAO, 1995f).
Table 4 shows average annual production (in tonnes) and rates of growth of major food crops in sub-Saharan Africa during four periods. The analysis is based on five-year averages up to 1985 and a four-year average for 1991 to 1994, to reflect the long-term changes over the time span 1961 to 1994. The rate of growth in production of cereals increased from an average of 1.3 percent during the period 1961 to 1965 to 3.6 percent during the period 1971 to 1975. It remained stable at a rate of 2.5 percent from the period 1981 to 1985 to the period 1991 to 1994. Among the grains the fastest growth in output was achieved in rice, but its effect on growth of total cereal output was limited because of the relatively small share of rice in cereal production. It is notable that the growth rate of pulse production has declined substantially since the 1960s and that the rate of growth of production of oil crops, after suffering a rapid decline during the 1980s, recovered significantly
during the early 1990s.
For sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, exports of cereals declined and imports expanded rapidly during the 1970s and 1980s (Table 5). Imports nearly doubled between the 1960s and 1970s and trebled from then to the 1990s, reflecting both structural food deficits resulting from rapid population growth and food shortfalls caused by drought and civil disruption in various parts of Africa, especially during the 1980s and early 1990s. In the mid-1980s, 20 percent of the staple food requirements of sub-Saharan Africa were provided by imports. This proportion is predicted to rise by the end of the 1990s (FAO, 1992e).
Since the 1980s availability of basic food staples for consumption has expanded as follows: cereals and cereal products by 30 percent, roots and tubers by 40 percent, pulses by 35 percent and oil crops by 33 percent (Table 6). Population growth is the main factor responsible for increases in food supply and energy requirements. For the region as a whole, the estimated annual rate of population growth for the last three decades was about 3 percent as compared with a rate of growth in food production of around 2 percent and rate of growth in cereal production of 2.5 percent (Table 4). A significantly greater growth in food production will be needed in the future if dependence on commercial or concessionary imports is to be avoided.
Table 4 - Average annual food production and its rate of growth for sub-Saharan Africa, 1961-1975 to 1991-1994
Crop Group
Mean 1961-1965
Mean 1971-1975
Mean 1981-1985
Mean 1991-1994
Production
('000 tonnes)
Growth rate
Production
('000 tonnes)
Growth rate
Production
('000 tonnes)
Growth rate
Production
('000 tonnes)
Growth rate
Wheat
Rice, paddy
Cereals, total
Roots and tubers
Pulses, total
Oil crops, primary
Source: FAO, 1995f.
Table 5 - Average annual exports and imports of basic food staples for sub-Saharan Africa, 1961-1965 to 1991 - 1993
Crop Group
Mean 1961-1965
Mean 1971-1975
Mean 1981-1985
Mean 1991-1994
Imports
Exports
Net trade^a
Imports
Exports
Net trade
Imports
Exports
Net trade
Imports
Exports
Net trade
Cereals, total
Pulses, total
Oilseeds
Source: FAO, 1995f.
^a Net trade = exports minus imports.
Table 6 - Food available for consumption for sub-Saharan Africa, 1961-1965 to 1991-1992 (`000 tonnes)
Crop group
Mean
Mean
Mean
Mean
Cereals and cereal products, including beer
Starchy roots and products
Pulses and products
Oil crops and products
Source: FAO, 1995f.
Population data, unlike those of other developing regions, show that growth rates for sub-Saharan Africa are still increasing. It is projected that the overall population growth rate between 1990 and the end of the twentieth century will be 3 percent faster than the population growth of the region during the previous decade. Figure 3 shows population, food production and per caput dietary energy supply (DES) trends from 1961 to 1995, indicating that food production and DES have not kept pace with population growth. Although it is not evident in Figure 3 (because the graph is based on indexes), data suggest that in sub-Saharan Africa food production was adequate to meet local demand until about 1973 (FAO, 1992e). Since then, however, per caput output has been on the decline.
How can data of the type just given, expressing production and food availability for consumption in terms of tonnage of food commodities, be used to assess the adequacy of national food supplies in nutritive terms? One answer is to use food balance sheets, which are compiled annually by FAO from country-level data on the production and trade of food commodities. Based on these data in addition to available information on seed rates, waste coefficients, stock changes and types of utilization (i.e. feed, food, other uses), a supply/utilization account in weight terms is prepared for each commodity. Besides giving information on individual commodities, FAO food balance sheets also provide total availability estimates by aggregating the food component of all commodities after conversion into nutritive values. These values, combined with population data, are used to calculate estimates of a country's per caput DES, protein and fat. A food balance sheet for Kenya is shown in Table
DES (i.e. food available for direct human consumption per person per day) is expressed in kilocalories (kcal) per day. Its significance as an indicator of national nutritional status is that it relates food availability to a theoretical energy allowance. This is an average allowance for planning purposes, representing the daily energy supply required to maintain body weight and to support light activity. It is calculated as 1.54 times the basal metabolic rate (BMR).^1 If a population's access to food is below this level of per caput energy availability, it follows that, even if it is assumed that the distribution of available food supplies is not very unequal, the majority of the population would be classified as chronically undernourished.
^1 The basal metabolic rate is defined as the minimal rate of energy expenditure compatible with life. It is measured under standard conditions of immobility in the fasting state at an environmental temperature of 26° to 30°C, which ensures no activation of heat-generating processes. It is dependent on a physiological requirement which varies with the body weight, age and sex of the individual. BMR is a very theoretical quantity, and strictly speaking, calculation of energy allowances would require a breakdown of the population by age and sex. Such a breakdown would not be justified by the precision of the production data, which, in the case of non-cereal foodstuffs, are often subject to quite a large margin of error. Therefore, simplifying factors are used to estimate the average BMR of the population and hence per caput energy requirements. Energy requirements for light activity range from 1961 to 2072 kcal per day.
FIGURE 3 - Trends in population, food production and dietary energy supply for sub-Saharan Africa, expressed as indexes (1989-1991 base year = 100)
Source: FAO, 1997b.
Notes: The indexes show values relative to the base year, which is assigned the value of 100. The food production index is derived from the value in United States dollars of food produced per caput. The DES index is calculated from figures for dietary energy supply in kilocalories per person per day. The population index refers to the aggregate population.
Table 7 - Food balance sheet for Kenya - average 1990-1992
Product
Domestic supply ('000 tonnes)
Domestic utilization ('000 tonnes)
Per caput supply
Production
Imports
Stock changes
Exports
Total
Feed
Seed
Processing
Waste
Other uses
Food
Quantity per year
(kg)
Energy per day
(kcal)
Protein per day
(g)
Fat per day
(g)
Cereals
Starchy roots
Sugar crops
Sweeterters
Pulses
Treenuts
Oilcrops
Vegetable oils
Vegetables
Fruit (excluding wine)
Beverage crops
Spices
Alcoholic beverages
Meat
Offals
Animal fats
Milk (excluding butter)
Eggs
Fish, seafood
Total
Vegetable products
Animal products
Source: FAO, 1995f.
Chronic undernutrition and nutritional deficiencies
The chronically undernourished are defined as those people whose estimated average daily energy intake over a year falls below that required to maintain body weight and support light activity (FAO/WHO, 1992g). The appropriate term used for the estimate is "chronic dietary energy deficiency" or "chronic undernutrition", reflecting the proportion of the population that has inadequate access to food.
Table 8 shows the per caput food supplies for direct human consumption in sub-Saharan Africa for three periods between 1969 and 1992, and Table 9 gives estimates of the incidence of chronic undernutrition in developing regions for the same periods as well as projections of chronic undernutrition to the year 2010. The data show that in Africa the proportion of chronically undernourished people rose from 38 to 43 percent between 1969 and 1992, but the absolute numbers of people with inadequate access to food doubled, rising from 103 million to 215 million in the same period. This is not surprising, especially in view of the rapid population growth (around 3 percent annually) and droughts, recurrent in some countries, during the 1980s and early 1990s. War and civil conflicts also inevitably contributed to the deterioration in food security.
Table 8 - Per caput dietary energy supplies: 1969-1971, 1979-1981 and 1990-1992
Country
Population
(millions)
Per caput DES
(kcal/day)
Annual growth rate
1969-1971 to 1990-1992
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo (Republic of)
Côte d'Ivoire
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania, United Republic
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Former Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Sub-Saharan Africa
Africa
World
Source: FAO, 1995f.
Table 9 - Estimates and projections of chronic undernutrition in developing regions
Region/year
(three-year average)
Total population
(millions)
Undernourished
Percentage of total population
Persons
(millions)
Sub-Saharan Africa
Near East and North Africa
East Asia
South Asia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Total
Source: FAO, 1996b.
The number of chronically undernourished people in a country can be estimated by combining data on DES with information about the distribution of food supplies (see Table 9). Such estimates are useful guides, at the national level, for analysing trends in food adequacy. However, it is important to remember that such information may be misleading, as it relates only to the potential average availability of energy supplies; it does not provide a direct assessment of food consumption at the household or individual level. Moreover, because of inequity in the distribution of the available food among the households, a significant proportion of the households are likely to have consumption levels that are below minimum standards, even if the per caput DES is higher than the per caput energy requirements.
A proper assessment of the proportion of households or individuals in the undernourished category requires information from sample surveys that measure the nutritional levels of households or individuals in the population, i.e. food consumption or dietary surveys, and anthropometric surveys. However, nationally representative surveys are costly and time-consuming and have been undertaken in very few countries. FAO has developed a methodology that uses DES data in combination with information regarding the variation of the distribution among households obtained from available national household surveys in order to estimate the prevalence of undernutrition in developing countries (FAO, 1996a).
Energy deficiency is not the only parameter of nutritional status. Micronutrient deficiencies frequently occur in association with protein-energy malnutrition in sub-Saharan Africa. These deficiencies affect all population groups to a lesser or greater extent, depending on age, physiological state and geographical location. They are particularly serious for children under five years of age and pregnant and lactating women.
FAO has estimated that about 215 million people in sub-Saharan Africa suffer from chronic undernutrition. Anaemia caused by iron-folate deficiency and parasitic infections affects another 206 million people on the continent. Iodine deficiency disorders and vitamin A deficiency are also of high public health importance, with 181 million and 52 million people at risk, respectively (see Table 3). These aspects of nutritional status are discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
Malnutrition contributes substantially to high rates of child illness and death. Mortality rates in children under five years of age are estimated to be 40 times higher in sub-Saharan Africa than in affluent countries. It is estimated that there are about 4 475 000 deaths of children under five in sub-Saharan Africa per year (UNICEF, 1995) and that malnutrition underlies about 30 percent of these deaths (WHO, 1995a).
National policies affecting food security and nutrition
Many of the policies pursued by African countries during the 1970s and 1980s successfully achieved aggregate national food security. Despite achieving national food security in terms of average energy availability per caput, however, these countries did not achieve adequate consumption for all individuals and groups within the country (FAO, 1992e). An analysis of the causes of, and the potential policy responses to, food insecurity affecting many people in Africa in the past three decades is far beyond the scope of this book. However, the section that follows provides a brief overview of the major policy instruments used by governments to attain national food security.
The evolution of African food security policies
In the post-independence period, many African nations were eager to modernize their economies by seeking rapid growth of the industrial sector. They often favoured urban-biased development strategies to the detriment of the agricultural sector, which did not receive the kind of financial, infrastructural and political support needed for its development. In the late 1960s it became apparent that the industrialization strategies were not meeting the objectives that had been set. The interdependence of agriculture and industry was recognized and with it the need for development of the agricultural sector. The change in emphasis in favour of agriculture was reinforced by the increased population projections and the recognition in the 1970s that in order to attack the problem of rural poverty, smallholder agriculture needed immediate attention.
To meet domestic demand, maximize food production and increase marketed supplies of food, many African countries embarked on food security strategies focused on achieving food self-sufficiency during the late 1970s and early 1980s, using policies designed to maximize domestic output of staple crops. In the countries of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) [until 1992 the Southern African Development Coordination Conference (SADCC)], policies included subsidies on agricultural inputs in food production, increases in consumer prices of staple foods and promotion of large-scale irrigation schemes.
In the SADC countries the focus of food policies rapidly moved beyond self-sufficiency via maximization of domestic production to increasing and stabilizing the marketed supply of staple foods. This reorientation of policy acknowledged that the marketed supply of food fluctuates much more than total production, which is the case because subsistence producers predominate in the region. In poor production years, such producers retain sufficient food for household consumption needs, at the expense of the share of crops released into the market for sale. Because of the resulting fluctuations in the market supply of food which occurred in many SADC countries during the 1970s and 1980s, State marketing boards and private traders were often unable to meet the increasing food demands of their growing urban sectors and the rural landless.
Policies aimed at increasing and stabilizing the market supply of foods included: increases in producer prices of food crops; intensified marketing activities on the part of State marketing boards; and development of national strategic grain reserves. Although these strategies managed to increase the market supply of food, individual food security often suffered, as higher producer prices often necessitated increases in consumer prices. Hence, it became necessary for governments not only to stabilize prices but also to lower consumer prices to the level demanded by urban consumers.
In many countries, stabilization of prices has been achieved through the food marketing activities of the State marketing boards, which adhere to government-controlled prices and have access to public funds often needed for subsidizing producer and consumer prices. Along with an overvalued exchange rate, price stabilization has been used to keep domestic food prices low. This type of cheap-food policy has resulted in subsidized food imports and implicit taxation of non-food exports, while the domestic producer prices of food commodities are either suppressed or, more often, supported by increased input price subsidies. Although an overvalued exchange rate permits cheap food imports, it is also an important factor in keeping consumers poor. Overvalued exchange rates slow economic growth as exports become too expensive for buyers abroad. At the same time they lower incentives for agricultural production of export crops. The combination of these two factors reduces the demand
for unskilled labour and creates unemployment. For many African countries the fiscal costs of this type of cheap-food policy placed a high financial burden on the government budget which could no longer be sustained by the early 1980s. Many countries began to dismantle the associated policy regimes as part of structural adjustment and macroeconomic stabilization programmes.
Structural adjustment policies and the agricultural sector
The economic situation in many African countries during the 1980s was strongly influenced by the external economic crisis and world recession, but also by internal policies which had favoured rapid growth of a very costly public sector. External trade forms a significant proportion of gross domestic product (GDP) in most African countries. However, with the sharp decline in commodity prices in the late 1970s and the rise of export prices following the oil crises in 1979, declines in export revenue were accompanied by a rapid buildup of debt to finance increased levels of domestic spending.
Import levels had risen in many African countries in response to the short-lived commodity boom of the mid- 1970s. The public sector, in particular, increased its consumption and investment expenditure in many countries. When commodity prices dropped, import levels were not reduced fast enough, and the financial deficit was met by foreign borrowing. The burden of this borrowing was made heavier by the rise in world interest rates, which led to extremely high debt-servicing demands. By the early 1980s, many African countries, having borrowed heavily, were faced with mounting inefficiencies and declining growth rates. Table 10 shows, for example, the dramatic increase in Nigeria's outstanding external debt and total debt service costs between 1971 and 1987.
In response to recommendations from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, many governments embarked on structural adjustment programmes in the 1980s. One of the aims of structural adjustment was to reverse the unfavourable bias against agriculture in the domestic economy. Strategies directed towards this objective included: eliminating food subsidies; raising official producer prices and consumer prices while promoting market liberalization; and reducing foreign exchange deficits. Other measures included: the dissolution of marketing boards; removal of subsidies on agricultural inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides; and promotion of food and cash crop exports.
The impact of structural adjustment on agriculture
The impact of adjustment policies on agricultural performance has been variable in different African countries. However, overall agricultural performance during the 1980s has been judged as disappointing. The annual average growth rate between 1980 and 1985 was 0.9 percent, as compared with the target of 3.9 percent; in per caput terms this represented a negative growth rate of 2.4 percent (FAO, 1992e).
Table 10 - Nigeria's outstanding external debt and total debt service, 1971 to 1987
Year
Total outstanding debt
Value of exports
Total debt service
Debt service ratio
([DEL: N :DEL] million)
(US$ million)
([DEL: N :DEL] million)
([DEL: N :DEL] million)
1988^a
Source: Igbedioh, 1990. Reproduced with the permission of Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK
^a Estimates as at end of 1988 (Nigerian Economist, 1989).
The fact that African agriculture has not met the expectations of the designers and implementers of the adjustment policies does not mean, however, that all the policies have failed. Rather, the policies implemented, primarily price incentives to farmers, appear to have been insufficient, as they often bypassed the subsistence sector. The complex circumstances of African agriculture require more than price policy reform. Other problems also need to be addressed, including poor agricultural marketing structures, infrastructure, storage and transport facilities, lack of credit, land scarcity, poor input supply and other physical constraints facing the sector. Structural adjustment policies have paid insufficient attention to these problems, which helps explain the disappointing performance of agriculture and its weak ability to provide employment and incomes to those people who depend on it for their livelihoods.
In recent years, the SADC and many African governments have come to realize that attaining food self-sufficiency, increasing and stabilizing market supplies and stabilizing producer and consumer prices do not necessarily guarantee food security at the household level. This micro-level objective has now become the focus of food security policies throughout much of the region. Although achieving household food security requires many of the policy instruments referred to earlier such as strategies for increased production, supply stabilization and price stabilization, focusing on these latter objectives will seldom achieve the broader objective of household and individual food security.
The exact policy mix required to achieve household food security will vary according to country circumstances. What has become clear, however, is that much broader policy instruments are required, including policies related to employment, land distribution, macroeconomic growth, distribution of the gains from economic growth, population growth, incomes and income stabilization. With respect to agriculture, more support will be necessary for extension work, credit availability, irrigation and encouragement of greater use of inputs such as fertilizer and improved seed.
Because of agriculture's central role in generating employment and income in rural areas throughout the region, policies aimed at increasing agricultural production and productivity are essential for improved household food security and nutrition in sub-Saharan Africa. This does not mean, however, that the focus must only be on food production for domestic consumption. Studies undertaken by researchers at the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) in the Gambia, Kenya and Rwanda showed that cash crop production can result in significant increases in household income and improved household food security (Kennedy and Haddad, 1992). In this context, it is important to emphasize not only the absolute level of income, but also the control of income and the source, as these can significantly influence household food security. Researchers at IFPRI and others found that income controlled by women, particularly in Africa, is more likely to be spent on food. Households
with more women-controlled income were found to be more likely than others at similar income levels to be food secure. This implies that a shift in the control of income from women to men might have negative effects on household food security despite increases in overall income. The promotion of cash versus non-cash crops is discussed in Chapter 4.
Other factors affecting food security and nutrition
Environment and nutrition
This section highlights the agriculture-nutrition linkages in relation to the nature of technology utilization. In the past, African farmers and pastoralists developed farming systems according to their environment. The dominant forms of land use were shifting cultivation in the humid tropics and nomadic grazing in the semi-arid areas. Yields were low, and relatively large areas were needed to support a small population. Recent years have witnessed rapid growth in population and increasing expansion into marginal areas where available resources are being stretched to the limit. The result has been environmental degradation with gully, sheet and wind erosion, degraded vegetation, declining soil fertility and desert encroachment.
Food-insecure households do not deliberately degrade their resource base; on the contrary, they are usually fully aware that their food security is at risk if their environment is threatened.
Population growth directly increases consumption needs and forces many farm families into marginal areas where conservation practices are essential. FAO has estimated that half of African farmers live in environments with a highly vulnerable natural resource base. Such areas include cleared forest soils of fragile structure, steeply sloping lands and dryland areas with limited rainfall. In addition, the increased demand for fuelwood for cooking may leave marginal lands permanently denuded of soil cover and subject to erosion. Such loss of productivity in the resource base inevitably reduces food supplies and increases food insecurity and nutritional stress, particularly among vulnerable groups. Reduction in the availability of fuel or time for cooking (as women have to walk further to gather wood) could also result in preparation of fewer cooked meals or inadequate reheating of foods, thus decreasing food consumption by children and increasing the risk of microbial
contamination of food.
Pressures on land are further complicated by changes in the patterns of traditional land tenure. When farmers are no longer certain of their continuing rights of access to community land for food production, they may be reluctant to invest cash and labour in that land on a long-term basis, especially since effective measures to conserve soil and water and to increase productivity require considerable inputs.
Policies determining access to land and security of land tenure, as well as those that encourage investment in land (e.g. irrigation and greater use of inputs such as fertilizer and improved seeds), are key to increased food crop productivity, greater food availability and adequate nutrition. In marginal areas, appropriate agricultural technology can go a long way towards stabilizing food availability and facilitating food access for the poor.
Population growth, migration and nutrition
Rapid population growth and urbanization were identified above as major factors influencing food production, food demand and nutritional status trends in Africa. Figure 3, which showed trends in population, food production and dietary energy supply in sub-Saharan Africa as a whole from ] 961 to 1995, indicated that per caput food production in sub-Saharan Africa has been declining since the early 1970s. This decline has had serious consequences for general economic growth, import demand, agricultural-sector incomes, domestic food prices and nutritional outcomes.
Not only rapid population growth, hut also population structure and population migration affect food production and the nutritional well-being of people. In recent years life spans and child survival have improved in some African countries. Figures 4 and 5 show the age distribution in developing and more developed countries, respectively. It is evident from these data that the proportion of nonproducers (the base and apex of the pyramid) to the active labour force (the middle section) is very different in the two examples. In a country with a very high proportion of young children to support, the economic burden on the productive age groups is correspondingly high. Children less than 15 years of age now constitute 44.2 percent of the total population in sub-Saharan Africa, while children under five years of age constitute 17.4 percent (UN, 1994a). The high dependency ratio has arisen from a rapid increase in births and recent reductions in infant and child deaths.
FIGURE 4 - Population pyramid, less developed countries
Source: FAO, 1992f.
FIGURE 5 - Population pyramid, more developed countries
Source: FAO, 1992f.
The current age distribution means that there is a huge potential for continued population increase in Africa as young people move into child-bearing age. Even if the total fertility rate were to drop immediately to the replacement level of 2.2 births per woman, it would take about 100 years for Africa's population to begin to stabilize, and the population would then be 80 to 100 percent larger than it is now (FAO, 1992f). Present strategies to achieve sustained increases in food production will fail unless they are combined with measures to slow population growth and create alternative employment opportunities. However, the increased population also points to a potential wealth of human resources, which, if given access to education, health and the means to work, could positively influence both economic and agricultural growth.
The current shortage of adults in the most productive age groups in a number of African countries is exacerbated by migration of the working-age population, especially young male workers. Rural-to-urban migration is increasing fast and accounts for at least half of the population growth of African cities, which is 5 percent overall. Just under 30 percent of sub-Saharan Africans were estimated to live in towns and cities in 1990 (Figure 6). It is estimated that by the year 2000, 27 of the world's largest cities will be in developing countries (World Bank, 1989).
Reasons for rural-to-urban migration include: population pressure on agricultural land; pursuit of employment or better-paid employment; pursuit of higher education; and expectation of better social amenities including housing, water and health care. Migration may be seasonal or permanent, but either way it often causes the major burden of farming to fall on women, children and older men, while the demand for additional food to provide for the city dwellers continually increases. The effects of urbanization on food consumption patterns and nutrition are discussed in Chapter 4.
FIGURE 6 - Population and urbanization in sub-Saharan Africa, 1960-2020
Source: World Bank, 1989.
Note: Figures for 1990 and 2020 are projections based on declining fertility rate
Another type of migration which is serious in Africa is that of refugees or displaced persons. People become refugees when they flee to a neighbouring country out of fear of persecution in their own country. People may also be displaced within or outside their own country following natural events such as droughts. Most often, however, displacement is a result of disasters of human origin such as civil conflict and war. These conflicts tend to be protracted and to devastate the economies of the countries involved.
It is estimated that one of every two refugees in the world in 1990 was African. The refugee population in Africa grew from an estimated 1 million in 1970 to about 18.5 million in mid-1994 (including internally displaced persons) (UN ACC/SCN, 1994). Some of the countries hosting large refugee populations during the 1980s and 1990s, such as Ethiopia, Malawi, Somalia, the Sudan, Uganda and former Zaire, are among the poorest and are unable to feed their own populations adequately. Other countries such as Kenya and the United Republic of Tanzania have had their economic growth slowed by influxes of refugees.
International assistance providing food, medicine, shelter and basic health care is essential to enable African countries to render basic services to refugees. Despite this assistance, unprecedented levels of malnutrition and mortality were observed in refugee and displaced populations in sub-Saharan Africa from 1985 to 1995, caused by a combination of lack of adequate food rations and high levels of communicable disease. Even when refugee or displaced populations are protected from starvation, they are often exposed to micronutrient deficiencies because they are dependent on just a few selected foodstuffs. In recent years there have been outbreaks of scurvy (vitamin C deficiency) among refugee populations in Somalia (1981 /82), the Sudan (1985/86) and Ethiopia (1988/89) and of pellagra (niacin deficiency) among Mozambican refugees in Malawi (1990/91).
The five worst situations in 1995 were those of refugees and displaced persons from and within Rwanda and Burundi, Liberia and Sierra Leone, Mozambique, Somalia and the Sudan (UN ACC/SCN, 1995). In Rwanda and Burundi alone it was estimated that more than 2 million people were severely malnourished and an additional 3 million at high risk from malnutrition in 1994 (UN ACC/SCN, 1994). In such situations, control of communicable diseases is as crucial as the provision of adequate food or of money to buy food. The future nutritional status of populations in many parts of sub-Saharan Africa will depend to a large extent on the development of policies and measures to resolve local conflict and the provision of sufficient resources to prevent and mitigate such situations. Famines resulting from armed conflict should be considered at the highest political level and confronted through continuous diplomatic efforts.
HIV/AIDS and its impact on household food security and nutrition
The malnutrition-infection complex, which is described in Chapter 3, most commonly affects children. It is also a significant factor among adults. Energy and nutrient deficiencies, often coupled with infections and parasitic diseases, hinder adult physical performance and work capacity. The resulting loss of productivity may often entail serious consequences for the food security of affected households. Few infections have the potential for as profound an effect on food production capacities and nutritional status in Africa as HIV, which causes the disease AIDS. The precise impact of HIV/AIDS on food production is still not clear in view of its relatively recent on set in epidemic proportions. However, present morbidity and mortality rates show that in many countries AIDS is likely to have a significant impact on the ability of people to produce, transport, sell and buy food.
In rural districts HIV infection levels have been estimated to exceed 30 percent for some age groups. Conservative estimates suggest that AIDS-related mortality could reduce the adult labour force by as much as one-quarter by the year 2010. In addition to the direct impact on farms, the serious indirect socio-economic consequences include disappearance of traditional family welfare structures, loss of a trained workforce and reduced family income. The number of orphans is rapidly increasing in all severely affected countries, with the result that traditional coping strategies, where they still exist, may soon be overwhelmed.
Patterns of malnutrition will be determined by the prevalence of HIV in given communities and the efficacy of community-based coping strategies. For example, in rural areas where women have an active role in agricultural production and up to 20 percent of women attending antenatal clinics are HIV positive, a significant decline in the number of adults in the workforce is inevitable. In some rural communities of sub-Saharan Africa, HIV/AIDS is now resulting in labour shortages for both farm and domestic work. Besides losing the AIDS patient's labour through sickness and subsequent death, family members have to divert time to care for the sick and consequently neglect farm and off-farm activities. The result is loss of potential income. Box 1 illustrates how the livelihood of a young family is affected through sickness and death.
A decrease in food production and a threat to household and community food security are very likely in view of the high numbers of household heads and their spouses dying of AIDS in some agrarian communities. Further consequences include a decline in the nutritional and health status of farm families, which is already being witnessed in severely AIDS-affected communities where there has been a change in the volume and kinds of crops produced; a decline in educational status as children are forced to leave school; changes in the social system as households adapt to HIV/AIDS (i.e. the breakup of families, a growing incidence of female-headed households and increasing numbers of orphans and rural poor). The impact of HIV/AIDS is likely to be most severe among already vulnerable groups such as the malnourished and the food insecure. In any event, careful assessment of the nutritional impact of AIDS on non-infected household members is required.
The direct costs of treating AIDS patients (drugs, doctors' fees, hospitalization, etc.) are enormous and greatly surpass available resources in Africa. AIDS prevention measures urgently need to be introduced or strengthened, through health education, to enable people to protect themselves against HIV infection. A major consequence of HIV/AIDS is increased pressure on the household labour economy; the most important programme and policy responses, therefore, are those that enable people to cope with the results of labour loss. There are also implications for the targeting of assistance to women and children and in some cases to widowed men who are raising children. Policy responses should also endeavour to integrate all aspects of poverty relief, domestic and farm labour, the educational needs of orphans and other young people, food security and nutrition and income generation.
Box 1 - The impact of AIDS on the livelihood of a young family: The story of Joseph and his family
Joseph, 35, and his wife Vincentia, 33, had four girls and one boy, ranging in age from four to 12. Joseph had married a second wife who left him when he became sick in 1989. Prior to his illness and death, farm work was mainly carried out by his first wife.
Joseph was a farmer and a successful small goods trader in a fishing village about 10 miles (16 km) away from his home village. On his one acre (0.4 ha) of land he had a new house and a banana plantation. The family used to rent land and plant cassava, sweet potatoes and groundnuts. They owned five cows and it traditionally was Joseph's responsibility to transfer the cow dung from the cattle kraal to the banana plantation in order to maintain soil fertility. Joseph's plans had been to purchase additional land for cultivation.
However, these plans were soon abandoned when Joseph started suffering from multiple illnesses in 1989 and was bedridden for several months in 1991. During this time his wife was forced to abandon the field she had ploughed for groundnuts so as to be able to look after her ailing husband. Joseph was no longer able to spread the banana plantation with cow dung. Therefore the yield of the banana plantation started slowly to decline because of lost fertility. In 1991, Joseph died of AIDS.
In June 1992, Vincentia fell seriously sick and was bedridden for three months. During her illness the banana plantation as well as the fields for cassava and sweet potato gradually turned from weeds to bush. Joseph's wife died in October 1992. The cows were also neglected and when they became sick, there was no money to buy veterinary drugs and all five head of cattle died.
Recently, Joseph's 27-year-old brother has attempted to reclaim the banana plantation. In addition, he has started to keep pigs and chickens on his late brother's piece of land. He also would like to keep cattle, but lacks the money to buy the animals. Joseph's two eldest children are staying with him, while the three younger ones are cared for by the maternal grandmother, who is herself of advanced age and in ill health.
Source: FAO, 1944b.
Policies and actions needed to improve household food security and nutrition
Knowledge concerning appropriate actions for ending hunger and malnutrition has markedly increased over the past three decades. The ICN's focus on food, health, care and education factors is part of an emerging international consensus concerning the causes of malnutrition and represents a shift in emphasis from the more narrow food supply approaches of the 1960s and 1970s.
Participants at the ICN discussed a broad range of strategies and actions for improving nutrition which are structured along the lines of the major factors causing malnutrition (FAO/WHO, 1992a). The actions discussed range from macroeconomic policies through various agricultural and income policies to specific direct nutrition programmes and interventions. It was emphasized that efforts to improve nutrition must from the outset attack the detrimental reinforcing linkages among food insecurity, disease, poor sanitation, inadequate education and undernutrition. Otherwise, the progress made through specific agricultural or health measures alone will have limited effect on nutritional improvement. The ICN's World Declaration on Nutrition is reproduced in Annex 3.
In support of the ICN, the Rome Declaration on World Food Security, approved by the World Food Summit in Rome in 1996, calls on all governments to accelerate the efforts and facilitate the actions needed to achieve the goals of food security and improved nutrition. The following are priority areas of attention.
Promotion of nutrition-friendly agriculture and food technology
The role of agriculture and of agriculturists in the economic growth of Africa is clear. There is an urgent need to increase the efficiency of present resource utilization while simultaneously conserving and, where possible, enhancing the productive capacity of the resource base. The strategy must involve sound land-use planning and subsequent implementation of actions to match demands with the potentials of both the land and its people. The key to successful implementation is commitment to economic growth, which should be compatible with securing sustainable livelihoods and improved quality of life for the poorest communities.
In some rural areas the overriding nutritional problems are more closely associated with a shortage of jobs than with a shortage of food. Poor households are very likely to contain malnourished members. Women and children are often the most severely affected. Growth in the food and agriculture sector is vital for the alleviation of poverty and for ensuring an adequate and stable food supply for most of the population in developing countries. Producer incentives and new technologies that increase production and employment in the agricultural sector, including the establishment of small- and medium-scale food-processing facilities, can help augment incomes, alleviate poverty and improve food security.
Increased production and diversification of food need to be promoted in such a way as to offer particular benefit to the rural poor. Measures should include targeted interventions to increase the productivity of small-scale farmers such as production incentives, development of an efficient marketing infrastructure and more research on rain-fed and disadvantaged areas. The impact of such programmes on nutrition can be strikingly enhanced if they are accompanied by effective extension services, credit availability for men and women and encouragement of the use of inputs such as fertilizer and improved seeds. Although productivity growth is the key to development, it must be realized that technology alone can achieve little. However, technology combined with investment in people -especially education for men and women farmers, particularly on nutrition, health and population - can show high rates of return.
Nutritional considerations in production policies and programmes can avoid some of the adverse effects sometimes associated with new technology and can foster nutritional well-being. Developing and testing appropriate technologies for diverse agro-ecologies will remain a major task for decades to come. The health and nutrition risks of technological change (see also section on irrigated agriculture in Chapter 4) must be mitigated through appropriate technology design. There is substantial scope for agricultural, public health and nutrition workers and researchers to collaborate on improving the designs of agricultural programmes.
In countries and regions that frequently suffer serious food shortages, such as those prone to drought, programmes in the agricultural sector are frequently complemented by public measures such as income and employment generation programmes and direct food transfers (e.g. food price subsidies, food rationing and food stamps) as a means of stabilizing household food security and maintaining nutrition levels for the poorest. A cost-effective but organizationally more demanding alternative, however, is a system of direct nutrition interventions.
Direct nutrition actions
Direct nutrition actions aimed at addressing immediate nutrition problems work best when they actively involve those who are affected. Such actions address problems associated with access to food (e.g. through supplementary feeding or targeted feeding programmes), micronutrient deficiencies (micronutrient programmes), poor nutritional knowledge and behaviour (nutrition education programmes), detrimental health-nutrition linkages (health and sanitation programmes) or a combination of these. Considerable progress has been made in the effectiveness of direct nutrition interventions since the mid-1980s. The scope for further strengthening of the best practices of such programmes and their potential for achieving rapid nutritional improvement should be underlined.
Targeted supplementary feeding. Feeding programmes are generally aimed at persons especially vulnerable to malnutrition, usually children and women of child-bearing age at low income levels. Feeding programmes are often a relatively acceptable means of achieving targeted income transfer, and in countries with inadequate market structures and functioning they have shown more potential for increasing food intake than comparable cash income transfers. School feeding programmes often have the combined target of increasing school enrolment and improving the nutritional status of schoolchildren. Many countries combine such programmes with nutrition education and school gardening. Such programmes can be a very cost-effective mechanism for food-based targeted transfers.
Protecting consumers through improved food quality and safety. A safe food and water supply of adequate quality is essential for proper nutrition. Food safety and quality control ensure that the desirable characteristics of food are retained throughout production, handling, processing, packaging, distribution and preparation, in turn promoting healthy diets, reducing food losses and encouraging domestic and international trade. Effective food quality and safety control programmes are essential and may comprise a variety of measures, such as laws, regulations and standards together with systems for effective inspection and monitoring including laboratory analysis.
Micronutrient programmes. Considerable and successful actions have been taken since the mid-1980s in the area of overcoming micronutrient deficiencies. Still, increased efforts are necessary. A combination of actions needs to be adopted to increase the availability of micronutrient-rich foods, to promote adequate food processing and preservation techniques, to disseminate education related to food and nutrition, to promote dietary diversification, to establish legislation and implement programmes for food fortification and supplementation and to implement appropriate public health measures.
Promoting healthy diets and lifestyles through education. Promoting better eating habits and positive health behaviour is one of the most challenging tasks in overall efforts to improve nutrition. In addition to access to a variety of safe and affordable foods, people need accurate information as to what constitutes a healthy diet and how to meet their nutritional needs. The ICN's Plan of Action for Nutrition called for the implementation of nutrition education programmes at all levels which should involve the mass media, primary and secondary schools, community participation programmes, extension staff and higher-level education as channels for communicating nutrition information. The limitations of nutrition education must, however, also remain in perspective. Many desirable behavioural changes require household resources (including time) for appropriate responses. Nutrition education may thus be most effective in combination with other poverty-reducing and
nutrition-enhancing actions.
Nutrition/health and integrated nutrition programmes. Since nutrition problems have multiple causes, it seems logical to design policies and programmes in a multifaceted way to achieve effective nutrition improvement. One of the most effective methods of identifying and targeting nutrition and health interventions is to monitor children's growth. The ICN has called on governments to develop and strengthen growth monitoring and health care systems. While growth monitoring alone does not necessarily change nutritional status, it does provide important information to be used in actions such as food supplementation, nutrition education and medical referral, when needed. Integrated nutrition projects typically couple growth monitoring of young children found to be nutritionally at risk and nutrition counselling for their mothers with targeted interventions (on-site feeding, health checks, immunization, family planning, etc.). Emphasis is also placed on intersectoral
collaboration, as narrow sectoral approaches that focus exclusively on health, agriculture or education cannot tackle the nutrition problem effectively.
Community participation. Households, and women and mothers in particular, usually have the desire and often also the knowledge to improve the nutrition of their vulnerable members. Success is impeded by a lack of resources, including the lack of a voice in relevant community decisions. Empowerment of the vulnerable is therefore needed in community nutrition actions. Empowerment can be fostered directly and indirectly through the assignment of resources and leadership tasks to women in community-based nutrition programmes or through guidance and assistance in group formation, combined with provision of knowledge and skills to these groups.
Among resource control issues, access to even small amounts of land (e.g. garden plots for women) has remained an important component of household food security in low- and middle-income countries. It is necessary to give renewed consideration to women's control over resources and land and its relation to household food security. Advocacy of widespread access to home gardens, in peri-urban as well as rural areas, and appropriate agricultural services for this subsector should be pursued in many low-income countries.
Building organizational capacity. Only if the urgency and significance of the food security and nutrition situation are readily apparent will appropriate action be taken and national and international support for such action be sustained. The availability of organizational capacity in nutrition is essential for effective implementation of nutrition interventions and for monitoring changes in the nutrition situation to evaluate the effects of nutrition policies and programmes and to adjust them to suit changing circumstances. The "learning by doing" approach, so effectively employed in some countries, is considered a viable alternative to "perfect" planning prior to action. It is imperative that the governmental organizations, particularly ministries, as well as the non-governmental organizations (NGOs) involved in nutrition actions be well coordinated by an established framework. It is necessary to create a legal basis for mandatory coordination at the national level in
order to ensure that food security and nutrition improvement actions are sustained and consistent. Improving nutrition is not an issue for short-lived task forces, but a challenge requiring long-term commitment.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 3 - The food system and factors affecting household food security and nutrition
The food system and household food security
Concepts in household food security
Stability of household food supplies
Sustainability of food supplies
Health factors and their impact on nutrition
Knowledge, education and care at the household and community levels
Chapter 3 - The food system and factors affecting household food security and nutrition
The food system and household food security
The perception underlying the systems approach is that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. In this approach any situation is viewed in terms of relationships and integration. A food system may thus include all activities related to the production, distribution and consumption of food that affect human nutrition and health (see Figure 7).
Food production comprises such factors as land use and tenure, soil management, crop breeding and selection, crop management, livestock breeding and management and harvesting. Food distribution involves a series of post-harvest activities including the processing, transportation, storage, packaging and marketing of food as well as activities related to household purchasing power, traditions of food use (including child feeding practices), food exchanges and gift giving and public food distribution. Activities related to food utilization and consumption include those involved in the preparation, processing and cooking of food at both the home and community levels, as well as household decision-making regarding food, household food distribution practices, cultural and individual food choices and access to health care, sanitation and knowledge.
Among the components of the food system, e.g. food processing, communication and education, there is substantial overlap and interlinkage. For example, household decision-making behaviour with regard to food is influenced by nutrition knowledge and by cultural practices with regard to food allocation within the household as well as by purchasing power and market prices.
FIGURE 7 - The food system
Source: Combs et al., 1996.
Food systems are further embedded in environments which differ according to a variety of factors such as agro-ecology, climate, social aspects, economics, health and policy. The model presented in Figure 8 is useful in conceptualizing the various activities that determine food security and nutritional well-being and the interactions within the food system. The food systems approach can also be expanded to address such issues as the impact of agricultural interventions on health or the extent to which improved and accessible health services and construction of wells that provide a safe water supply influence women's workload and their ability to provide care.
FIGURE 8 - Interactions within the food system
Source: Combs et al., 1996.
Concepts in household food security
Food security is one of the important conditions that must be achieved for an individual to be nutritionally secure and to maintain good health. As presented in Box 2, the definition of food security has changed since the early 1970s, but there is now general agreement among the development agencies that food security must entail "secure access to adequate food at all times". Chapter 2 examined food security at the national, community and household levels. At the national level it was perceived mainly in terms of food available for consumption, as derived from food balance sheets. At the household or individual level, the emphasis has shifted from simple "availability of food" to a more complex system of "food access". As expressed by FAO's Committee on World Food Security (FAO, 1983a), this system consists of three components: adequate access, stability of food supplies and sustainability of food procurement. In order to operationalize the concept of household food
security, it is useful to consider one by one the defining characteristics of adequacy, access, stability and sustainability.
Adequate food
The concept of adequate food is an important part of the current definition of household food security. Clearly, what is adequate for one member is not adequate for another. A person's requirements for different nutrients depend on many factors including age, sex, level of activity and physiological status. However, adequacy of diets should not be considered only in quantitative terms (i.e. caloric sufficiency), but also in qualitative terms (i.e. variety, safety and cultural acceptability).
Several major conditions define an adequate diet, necessary for an individual to stay active and healthy:
· It should provide adequate energy and protein.
· It should provide micronutrients (vitamins and minerals) in sufficient quantities to maintain good health.
· It should be safe and free from contaminants, parasites and toxins which may be injurious to health.
· It should be culturally acceptable and, in addition, should satisfy the palate and be capable of providing pleasure to the consumer.
Box 2 - Changing concepts of food security
Food security has been a global concern since the 1974 World Food Conference, held at a time when world food supplies were tight and large-scale food shortages and starvation appeared imminent. In response to the perceived crisis, such bodies as the World Food Council, the FAO Committee on World Food Security (with its Food Security Assistance Scheme) and the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes were formed. Their activities focused on increasing domestic agricultural production and creating international grain reserves. Food security was identified with commercial food prices and physical food availability, rather than with demand and consumption by poor people or nutritionally vulnerable groups.
By the early 1980s many of the assumptions underlying the 1974 conference proved to be unfounded. Increased food production was not the simple answer to the hunger problem. The problem became recognized as one of distribution to reach the population. In 1983, FAO's Committee on World Food Security expanded the concept of food security to its current definition, encompassing three specific goals: ensuring adequacy of food supplies; optimizing stability of supplies; and securing access to available supplies for all who need them. The ultimate objective of this enlarged concept of food security is to ensure that all people at all times have both physical and economic access to the basic food they need.
This definition was adapted readily by other major bodies (e.g. the World Food Council, the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations and the Council and Conference of FAO) and formed the basis of the international consensus of actions required at the global, regional and national levels to achieve world food security. In 1986, the World Bank's position paper on poverty and hunger added the concept of activity level to these goals, stating that food security must assure "access by all people at all times to enough food for an active and healthy life". Food insecurity, in turn, was defined as the lack of access to enough food for a healthy, active life. The World Bank described food security as essentially a matter of ensuring effective demand rather than a question of food supply. The relationship among poverty, hunger and the food problem was gaining recognition, and vulnerable groups were beginning to be defined.
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1992b.
The diet can meet all these requirements when it is diversified and constituted in the right proportions and when it can satisfy the preferences and food habits of the consumer.
Whereas before the 1990s food security was equated primarily with energy sufficiency, the current approach to food security emphasizes the composition of the diet, especially with respect to micronutrients. The emphasis on micronutrients can be attributed to two factors: increased understanding of the extent and the far-reaching consequences of micronutrient deficiencies, especially iron, iodine and vitamin A deficiencies; and the availability of proven and low-cost methods of preventing these deficiencies. For more information on micronutrients and strategies to prevent micronutrient deficiencies see Chapters 5, 7 and 8.
Access to food
Household food security, as noted earlier, depends not only on the availability of an adequate and sustainable supply of food, but also on the strategies employed by households for its acquisition. The ability of different households to establish access to the food supply can be considered both in terms of production and in terms of the people's ability to exchange their assets for food, for example through bartering, purchase or food-for-work. People's assets may include their income; their access to, use of and/or ownership of land; their livestock; their labour and the products of their labour; their inheritance; and gifts and transfers. The value of the exchange for individuals or households will vary with market forces, including wages and prices.
Food enters a household in a variety of ways. A household may produce food when it has the human and material resources to do so; such households have direct access to food. The ability of farmers to produce food in adequate amounts and sufficient variety depends to a large extent on their access to resources - chiefly sufficient and fertile land, labour, tools, seeds, draught power, credit and other essential agricultural services - as well as the knowledge to grow crops and raise animals that provide beneficial nutritional outcomes and sustain the household's livelihood on a continuous basis. In many rural communities, gathering of wild foods and non-wood forest resources also makes an important contribution to family food supplies.
Poor farmers, including women farmers, often lack access to adequate resources (such as land, improved technology, credit, extension advice and training) and to markets. Box 3 provides a case-study from Zambia on some of the problems and constraints and their underlying causes -experienced by different economic groups in meeting their food needs. Decision-makers in agriculture, extension services, the private sector and agricultural investment projects need to address urgently the special production constraints of poor farmers and women farmers to assist them in enhancing their productive capacity and raising crops and animals for household consumption and sale.
Food is also purchased. Indeed, most households purchase a portion of their dietary requirements depending on need and affordability. This type of food acquisition represents economic access. Rural farming households regularly purchase a proportion of food commodities which they do not produce themselves. In addition, during seasonal troughs households that do not have sufficient food stocks may have to borrow money, sell assets such as small livestock or engage in wage labour to buy food to replenish family supplies until the next harvest season. Urban households purchase most of their food commodities. They may also receive food as gifts or transfers from rural relatives. These means of access are also prone to risk, especially if jobs are lost, incomes fall, food prices rise, harvests in the rural areas are hampered or relatives move into town.
The interest in whether and how people acquire food is closely associated with the concept of vulnerability as connected with the relative distribution and control over resources or access to employment. Thus different groups of individuals in a population, such as the rural landless, small marginal farmers or the urban poor, may be defined as vulnerable based on their specific socio-economic characteristics. Women-headed households in particular are often vulnerable to food insecurity as, even if they do have access to sufficient land, they often lack the labour and other essential inputs to achieve adequate production. Box 4 describes some of the groups most vulnerable to food insecurity and malnutrition. However, it is important to note that vulnerability to food insecurity is location specific and must therefore be assessed independently in each community or district.
Box 3 - Household food security for different wealth groups in the Luapula Valley, Zambia
A rapid rural appraisal showed that in the Luapula Valley women tend to dominate subsistence farming activities and are therefore extremely important in maintaining the household food security in terms of staple foods. Men, on the other hand, are the main providers of cash income, from fishing, sawing, charcoal cutting, casual labour, etc. Income is vital to household food security, as cash is needed to purchase essentials such as salt, oil and relish foods that are not home produced or bartered. As men are the providers of income, their food preferences are paramount in determining what the family eats or does not eat. The women also generate some income, but considerably less than men, given their overriding responsibilities for subsistence agriculture.
A wealth-ranking exercise showed that only the poor groups experience shortages of food during the year. The wealthier groups were seen to be able to secure their food needs throughout the year. Characteristics of the poor groups show clearly why they have difficulties: they have on average smaller farms; the number of people per household tends to be less, possibly indicating a shortage of labour; and very importantly, they have few if any alternative sources of income, in contrast to the wealthier groups which have invested capital and diversified their activities to include several sources of income. The poor groups also contained a high proportion of women-headed households and also elderly people, some of whom were responsible for the care of their grandchildren. Women in the focus groups also ascribed poverty to social factors, such as men neglecting their families by not giving them sufficient income, by not helping with agricultural activities or because of drinking
problems.
Shortages of staple foods, mainly cassava, are obviously the most pressing nutritional problem among the poor. The limiting constraint for poor households is labour, particularly of women, who are responsible for planting, weeding and harvesting. In women-headed households, women on their own have to undertake all the work including the land clearing and preparation. It is therefore not surprising that little or no time is left for other activities.
Apart from staple foods, other foods also make an important contribution to household food security, particularly sources of oil and relish foods (i.e. fish, vegetables, groundnuts). No household is self-sufficient in any of these items, and households will be dependent to some extent on either barter or purchase.
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1992g.
Box 4 - Groups most vulnerable to food insecurity and malnutrition
Broadly speaking, those who are nutritionally insecure share common socio-economic, agro-ecological, demographic and educational characteristics. Usually these vulnerability factors operate simultaneously in combination to increase the risk. For example, rural and urban households vulnerable to malnutritional insecurity are precisely those most vulnerable to environmental degradation, poor sanitation, pollution, overpopulation and disentitlement to education, training and employment opportunities needed to improve their nutritional situation in the long term. With regional and local variations, the following types of household are likely to be most vulnerable to food insecurity and malnutrition:
· subsistence farmers who produce marginal or inadequate amounts of food;
· landless wage earners lacking adequate resources to produce food or income to obtain to food;
· households headed by women;
· households with a large number of dependents;
· households situated on marginal lands (e.g. drought-prone areas or steep slopes adversely affected by erosion);
· households with insufficient income to enable continued access to adequate supplies of safe and good-quality food.
Among these households the most vulnerable groups are children under five years of age and women of child-bearing age. Their risk is increased by inadequate access to health services and by unstable environmental and political factors.
Sources: Adapted from FAO, 1992b.
Typical sources of risks of household food insecurity for population groups are shown in Table 11. Conflict is an increasingly common source of risk to people's ability to meet their nutritional needs and maintain their livelihoods, and in Africa it has taken over from drought to become the primary cause of famine and human displacement in the 1990s. Box 5 describes the disruption that can be caused by conflict and the devastating effects on agricultural production and economic life that can result.
Diversity of food and income sources is considered to be one of the main practices against risk in agrarian communities. Understanding of the relative importance of different income sources and their characteristics and seasonal fluctuations is vital, therefore, to any understanding of household coping and survival strategies and ultimately to the effective design of food security and nutrition strategies. A better understanding of the risks to food security will also help in identifying the links between food security and adequate dietary intake.
Stability of household food supplies
Stability of household food supplies refers to the ability of a household to procure, through income, production and/or transfers, adequate food supplies on a continuing basis, even when the household is faced with situations of unpredictable stress, shocks or crises. Such situations could include crop failure resulting from drought, market fluctuations such as sudden price rises, the decline or loss of employment and loss of productive capacity because of sudden illness.
The concept also denotes an ability to stabilize food supplies through seasonal fluctuations of production or income. It also implies the household's ability to cope with or minimize the extent and duration of the effects of food deficits. The critical test of stability is the ability to bounce back or to regain quickly an adequate food supply For this to be a possibility, safety-net mechanisms are needed such as community grain stores or labour-intensive public works to support the purchasing power of the poor temporarily and to absorb the effects of short-term production or income losses that adversely affect the food supply of households.
Table 11 - Sources of risks of household food insecurity and affected populations
Area of risk
Households and people at risk
Crop production (pests, drought, etc.)
Smallholders with little income diversification and limited access to improved technology (e.g. improved seeds, fertilizer, irrigation, pest control)
Landless term labourers
Agricultural trade (disruption of exports or imports)
Smallholders who are highly specialized in an export crop
Small-scale pastoralists
Poor households that are highly dependent on imported food
Urban poor
Food prices (large, sudden price rises)
Poor, net food-purchasing households
Employment
Wage-earning households
Informal-sector employees in pert-urban areas
Informal-sector employees in rural areas when there is a sudden crop production failure
Health (infectious diseases, for example, resulting in labour productivity decline)
Entire communities, but especially those households that cannot afford preventive or curative care and vulnerable members of those households
Politics and policy failure
Households in war zones and areas of civil unrest
Households in low-potential areas that are not connected to growth centres via infrastructure
Demography (individual risks affecting large groups)
Women, especially when they have little or no access to education
Female-headed households
Children at weaning age
The elderly
Source: FAO/WHO, 1992b.
Households may suffer from transitory food insecurity as a result of unpredictable circumstances such as sudden price rises. They may suffer from seasonal food insecurity when there is a regular pattern in the recurrence of inadequate access to food. Chronic food insecurity, by contrast, occurs when households run a continual risk of being unable to meet the food needs of all the household members. In practice, of course, chronic and transitory insecurity are linked. Recurrent exposure to temporary but severe stress may increase the vulnerability of the household to chronic food insecurity.
Box 5 - The impact of conflict on agricultural production and household food security in the Juba Valley, Somalia
In 1991, the Juba Valley was badly affected. A large proportion of the population was displaced to Mogadishu and Kismayo and to refugee camps in northeastern Kenya. From 1993 onwards, people started to return to their villages. However, the effects of previous displacement, the prevailing insecurity and low-level conflict continued to hamper people's ability to cultivate and produce sufficient food. Production levels for the main harvest in 1995 were estimated to be 40 to 50 percent less than pre-war levels.
When families returned to their land, it was overgrown with bushes. Clearing the land was time-consuming and difficult, so the land area that could be planted in the first year was reduced. Insecurity, particularly for the Bantu population, led to more cautious planting strategies. Farmers planted closer to their villages for fear that they might be attacked and looted, and they were unable to take advantage of the different types of land in the area.
Many of the flood-control systems and canals in the area were destroyed and looted or fell into disrepair. Some repair work was done by the World Food Programme and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), but this was limited. This meant that the Juba River was no longer controlled and crops in many places were destroyed either by a lack or an excess of water. There was also limited access to tools and seeds. Extension advice and inputs previously provided by the Ministry of Agriculture were no longer available.
Many of the grinding mills in the area prior to the war were either stolen, looted or damaged, and in many villages several families now shared one grinding stone. This was one of the factors that had contributed to an increase in women's workload.
Opportunities for off-farm employment and income generation used to be available on banana plantations and in packing factories in the area, but following the collapse of the irrigation system the banana trees died, and larger landowners in the Juba Valley have not been able to re-establish their plantations. Loss of transport and insecurity have reduced access to markets in Kismayo town as well. Purchasing power within the town was also low.
Source: FAO, 1996d.
Seasonal changes in food supplies, food prices and employment opportunities often place severe stress on the ability of households to maintain nutritionally adequate food intakes. This difficulty is often reflected in seasonal changes in the body weight and health of vulnerable household members, especially women (see Figure 9) and children.
Seasonal constraints for household food security in agricultural and fishing communities often occur just before the harvest, when agricultural labour is at its peak, stocks from the previous year's harvest are nearly exhausted, and cash is running out. Shortages of food usually give rise to high market prices, which decline following the harvest. Women, who tend to perform a large proportion of the agricultural labour, have less time available for meal preparation and child care. The hungry season also frequently coincides with the rainy season, especially where the rains are confined to a single season and are accompanied by an increased incidence of infectious diseases, particularly diarrhoea, respiratory diseases and malaria (see Figure 10). In combination, these factors often contribute to raised levels of malnutrition among vulnerable groups. In a study carried out in the Gambia it was observed that child morbidity and mortality tended to reach their peak in the
pre-harvest period and that women whose last trimester of pregnancy coincided with this period tended to deliver babies whose birth weight was significantly lower than normal (Lawrence et al., 1989). The effects of low birth weight on children's capacity for survival and development are discussed in Chapter 8.
Communities that have lived under difficult climatic conditions for many generations develop management strategies to lessen the impact of drought or other environmental and climatic stresses on household food security. These fall-back mechanisms, i.e. permanent changes in the mix of ways in which food is acquired, may include alternative cropping patterns and food access systems involving numerous strategies to reduce nutritional risk. Often farmers will select and plant those crops and varieties that provide the best risk spread (see Box 6). Sorghum and millets are typical examples of crops that even in areas with erratic rainfall still produce a minimum yield. In areas where seasonality results in regular annual hungry periods among households such responses become a permanent feature of the farming system.
FIGURE 9 - Seasonal body weight changes of rural Beninese women, December 1985 to November 1986
Source: Schultink et al, 1990.
Note: n = 130; weight changes expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean.
During more serious or prolonged food shortages caused by loss of employment or illness of an adult in the family, people may resort to mortgaging or selling their assets, migrating for wage labour or taking on extra loans and going deeper into debt in order to survive. Women in particular may be inclined to convert assets they possess (e.g. jewellery) directly into food products for short-term consumption purposes.
The situation of pastoralists and semi-pastoralists is often complex and especially interesting. In areas where animal and population densities are not extreme, these communities have developed their own strategies to stabilize their food supplies (see Box 7).
FIGURE 10 - Nutritional stress calendar for small-scale fish smokers in two coastal villages in Ghana
Source: FAO, 1993f.
Note: The calendar was prepared during a participatory rapid appraisal carried out in January 1992 in Chokomey and Oshiyie, Ghana. The calendar starts in September in order to follow the traditional time frame of the community
Box 6 - Farmers' coping strategies to stabilize food supplies
Seasonal fluctuations in food supplies occur in many African countries. Rural people and farmers are well aware of the recurring periods of seasonal stress and of their damaging consequences. Within their limited resources they try to minimize their effect on household food security with a variety of strategies.
Farmers' strategies such as serial cropping, intercropping, mixed cropping, varietal selection and staggered planting dates all have a seasonal rationale. A close examination of intercropping techniques shows that farmers time their planting and arrange the spacing of crops to create complementarities in growth and canopy cover. In this way a continuous flow of food is produced; some crops are harvested green for early consumption, and unavoidable gaps in food supplies are filled by a crop such as cassava, which can be stored in the ground.
Such strategies by farmers to sustain themselves should be complemented by government interventions such as irrigation and water management schemes to extend and increase production; price regulation to ensure security of access for the poor; and the provision of storage centres at the local level.
Source: Adapted from Longhurst, 1985.
It is important to distinguish these management strategies from what are referred to as coping strategies, i.e. short-term responses to an immediate and irregular decline in access to food (Maxwell and Frankenberger, 1992). Under conditions of extreme food insecurity, whether caused by climatic stress such as drought or floods or by civil conflict, households will adopt a different set of measures, which are increasingly threatening to their livelihood, to attempt to maintain minimum levels of nutritional intake. Such strategies usually follow a sequence: reduction of the number of meals eaten, with particularly severe consequences for child nutrition, and increased consumption of wild and famine foods, such as leaves, berries and rodents, is followed by labour migration and the sale of bigger assets such as livestock, tools, housing and fields. This sequence of responses has been observed to occur in severely drought-affected countries in the period leading to a famine in
the absence of timely preventive action and provision of external aid to protect people's resource base and nutritional security.
Box 7 - Stabilizing household food supplies in semi-pastoralist societies
Semi-pastoralists who keep sheep, goats and camels gain a considerable degree of flexibility in coping with seasonal food deficits. Goats and camels are browsers and thrive on bushland not well suited to cattle. They can utilize African bushland plant species that retain their nutritive value into the dry season, when grassland forage is exhausted. Goats and sheep give milk, of course, but they are also the pastoralists' main source of meat. (This dietary preference accounts for the widespread misconception that African pastoralists avoid slaughtering their stock, which is true mainly in respect of female cattle.) They represent a convenient store of savings, easily converted into either grain or cash. Indeed, field observation has suggested that they constitute the main option for increasing the liquidity of household income in most African settings where banking is not yet effective. Small stock are often left under the control of women, and the possibility of trading a
goat or two could make a huge difference in a household's food situation at the end of a long dry season. These advantages explain the persistence and expansion of small-stock production even in environments that are favourable to cattle (such as at Ngorongoro in northern Tanzania).
The conversion of livestock into grain remains a necessity for the survival of African pastoralism. Even with mixed herds, the milk supply is extremely variable over the season. A fairly substantial herd must be accumulated before a family can sustain itself on livestock products over the entire year.
The ability to rely on grain foods during the period of milk deficit is crucial to producers with insufficient milking animals. If, however, the usual seasonal shortfall extends into a major drought, animals begin to die, prices plummet, and grain supplies disappear from local markets. Thus the very success of conversion from small stock to grain in normal seasons leaves livestock producers overextended and vulnerable in major droughts.
Source: Adapted from Moris, 1989.
Mechanisms to stabilize food
Mechanisms to reduce fluctuations in food supplies may operate at the regional, national and household levels. The typical scenario of poor households, that of combined transitory and chronic food security problems, requires a well-designed portfolio of food security policy actions based on relevant, accurate and timely information to ensure precise and efficient targeting of support initiatives. These policy actions should be complemented by actions to facilitate physical access to food supplies through improved agricultural technology, food production and nutrition diversification programmes, improved market infrastructure, transportation and road extension and the provision of local storage and processing facilities in rural areas. Poor availability of marketing facilities has been found to correlate positively with malnutrition. Families living in the vicinity of food markets have steady and easy access to cheaper foods and have greater dietary diversity.
The development of labour-intensive food processing industries in rural areas is another option that can help stabilize food supplies, provide employment opportunities and raise incomes, in addition to reducing the massive post-harvest losses that occur in perishable commodities in many African countries. Figure 11 illustrates the source and nature of some of these food losses occurring between producer and consumer. Improvements in post-harvest management at the village and household levels can often significantly reduce food losses and increase overall food availability. An additional gain is that a reduction of losses leads to lower costs for producers and distributors, as well as lower prices for consumers. Food storage and processing and the effects of improvements in this sector on household food security are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
Famine prevention and preparedness. Areas and countries that are particularly at risk of recurrent and severe harvest failure because of their agro-climatic and infrastructural circumstances as well as their poverty need to adopt a variety of famine prevention and preparedness measures, to support people's livelihoods and to improve their access to food or income. Sometimes these measures can also contribute towards creating the infrastructure for facilitating future development. In Ethiopia and Burkina Faso attempts have been made to mobilize labour for environmental conservation and production enhancement activities (mainly soil and water conservation), while at the same time the food security of the poor has been improved through payment in food aid, constituting a direct income transfer (FAO/WHO, 1992h). Other income or livelihood support measures include the sale of food aid on local markets to generate local currency for development projects or the release of
international or locally available stocks of food on the market to prevent sudden price fluctuations (see Box 8).
FIGURE 11 - The food pipeline
Source: Adapted from Pariser, 1987.
Box 8 - Examples of intervention strategies intended to support livelihoods and improve access to food or income
Market interventions
· General food subsidies
· Management of food reserves to prevent fluctuating food prices
· Subsidized weaning foods
· Food tokens
· Fair price shops
Income support programmes
· Employment schemes: food-for-work or cash-for-work on local construction projects (housing, roads, dams, wells, well protection, local amenities)
· Income-generating activities: production of useful local articles (rugs, mats, pottery)
· Exchange of livestock for cash, food or more drought-resistant animals
· Direct cash support
· Industrial projects: food processing (meat from destocking projects, production of weaning food or high-protein biscuits)
Agricultural support projects
· Crop diversification and improvement: distribution of drought-resistant seeds and appropriate tools
· Storage and transport
· Marketing of produce
· Horticulture, kitchen gardens
Livestock support projects
· Veterinary care
· Fodder distribution
· Water schemes
Source: Young and Jaspars, 1995.
Funds generated by food aid sales should be appropriately directed and targeted towards reducing malnutrition among disadvantaged groups in the recipient communities. Non-food inputs and measures which reinforce people's own coping strategies can include the timely distribution of agricultural inputs such as seeds, tools and/or credit to enable farmers to replant their fields following crop destruction caused by pests, diseases or heavy rainfall, or the provision of fodder to pastoralists for their livestock when grazing is insufficient.
Food aid has a role in the prevention of emergencies as well as during them. However, it is used in different ways depending on the stage and particular circumstances of the food security situation. Many labour-intensive public work programmes have successfully integrated the use of food aid as part of measures to provide income and livelihood support to people threatened by temporary food shortages. Food aid in kind is most appropriate if a large public works scheme induces an increased demand for food that cannot be met from local resources. Short-term food aid also continues to be an essential element of an overall food security strategy in emergency relief operations such as those engendered by ecological and sociopolitical stress. In the late stages of famine, people who have been displaced from their homes are often entirely dependent on food assistance, and the priority is then to alleviate malnutrition and to save lives.
A pre-condition for the effective use and management of food aid for disaster prevention, preparedness and mitigation is the operation of appropriate early warning and information systems. Much effort has been put into developing and fine-tuning information systems relevant to crisis prediction and prevention in a number of African countries. Early warning systems typically depend on rainfall, agricultural and market data used to monitor crop production, crop deficits and market prices. Sometimes, as is the case in Ethiopia and Botswana, they incorporate nutritional status data as the main outcome indicator. Such systems usually focus on predicting acute food shortages to trigger a timely response in the form of emergency relief. Other early warning systems adopt a more localized response mechanism and attempt to monitor increased vulnerabilities and risks to livelihood by examining the possible causes of food insecurity. The emphasis in data collection is on finding out how
people feed themselves; thus a wide variety of socio-economic indicators and qualitative data are gathered to assist in the early identification and implementation of appropriate interventions that will support people's own coping strategies (e.g. food- or cash-for-work). Ideally, central and local-level early warning systems should operate side by side in the same country to constitute a comprehensive system.
Sustainability of food supplies
Agriculture is essentially an environmental activity. One of its basic functions is the modification and adaptation of natural ecosystems in order to channel energy to consumers in the form of food. Each agricultural project takes place within a complex system of social attitudes, cultural patterns and practices, economic networks and physical, chemical and biological factors, which comprise the setting for agricultural productivity. Access to adequate food and physical well-being are crucial to the ability of farm households to perform work and consequently to sustain and increase food production and ultimately nutritional well-being.
Sustainability of food supplies refers to the capacity to ensure the long-term stability of the household food supply and the ability of households to meet consumption and livelihood needs on a continuous basis. Sustainability has many dimensions, and means of food procurement must meet a set of multiple conditions if it is to be achieved.
One of the main requirements is a sustainable food production system. Where households depend on natural resources for their income and food (i.e. agriculture, fishing and forest products), it is important that production practices do not conflict with or damage the environment, undermining future production. Environmental degradation is often closely linked with the perpetuation of poverty and food insecurity. To meet their survival needs. especially in areas with rapidly increasing populations, the rural poor may be forced to cultivate fragile, steep and/or marginal lands that are highly susceptible to erosion. In times of stress they may be compelled to reduce stocks of seed varieties in order to sustain household food needs and to use crop and animal residues in less than optimal ways. However, people can be assisted to manage their natural resources more effectively. For example, they can be encouraged to adopt appropriate soil conservation practices or given
food-for-work opportunities to help them conserve their seed stocks.
For improved resource management to be realized by the poorest and most vulnerable groups, however, such strategies must be within the limits of time, labour and income constraints and must be perceived by the target beneficiaries as offering short-term as well as long-term gains. Without suitable inducements, including security of land tenure, small-scale producers have little incentive to invest in long-term activities such as land improvement, tree-planting and forest conservation.
A second requirement is the protection of future productivity. If food procurement methods involve disposal of productive assets (e.g. land, production equipment and draught animals), as could be the case during famine or conflict situations, households can suffer a loss of their future productive capacity. Current food consumption would then be achieved at the cost of future consumption. Hence, sustainability requires that food be procured in a manner that does not lead to a loss in the productive capacity of the household. As already discussed in the previous section, emergency preparedness and mitigation policies and actions are required to strengthen people's own coping strategies and protect their resource base, particularly in countries and areas that are vulnerable to climatic stress.
A third requirement is that food be procured through self-reliance, i.e. through dependence on one's own efforts and resources, self-help, exchange or market processes rather than on charity, aid, philanthropy or the benevolence of others. Dependency is unsustainable as a procurement method in the long term, and it also conflicts with human dignity and self-respect. People whose resource base is adequate to enable them to procure sufficient amounts of food should not depend on direct food hand-outs beyond times of real need and should rely on them only until their production has been safely re-established. With regard to the poorest segment of society, direct welfare or well-targeted income-generating activities may be appropriate.
The last requirement is that efforts by households to achieve food security must be understood and placed in the context of a wider overall framework of basic household needs in which resources are limited and there is competition among needs and priorities. It is important that an adequate and stable food supply be achieved without compromising the fulfilment of other basic needs considered important by households such as education, health, drinking-water and housing. A household that has to spend a large proportion of its resources to obtain adequate food may find it difficult to meet basic needs and thus may find it difficult to sustain itself in the long term. This factor highlights the critical importance of enhancing the real incomes of households for them to be able to meet total livelihood needs. Nutritional well-being at the household level depends on the sustainability of agricultural productivity and on the concurrent sustainability of access for all household
members to sufficient food of adequate quantity, quality and safety to meet their nutritional requirements.
Health factors and their impact on nutrition
A food-secure environment is clearly an important determinant of dietary intake. Whether this translates into good nutritional status, however, will depend on a range of other factors such as health and sanitation, methods of food preparation, the adequacy of general child care and the knowledge, education and skills needed by different family members to use available human, organizational and economic resources for the benefit of the household and its vulnerable members in particular.
The malnutrition-infection complex: health/nutrition synergism
The healthfulness of the environment influences exposure to infectious diseases, while the provision of health services and access to them influence treatment of infection. Poor population groups are particularly affected by environmental factors that increase exposure to infectious disease such as limited water supply, inadequate sewage disposal and general sanitation, contaminated surface water, overcrowded and poor housing and unhygienic food preparation.
The poor are also at a particularly serious disadvantage where infection is concerned because of their frequently limited access to health care, inability to pay for needed medications and services including immunization and family planning, and insufficient time and other resources to care adequately for family members during periods of acute illness or to promote their nutritional recovery during convalescence. As a consequence, treatment of infection is often inadequate or late, and the resulting prolonging of the disease places children at increased nutritional risk. Local health services are often understaffed or have limited supplies of essential drugs. Attitudes to health care and education are also important factors affecting mothers' willingness to make use of available services.
Infectious diseases constitute one of the major factors contributing to child malnutrition; conversely, malnutrition makes a child more susceptible to these infectious diseases. The interaction between nutrition and infection, known as the malnutrition-infection complex, accounts for the severity of many infections and the high mortality rate associated with diarrhoea, respiratory infections, measles, worm infestations and malaria. The burden of these largely preventable or inexpensively curable diseases of children is very high in sub-Saharan Africa.
Several factors may contribute to deteriorating nutritional status during severe and prolonged infection. These include decreased food intake, inefficient nutrient absorption, losses of body nutrient stores and increased nutritional requirements. People who are sick frequently lose their appetite and are thus unlikely to maintain their dietary intake unless encouraged to do so. The range of possible outcomes is quite broad, from weight loss to an increased incidence of growth faltering (i.e. inadequate skeletal growth), protein-energy malnutrition, low birth weight and micronutrient deficiency diseases, especially vitamin A deficiency. These forms of malnutrition are described in detail in Chapter 8.
Malnutrition, on the other hand, both reduces resistance to infection and disease and increases the severity and duration of illness. Increasing evidence suggests that even minor degrees of growth faltering and micronutrient deficiencies, especially vitamin A deficiency, are associated with increased risk of infection and mortality from infection (FAO/WHO, 1992d). Figure 12 shows some of the interactions among variables that influence the cycle of infection and malnutrition.
While the malnutrition-infection complex most commonly affects children, it is also significant where adult morbidity is concerned. Infections and parasitic diseases have a major role in loss of productivity through their impact on adult physical performance and work capacity, often entailing serious consequences for the food security of affected households. Such health hazards include malaria, intestinal parasites, onchocerciasis or river blindness (a type of filariasis involving a parasitic worm and causing blindness) and schistosomiasis or bilharzia (a disease caused by river flukes and involving freshwater snails as intermediate hosts, which can lead to bladder tumours and cirrhosis or scarring of the liver, finally causing liver failure). The potential effects of human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS) on people's productive capacities and ability to meet their families' food needs were discussed in Chapter 2.
In all countries, successful implementation of policies and programmes to improve health and nutrition requires action from many sectors. Health actions should include the establishment of adequate, accessible and affordable health services at the village, community and national levels to provide medical treatment. Public health measures involving improved housing, water supply, sewage disposal and personal hygiene, as well as food safety measures such as promotion of appropriate food storage and preparation techniques, food quality control and legislation, need to be implemented to control and prevent infection. These measures have the potential to reduce significantly morbidity from various water- and faeces-borne infectious diseases. Providing and improving sanitation and water supply near the home can enhance people's health and raise productivity not only by diminishing days of sickness but also by saving time and energy for women who would otherwise have to collect
water from distant sources.
FIGURE 12 - Simplified model of the malnutrition-infection cycle
Source: FAO/WHO, 1992d.
Other measures that have an important role in the prevention, control and management of infectious diseases include: immunization; early recognition of growth faltering through growth monitoring, and early intervention; breastfeeding; promotion of locally appropriate mixes for the dietary management of infection and encouragement of appropriate feeding during illness and rehabilitation; and family planning. Primary education can have an equally important role, through emphasis on rudimentary nutrition principles and health. However, it is a fundamental fact that nutrition and health improvements cannot be sustained without concurrent improvements in food and agricultural systems and socioeconomic status.
Actions outside the health sector are also essential, as each infection has its own transmission mechanism and many are related to the environment. The transmission of malaria and schistosomiasis, for example, is facilitated by vectors which are permitted to thrive by their environmental conditions, either naturally occurring or designed by humans. Strategies such as the elimination of breeding sites can successfully decrease malaria transmission and lower the incidence of the disease. The use of insecticide-impregnated bed nets for self-protection has also been successful. Good engineering of dams and irrigation systems can avoid the dangers of the spread of schistosomiasis.
In most instances, specific health programmes aimed at preventing or reducing the reproduction or transmission of the infecting agent are needed. However, precautions are necessary to ensure that new or existing projects or development activities do not create additional health hazards. A nutrition or health impact statement should be included in the documentation of all proposed development projects.
Knowledge, education and care at the household and community levels
Other important factors influencing dietary intake and nutritional status are those conditions and activities that have been grouped under the category of "care". Care has been defined as the provision in the household and community of time, attention, support and skills to meet the physical, mental and social needs of nutritionally vulnerable groups. Care can be provided within families and communities or by external institutions. Among the nutritionally vulnerable groups, attention is often focused on preschool children, but other vulnerable groups include school-age children, mothers, the elderly, the disabled, the landless and the unemployed, as well as refugees and displaced persons.
Caring capacity is the ability to use human, economic and organizational resources for the benefit of the household. It therefore involves issues of education, knowledge, culture, time and control over resources, including income. In the context of nutrition, it involves facilitating the optimal use of household food resources for family feeding and of parental resources to protect the family from infection and to care for a sick child or other vulnerable member of the household. More generally, it includes responding promptly to nutrition needs and nurturing physical, psychological and emotional well-being, which in turn will benefit nutrition and health.
Specific care-giving for children includes breastfeeding; providing security and reducing child stress; providing shelter and clothing; feeding, bathing and supervision of toilet; preventing and treating illness; showing affection; interaction and stimulation; playing and socializing; and providing a safe environment for exploration. It also includes the use of resources outside the home, such as curative and preventive health facilities, prenatal care, traditional healers or members of the extended family network. Breastfeeding is a prime example of care, since it combines food security, caring and a healthy environment in one action. The way in which the care-giving activities are performed is an important aspect of care: the care-giver's motivation, skill, physical capacity, consistency and responsiveness to the child's needs are all related to child survival, health and development. Some common constraints to providing care and ways to address them are described in Box
Box 9 - Some common constraints to providing care, and how they may be addressed
Low levels of education, lack of support for traditional wisdom, and beliefs about care
The demand for care, or the perception of the importance of early and intense investment in the child, varies from culture to culture and among individuals, as does the understanding of the meaning of mothering, fathering and care. Education and literacy are fundamental to achieving benefits from other policies. Adult education and literacy classes are important, as are carefully tailored education on child care, which should communicate the importance of exclusive breastfeeding in the early months of life, increasing the energy density and quality of complementary foods, decreasing contamination and maintaining frequent feedings.
Lack of support from family or community
Family or community support can increase the care for children and women through reduction of workload, economic assistance, knowledge or emotional support. Many societies have traditional mother's helpers who provide assistance during childbirth and the post-partum period, including advice and emotional support. Community groups can also provide support for children and women. Programmes can increase support by forming women's organizations, increasing the support provided by older siblings or encouraging the father's support in child care. Social security systems for women can be expanded in those countries that can afford them.
Heavy workload in income generation and household production tasks
Heavy workloads, particularly during the agricultural season, place a physical and emotional burden on women and thus reduce their ability to provide care for themselves and their families. Technology and infrastructure can relieve demands on women's time and efforts. Possible areas for assistance include water collection and fuel gathering, access to health services and technologies for improving hygiene and sanitation.
Poor physical and mental health
Physical health needs include nutrition, medical care services, prenatal care and care for the child. Mental health needs of women include self-confidence, absence of depression and reasonable levels of stress. Programmes can be designed to empower women to use their own skills and to learn new ones that allow them to feel confident in a larger sphere. Access to publicly provided health and related services is essential, including general health, prenatal, obstetric and family planning services. Better birth spacing and weaning practices will improve the health of women and children. Education on the value of family planning also needs to be targeted towards men.
Source: FAO/WHO, 1992c.
Women's work load and the consequences for nutrition
The responsibility for providing care often falls disproportionately on women. As a result of their multiple responsibilities, women are often unable to spend sufficient time on food preparation, child feeding and other caring activities that have beneficial nutritional outcomes. Studies undertaken by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) in Botswana, Ghana and Kenya (Brown and Haddad, 1994) and in Zambia (Kumar, 1994) pointed out that considering that children are valuable resources in terms of their contribution to productive activities, very little is invested in them in terms of direct care time. Time recorded in direct child care was generally less than one hour per day.
Women often face difficult choices in their time allocation decisions. Although caution is needed in generalizing about people's time allocation patterns and burdens, recent data from different African countries support the popularly held belief that women not only work longer hours than men but also spend more hours in productive activities per day than men. Data from the region of Mbeya in the United Republic of Tanzania, a largely agricultural area, revealed that women worked 12 to 14 hours during the dry season and 14 to 17 hours during the wet season, without rest, whereas men worked eight to ten hours in the dry season and ten hours in the wet season, with a rest period of three to four hours (Mwalemba, 1995).
In rural areas women are often major producers and processors of family food; in urban areas women are involved in both the marketing and purchasing of food supplies, as well as in the "fast-food" sector of street food production and sales. In certain cities in Africa, as much as 90 percent of the street food trade is conducted by women. Urban women prepare and market street foods to augment their household income, to ensure domestic self-sufficiency and to improve the food security and welfare of their families.
Women's activities in the food chain influence their resource situation in two ways. On the one hand, food and cash are generated through these activities; on the other hand, the labour and time spent in the process are diverted from food preparation and child care activities. The necessity for many women to play a dual role in the household - in production (food production and income generation, for example) and in reproduction (activities related to nurturing and attending to basic family needs) - imposes immense pressure on women's time, labour and attitudes. Often the physical labour involved may be so heavy that it is detrimental to the woman's health, especially during pregnancy and lactation. In such households, nutrition insecurity will be reflected also in higher levels of stunting and wasting among infants and preschool children. This is particularly the case when access to basic necessities such as water and fuelwood for cooking involves carrying heavy loads and
walking long distances every day. Table 12 shows that rural women in several African countries spend considerable time working in both home production and agricultural activities. Box 10 presents an example of household division of labour between men and women.
Water collection, in particular, is frequently a time-intensive task for women. Women in all rural areas would benefit in various ways from investment in provision of and access to safe water. It would do much to relieve women's time burden by enabling them to spend less time in water collection, therefore relieving physical stress and improving women's nutritional status. The freeing of women's time would also open up possibilities for income generation. Greater water availability will also have positive effects on child health by enabling improved hygiene and sanitation practices within the home.
Table 12 - Rural women's daily work patterns (hours)
Location
Number of households
Home production
Market production
Child care
Food activities
Hauling fuel and water
Other
Agriculture
Other
Botswana
2.14^a
Kenya (dry season)
Kenya (wet season)
Sudan
8 villages^b
Tanzania
Source: McGuire and Popkin, 1990.
^a Includes other housework activities in addition to cooking.
^b Data are averaged over the eight villages.
Box 10 - Division of household labour between the sexes in Chibate, Zambia
Tasks usually done by women
Agriculture
· Picking and heaping branches
· Planting cassava
· Planting other crops
· Weeding
· Harvesting crops other than cassava
Domestic duties
· Taking care of children
· Fetching water and fuelwood
· Digging cassava, peeling, soaking, drying, pounding, winnowing
· Searching for relish/wild vegetables
· Cleaning yard, house and plates
· Washing clothes
Handicrafts
· Knitting
· Embroidery
· Crocheting
Tasks usually done by men
Agriculture
· Cutting trees
· Preparing the fields
· Digging holes for cassava plants
· Growing vegetables
Handicrafts
· Carpentry
· Basket-making
· Building and roofing houses
· Building bath shelters
· Making drums
· Blacksmithing
Other activities
· Hawking
Tasks done by either men or women
Agriculture
· Harvesting maize
· Making ridges
Note that weeding, sowing and harvesting are basically female activities. Men engage in building houses, but the roofing grass is cut by women. Male activities are fewer than female, more spaced out and less repetitive.
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1991b.
The adoption of labour-saving techniques may be useful in lessening women's workload. However, often the fundamental need is to promote equitable sharing of responsibilities for care and the burdens of work in general among household members. Care of the mother, either by herself or by her family, assisted by social support in the community and by the social services network, will have a direct effect on her ability to care for her children.
Box 11 outlines some appropriate strategies to assist women and their families to improve their nutritional well-being.
Women's control over resources and the consequences for nutrition
Available evidence from different African countries shows that the effect of income on family nutritional well-being and health depends largely on who controls the income and takes decisions on its disposal. Often the income controlled by women has greater immediate benefits for the family's nutritional well-being than male-controlled income. One way of increasing women's economic influence and their ability to enhance the family's food security is through increasing their participation in income-earning activities. Unfortunately, there are still many stumbling blocks preventing women's enhanced control over economic resources and their more active involvement in income-generating activities.
In a study in Zambia it was found that in contributing to household food security, men prioritized their time between producing food or earning income from more lucrative occupations such as fishing or sawing wood. Very often? men chose the short-term benefits of income at the expense of the nutritional well-being of their wives and children. The high costs of fishing made loans necessary, but a rapid turnover made it possible to pay the loans off quickly, and the high incomes that were generated were usually reinvested in fishing. Thus the additional income was rarely used to hire agricultural labour, although the use of hired labour for fishing was common. In other words, the men were prepared to hire labour to replace themselves but not to replace their wives, despite the potential economic and other benefits for their families if the wives could be freed from agricultural duties to engage in income-generating activities (FAO, 1992g).
Box 11 - Strategies to assist women to improve nutritional well-being
A major review of the roles and responsibilities of women in providing and sustaining family nutritional levels recommended five major groups of strategies to assist women to fulfill these roles more efficiently and equitably.
The first involves reducing the burdens of reproduction. The two most successful strategies for accomplishing this include efforts to increase the age at which women begin to have children and efforts to lengthen the time intervals between births. Both of these strategies entail increasing educational opportunities for girls, implementing information campaigns and altering the factors that favour the formation of large families (for example, reducing productive time and labour requirements, lowering poverty and lessening environmental degradation).
The second group of strategies includes methods to reduce the burdens of child care. Strategies for accomplishing this objective include increasing educational opportunities, improving health and nutrition information, providing more access to time- and labour-saving technologies, securing more equitable wage scales for women and initiating innovative child care systems such as mobile creches and community-sponsored day-care centres.
The third set of strategies involves the improvement of access to maternal health and nutrition care. The strategies include renewing the focus on maternal as well as child health, especially in terms of broadening knowledge about and availability of pre- and postnatal care and birth attendance, expanding outreach and extension services, particularly in rural areas, and improving the quality of the services offered.
The fourth group of strategies involves enhancing the position of women in food production and farming. To achieve this, the visibility of the economic contributions of women in food production should be increased through improved databases and national statistics, and women's access to productive resources such as land, technology, credit, training and extension needs to be improved.
Finally, the fifth set of strategies involves the elevation and improvement of the position of women in society. The strategies for achieving this include increasing educational and training opportunities for girls and women, increasing the opportunities for women to generate income and to control the use of income, empowering women through organizational and political participation and altering social and cultural attitudes in favour of women's equality through educational, political and legal institutions.
Source: Adapted from UN ACC/SCN, 1990.
In many countries in Africa, women's access to support services including access to improved technology, credit, extension advice, training and markets - is still very limited compared with that of men. Most services, especially credit and extension, tend to be biased towards cash crops whose production is dominated by men, at the expense of crops in the traditional production sector, mainly for family consumption, that are usually grown and controlled by women.
Another factor limiting women's access to extension is the predominance of male extension workers in the extension system. Culturally determined norms often do not allow a male extension worker to approach another man's wife or to deal directly with female heads of household. A strategy of working through groups of female farmers, rather than individual women, may be considered culturally more acceptable. Residential extension courses also tend to alienate women; they are likely to find it difficult to leave behind their domestic responsibilities and to secure the cooperation of their husbands, who may not be in favour of their wives attending residential courses or going to meetings unaccompanied.
In order for women farmers to enhance their productive capacities, play a more active part in economically productive activities and improve household food security, their special needs and priorities need to be addressed in development interventions. In view of the tremendous costs incurred in terms of agricultural and food production by failing to address this problem, there is an urgent need for extension services to give more attention to women farmers to enable them to overcome the production constraints they continue to face in many countries. However, this need calls for strategies that are sensitive to both men's and women's socio-economic circumstances in rural areas, and consideration of how they may be changed by specific interventions. It is also critical that men's social circumstances and women's socio-economic roles be made clear to policy-makers, grassroots workers and the rural people themselves. This clarification is commonly known as gender sensitization.
Cultural patterns and food distribution within the family
In addition to the above factors of women's workload and their control over resources, socio-cultural beliefs and customs can also have a significant influence on family nutritional well-being in terms of food choice and food-sharing behaviour within the family. In many societies some foods are more prized than others and no meal is considered complete without them. When the favoured food is a root or tuber (e.g. cassava or plantain), this custom may be disadvantageous to young children. A weaning diet based on roots or tubers is bulky and has a low concentration of nutrients, especially energy and protein. Young children with limited stomach capacity are unable to consume sufficient quantities of such foods to cover their energy and nutrient requirements, unless the staple is enriched with additional foods, preferably fats or oils, mashed legumes and vegetables or fruits. Cultural food beliefs and taboos are often related to foods of animal origin and frequently apply to
women and young children. Culture can be a strong behavioural determinant and can dictate preference or avoidance of certain foods, especially during illness and pregnancy. While some cultural beliefs and habits are nutritionally harmful, others which are beneficial should be promoted through positive messages to raise household members' and especially women's knowledge and awareness of the benefits of a nutritious diet using locally available foods.
Cultural influences may also include customary systems of food-sharing and food distribution within the family and cultural attitudes towards food preparation, breastfeeding and child feeding. Intrafamily food distribution is often related to hierarchical position, with the head of the family and the income-earning members of the household receiving priority in eating. In such families mothers and young children may receive a smaller share of the family's food relative to their nutritional needs. To raise awareness among all family members and to convince fathers of the benefits of adequate nutritional intake for the nutritional well-being and productive capacities of all household members, the social and cultural background of such customs which are potentially harmful to nutritional well-being need to be well understood. More details on nutrition education programmes that address the social and cultural factors determining eating patterns and that promote healthy diets are
discussed in Chapter 9.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 4 - Food supply systems in Africa
Agriculture in transition: Factors affecting food security
Selected food supply systems
Urbanization and changing patterns of food demand
The role of agricultural research
Chapter 4 - Food supply systems in Africa
Agriculture in transition: Factors affecting food security
The agricultural production and food supply systems of a country depend on many factors including government policy, ecological potential, and the level of technology, inputs and skills of the agricultural producers. Food self-sufficiency has been a food policy objective of many African governments. However, while this objective may have been politically desirable, it has not always been economically and ecologically feasible. In some countries food self-sufficiency has been taken to mean adequacy of food supplies of locally produced staple cereals (e.g. maize, sorghum, rice) to meet the population's per caput energy requirements, but more often it has been seen as adequacy to meet market demand. Foods other than staple crops may be included, but in all cases the concept is that countries would not need to import foods or would minimize dependence on food imports as far as possible. While a certain degree of food security can be obtained with such an approach, especially in
remote areas with risky or unstable markets or in those lacking markets, a strict policy of food self-sufficiency is generally not desirable.
By contrast, the concept of food self-reliance takes into account the possibility of international trade. It implies maintenance of a level of domestic production plus a capacity to import in order to meet the food needs of the population by exporting other products.
The benefits and risks of relying on international trade to ensure food security for all are at the heart of the debate over these alternative strategies. Discussion of that issue, however, is beyond the scope of this book.
Production potentials and crop selection
The production potential of land is set by soil and climatic conditions and by the level of inputs and management applied to the land. Crop production can be rain-fed or irrigated and can be maximized by matching the climatic and soil attributes of the land with the climatic and soil requirements of the desired crop. Attempts to grow crops that are not suited to the prevailing ecological conditions will often result in low yields or crop failure, with consequent adverse effects on food security. Figure 13 shows the characteristics of the six major climatic zones of Africa.
The type, timing and level of inputs also have a major effect on yield. A low level of inputs is associated with subsistence or small-scale production, low capital intensity, manual labour, local cultivars (seed types), little or no fertilization, no pest control and small farm areas. A high level of inputs is associated with commercial production, moderate to high capital inputs, increased mechanization, improved cultivars, the use of inorganic chemical fertilizer and pest control, medium to large landholdings and accessibility to markets. In general, the continent of Africa as a whole is characterized by a low level of inputs.
The suitability of land for each crop may be assessed and defined in terms of a percentage range of the maximum yields attainable. Land areas capable of yielding 80 percent or more of the maximum yields attainable are classified as very suitable; areas yielding from 40 to 80 percent of the maximum are suitable; areas yielding from 20 to 40 percent are marginally suitable; and areas yielding less than 20 percent are classified as not suitable. Under the current conditions in Africa, the most extensive area of land (455 million hectares) is suited to the cultivation of cassava, followed by maize (418 million hectares), sweet potato (406 million hectares), soybean (371 million hectares) and sorghum (354 million hectares). In the Sudano-Sahelian region millets are recommended as the primary crop, suitable for the largest area of land, since they require less moisture, while sorghum is dominant in subhumid and semi-arid southern Africa. Maize is to be preferred in terms of
suitability for the largest areas in humid and subhumid West Africa and subhumid and mountainous East Africa. In humid Central Africa, the most appropriate crop choice for the widest land area is cassava. Table 13 gives the yield ranges of 11 important crops on land classified by suitability for each crop. The yield differences between very suitable and unsuitable land are substantial. The data also confirm the significant impact of higher levels of inputs on yields.
FIGURE 13 - Major climatic regions of Africa
Source: FAO, 1986.
Crop specialization and food security
A first approach to food security could be the promotion of a regional^1 food security system based on "comparative advantage", in which countries would grow mainly the crops most likely to yield well under prevailing national conditions and would meet other food needs through interregional trade. The Southern African Development Community (SADC) has made moves in the direction of a regional food security policy based on crop specialization, but the issues are still being defined.
^1 "Regional" refers to countries in close proximity that share international trade in food commodities.
Sorghum may be the most suitable crop to select as the national food staple on ecological grounds, but many farmers and many governments will switch resources to the production of maize for several reasons: potential yields are higher, even if risks of failure are greater; export opportunities exist in the region; technical support packages are available; and maize is easier to process, both commercially and domestically, than sorghum. Risks of failure are greater for maize because it is particularly sensitive to the types of moisture shortfall that are typical in East Africa: delayed onset of the rains, a mid-season dry period and early termination of rainfall. However, sorghum is not without its problems; for example, it is particularly susceptible to attack by seed-eating birds.
Table 13 - Crop yield ranges of suitable land (tonnes)
Crop
Level of inputs
Very suitable
Suitable
Marginally suitable
Not suitable
Pearl millet
High
Low
Sorghum (lowland)
High
Low
Maize (lowland)
High
Low
Soybean
High
Low
Phaseolus bean (lowland)
High
Low
Cotton
High
Low
Sweet potato
High
Low
Cassava^a
High
Low
Rice
High
Low
Wheat (spring)
High
Low
White potato^a
High
Low
Source: FAO, 1986.
^a Dry weight.
A strategy of crop specialization that tends towards a narrowing of the food base is risky, especially in areas that are ecologically fragile and those that lack an efficient transport and marketing system to ensure rapid distribution of a variety of different foodstuffs throughout the country. In addition, a food production system in which the main food crop is also the main cash crop, as is the case with maize in eastern and southern Africa, is open to considerable risks, especially for resource-poor subsistence farmers. For these farmers crop failure will mean loss of both income and food for home consumption, as was demonstrated during the drought in southern Africa in 1992/93.
In Africa, a large proportion of the population is still dependent on small-scale agriculture for food. Therefore, policies that alter land use and farming systems at the subsistence level have a direct effect on food availability, access and consumption. Traditional systems of land use, farming practices and cropping patterns are all changing as small-scale farmers face growing demands from markets and government to increase productivity. The farmers are required simultaneously to produce a food surplus for urban consumption, to feed and maintain their own households and often to increase their output of selected cash crops for export. These diverse demands often put a considerable strain on the land, labour and time of the farming household. Food security at the household level may be affected by this transition.
Commercialization of agriculture: potential effects on household food security
Traditionally, food production in Africa remained at subsistence level and the farming system was based on shifting cultivation and bush fallow farming. Under these practices, soil fertility was periodically restored to cultivated land by the shifting of cultivation to fresh, rested ground, allowing the recently cultivated land to rest and recover. The use of external inputs such as chemical fertilizers was minimal, with farmers occasionally applying organic manure. Similarly, animal production was practiced as an extensive free-range system in which pastoralists moved with their herds to seek new pastures by following the seasonal rains.
Such systems of agriculture were ecologically appropriate and sustainable under low population densities. However, with increasing numbers of people and animals, more settled cropping patterns were established, and the fallow period was gradually reduced. As a result, cultivation practices became more intensive; crop rotation, multiple cropping and intercropping were adopted as effective strategies to maximize land productivity without endangering soil fertility. Land-use patterns were complex, involving the production of a wide variety of food crops for domestic consumption; this strategy ensured a varied diet and helped to stabilize the food supply against climatic and seasonal shortages.
Gradual monetization of the economy and a shift in the socioeconomic environment increased the need for cash. For example, there was increased demand for education, better housing, health services and communications. Cash crop production was increasingly adopted by small-scale farmers as they strived to generate cash both for themselves and as foreign exchange for their countries. In most cases, governments adopted the policy of balancing the production of exportable cash crops and food crops. The governments of several countries of eastern and southern Africa identified maize as the most appropriate food and cash crop for small-scale production, and cropping packages already adopted by commercial growers were promoted. However, in many cases there were unforeseen problems, and the maize production of the small-scale farmers failed to meet consumer demand.
The transition from subsistence farming to cash crop farming offers the opportunity to increase income, but it also harbours considerable risks. These include the food security risks of increased dependence on a limited number of crops, capital risks linked to prices and socio-economic dependence on the lender when credit is obtained. Poor farmers in particular have often failed to reap the benefits of technological change or commercialization, or have even lost from them. On the whole, cash crop production can be expected to have a positive impact on nutrition when the income it provides more than offsets not only the food production that is foregone, but also any rise in food prices that may result from an increased demand for purchased food and the freeing of prices.
Changes in cropping patterns resulting from the transition to commercial production may affect household food security. Traditional farmers have generally adapted food production practices to meet environmental, economic and technological limitations. They minimize risk by planting a variety of staple crops that mature at different times during the year. Monocropping may encourage seasonal shortages; traditional intercropping practices provide a cushion during seasons of insufficient food (see Chapter 5).
In many communities, a major staple is grown as both food and cash crop. If there is an efficient marketing organization, this crop will be sold, often by the household head (male or female), as the major cash source for the household. The household will meet its food needs partly by home storage, but also by buying back the main staple as required and/or by growing secondary crops such as millets, sorghum, cassava and sweet potato. These secondary crops are used for various purposes such as home consumption, beer brewing, sale in the informal sector, food for poultry or small livestock, food in case of drought (especially cassava) or informal exchange or barter during the season in return for seeds, small livestock, poultry or other goods.
In the Wedza communal area of Zimbabwe, cultivation and consumption patterns are circumscribed to a large extent by the needs of households to earn money and to subsist (see Box 12). A variety of activities are undertaken, including the production of enough food for daily needs, together with a minimal store of food, usually the basic staple, to last at least until the following season. In some cultures, the provision of food for family use is the responsibility of both husband and wife. In other cultures, it is largely the responsibility of women, who may have their own fields specifically for home food production (see Box 13).
In the African context, cash crop promotion and commercialization are of particular significance for women. Commercialization has often taken place through expansion of cultivated land rather than through substitution of modern varieties or cash crops on previously cultivated land. Frequently, the overall result of adopting cash crop production has been an increased demand for labour, especially women's labour. Some of the effects of new agricultural technology on women's workload and the shift in control over resources have been well documented (Kumar, 1994).
The timing of inputs, including labour, is often crucial to securing maximum yields when hybrid varieties are used; thus not only the quantity of labour but also the seasonal application of labour is important. In many cases, this will result in diversion of labour from other activities, including domestic work, home gardening, child care and regular preparation of well-balanced meals. When adult energy requirements increase, so does food demand, which is likely to be met at the expense of children's food intake. On the other hand, the nutritional status of overworked adult women stands to be compromised if the food available is insufficient to meet their increased body requirements for energy.
Box 12 - Cash and food production strategies of households in the Wedza communal area, Zimbabwe
Most households in this area try to combine several methods of improving their living standards. These include:
· improving the yields of one or two major crops such as maize plus cotton, or sunflower, to sell annually and to provide for food stocks (in the case of maize);
· improving the yields of various garden crops, especially green leafy vegetables and tomatoes, to eat and to sell regularly and informally;
· maintaining a minimal variety and quantity of other crops for home consumption and/or surplus for informal selling as necessary (typically millet, groundnuts, bambara nuts, cowpeas and pumpkins);
· obtaining remittances in cash or kind from any family member to supplement incomes from agriculture;
· engaging whenever possible in informal-sector activities in the form of casual labour (building, thatching, hiring out implements or draught animals) for men, or the selling of vegetables, poultry, pottery or sewing work for women.
In such ways, the households hope to achieve:
· an annual lump sum from crop sales for large expenditures such as school fees, fertilizers and clothes;
· a regular cash income to buy regularly foodstuffs and other groceries and to pay for such services as the grinding mill and bus fares;
· the daily food requirements of household members, together with a minimal store of food to last at least until the following season.
Source: Truscott, 1986.
Box 13 - Gender roles in agricultural production in the Wedza communal area, Zimbabwe
Traditionally, even today, it is considered the responsibility of women to provide for the daily food needs of household members "from the field to the plate". This has its origins in certain traditional divisions of labour between men and women, with men being the hunters and cattle owners and being responsible for heavy labour such as land clearing and ploughing. As landholders (through usufruct) and cattle owners, men also have controlled the households' most valuable assets. Today, the division is not as strict as it once was, with many women, by force of circumstances, taking on more responsibilities for ploughing, herding and other tasks.
Most households reported that women take the main responsibility for the production of most crops in terms of labour and decision-making. In half the survey households, the income accruing from maize sales was said to be received jointly by the husband and wife, and in two-fifths by the wife only. Practically all other crops (excepting sunflower and cotton which are cash crops) are said to be "women's crops".
A previous study in Wedza showed that despite this responsibility, men are still key decision-makers when it comes to allocation of land to particular crops, access to loans and control of income accruing from crop sales. Among the survey households, there appeared to be some disagreement over those issues Women in Wedza suggested that they must have access to land in their own right or jointly with their husbands to overcome the disparity. Women have joined farmer groups in large numbers as a way of overcoming some of the constraints they face.
Source: Truscott, 1986.
Production of cash crops often requires a variety of additional inputs. To increase yields, farmers are encouraged to purchase hybrid or improved seeds in place of their own local varieties saved from the previous harvest. The farmer often requires credit to purchase not only the improved seeds but also the appropriate fertilizers and pesticides. A farmer growing cash crops therefore faces the risk of going into debt, especially if payment for the previous cash crop is delayed. These circumstances may limit the family's cash flow resources and reduce household food security.
Despite the potential risks, commercial agriculture can provide opportunities for household food security and nutritional improvement, particularly if it is managed so as to benefit the rural poor. To obtain such benefits it may be necessary to increase the productivity of small-scale farmers through targeted measures such as production incentives, development of marketing infrastructure and more research on rain-fed and other disadvantaged areas. The impact of such programmes can be strikingly enhanced if they are accompanied by effective extension services, farmer education and nutrition education programmes. Programmes to increase production and incomes in enterprises controlled by women can also contribute to the improvement of household food security; many studies have shown that earnings by women are likely to be utilized for increasing family food consumption. However, projects targeted towards women with the goal of income generation need to be sensitive to competing
demands on their time - particularly demands generated by child care.
A policy for self-sufficiency in food production or adoption of a "food first" policy that emphasizes food crops to the exclusion of cash crops is not necessarily desirable or crucial for alleviating malnutrition, when market infrastructure and transportation do not impede trade. Where market infrastructure is not well developed, it should be strengthened in the long-term interest of achieving food security on a sustainable basis. In the short and medium term, the joint promotion of food crops and cash crops, especially home gardening and small animal rearing, is required in support of food security enhancement.
Selling cash crops on the market instead of producing only food crops often increases household income and may thus also be likely to increase food consumption, provided the switch to cash crops does not lead to a change in income control at the household level and consequently to decisions for its disposal that could reduce expenditure on food.
Additional employment and income can also be derived from the development of small-scale agro-industries involving post-harvest activities, from cleaning and sorting of crops to storage, processing and marketing of foods and other agricultural crops. This is a key factor both in overall development and in providing income to poorer sectors of the population.
Commercialization of agriculture, the development of labour-intensive agro-industries and an active food system, supported by an appropriate policy environment, provide the only way out of subsistence agriculture and allow communities and governments to generate the wealth required to pay for needed social and infrastructural improvements. To ensure that agricultural growth will benefit the poor and to meet the consumption needs of present and future populations, the creation and dissemination of nutrition-enhancing agricultural technologies developed to suit different agro-ecological areas and farmer groups are of major importance.
Selected food supply systems
Compound farms and forest gardening
In many humid and subhumid areas, people commonly cultivate compound farms or home gardens, which are sometimes also referred to as backyard or kitchen gardens (Figures 14 and 15). The home garden is only one of several field systems operated by a farmer or farm household (Figure 16), except in urban and pert-urban areas and in areas of land scarcity, where the home garden may be the only cultivated plot. The home garden is thus one of the components of the whole farming system and is under the same household management or subject to related multiple decision-making processes (Okigbo, 1994).
The home garden often includes a permanent agricultural plot or forest garden which contains an ecologically balanced mixture of perennial and annual crops. The garden forms a hub' with the homestead at its centre, from which paths lead to other field systems and other production units devoted to annual crops for the market and for home consumption.
FIGURE 14 - Typical vertical zonation of an intensive home garden in the humid tropics of Ghana
Source: Asare, Oppong and Twum-Ampofo. 1985.
Home gardens are often highly diversified. Crop mixtures found in home gardens are mainly the result of deliberate selection and cultivation of a wide variety of herbs and trees occupying complementary levels and playing supportive roles. The gardens provide farmers with a mixture of food and cash crops (Table 14). Livestock, including sheep, goats, poultry and to some extent cattle and pigs, are also kept, although on a small scale, providing food, income and manure. Mixed tree and herb cropping systems have greatly extended harvesting periods and thus ensure continuous availability of some food. Tree species, once established, require only minimal labour and inputs for maintenance. They provide a continual food supply for years without the need for annual replanting.
The biological diversity and complexity of home gardens decline with the transition from the humid to the semi-arid and arid areas of the Sahelian countries. As defined by the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), semi-arid areas are those where average annual rainfall is 400 to 1 400 mm per year. Precipitation exceeds potential evapotranspiration for two to seven months of the year. Rainfall tends to be erratic, both in timing and areas covered, and this problem is worse in the low-rainfall areas. The dry season is a period of drought, with hot days and warm nights. In some areas, rainfall is less than 30 mm per month for five to seven months of the year. Thus plant growth is limited for a considerable part of the year.
FIGURE 15 - Home garden of fruit and vegetable crops close to the homestead
Source: Asare. Oppong and Twum-Ampofo, 1985.
FIGURE 16 - Schematic diagram of compound farms in relation to associated field systems in traditional farming systems of the humid tropics of Africa
Source: Okigbo, 1994.
Table 14 - Farming systems in West Africa
Zone
Dominant crops
Minor crops
Livestock
Subsistence crops
Cash crops
Humid tropics/rain forest
Yam
Cacao
Vegetables
Sheep
Rice
Rubber
Cocoyam
Goats
Cassava
Oil-palm
Tree crops
Poultry
Maize
Banana
Banana
Plantain
Coffee
Sweet potato
Cocoyam
Coconut
Forest/savannah mosaic
Sorghum
Soybean
Cocoyam
Goats
Millet (Digitaria sp.)
Sesame
Cassava
Sheep
Cassava
Sugar cane
Cowpea
Poultry
Yam
Cotton
Vegetables
Few cattle and horses
Rice
Tobacco
Groundnuts
Sweet potato
Guinea savannah woodland
Sorghum
Groundnuts
Sweet potato
Cattle
Millets
Sesame
Vegetables
Goats
Rice
Cotton
Banana
Sheep
Maize
Tobacco
Cassava
Horses
Cowpea
Soybean
Tree crops
Poultry
Sugar cane
Pigs
Sudan and Sahel savannah
Millets
Groundnuts
Vegetables
Cattle
Sorghum
Cotton
Sweet potato
Goats
Cowpea
Some rice
Rice
Donkeys
Wheat
Sesame
Sheep
Tree crops
Horses
Poultry
Camels
Tropical highlands
Millets
Arabica coffee
Sweet potato
Cattle
Beans
Hausa potato (Plectranthus and Solenostemon spp.)
Sheep
Sorghum
Tobacco
Vegetables
Goats
Irish potato
Cowpea
Poultry
Tea
Tree crops
Horses
Subtropical vegetables
Donkeys
Cotton
Source: Okigbo, 1983.
An increase in land productivity in these areas is essential to reduce the pressure to extend into even more marginal areas, which could provoke further land degradation. As the drylands are characterized by marked seasons, the availability of resources changes through the yearly cycle. Insufficient water is one of the major constraints to successful gardening in dryland areas; however, through effective soil management and cheap and effective solutions for harvesting and storing water, crops can be kept growing through some of the dry periods.
Gardens in dryland areas can contribute greatly to the nutritional and economic well-being of households by reducing the level and duration of seasonal food shortages and introducing an increased variety of nutrient-rich foods into the household diet. Boxes 14 and 15 describe some of the gardening principles and suitable plants for home gardens in the semi-arid tropics.
As Africa's marginal lands are much greater in area than its fertile rain-fed or irrigable lands, even modest increases in local food supplies in the semi-arid areas could contribute considerably to the food security of the continent.
Ecologically the compound farm or home or forest garden, together with animals, forms one of the most sustainable traditional farming systems; it maximizes biological production, protects the soil against erosion and can provide a varied and nutritious diet on a continuous basis, thus ensuring food security at the household level. However, with increasing population density farmers have sometimes adopted farming practices that have led to tree removal, thus enhancing soil erosion and decreasing crop yields and returns to labour. Tree removal has often culminated in serious environmental degradation. Continuing replacement of home gardens and traditional farming systems with row crop production systems has also resulted in increased soil erosion, soil degradation and deterioration of the environment.
Box 14 - Gardening for food in the semi-arid tropics
A garden may surround a house or be located in a family field or in a community gardening area on the edge of, or some distance from, the village. It may be a home garden for one family, an income-generating project for a group of village women or a youth group, a school project or a health centre garden. The following suggestions advocate the use of indigenous design and systems rather than a fixed model.
The structure of the garden is adapted to the semi-arid tropical environment. It provides a diversity of foods over a long harvest period. Unlike the neat rows of annual crops characteristic of the industrialized countries in the temperate zone, the mature mixed garden consists of a dense mixture of annual crops and perennial trees. The mixed garden makes maximum use of limited space and maximizes the total yield, even though some of the individual plants would yield more it given more space and sun. It is multi-storied, making full use of the air space with a maximum of trees, bushes, climbing plants on poles or branches, erect and spreading plants and ground-trailing plants. The roots also exploit different levels underground, with some close to the surface and others, including the trees, reaching to the moisture further down.
A good design for a mixed garden takes account of the way different plants can share light, air and root space and leave little room for weeds. The multi-storied garden provides "canopy mulch" and protects the soil and the plants from the wind, excessive sun and rain. Soil fertility is increased by composting, mulching and the incorporation of dead plant material, which in turn increases crop production and conserves soil moisture. Leguminous trees and plants build fertility, and companion planting decreases pest buildup.
Economically, the mixed garden is a low-capital, high-return cropping system. Local planting materials, if they cannot be stored by the family, are usually available at low cost through trade or purchase. Most crops that are native or have become adapted to the environment over time are relatively resistant to many pests and diseases. These crops are generally less dependent on fertilizer and water than temperate species.
The appearance of the garden changes dramatically according to the season. During the rainy season there is an impressive mass of greenery. In the dry season the absence of greenery is noticeable, except for a dark-green mass of trees usually surrounding the home compound, and a small watered area.
A larger mixed garden provides an ongoing supply of vegetables and fruits that contribute significant quantities of energy, protein, vitamin A, iron and vitamin C to the family diet. Also the garden, and especially the trees, is an amenity for the household and the surrounding area. Additionally, the complete garden can produce some fuelwood.
Source: WHO/UNICEF, 1985.
Box 15 - Some plants suitable for basic garden categories in the semi-arid tropics
Dark-green leafy vegetables
Amaranth, Ceylon spinach (Basella rubra, Basella alba), chaya (Cnidoscolus chayamansa), mustard (Brassica juncea) and leaves from baobab, cassava, drumstick tree, cowpea, sweet potato, pumpkin
Perennial fruits and annual fruit vegetables
Fruits: Avocado, baobab fruit, cashew fruit, citrus fruits, guava, mango, papaya, passion fruit, banana, jackfruit
Fruit vegetables: Eggplant, gourd, green pepper, okra, squash, pumpkin, tomato, chili
Legumes
Bambara nut, cowpea, guar or cluster bean, hyacinth bean, mung bean, lima bean, groundnut, pigeon pea, soybean
Oil crops
Vegetables: Bambara nut, mustard, okra seed, groundnut, sesame
Trees: Avocado, cashew, locust bean, shea butter
Staple crops
Maize, sorghum, banana, cassava, cocoyam, plantain, sweet potato, yam
Increased urbanization and deforestation threaten some edible and useful plants that feature in the home garden but that have remained largely semi-wild and underutilized. An increasing focus on a few major staples such as maize and rice and changes in food habits towards the increased use of convenience foods have narrowed the food base of urban and to some extent also of rural populations. All these factors call for measures to ensure that the full potential of plants found in home and forest gardens be realized through genetic improvement, improved home garden management and better processing and utilization.
Irrigated agriculture
African food supply systems and types of agricultural production have traditionally inclined largely towards rain-fed cultivation. Additional needed food has come mainly from increasing the area cultivated. However. good land is becoming scarce, and farmers have little choice but to intensify production systems to increase yields per unit of land and per hour of labour input. If food production is to keep up with population growth and dependency on commercial or concessionary imports is to be avoided, production increases of up to 4 percent per year are needed. Attempts are being made to increase crop production in dry areas through more irrigation development schemes. Irrigated agriculture is particularly appropriate for the production of high-value horticultural crops in pert-urban areas, and it can also extend production of other crops such as wheat, rice and barley, which are not easily grown in most of Africa.
The physical potential for irrigated crop production in Africa is large. Areas of irrigable land are considerable, and there are large amounts of surplus water that could be used for irrigation. On average, 27 percent of the potential has been realized in continental Africa, but large disparities exist among the regions. North Africa has already realized 79 percent of its potential, but a large amount of potential remains untapped in central African countries, where water resources are relatively abundant. Sub-Saharan Africa, where only 4 percent of arable land is under irrigation, is far from reaching the world average of 18.5 percent.
Institutional, economic and social considerations are among the main constraints to an expanded programme of irrigated production, especially for production units under central control such as State farms. Large irrigation schemes tend to be fairly expensive both to initiate and to maintain and should therefore be discussed fully in terms of viability and cost-effectiveness before they are recommended as a strategy to improve food production. Smaller-scale community-supported irrigation systems using locally appropriate technologies, including water harvesting, small pump schemes and inland valley swamp development (locally known as fadema Nigeria and vleis, dambos or mapani in southern Africa), have a large potential for achieving and sustaining needed increases in food production.
There are, however, environmental risks associated with irrigation schemes. Waterlogging and soil salinization are major causes of declining yields on irrigated land. Waterlogging may occur if provision of drainage is inadequate. Soil salinity increases because plants extract pure water and most of the salt contained in irrigated water is left behind. Degradation of water resources through the excessive exploitation of groundwater using tubewells is already recognized as a cause of desertification in some countries, especially India (see Box 16). An innovative approach developed in China, called the "four waters concept", has shown that the comprehensive control and supervision of groundwater, surface water, soil moisture and rainfall can prevent salinization and reclaim salinized land (FAO, 1995d).
Irrigated agricultural projects, which are expected to increase food supply and thereby to improve the nutritional status of the population, have often been found to have an adverse impact on health. Increased prevalence of schistosomiasis and malaria has been linked with many wafer resource development projects (see Table 15). While there is no doubt that in warm climates the presence of an irrigation system with extended shorelines of reservoirs and canal banks can contribute to a more optimal habitat for the vectors of schistosomiasis and malaria, it has not been determined yet to what extent the irrigation practices per se contribute to the incidence of these diseases.
Recent studies indicate that much of the schistosomiasis infection occurs not during the irrigation phase but during contact with impure water, especially when domestic water supply and sanitation are inadequate. The provision of clean water, sanitation, better health care and health education can significantly reduce the incidence of schistosomiasis, as is being demonstrated for example in Egypt, which has been afflicted with schistosomiasis since Pharaonic times. Similarly, studies from India suggest that there is no direct correlation between the annual malaria parasitic index and the presence or absence of malaria. Research indicates that factors other than the mere presence of irrigation water, including poor drainage, may contribute to the spread of vector-borne diseases in irrigation development. More research is needed to gain a better understanding of the complex relationship between agriculture, environment and health (Biswas, 1994).
Box 16 - Consequences of unsustainable exploitation of groundwater using tubewells
Much of the successful expansion of irrigation in recent decades has come from the exploitation of groundwater using tubewells. They have the advantage of small-scale, low-cost and rapid construction without the loss of fertile land and the destruction of human settlements commonly associated with large-scale, gravity-fed schemes based on reservoirs. The expansion has been very rapid. In India alone, the number of tubewells jumped from nearly 90000 in 1950 to over 12 million in 1990. Behind this success, however, is neglect of the fact that agricultural development based on groundwater is unsustainable when it uses "fossil" water or extraction rates exceed rates of recharge.
The rapid expansion of tubewell irrigation has put extreme pressures on what is commonly a static resource because natural rates of recharge are low. Moreover, the problem has been intensified by pressures that are generally some distance from the site of extraction, largely through deforestation in upland watersheds or overgrazing and other forms of land degradation that accelerate runoff and reduce rainfall infiltration. Consequently, water tables are dropping, which is causing a wide range of environmental, economic and social problems. Saline intrusions are becoming a problem in many coastal regions. Overpumping has led to increased investment or operating costs as falling water tables have necessitated deeper wells and greater energy consumption for pumping. In some instances poor farmers without the capital to deepen their wells have had to revert to rain-fed production. In others the necessary adjustments have been too late and the land has been decertified, as in
some places in India.
Source: FAO, 1995d.
Table 15 - Examples of increased prevalence of schistosomiasis resulting from water resource development projects
Project
Year completed
Country
Pre-project prevalence
Post-project prevalence
Interval elapsed
(years)
Aswan Dam (first)
Egypt
Gezira scheme (irrigation)
Sudan
Arusha Chini (irrigation)
Tanzania, United Rep.
Low
Lake Kariba
Zambia and Zimbabwe
16 (adults)
69 (children)
Volta Lake
Ghana
Low
Lake Kainji
Nigeria
Low
Source: Rosenfield and Bower, 1978.
Pastoralism and semi-arid food supply systems
The forest garden or compound farm is a sustainable food supply system under conditions of reliable rainfall, but some climatic zones have little or no potential for rain-fed agriculture. As shown above in Figure 13, populations in the low-rainfall areas of the Sahara, the Sahel and the semi-arid Sudano-Sahelian zone have food supply systems very different from those of cultivators in the humid zone and encounter numerous problems that are critical to their nutritional well-being (Box 17).
A threat to the food supply system of pastoralists arises as agriculture extends into more marginal zones. Seasonal pastures are destroyed, and land fertility is rapidly lost in fragile soils. Erosion and permanent environmental damage often follow.
Box 17 - The food supply system and its nutritional consequences for a pastoral family in the Malian Sahel
A Fulani "noble" family of six lives in round huts built of dried stalks, which when new are rain-resistant. They have a herd of 24 cattle and ten goats; during the rainy season they grow a millet crop.
During the wet season they camp around rain-filled ponds, which dry out by November, when the young men, in cooperative groups from several households, leave with the main herd in search of better pastures. The remainder of the household, with their goats, weaker animals and some milk cows, camp during the cold dry season (November to February) on the edge of a village, buying or bartering for cistern water; during the hot dry season they move to camp around a well.
The adult men are responsible for the main herd and for most of the millet cultivation, especially weeding. Boys tend the goats and calves. The women and girls collect fuel and water for domestic use, help with the harvest, pound millet and also prepare meals.
The household's maximum dietary energy intake in October, after the harvest, is 14 700 kcal per day (65 percent from millet, 35 percent from milk); 9 105 kcal would cover the children's total requirements and allow the adults to maintain their body weights if they did no work, leaving 5 595 kcal for the adults' activities and weight gain. However, from December to June their intake is only from 7 840 to 8 820 kcal per day (9 to 20 percept from milk), so that the family is in a negative energy balance. During the rainy season they supplement their diet with gathered food. Their intake in June/July is from 9 996 to 10 740 kcal per day (43 to 50 percent millet, 8 to 12 percent milk and 42 to 45 percent gathered food).
The man and the woman (172 and 163 cm tall, respectively) are at their heaviest in November/December, when they weigh 55.3 and 49.6 kg, respectively; the post-harvest period of abundant food and little work allowed them to gain 2.3 and 0.7 kg, respectively, since July/August. During the dry season, decreasing food and increasing distances to walk for water and pasture cause weight losses of 2.2 and 1.5 kg, respectively, by May/ June. Despite increased intakes during the rainy season, the labour demands of millet cultivation prevent their regaining weight until after the harvest.
The weight changes of the four children, aged 5 to 12 years, between July/August and November/December range from +0.6 to +1.5 kg; from November/December to July/August they range from -0.7 to +0.5 kg. Despite their poor growth during the dry season, their weight rarely falls below 80 percent of the standard for their height. Households with sufficient milk or grain for barter during the dry season are able to reduce livestock sales and their dependence on the market, but if a family's food supply runs out during the hot dry season, they may be forced to sell off young livestock below their full value.
Livestock sales accounted for 93 percent of the family's 1982/83 cash income; 68 percent of their total income was from barter of cereals and 5 percent from barter of milk products. Some 50 percent of the family's cash expenditures went to purchases of cereals, and of their expenditures in kind 55 percent were for milk products.
Recently the situation has worsened because of deteriorating terms of trade resulting from poor rainfall. A prime steer that in 1982 was worth the equivalent of 1 300 kg of millet was worth only 520 kg a year later, grain prices having doubled while livestock prices fell.
In 1973, after five years of drought, grain prices soared to nearly 1 000 Malian francs per kilogram [426 MF = US$1 at 1 July 1973], while the emaciated livestock fetched only one-sixth to one-twelfth of their pre-drought prices. In that year alone, an estimated 100000 people died, as did 40 to 60 percent of the livestock. Many pastoralists, forced to sell their animals, were reduced to dependence. Currently, while the majority have rebuilt their herds sufficiently to return to pastoralism, some have never regained former herd sizes and so are in a weaker market position, while others work as paid herders, tending animals bought cheaply by profiteers during the drought.
Source: FAO, 1985b.
To improve the sustainability of food production systems that are under stress from both pastoralists and shifting cultivators, it may also be necessary to practice agroforestry and mulching in a more intensive manner. Permanent vegetation could reduce the erosion risk by providing ground cover, helping to conserve water resources through mulching, increasing the organic content of the soil and assisting in recycling of nutrients. Strip-planted Acacia and Leucaena species, members of the family Mimosoideae, would provide both mulch and fodder and also enrich the soil through their nitrogen-fixing properties. A food supply system containing these elements, incorporating permanent tree crops, annuals and animals, is traditional in parts of the Sudano-Sahelian zone of West Africa. It is ecologically more stable and offers greater nutritional security than less diversified systems.
In Botswana and Swaziland, unmanaged natural bushlands and/or grasslands are set aside by law as community grazing lands for livestock, particularly cattle, which form a central and integral part of the farming systems. These grazing lands are used to provide both fodder and fuel, for which the need becomes acute during the cold winter season. An efficient silvipastoral system, combined with controlled rotational grazing, could usefully complement the existing practice.
Figure 17 shows some of the interrelationships in a typical animal-based cropping system in Swaziland. However, effective as they were in the past, these systems are deteriorating because of rising demands on them by a growing population and because livestock are increasingly passing out of the hands of experienced pastoralists into those of farmers and investors with inadequate experience in livestock management. Research and extension are doing little to discourage this trend and continue to underrate the effectiveness of traditional systems and the potential productivity of the natural resources. It should be emphasized that solutions are more likely to be found in the support of transhumance and arable systems through better use of fertilizers, legume fodders and cash crops than through digging of wells, veterinary services and protection of grazing lands. Unfortunately, however, the underlying socio-economic conditions are not favourable for such solutions because of
the sometimes acrimonious relationship between pastoralists and farmers.
There is also an increasing need for techniques to supply feed at affordable costs to farmers in sedentary animal production systems. The most important sources are crop residues from arable fields and roughage from adjacent non-cropped areas. Both could be managed more efficiently but would require external inputs to increase production. Although grain is the most important part of the cereal plant for human consumption, the straw may be equally important for maintaining livestock production. This should be kept in mind in breeding programmes aimed at systems involving both crops and livestock, as in the barley breeding programme at the International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA), for example.
FIGURE 17 - Schema showing some of the interrelationships in a typical animal-based cropping system in Swaziland
Source: Sam-Aggrey, 1983.
Animal production and supplies
Livestock and their products contribute about 19 percent to the total value of the production of agriculture, forestry and fisheries in sub-Saharan Africa. However, this figure underestimates the substantial contribution that livestock frequently make to crop production through draught power and manure. Ten countries account for 70 percent of the value of animal production, and five countries, i.e. Ethiopia, Kenya, Nigeria, the Sudan and the United Republic of Tanzania, account for one-half. Table 16 shows the population of selected livestock in sub-Saharan Africa in 1994.
Table 16 - Sub-Saharan African livestock population, 1994 (selected countries and animals)
Country
Cattle
Sheep
Goats
Pigs
Chickens
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo (Republic of)
Côte d'Ivoire
Djibouti
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania, United Rep.
Togo
Uganda
Former Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Total
Source: FAO, 1996e.
Animal products, especially meat and milk, are highly income-elastic products, i.e. their consumption increases with incomes and urbanization. On average, meat and meat products make up only 3.2 percent of dietary energy supply (DES) in sub-Saharan Africa. However, in some countries the contribution of meat and meat products to DES is much higher. Milk is scarcely consumed, providing on average 2.5 percent of DES, except among pastoral populations where milk can contribute up to one-half of total dietary energy intake (see section on composition of African diets in Chapter 7). The value of dietary animal protein goes beyond its proportional content in the diet. The consumption of even small amounts of animal protein improves the protein quality of predominantly cereal diets and thus the utilization of total dietary protein.
Animals also make an indirect contribution to human nutrition in sub-Saharan Africa. Cattle are the primary source of the cash income that pastoralists use to buy foodgrains. Among sedentary farming populations, livestock enhance the economic viability and sustainability of farming systems. They diversify production and management options, increase total farm production and income, provide year-round employment and provide insurance in times of need. Livestock often form the major capital reserve of both farming and pastoral nomadic households.
Fish supplies
The land area of Africa is the principal food supply source for crop and livestock products; the rivers, lakes and waters around Africa also have a role in the continent's food supply systems by providing fish. Fish and fishery products provide on average 3.8 percent of total dietary protein supply in sub-Saharan Africa. Figure 18 shows the surface areas of some water systems of the African continent. Table 17 is a food balance sheet for fish and fishery products of African countries for the period 1988 to 1990.
Fisheries have an important role in food production, income generation and provision of employment. According to the International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM), the number of full-time fishermen in sub-Saharan Africa totals approximately 1.5 million. In addition, there are many millions of part-time fishermen.
FIGURE 18 - Surface areas of the inland waters of the African continent
Source: FAO, 1992d.
Table 17 - Supply of fish and fishery products, average, 1988-1990
Country or area
Production
(tonnes live weight)
Imports
(tonnes live weight)
Exports
(tonnes live weight)
Per caput supply
(kg/year)
Western Africa
Benin
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Côte d'Ivoire
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Nigeria
Saint Helena
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Togo
Central Africa
Angola
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo (Republic of)
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Sao Tome and Principe
Former Zaire
Eastern Africa
Burundi
Comoros
Djibouti
Ethiopia
Kenya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritius
Mozambique
Reunion
Rwanda
Seychelles
Somalia
Tanzania, United Rep.
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Southern Africa
Botswana
Lesotho
Namibia
Swaziland
Source: FAO, 1995b.
Aquaculture differs from capture fisheries just as agriculture does from hunting and gathering. The potential impact of aquaculture on household food security is summarized in Table 18. More detailed information on the potential role of fish ponds in improving household nutrition is provided in Chapter 5.
Table 18 - Potential impact of aquaculture on household food security
Key elements of household food security
Fish/aquaculture link to household food security
Preconditions
Activity that could enhance potential for household food security and nutrition
Access to food supplies
Physical availability of fish
Cash to buy fish
Own production
Land, water inputs,^a labour, time expertise
Extension credit availability for inputs, consideration of possible ways that groups lacking these resources can benefit
Income from sales
Surplus, marketable product, demand
Training in processing assistance in market assessment, promotion to create demand if non-existent
Means to trade for other food
Other food available for exchange
Fish as payment or gift to non-producers
Adequacy of food supplies both in quality and diversity (for adequate intake of nutrients) and in quantity (for adequate energy intakes)
Fish consumption
Desire to eat fish (or motivation to use it), understanding of importance of diversity, porridge (nutrition type of fish that is education) culturally acceptable
Promotion of use and benefits of fish and use of fish in children's
Integration with rice, ducks or vegetables
Knowledge of possibility, advantages and methods
Extension to promote integration with other productive activities
Income to buy other foods (or means to trade)
Other foods available to buy or trade, i.e. access to market
Income to buy staple foods (or means to trade)
Income to buy oil or sugar to increase energy density (or means to trade)
Knowledge of the benefit of adding oil or sugar to children's meals to reduce bulkiness
Nutrition education
Stability of food supplies, to ensure availability and access at all times
Fish to fill seasonal relish/protein gaps
Growing season and harvest times that fit seasonal gaps, knowledge and use of processing techniques to facilitate storage
Training of extensionists to adapt techniques according to farmers' needs, promotion and teaching of processing techniques
Extension of growing season using irrigation from pond, to fill gaps with vegetables
Knowledge of how to integrate vegetables for maximum benefit
Promotion of integration
Diversification of food production and income, spreading risk
Fish in pond as a buffer to draw on in crisis
Continuous availability of fish
Promotion of suitable intermittent harvesting practices
Source: FAO, 1993d.
^a Inputs refers to fingerlings or other fish for initial stocking, compost. manure, fertilizer and feed according to type of fish farming practiced.
Although there is still considerable potential for increasing the fish catch from inland waters in Africa, in many situations there are so many fishermen that they are not able to make a decent living from fishing. Poverty becomes a major cause of nutritional stress in such communities. A further problem is created by modern foreign trawlers which compete with the national fishing industry in some coastal waters and provide little or no benefit to the local communities or to the national economy.
Urbanization and changing patterns of food demand
The rapidly increasing rate of urbanization (5 percent in sub-Saharan Africa) is one of the most striking demographic features of the last half of the twentieth century. Urbanization influences all aspects of food production and consumption.
Urbanization is an inevitable consequence of socio-economic development, but in many countries it is proceeding at such a fast rate that it is outpacing the growth of services and employment. The result is mushrooming slums in city centres and shanty towns on their peripheries. Under such conditions the supply of potable water for cooking and washing is limited, and facilities for sewage and waste disposal are inadequate or often lacking altogether. Housing is no longer provided through communal and self-help construction, but is another matter for commerce, as rents must be paid even for a space on the floor in a single room. Such housing often lacks facilities for meal preparation. Wage employment and monetary income are the objectives for all physically active members of the family. If jobs in the formal sector are insecure or hard to come by, work might be found in the informal-sector activities of petty trading, repair and maintenance services and food vending. However,
the majority of urban dwellers in developing countries remain highly disadvantaged, with very limited purchasing power. For these people, guaranteeing the efficient distribution of low-cost but nutritious food is becoming an ever more pressing concern.
Some of the factors affecting household food and nutrition security in urban areas are related to policies and interventions already discussed in relation to rural areas. Such common factors include economic entitlement, price and income policies, employment opportunities and wages, and food or income transfer. The overall availability of food supplies at the national level will also have a major effect on the sustainability of adequate nutrition in the cities. However, a number of other aspects are of greater significance in urban than in rural areas. The most obvious is the necessity to purchase most of the food needed by the household and the consequently greater dependence on the market system and on commercially processed food products.
With rapid urbanization, food processing and food marketing must be particularly emphasized. It is estimated that 47.5 percent of the population of developing countries will live in towns and cities by the year 2010 (UN, 1994b). A population shift of this magnitude demands increased agricultural productivity, improved transportation, processing and marketing facilities and a modern food control infrastructure to maintain the nutritional quality of food and to ensure consumer confidence in the food supply. Transport facilities are often insufficient to bring food produced in market or home gardens to markets; this inadequacy contributes to food losses and to reducing the stimulus for farmers to increase production. An effective marketing system is needed for distribution and for reduction and minimization of loss of fresh or processed food through the wholesale chain to the retail shops. The marketing system includes all aspects of food control, quality assurance and
inspection to guarantee the quality and safety of the foods to the consumer (see also Figure 11, in Chapter 3).
Urbanization usually involves varying degrees of modernization and westernization, which may influence dietary habits and consumption patterns. A shift away from starchy roots and coarse grains to wheat and rice is a common and irreversible trend associated with urbanization of populations that traditionally consumed the former staples. Table 19 shows supply-derived estimates of cereal consumption for Senegal, disaggregated between urban and rural areas. The predominance of rice, followed by wheat, in the Senegalese urban sector is obvious, whereas in rural areas consumption of wheat is almost negligible and the diet is dominated by millet and sorghum products. Table 20 shows that in Côte d'Ivoire there has been an urban swing away from the consumption of traditional starchy staples such as yam and cassava, towards processed and convenience products such as attiéké, a dish of cassava couscous, and plantains, often sold in cities as a snack food of fried plantain chips.
A major reason for the shift away from traditional staple foods is convenience. For example, white rice cooks easily and quickly, and wheat products, particularly bread, offer important advantages to consumers who have to travel to work on public transport and usually eat their midday meal away from home, in the form of snack foods or sandwiches.
Table 19 - Supply-derived estimates of cereal consumption, Senegal, 1983-1985 (kg/caput/year)
Cereal
Dakar
Total urban
Total rural
Millets/sorghum
Rice
Maize
Wheat
Source: Delisle, 1989.
Table 20 - Consumption of starchy products, Côte d'Ivoire, 1979 (kg/caput/year)
Food
Abidjan
Other urban
Rural
Yam
Cassava
Attiéké
Cocoyam/sweet potato
Plantain
Other
Total
Source: Delisle, 1989.
The tendency for certain urban consumers to move away from local food has a potentially adverse effect on rural production, since urban food demand should provide increased markets for domestic production. Agricultural extension services, food technologists and mass media educational services all have an important role to play in linking urban consumer demand to local food production and processing.
The shift towards convenience foods reflects another of the major changes in food demand patterns that accompany urbanization. Whereas rural households prepare and eat most of their meals within the domestic domain of house and farm, many urban households consume at least one meal a day, and often two, outside the home. Even in households where cooking space is available, the continually rising cost of fuel has made daily cooking too expensive for some urban families. Male members of such households often prefer to purchase their meals outside the home, where economies of scale may bring down the price of a serving below the cost of home production.
Table 21 shows the amount of food prepared outside the home relative to total food consumed by households in Côte d'Ivoire. It was estimated that food eaten outside the home accounted for 23 percent of the average food budget for urban households in Abidjan in 1979 (Delisle, 1989). Much of this expenditure would have involved the purchase of street foods.
The expansion of the street food trade has been largely a result of the substantial demand for ready prepared food by schoolchildren, urban workers and homemakers, who have limited time and often live in housing where cooking is difficult because of overcrowding and poor sanitation. This need has been recognized and met by the growing number of urban unemployed or underemployed, who have found a livelihood in informal street food activity. In 1987, Abidjan had nearly 12 500 mobile street food outlets in addition to approximately 1300 maquis, restobârs and stalls also serving snack meals (Delisle, 1989).
Table 21 - Foods prepared outside the home, as percentage of total amounts consumed by households, Côte d'Ivoire, 1979
Food
Abidjan
Other urban
Forest (east)
Rural forest (west)
Savannah
Fresh maize
Millet flour
Pasta
Cassava flour
Attiéké
Sweet potato
Potato
Plantain
Source: Delisle, 1989.
One of the most universal locations for street food vendors is outside the gates of urban schools and colleges. Not only is there a sizeable demand for street foods among children, in some countries this food comprises an important part of the students' daily diet.
Some advantages of the street foods are listed in Box 18. The street food sector contributes to the maintenance of food traditions by offering local dishes, particularly those that are infrequently prepared in urban households. The sector provides a valuable service for urban consumers and a source of cash income for vendors, many of whom are women. However, it also spreads various socio-cultural changes in food habits, introducing behaviours such as eating alone, snacking and replacing meals by "fast food". In addition, problems of hygiene and food safety are bound to arise under the insanitary conditions of the shanty towns and slums where the poorest groups live.
Box 18 - Some advantages of the street food business
The power behind the existence of street foods lies in the benefits derived from the trade by the vendors and clients and the anticipated contribution to the local economies. However, general observation yields the following non-exhaustive list of advantages of the street food trade.
· It provides affordable food, conveniently made, available when wanted (time) and where required (place).
· It offers employment to educationally less advantaged members of the community.
· It offers a nutritionally balanced diet which is sufficient in quality and presents options for variety of choice.
· The traditional ways of cooking different dishes preserve cultural heritage and give pride to ethnicity.
· The street food trade offers an assured market for local agricultural products, thus encouraging more production and contributing to the local economy.
· The trade provides for an economic system in family circles because of division of labour among the family members, i.e. in buying raw foods, preparation, cooking, serving, utensil cleaning and above all management of the trade.
· The street food trade offers employment opportunities to school leavers who are attracted by wages which are often higher than government minimum wages.
· The business demonstrates the dynamic role of women as planners, managers and bread-earners as well as employers.
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1992a.
Food industries and small-scale processing
Food industries are a relatively new commercial area in Africa. Their development has been based in part on concepts of added value, fostering processing of primary commodities that are traded internationally such as tea, coffee and cocoa, and of import substitution, fostering production of fruit juices, soft drinks and beer. Other large-scale food industries are the milling industry, producing cereal flours, and the oilseed milling and extraction industry, making refined edible oils and fats from locally produced oilseeds. Rural processing plants, including flour and oil mills, are increasingly being established in many countries. They contribute to the much greater availability of basic processed food items (e.g. milled flour and vegetable oil) for local purchase and sale, and they help to reduce women's workload. Small-scale, community-based food processing plants are as important as large-scale food industries in preserving food quality, preventing food losses and
providing employment and increased family incomes.
In addition to the basic processing industries, a number of multinational food companies have started to finance local subsidiary companies to manufacture their products under licence. These companies produce a variety of consumer goods ranging from breakfast cereals to instant coffee, dried milk powder, weaning foods, chutneys, sauces and pickles. Thus the range and choice of food commodities tend to be wider in the urban areas. However, many of these commercial products, especially the cooking oils and fats, tend to be priced beyond the means of the urban poor, who are dependent on urban and pert-urban markets for most of their food requirements. The purchased food is supplemented by the little food they can grow in the limited space available, by gifts from visiting rural relatives or by any food they can acquire during visits once or twice a year to their home village.
More market research is no doubt needed for food technology development, with particular reference to urban consumers' perceptions, attitudes, preferences, wants, means and behaviours regarding food. Such research could lead to the commercial development of convenient versions of some traditional foods or dishes, which might stimulate the consumption of local foods by urban consumers. Examples of such foods already developed in West Africa include instant yam (a dried, reconstitutable yam powder intended to simulate pounded yam) and gari (a fermented, dried, granular cassava product, used to prepare a sticky, starchy paste called eba). Development of such products can strengthen rural/ urban economic links by enhancing demand for the production of traditional foods in rural areas and by reducing urban dependence on food imports of cereals such as wheat and rice.
The role of agricultural research
National agricultural research organizations
National research organizations, which include universities, research institutes and the national agricultural research centres, have made tremendous achievements in agricultural research and added substantially to some of the successes that have contributed to increased and more diversified food production. Notable achievements include the development of hybrid seeds to suit different ecological zones, as has been done for maize in Kenya, and integrated pest control measures.
Currently, however, most national agricultural research systems face many financial and operational problems. Diminishing resources over the years have led to a severely curtailed level of research output and a severe brain drain of well-trained scientists either to the industrialized countries in the West or to better-paying regional, international or private-sector organizations. Those scientists who choose to stay are often not fully utilized for lack of adequate funding and are usually not well motivated to produce much, even if there is a possibility to do so.
Another long-standing problem has to do with the dissemination of research findings. There is reason to believe that much of the earlier research work which generated relevant data is still confined within the agricultural research institutions, while extension workers continue to impart outdated information and inappropriate messages to farmers. Few countries have formalized links between researchers, extension workers and farmers. This situation is cause for worry and needs to be addressed immediately.
National research organizations have a mandate to focus their research activities within the national agricultural research agenda. The enormity of this responsibility is such that these organizations cannot achieve much on their own. They should therefore, as some of them have already done, work in close collaboration with the international agricultural research system. They should also establish and strengthen links with the local farmer and extension systems, consumer groups and the private sector within their countries in order to foster more effective communication and to devise ways of managing available resources both maximally and efficiently.
The most effective way of passing on the knowledge engendered by research to farmers is by involving farmers as partners in the whole research process from the start, including the setting of research priorities and appropriate institutional arrangements, to ensure that farmers continue to be heard. Extension workers should also be involved in this process. Close interaction with farmers can also give research scientists an opportunity to gain useful knowledge, for example, regarding viable traditional farming systems and practices. The SADC countries, working closely with ICRISAT's regional office in Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, have demonstrated that this kind of collaboration is feasible and highly effective.
International agricultural research centres
The 16 international agricultural research centres of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) fully recognize the strengths and limitations of many aspects of the traditional food production systems. They are actively contributing to research on the development of improved systems to optimize productivity, to ensure sustainability and to maximize the efficiency of utilization of inputs, within the constraints of smaller producers.
A number of agricultural research centres have an active role in Africa. The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) in Nigeria has been involved for many years in developing methods of soil mulching and mixed cropping, as well as in screening woody perennials for their potential use in agroforestry systems such as alley farming. The potential of this system for sustainable production of crops and small ruminants in the humid and subhumid tropics has been clearly demonstrated by IITA in collaboration with the International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), which has offices in Nairobi, Kenya and Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. However, its implementation on a large scale awaits further research into socioeconomic aspects.
In the semi-arid tropics, ICRISAT in Harare, Zimbabwe has made notable progress with new systems of management of small watersheds, management of vertisols during the rainy season and various systems of intercropping.
ICARDA in Aleppo, Syria has shown how production can be sustained in the dry regions of the Near East and North Africa through the application of relatively small amounts of phosphate in production systems that integrate cereal, livestock and legume production (Cooper et al., 1987).
While not itself a research institution, the International Center for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF), based in Nairobi, Kenya, promotes research on production systems incorporating woody perennials, particularly in relation to their potential for sustaining crop and animal productivity. The centre is taking the lead in streamlining terminology and developing methodology for research in agroforestry. ICRAF suggests that in the process of intensifying land use, trees can have both an ecological role (for example, in fertility maintenance and erosion control) and an economic role (for example, in increasing income through sale of tree products).
Research should strive to maximize productivity with low levels of inputs, consistent with the requirements of sustainability. Research centres need to recognize that control of soil erosion is a vital component of sustainable agriculture, and they must try to refocus their research agendas accordingly. All over Africa, the traditional food supply systems involving shifting cultivation are disappearing as population pressure results in shorter fallow periods, which lead to inadequately regenerated soil, to reduced crop yields and ultimately to food shortages and hunger. The problem with low-input agriculture is its inability to return to the soil a fair proportion of the nutrients that have been extracted by crops. If the low input level of traditional agriculture continues under these circumstances, the food supply systems will be crippled in a number of African countries to a point where they will be unable to feed their fast-growing populations. To restore soil fertility,
higher inputs become necessary. The aim of research should therefore be to promote an evolution towards greater productivity from balanced systems, with maintenance of low levels of purchased inputs, as farmers are often unable to afford high input levels on a sustainable basis.
An urgent need under low-input conditions is to alleviate soil degradation and prevent further erosion. Techniques are required that can give the farmer immediate benefit while also contributing to long-term sustainability. The use of animal manure and fertilizers is crucial in this respect, but other methods can also be introduced. For example, establishment of grass strips can provide dual benefit, protecting the soil from erosion and providing reserves of fodder for use at critical times of the year. Also, in some environments, legumes might be grown for both short- and long-term benefits. For example, it might be possible to grow a leguminous crop with applied rock phosphate on residual moisture after the main crop has been harvested. The farmer could thus obtain fodder for use in the dry season, while the fertility of the soil would improve from animal manure and decomposing legume roots.
Because many farmers do not have access to purchased inputs, cannot afford them or do not use them for fear of economic losses, the research centres have recognized the importance of research both to alleviate the constraints and to benefit resource-poor farmers, especially those in less favourable environments. Their endeavours include programmes to develop crop varieties that are resistant to pests and tolerant of environmental stresses such as drought, salinity and aluminium toxicity or that exploit limited soil resources more effectively through better root systems or through association with mycorrhiza.
Nutritional considerations in agricultural research
Agricultural research and related policies offer great opportunities for long-term nutritional improvement. They can improve the income of poor farmers and agricultural workers and reduce the unit costs of production, thus reducing food prices for low-income consumers. For full realization of the opportunities, nutritional issues must be considered explicitly in the planning of agricultural research.
Research for agricultural production influences human nutrition in many ways, for example, through effects on: household incomes of families at risk of having undernourished members; prices of the food commodities; production systems of subsistence farmers; risks of fluctuation in food production, prices and income; nutrient composition of foods available to households experiencing malnutrition; household income, intrahousehold income and budget control; time allocation of women; and demand for labour.
Consideration of nutritional impact should be incorporated in several areas of agricultural research The following are priority areas for on-farm technological research:
· the development of integrated farming systems that maximize the production of nutrient-rich food crops under varied climatic, agronomic and economic conditions, and/or small-scale, low-input, environmentally sustainable livestock enterprises on limited land in rural and urban areas [including research into appropriate cultivars for home gardens (e.g. those with year-round maturation, pest resistance and locally preferred taste), low-cost and environmentally safe fertilization and pest control methods, special techniques for flooding and dryland gardens, and seed saving, multiplication and preservation!;
· the development of agroforestry techniques, including intercropping systems for production of both food and fuel;
· varietal improvement of underexploited indigenous food crops which not only will broaden the food base but will result in a range of foods that are nutritionally complementary;
· the development of agronomic methods to improve the bioavailable micronutrient content of major crops, including staples, with such efforts directed towards crops that are widely consumed.
The development of research in these priority areas will call for comprehensive consideration of specific food systems and for the active collaboration of researchers from several disciplines, often with the participation of local families.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 5 - Promotion of food and dietary diversification strategies to enhance and sustain household food security
Food diversification for stable access and a sustainable food supply
Mixed cropping
Gardening for food
Urban agriculture
Promotion of underexploited traditional food crops
Introducing new crops
Small livestock and poultry keeping
Fish farming
Integrated crop/livestock/fish management
Trees and forest products to improve nutrition
Preservation of foods
Factors to consider in the diversification of food production
Promoting diversification of diets
Chapter 5 - Promotion of food and dietary diversification strategies to enhance and sustain household food security
Many people lack adequate amounts of foods that are rich in the nutrients needed for health and a productive life. Chronic undernutrition affects some 215 million people in sub-Saharan Africa, or 43 percent of the population (FAO, 1996b). Deficiencies of iron, vitamin A and iodine are also widespread; about 300 million people are affected every year, and a much greater number are at risk of these deficiencies. Malnutrition increases people's vulnerability to infections, causing numerous deaths (see also Chapter 8). In the face of this bleak situation, major efforts are required by national governments and the international community to bring about reductions in malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies.
Food diversification for stable access and a sustainable food supply
Increased food production and access are crucial to achieving major nutritional improvement. More foods should be produced that are rich in all the essential micronutrients, available in sufficient quantities and accessible to people all year round. This requires the collaboration of people working in agriculture, fishery, forestry, small animal husbandry, industry, marketing, communications, women's participation, home economics and nutrition. The wide application of proven technologies and approaches in these fields, as well as the development of new concepts, will contribute towards solving nutritional problems. The results of research must be transmitted to farmers, and efforts must be made to build on farmers' indigenous knowledge. Consumers, too, need to be involved and educated on how to prevent nutritional deficiencies.
Access to stable and sustainable food supplies is a precondition for the establishment of food security at the household level. Greater and more sustained yields from the farming system will increase the potential access of the household to an adequate diet. Similarly, farming practices that improve the regular flow of a variety of different foods into the household throughout the seasons enhance food security for its members. Promoting appropriate and improved technologies for home preservation and drying of vegetables and fruits at home will reduce wastage and ensure better utilization of fresh produce (e.g. mangoes) available in abundance during the harvest season. Increased food processing through the establishment and strengthening of small-scale agro-industries can contribute to the year-round availability and variety of micronutrient-rich foods in rural and urban markets. Agro-processing industries will not only even out seasonal price fluctuations, but will also
create jobs and incomes from such activities as processing, storage, distribution and marketing. Agro-processing will also stimulate demand for farmers' crops and products and give consumers additional choice.
Strategies for food and dietary diversification at the community and household levels include a range of food-based activities that can maximize the availability of adequate amounts and greater variety of nutritious foods. These activities include:
· promotion of mixed cropping and integrated farming systems;
· introduction of new crops (such as soybean);
· promotion of underexploited traditional foods and home gardens;
· small livestock raising;
· promotion of fishery and forestry products for household consumption;
· promotion of improved preservation and storage of fruits and vegetables to reduce waste, post-harvest losses and effects of seasonality;
· strengthening of small-scale agro-processing and food industries;
· income generation;
· nutrition education to encourage the consumption of a healthy and nutritious diet year round.
Some of these strategies are discussed in this chapter. Diversification must entail management and generation of resources in such a way that all the various measures undertaken collectively work to improve the livelihood of the rural poor.
Mixed cropping
Traditional farming systems already use a diversity of crops in both mixed and relay intercropping as well as integration of crops with livestock and/or aquaculture. Research on cropping patterns and rotations is generating improved methods to ensure greater and more sustained yields. A holistic approach to research on farming systems, combining knowledge of socio-economic constraints and a better understanding of small farmers' conditions, should help in finding solutions.
For small-scale producers, mixed cropping can be associated with potential yield improvements and monetary advantages as well as positive implications for food security, dietary balance and nutrition. Mixed cropping reduces the risk of crop failure. It can also reduce the need for expensive inputs if crop residues from leguminous intercrops, supplemented where appropriate with rock phosphate, are returned to the soil. Mixed and/or rotational cropping offers increased protection from disease and pest damage, thus potentially increasing profitability and income. All of these attributes reduce risk in the food supply system and thus favourably influence food security.
Farming systems based on mixed cropping can extend the harvesting period and help to alleviate seasonal food shortages, thus enhancing the stability of household food access. They can also reduce erosion risks by providing increased soil cover and additional crop residues for use as green manure and mulch. Such characteristics offer gains in sustainability and in stability for the food supply system.
The choice of intercrops usually includes legumes and/or oilseeds such as melon seed, groundnut, soybean or sunflower, together with cereals as the dominant crop. In terms of dietary balance, grain legumes, or pulses, contain more protein than cereals and about ten times as much protein as most roots and tubers (Table 22). More significantly, in composition the proteins in cereals and legumes are complementary to each other.
Proteins are not all equally effective in promoting growth. The quality of a protein is determined by the kind of amino acids it contains and the proportion in which they are present. Good-quality proteins contain all the essential amino acids in proportions capable of promoting growth when they are the only proteins in the diet. Such proteins are known as complete proteins or proteins of high biological value. All animal proteins are complete proteins, and if eaten in adequate amounts they meet all a person's protein needs. Proteins from vegetable sources, such as beans, contain all the essential amino acids, but contain one or more of them in insufficient quantity to meet the needs for growth. Bean proteins are generally rich in lysine, an amino acid often deficient in cereal proteins, and legume proteins are therefore valuable supplements to cereal-based diets. Table 23 shows the amino acid composition and amino acid score of wheat and chickpea (Cicer arietinum),
separately and in combination. An optimal protein quality can be obtained by combining wheat and chickpea at a ratio of approximately 2:1.
Table 22 - Comparative energy and protein content of some cereals, tubers, legumes and oilseeds (per 100 g)
Food
Energy
(kcal)
Protein
(g)
Maize, white
Rice, brown hulled
Fonio meal
Millets
Sorghum
Cowpeas
Beans (Phaseolus spp.)
Groundnuts
Sesame
Soybeans
Cassava flour
Cassava, fresh
Yam flour
Yam, fresh
Sweet potato
Taro
Plantain
Source: FAO/United States Department of Health. Education and Welfare, 1968.
The total protein content of different legumes varies widely, from around 12 percent for some varieties of chickpea to over 35 percent for high-protein cultivars of winged bean (Psophocarpus tetragonolobus) and soybean (Glycine max) (Table 24). Protein content also varies widely among different varieties of the same species. For example, the protein content of pigeon pea (Cajanus cajan) can vary from 13 to 20 percent, depending on the cultivar and the conditions of cultivation.
Table 23 - Essential amino acid content of wheat and chickpea (Cicer arietinum) (mg per g nitrogen in the food)
Food
Lysine
Threonine
Methionine
Leucine
Isoleucine
Valine
Phenylalanine
Tryptophan
Wheat
Chickpea
Wheat 67% + chickpea 35%
ideal protein
Amino acid score^a
Source: Siegel and Fawcett, 1976 (quoted in FAO, 1989f).
^a Amino acid score = amino acid content in wheat/chickpea mixture - amino acid content in ideal protein (egg) x 100.
Table 24 - Proximate composition of mature, dry winged bean seeds, compared with some commercial dry legume seeds (%)
Legume
Protein^a
Fat
Winged bean
Soybean
Chickpea
Cowpea
Source: Vietmeyer, 1975 (quoted in FAO, 1989f).
^a N x 6.25.
The diversity of food supplies offered by mixed cropping systems accords well with nutritional security, especially since the young leaves of many grain legumes, such as cowpea, are also utilized as a green vegetable, providing essential minerals such as calcium and iron together with useful amounts of vitamins A and C. Table 25 lists some specific nutrients found in the major plant groups.
Improving mixed cropping technologies through farming systems studies and adaptive research
Farming systems research can contribute to the nutritional wellbeing and food security of households in a number of ways. With its comprehensive, interdisciplinary nature and its aim to improve the viability of small farms, such research is geared towards promoting sustainable livelihoods. It also includes a priority focus on increasing household food production and improving the assets of the farm household.
Farming systems research is directed towards improving the access of farm households to food and income through interventions related to choice of crops and cropping practices, increased use of small livestock, development of labour-saving technologies and improved storage and processing techniques. Thus strategies to encourage food diversification, such as promotion of mixed cropping technologies (including systems integrating crops with livestock and/or aquaculture), should include support for farming systems research and for the efforts of adaptive research planning teams which work directly with farmers in developing locally appropriate systems of integrated farming. Specific emphasis should be given in farming systems research to increasing the micronutrient output of agricultural systems and developing effective storage and preservation techniques for fruits and vegetables that can be employed at the household and community levels.
Table 25 - Specific nutrients found in the major plant groups
Plant group
Nutrient
Cereals
Carbohydrates, protein, dietary fibre,^a vitamin B complex,^a iron,^a calcium^a
Roots
Carbohydrates, protein, some vitamin C
Legumes, oilseeds, nuts
Carbohydrates, protein, dietary fibre,^a iron,^a calcium,^a vitamin B complex^a
Fruits and vegetables
Vitamin C, vitamin A, iron, calcium, vitamin B complex, dietary fibre
Source: FAO, 1988c.
Note: The diets of vulnerable groups may be low in ail these nutrients.
^a Particularly high nutrient values are found in the hull.
Support services and advocacy for mixed cropping
Improved agricultural practices for a wider variety of food crops, once disseminated and accepted by the producers, often need support if they are to be widely adopted. For the integration of nutrition objectives into farming systems research, such support may be needed at the policy level. Actors involved in providing support may include government agencies through extension services, together with financial institutions, agricultural banks, farmer groups, fertilizer and seed companies, food industries and other private-sector agencies who may wish to profit from policies for food diversification.
The aim must be to provide timely and appropriate inputs, advice and assistance to farmers and producers to maximize the returns and minimize the risks arising from adoption of new strategies. Development of improved seed, together with advice on cultural practices and required inputs, must generally be accompanied by increased access to low-interest credit and greater security of land tenure to reduce risks in marginal areas. Action will also be required to ensure effective demand and marketing.
Smallholder farmers are profit maximizers and will adopt improved technologies if they are not too risky and are profitable at an early stage in the adoption process. Risk is perceived not only in terms of monetary returns, but also in terms of the stability and sustainability of the household's livelihood, including access to food.
The adoption of strategies to improve the productivity of mixed farming systems, if successful, will create an increased supply of a variety of foods in excess of the immediate demand for food within the producer communities. Therefore, before a food diversification strategy is undertaken, it will be necessary to assess and ensure marketability of excess products. Consumer surveys regarding the promoted crops will be required, together with advocacy and nutrition education to stimulate demand among urban groups, who may have become unfamiliar with some traditional foodstuffs.
The United Nations University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa (UNU/INRA) has commissioned a series of studies in 14 African countries on indigenous food crops and other useful plants, to determine people's knowledge of indigenous crops, the use they make of them and the preparations that are made from them. The aim of the surveys is to provide data for determining the status of, and priorities and strategies for, research and training related to indigenous food crops. Such information would be useful in improving cropping systems utilizing indigenous food crops; in planning to enhance sustainability, to reduce risks of crop failure, to diversify production to meet farmers' food needs and to ensure genetic conservation of indigenous African food crops; and in promoting improved methods of cultivation, processing and preparation.
In the case of small-grained cereals such as millets and sorghum, improved processing techniques may be necessary to provide products for urban housewives, who have become used to the convenience of rice and of wheat-based baked products such as breads and biscuits. Development of appropriate snack foods based on a wide variety of crops will help provide a market to absorb anticipated surpluses. In addition, widespread dissemination of nutritional information about these products should accompany their marketing.
Many of the foodstuffs produced in diversified farming systems, such as roots and tubers, plantains and bananas, and fruits and leafy vegetables, are highly perishable. As their production is promoted, therefore, transport and marketing facilities need to be enhanced to avoid post-harvest losses, whose high cost is inevitably passed on to the consumer. Agricultural policies favouring diversification should ideally entail a review of all sectors of the food chain from production to consumption, as well as mobilization of support at the national, district and community levels through producer and consumer interest groups.
Gardening for food
Traditional home gardens
In many agricultural communities, people rely on one main staple crop whose seasonality implies a period of food shortage, usually referred to as the lean or the hungry season. Home gardening can often supplement family food supplies during lean periods and can generate added income when other sources of employment and income may be limited, provided enough water is available. Home gardens have mostly been maintained by women, who often water and manure them from domestic wastes and use them to produce early crops such as green maize and the fruits, spices and vegetables needed to prepare relishes.
Home gardens are labour intensive, but as they are usually close to the house, the labour required can be combined with home and child care responsibilities. Children are often responsible for carrying water and for simple maintenance work, and they may also be given a few plants or a small area to tend. Support of home gardening through horticultural training and nutrition education at school, including the establishment and maintenance of a school food production garden, will provide useful training in intensive land management for the next generation.
Home gardening is quickly taking different forms to suit individual lifestyles and work patterns. For example, urban dwellers grow maize in the backyard and quite often in the front garden as well; busy traders plant bananas behind their roadside stalls and scatter tomato seeds in damp areas around their compound living area; and children bury mango seeds in rubbish heaps and in drains at the side of their houses. Gardening is often rather haphazard and disorganized at this level, with chickens and goats competing for the harvest, but the intention and interest in home gardening are there, waiting to be harnessed.
Unfortunately, home gardens have rarely received official recognition, and families often lack the necessary resources, knowledge and inputs to produce crops as effectively as possible. A survey in Ghana indicated that traditional home garden farming systems have a number of major constraints which need to be removed if the systems are to be successfully promoted (Asare, Oppong and Twum-Ampofo, 1985). Important factors to consider in encouraging the expansion of home gardens include security of land tenure to facilitate long-term investment in home gardens and better extension services, including credit, to promote the wider establishment of home gardens and improve their management.
Home gardens and nutrition
Traditional home gardens continue to be important sources of micronutrients for rural communities. Poor people obtain most of their nutrients from food plants, which are cheaper and more accessible than animal foods. In humid tropical countries, green leafy plants such as Amaranthus spp., Corchorus spp., Bidens pilosa, Gynandropsis spp., Celosia spp., Basella spp., Solanum scabrum, Solanum americanum, Hibiscus sabdariffa and Vigna unguiculata often grow wild and spontaneously. Traditionally, they have been consumed as leafy vegetables when climatic conditions have made the cultivation of exotic vegetables more difficult. The leaves of these plants tend to be good sources of protein, phosphorus and iron as well as vitamins A and C and in some cases B-group vitamins. In many cases they are of higher overall food value than introduced vegetable species, for example cabbage or tomatoes. Table 26 shows the nutritional content of some green leafy vegetables widely used in Africa.
Through careful selection, a range of fruit and vegetable crops can be cultivated throughout the year to provide a constant supply of micronutrients (see Figure 19). For example, yellow and orange perennial fruits (e.g. mango, papaya, cape gooseberry and guava), fruit vegetables (e.g. tomato, pumpkin, squash, gourd and eggplant), some root vegetables (e.g. carrot and yellow-fleshed sweet potato) and most dark-green leafy vegetables are generally moderate to good sources of vitamins A and C. Also, some leaves and fruits produced by local indigenous trees are consumed in rural areas and are rich in micronutrients, e.g. guavas and loquats. Some sources of nutrition from the home garden are given in Table 27.
Some staple foods also have a role as sources of micronutrients. For instance, leaves of roots and tubers are valuable sources. In many countries of the African humid tropics, leaves of cassava (Manihot esculenta) are also consumed. Millets are rich sources of iron in comparison with other cereals such as wheat or maize.
Fruit and vegetable cultivation presents rather different challenges under low-temperature conditions such as those found in the remote highlands of Ethiopia or Lesotho. In such areas, efforts to extend the production of leafy vegetables into the winter season, for example, need to be based on the selection of cold-tolerant cultivars of Brassica crops such as kale and mustard. Alternatively, it might be advisable to adopt locally appropriate protected cultivation practices, such as the use of simple low plastic tunnels or hotbeds which accumulate solar heat and shield crop plants from exposure to extremely low temperature and wind.
Table 26 - Nutritional content of some green leafy vegetables (per 100 g edible portion)
Food
Food energy
(kcal)
Moisture
Protein
(g)
Fat
(g)
Carbo- hydrate
(g)
Fibre
(g)
Ash
(g)
Calcium
(mg)
Phosphorus
(mg)
Iron
(µcg)
_-carotene equivalent
(µg)
Thiamine
(mg)
Riboflavin
(mg)
Niacin
(mg)
Vitamin C
(mg)
Amaranthus spp.
Raw
Cooked
Baobab leaves (Adansonia digitata)
Raw
Dried
trace
Blackjack (Bidens pilots)
Raw
Dried
Bitter feat (Vernonia amygdalina)
Raw
Dried
Cassava leaf (Manihot esculenta)
Raw
Dried
Cat's whiskers (Cleome gynandra)
Leaves, raw
Leaves and stems, cooked
Sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas)
Leaves, raw
Leaves, cooked, plus groundnuts
Source: FAO, 1990a.
FIGURE 19 - Food availability from home food production and supply systems, Nchelenge, Zambia
Source: Adapted from Thuvesson, 1988.
Table 27 - Some sources of nutrition from the home garden
Energy
Fats and oils
Protein
Iron
Vitamin A
Vitamin C
Avocado
Avocado
Cacao bean
Amaranth
Amaranth leaves
Annona
Cacao bean
Locust bean
Cashew nut
Banana heart
Ampalaya fruits/leaves
Baobab fruit
Breadfruit
Groundnut
Cowpea
Cassava leaves
Carrot
Cashew apple
Cassava
Soybean
Hyacinth bean
Ceylon spinach
Cassava leaves
Citrus
Maize
Groundnut
Dried beans
Ceylon spinach
Guava
Potato
Pigeon pea
Dried fruits
Drumstick leaves
Mango
Sweet potato
Soybean
Drumstick leaves
Hot chili pepper
Muskmelon
Yam
Watermelon seed
Green onion
Mango (ripe)
Papaya (uncooked)
Mustard
Parsley
Potato (white, Irish)
Spinach
Sorrel
Soursop
Sweet potato leaves
Spinach
Sugar apple
Squash leaves
Sweet pepper
Sweet potato leaves
Source: Adapted from WHO/UNICEF, 1985.
For fruit and vegetable crops, staggering planting dates in the case of short-cycle crops and choosing a mixture of early maturing, average and late-maturing varieties for both annual and perennial crops can extend the harvest period. For instance, some varieties of mango tree can be harvested three times a year, with flowering, first budding, ripening and harvesting stages occurring simultaneously on different parts of the same tree. Thus the problem of seasonality of available nutrients, in this case primarily beta-carotene, can be overcome.
Role of women in home gardening
The role of women in home and community gardens is of special importance. In addition to being responsible for producing crops on small plots of land, women, especially those who are elderly, often have good knowledge of indigenous species of green leafy vegetables; they know how to prepare them and how to preserve both seeds and produce. In local markets, the main vendors of these crops (fresh or dried) are often women.
Extension services unfortunately tend to focus on the major field crops. Improved planting materials, better cultivars and advice on cultural practices are rarely offered to cultivators of home gardens. Since women do the bulk of the work and are more conscious of and concerned with the nutritional needs of the family, extension advice, credit and agricultural inputs should be provided to them for maximum benefits. The organization of women's groups should be promoted to facilitate their access to inputs, to improve the efficiency of their work and thus to improve the diversity and productivity of gardens.
Home gardening as a development strategy
It is important to distinguish between traditional gardens, which are cultivated independently of any intervention, and promoted gardens, which receive external assistance. Many gardening projects, especially those that promote home gardening for nutritional and income-generating benefits, are supported by external donors and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The involvement of ministries of agriculture has generally been limited, as horticulture is still given a low priority in overall agricultural development programmes, and home gardening, in spite of its potential output, receives even less attention. Consequently, few agricultural extensionists have been trained in gardening techniques, and even fewer in mixed tropical gardening. Still fewer have the knowledge to promote better diets and nutritional practices.
The neglect of gardening in development strategies is partly explained by the paucity of data on the output of traditional home gardening systems expressed in quantitative and monetary-equivalent terms which could demonstrate a significant contribution to economic output and national development. As a result, most agricultural and research programmes tend to underestimate or discount the actual or potential importance of home gardening as a food security strategy, and in particular as a strategy for meeting micronutrient needs.
However, as more evidence showing the social, economic and nutritional benefits of home gardening is becoming available, some governments and the private sector are showing renewed interest in gardening activities. Case-studies from Bangladesh and Central America that examined the socio-economic aspects of home gardening and its contribution to family consumption and income provide strong evidence that home gardening has significant economic benefits and that it can be a viable strategy for increasing food supplies for family consumption (Marsh, 1994).
In an integrated nutrition/home gardening programme supported by Helen Keller International in Bangladesh, overall vegetable consumption increased by 30 percent, with home gardens supplying 80 percent of vegetables consumed by the family. As most of the income earned from sale of home garden produce was spent on food, the prevalence of malnutrition among children of participating families was also reduced. In a study in Honduras and Nicaragua, the gardens supplied a significant proportion of fruits and vegetables, legumes, roots and tubers, coffee, tea and medicinal plants for home consumption. The combined benefits of home consumption, income earned from sale of garden produce (25 percent of total average income in Bangladesh, although wide variation was recorded in Honduras and Nicaragua) and savings in expenditure on garden produce were judged to make a significant contribution to the household economy.
Data from an FAO-supported project in the Niger promoting the production and consumption of vitamin A-rich foods among women's groups and their families showed that the proportion of healthy children increased in the project areas, in comparison with the non-project villages (IVACG, 1994). The successful ingredients of this project were: a strong emphasis on nutrition education to promote underutilized indigenous foods such as green leaves; the cultivation of traditional wild sources of vitamin A; and the use of food preservation and solar drying to address the problem of seasonal shortages.
Available evidence clearly suggests that home gardening can result in tangible benefits for the household, including food on the table, extra income and healthy children. Access to home-grown fruits, vegetables, small animals and/or fish ensures a more balanced diet for rural families with limited purchasing power and increases their self-reliance. The sale of surpluses can provide direct benefits to producers, especially women farmers, and can also benefit consumers by increasing the quantity and diversity of food supplies in local markets. In communities where specific nutritional deficiencies persist or where there appear to be unexploited possibilities for income generation, households can with some support from government services or NGOs improve the diversity and productivity of their traditional gardens. Home gardening can also be a potentially important element in urban food security strategies.
For home garden projects to be successful and sustainable, a number of important elements need to be considered. Since home gardening is a complex and varied production system forming part of a wider household economy, garden interventions to improve nutrition require a good understanding of local conditions so that project goals can be adapted locally. Thus it is necessary to work closely with local farmers, especially with women farmers, to identify resource and other constraints and locally appropriate ways to promote home gardens that are sustainable. To ensure that availability of garden foods translates into nutritional benefits for the whole family, nutrition education and information about nutritional value and utilization of fruits and vegetables in the diet are essential. Promotion of crop diversification requires flexibility regarding choice of species and cropping patterns, encouragement of diversity and cultivation of locally adapted varieties to enhance
nutritional value, and attention to soil fertility, pest management, income-earning potential and genetic conservation. Involving women in all aspects of garden management and nutrition training is crucial, as women do most of the work and are responsible for family nutrition. Regular monitoring of garden progress, although costly, could help to resolve problems and to provide information quantifying gardening output and consumption increases; it could thus contribute towards inducing policy-makers and planners to direct more investment to the improvement of the home-gardening sector's output. Community organizing for gardening, preferably building on local farmers' and women's organizations, is also a clear prerequisite for sustainability of gardens in the long term.
Urban agriculture
In urban areas the households most at risk of food insecurity and chronic malnutrition belong to the lowest-income groups which cannot afford to purchase adequate food. Many of these households comprise families of recent migrants who have failed to find regular employment. Their income levels are often so low that they can afford to purchase only the cheapest and most basic foods, and since they cannot afford to rent housing they are forced to camp in makeshift shanty towns on the periphery of cities. Such families often cultivate tiny plots of land within their household area and keep small livestock as a basic survival strategy. However, many of the better-established urban residents have also developed their own subsidiary food supply systems which support food purchase from the urban markets.
Urban agriculture, like the street food trade, often tends to be discounted and frowned upon in official circles as a limited, transitory phenomenon practiced only by recent migrants, living in squatter areas, who have not yet adapted to a market economy. In contradiction to this view, a survey covering cities in a number of countries including Ethiopia, Kenya, Senegal, the United Republic of Tanzania and Uganda (IDRC, 1993) showed that urban agriculture makes a significant contribution to the food supplies of many major cities. A Zambian survey showed that urban enterprises can improve household food security, the variety of the diet and intakes of essential micronutrients (see Box 19 and Tables 28 and 29).
Peri-urban commercial cultivation of high-value crops, including tomatoes, onions, green vegetables and fruit, is a growing food supply enterprise for a number of African cities. Such production systems can be very profitable, justifying their high costs in terms of inputs such as irrigation, fertilizers and pesticides. The proximity of production to urban markets is essential to ensure the freshness of such perishable commodities and their contribution of vitamins and minerals to urban diets.
By practicing a diversified form of urban agriculture, poor urban workers are able to meet some of their nutritional requirements, especially those for minerals and vitamins, through the consumption of some of their produce. This capability is important, as marketed vegetables and fruits often tend to be too expensive for low-income urban dwellers. To encourage urban food gardening as a viable food security strategy, assistance is needed in many instances to provide better access to land, water, seeds, community-based extension services, nutrition education and markets.
Box 19 - Survey of urban agriculture in Lusaka, Zambia
Surveys were carried out in low-income areas of Lusaka, which are made up of five types of settlement: two types of squatter areas (A and B), one of which (A) lacks even basic services; two types of serviced plots (C and D), one provided by the local authorities (C), and the other provided under a World Bank housing plan (D); and an area of official low-cost public housing (E).
The questionnaire was designed to provide information about the following types of urban cultivation:
· irrigated plot gardens in the back andlor front yard which are cultivated all the year round;
· rainy-season gardens, which are usually located on the periphery of the city, i.e. a type of urban allotment, dependent entirely on rain-fed production.
Analysis showed that nearly 60 percent of the low-income households cultivated one or both types of garden (Table 28). The variety of produce from both types of garden is shown in Table 29.
Source: Adapted from Sanyal, 1985.
Table 28 - Extent of urban agriculture in Lusaka, Zambia (percentage of households engaged)
Nature of cultivation
Squatter area B^a
(n = 50)
Other areas
(n = 200)
Total
Total (weighted average)^b
(n = 200)
Plot garden only
Rainy-season garden only
Both gardens
None
Total
Source: Sanyal, 1985.
^a See Box 19 for definition of areas.
^b This estimate includes tenants living in low-cost housing areas.
Table 29 - Kinds of produce raised in urban plot gardens and rainy-season gardens (pecentage of households)^a
Produce
Plot gardens
Rainy-season gardens
Maize
Groundnut
Bean
Tomato
Rape
Pumpkin
Sweet potato
Cabbage
Cassava
Onion
Spinach
Okra
Banana
Other fruits (mango, papaw, guava)
Source: Sanyal, 1985.
^a Each column adds up to more than 100 percent because one household may cultivate more than one type of vegetable.
Promotion of underexploited traditional food crops
Traditional food crops are those accepted by a community, through habit and tradition, as appropriate and desirable sources of food. People are accustomed to them, know how to cultivate and prepare them and enjoy eating dishes made from them. It is not possible to list traditional food crops, as distinct communities have evolved their own food preferences and habits. However, they fall in two broad categories: those consumed as traditional dietary staples, such as cassava, yam, plantain, sweet potato, millets and sorghum, and those that serve as ingredients in accompanying relishes and sauces, which include a wide variety of legumes, oilseeds, fruits and vegetables.
Classically, in subsistence agriculture, farmers grew and used traditional food crops because the practice was familiar. They understood these plants, selected varieties to meet the needs and constraints of their environment and trusted seed from their own landraces to produce a reliable crop. Required inputs were low, family labour was available, and the seasonal demands of traditional plants fitted well into farming systems encompassing mixed cropping, shifting cultivation and bush fallow.
There were social reasons, of custom or prestige, for the selection of a diverse range of traditional crops. Sorghum was needed to brew beer for meetings, weddings, births and other festivities. Cassava and bush greens were fall-back foods in the hungry season before the harvest and during the early rains. Cassava was left in the ground until needed, and sorghum and millets were stored in household pots and granaries. Melons kept well, and their seeds provided oil.
Now many traditional crops are often scarce and expensive. In parts of Nigeria yam has become a luxury food. In Ethiopia the traditional cereal, teff, is increasingly used by the urban elite and better-off rural people to prepare the traditional dish of injera and wot, but it is expensive for the average Ethiopian.
Given adequate markets and remuneration prices, many farmers are likely to increase their production of a great variety of traditional foodstuffs, contributing to a more diversified food supply and increased dietary choice. However, the food chain between producer and consumer is long and involves many different sectors of the economy, many communities and many individuals with specific interests. If it is in the interests of all involved to increase their production and consumption of traditional foods, they will do so.
Box 20 - Benefits of traditional food crops
Arguments pro and con
Traditional crops have numerous advantages, especially in terms of household food security (see Box 20), as they are particularly important in the cropping strategies and consumption patterns of poor people. They provide a varied diet, often rich in minerals and vitamins including vitamin A, iron and calcium. Nutrition-based arguments, however, are not always the most persuasive, unless they are augmented by more material concerns such as economic benefits, convenience and palatability. Returns to labour in the production of traditional food crops must be seen to be advantageous compared with farming of cash crops if their production is to be promoted.
In a traditional subsistence economy, where there is mutual support and security, the appeal of traditional food crops is high and obvious, but changing to a cash economy and the purchase of processed food alters the food system. Roles change, and with them the type and amount of foods grown for domestic use, for social use and for sale. Changes, however slight, may disrupt daily household routines. The domestic processing of traditional grains is labour intensive; when time is short women prefer wheat bread, rice or maize which are easier to process.
Broadening the food base
Some 50 000 vegetable food species are known to exist worldwide, yet humanity uses no more than 200 of them. In view of the food scarcity in many developing countries, this proportion is not only insufficient, it is also ecologically and nutritionally dangerous. It is time to rediscover forgotten and neglected food plants and to broaden the food base using significantly more of the available resources.
Enhancing nutritional status
The nutritional value of diets is enhanced by traditional legumes, oilseeds, fruits and vegetables. They add taste and flavour to the diet, improve palatability and help to balance protein, vitamin and mineral intakes. Vegetables and fruits supply provitamin A, vitamin C, iron, calcium and many other micronutrients. In Africa, an estimated 80 percent of vitamin A and more than one-third of vitamin C are supplied by traditional food plants. Nuts and oilseeds are also good sources of protein and energy, valuable supplements in children's diets and useful in preparing snack foods.
Improving household food security
Seasonal food scarcity accentuates the severity and incidence of malnutrition. To see them through the so-called hungry season, rural people grow traditional food plants near their homes using available family labour. Many of these plants are drought resistant, can be grown without expensive inputs and have good storage qualities. For example, root crops such as cassava can be grown as a food reserve, left in the ground for up to two years and used as the main source of energy during lean times.
Increasing crop productivity, conserving soil and increasing soil fertility
Many traditional food plants make an important contribution to crop productivity. Grown as rotation crops between successive main crops, they have the advantage of reducing the buildup of pests and diseases. When interplanted, they may act as an ecological barrier to disease. By acting as ground cover, traditional food plants also help to prevent soil erosion, reduce evaporation and suppress weed growth. Grown as green manure and ploughed in, traditional plants can increase soil organic matter and improve soil structure. In addition, legumes fix atmospheric nitrogen, enriching the soil for the following crop or for nearby plants.
Increasing household and national Income
Traditional food plants benefit both producer and consumer. The producers - mainly women -increase their families' consumption and generate income by selling the surplus in local markets. Thus, they make more varieties of food available to consumers at lower cost. Generally, women use this income for improving the nutrition and welfare of their children.
Many food-deficit countries are forced to import large quantities of food to meet local production shortfalls. At national level, payments for food imports have become an increasingly heavy drain on the scarce foreign exchange resources of many countries. Increased production of a range of traditional crops, particularly staples, will increase food supply and thus contribute to reducing food imports. Development for the urban market of low-cost, ready-to-eat products and other convenience foods based on domestically produced traditional food plants will stimulate increased consumption of, and demand for, these foods.
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1988d.
Many traditional food plants are high in fibre, and some contain antinutrients such as cyanogenic glycosides, phytates, oxalates and enzyme inhibitors. These factors all reduce the big-availability of essential nutrients. Many antinutritional factors can be removed or rendered ineffective by appropriate processing, preparation and cooking. Similarly, the nutrients present, especially vitamins A and C and vitamins of the B complex, can be better conserved through appropriate handling or the use of improved techniques for drying and preservation. Effective processing, however, can often take considerable time, and women's time is limited by a multitude of domestic and other obligations.
The use of traditional underutilized crops by poor farmers and their consumption by disadvantaged farm families attaches the image of "poor person's food" to plants such as beans and green leafy vegetables; they are seen as foods to add to the sauce when the family cannot afford meat. This stigma makes it difficult to promote such plants. In addition, some food crops, often the traditional ones, may be known as "women's crops", which gives the impression that it is only women who are keen to promote traditional food crops. In Zimbabwe, women's crops include groundnuts, cowpeas and bambara nuts (Voandzeia subterranea). These crops are grown on small field plots in the same farm area as the main cash or food crop, maize, but they receive little or no fertilizer or manure and are produced with the farmers' own seed. Under such circumstances, it will be difficult for traditional food crops to regain their earlier popularity in terms of production and consumption levels.
Strategies for promoting traditional food crops
The changing food demand patterns of urban populations have had adverse effects on the consumption of minor crops in general, and traditional staples in particular. Presentation of improved, convenient forms of these foods, and especially the development and marketing of a wide range of snack foods based on them, will help to improve demand and restore their image. This strategy will also most likely increase the earning capacity of women, who are largely responsible for the preparation and marketing of street foods.
Perhaps, as already discussed, the best strategy for the promotion of traditional food crops is to provide support for the development and improvement of mixed cropping systems together with promotional programmes for selected crops. This support should be augmented by the introduction of technologies to reduce risk and increase yield, especially for poor farmers in marginal areas, where traditional crops usually make a major contribution to the food supply. In such areas, gathered foods and the produce from home gardens also contribute significantly to household food resources and to the income of women. Technologies and household techniques are also required to improve the nutritional value of food and to make post-harvest processing less laborious and time consuming for women and others involved in processing activities.
Introducing new crops
The adoption of mixed cropping practices in traditional farming systems has been discussed above. One of the interventions that could improve the productivity of such systems, with potential to improve farming incomes, is the introduction of new crops for which market demand can be developed. Provided they are compatible with ecological conditions and constraints, crops already grown and utilized in farming systems elsewhere within and outside the African continent could be considered.
The case of soybean
The programmed introduction of soybean into African smallholder agricultural production and subsequently into the food system is an interesting example of such an intervention.
The availability and consumption of dietary oil in Africa is generally low, especially among the poorest sectors of the population. In production terms, the introduction of soybean in Africa is promising. Its contribution to dietary diversification is also receiving considerable attention, as it contributes excellent quantities of both protein (35 to 40 g per 100 g) and fat (approximately 20 g per 100 g). Soybean has a very good nutritional profile in comparison with other legume crops (see Tables 22 and 24), and an enormous area of Africa is suitable for its cultivation (Figure 20). Especially in view of the worrying declines in world legume production, accompanied by accelerating prices of this crop which has always supplied a major proportion of poor people's protein, the promotion of soybean in combination with other food legumes deserves serious consideration.
In the early 1970s, the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) in Nigeria began a soybean production research programme and developed soybean varieties that grew well under the prevailing ecological conditions. However, consumer acceptance of soybean, unlike that of rice or wheat, was initially not very high except in one or two states where soybean had been introduced in the 1940s by British colonialists and where local uses, e.g. as a fermented condiment, had been developed.
In 1987 IITA conducted a baseline survey on soybean production and utilization in three rural communities in Oyo State, Nigeria. The survey revealed that consumer resistance to soybean consumption at household level arose from lack of information on the correct processing and cooking methods for this new bean. Subsequently, improved techniques were developed and disseminated to enable consumers to prepare an acceptable soybean flour for inclusion in traditional dishes such as egusi soup, usually made with melon-seed flour, and snack foods such as bean-balls (akara), normally made from cowpea flour.
FIGURE 20 - Areas of Africa suitable for rain-fed production of soybean
Source: FAO, 1986.
The adoption rate of soybean products was highest for the egusi soup recipe, as soybean flour was cheaper than melon-seed flour, and for soy iru or dawadawa, a type of stock cube or soup flavouring traditionally prepared from locust bean seed (Parkia biglobosa) (Table 30). Ease of preparation and comparative cost were the main criteria for adoption of the soybean products.
This case-study emphasizes the need, before the introduction of a new crop, to examine the whole food supply system from production to consumption and to ensure the acceptability of consumer products so as to provide market incentives for growers of the recommended crop.
Through practical training sessions at nutrition centres in Oyo State, mothers of undernourished children have learned the effectiveness of soybeans in supplementing children's diets to prevent and combat malnutrition. They have also learned how to incorporate soybeans into local dishes and how to grow soybeans in their gardens for home use (E.A. Kueneman, personal communication).
In Zimbabwe, and increasingly in Zambia and Malawi, soybean is being introduced not only into farming systems at the commercial level, but also into the cropping systems of small-scale farmers, as a rotational crop to follow wheat or maize. In Kenya, commercial sugar-cane companies have finally allowed farmers to intercrop legumes, including soybean, with sugar cane and are now providing certified seed for this programme. Soybean is grown intercropped with cassava and even citrus fruit when low plant populations permit penetration of light to the understorey soybean crop. Recommendations on introducing soybean into maize and cassava cropping systems are available from the IITA Grain Legume Improvement Programme (Post Box 5320, Ibadan, Nigeria).
Table 30 - Adoption rate of soybean products in three villages in Oyo State, Nigeria
Product
Adoption
Reasons
Soy vegetable soup
Very high
Extremely easy to prepare from whole soybeans and tastes very good. Soybean is cheaper than melon. Keeps well.
Soy milk
Moderate
Dehulling makes preparation time consuming. Hot extraction of milk hurts the hands. Milling process is difficult. Cannot keep for a long time.
Soy moinmoin
Moderate
Soy paste cannot be used alone as can that made from cowpeas.
Soy akara
Moderate
Same as for soy moinmoin. It disperses into the oil.
Soy ogi
High
Easy to prepare and tastes nice.
Soy iru or dawadawa
High
Tastes better than eni from locust bean iru. Easy to prepare and quite cheap and available in comparison with iru from locust bean.
Source: IITA, 1990.
As a new crop to diversify food production systems, soybean offers the following advantages:
· It fits into the main cropping systems of both commercial and small-scale farmers, and it can contribute to the productivity and sustainability of these systems. It is, at present, the most adapted legume crop for inclusion in most cereal cropping systems, except where rainfall is very low.
· It is a profitable cash crop when linkages are established between farmers and processors, and it is also becoming accepted as a local food crop. It provides the raw material for a wide range of agro-industries, including oil extraction and animal feed.
· It yields more protein per unit of land than any other commercial crop. Thus its promotion is the most cost-effective way of producing large quantities of protein for both human and livestock consumption.
· It has potential for fortification of the diet of rural populations, through the addition of soy flour to cereal flour and to root and tuber flour dishes.
· Its nutritional attributes, particularly its high protein and fat content, endow it with the greatest potential for cost-effective improvement of weaning diets and thus for substantial reduction of levels of protein-energy malnutrition, which is a public health problem in many African countries.
At present, many commercially produced soybean products, including maize/soybean drinks and soy-fortified flours and weaning foods, are priced beyond the reach of poorer families. In order that the potential contribution of soybean to African diets may be realized, greater use at household level is being promoted, based on existing cultural practices and food habits (see Table 30). It will also be important to increase production and to promote community-level processing technologies.
The case of soybean underlines the need to create awareness within the consumer sector before introducing unfamiliar food or cash crops to small-scale farmers, in order to realize the full nutritional benefits of the new foodstuff at the household level (see also Chapter 9, on nutrition education).
Small livestock and poultry keeping
In all societies, food is selected and prepared not only to satisfy hunger and to fill the stomach, but also as a source of pleasure, pride and display. Dishes prepared from animal sources are among the most prestigious and preferred foods and are served to honour guests, to celebrate births and to mourn the dead. Daily meals, however, in the majority of African households, contain only a relatively small amount of food from animal sources. Animal foods are not regularly served as a main component of meals, as they tend to be too expensive for regular use by the poorer sectors of the community. Often, animal products can only be used to add flavour to soups, stews and relishes.
Many extension agencies have promoted increased household involvement in the rearing of small livestock such as pigs, goats, sheep, rabbits and poultry (usually chickens) in Africa with the aim of increasing the amount of protein from animal sources in the household diet. Animal foods are also valuable sources of micronutrients, making a substantial contribution to the control and prevention of micronutrient deficiencies. Meat and meat products are generally excellent sources of iron. Animal products such as eggs, milk and liver are particularly good sources of vitamin A. Of the meats, sheep has the highest vitamin A content (20 mg per 100 g meat), while the meat of fowl also provides a valuable amount.
Animal foods are consumed infrequently by many families in rural areas, as animals represent a considerable investment for a poor community. They are often regarded as a form of insurance policy, to be traded for cash when times are hard and to be sacrificed for food only on special occasions. Eggs, the output of poultry, are consumed domestically, but they are also often marketed by poorer households to generate cash, and the cash may be valued much more than the nutritional advantage of eating eggs.
Another useful by-product of domestic animals is dung, which can be returned to the household garden as manure. However, dung is only readily available if the animals are confined, which usually implies stall feeding, a form of livestock rearing that often involves additional expenditure that most low-income households cannot afford. In addition, animals reared in free-range systems often feed among crop residues in the fields. Thus the benefits of using domestic waste or crop residues to fertilize the home garden are not forthcoming in situations where people cannot afford to practice stall feeding.
In many poor communities goats, chickens, sheep and even pigs are free to range. The animals forage around the village area in the daylight, often returning to their owner's compound only at dusk. The maintenance cost of such animals is low; any gains in terms of eggs or progeny may therefore be regarded as profit, to be marketed when cash is needed.
Beef or milk cattle are in a different class, however. They are regarded as a more valuable asset and are therefore supervised more closely and fed better and more regularly. Whether or not their output, such as milk and milk products, will he used within the owner's household depends on a number of factors, such as culture, tradition, preference for these foods in the diet, availability of markets, need for cash and understanding of the family's nutritional needs.
In pastoralist societies dairy products may form the basis of the diet, but in other areas of Africa where cattle production is restricted to local tsetse-resistant breeds such as the N'Dama this may not be the case. In such areas, the use of milk products is limited by tradition, custom and availability. The milk yield of local breeds is often very low, and it is even lower if the animal is inadequately pastured. In most "backyard" cattle-keeping situations, the calf is allowed to suckle freely until it is weaned and it becomes a valuable asset. The cow is then left to dry out until her next pregnancy and parturition.
Women often have the primary responsibility for small animal husbandry (e.g. the raising of goats, sheep and chickens) and the preparation of products from animals (e.g. cheese, butter, yoghurt). It is usually women who decide whether to sell eggs and other products or to use them for home consumption. When these products are sold, it is because cash is badly needed. The price of these foods, especially in urban areas, is usually high and beyond the reach of poor consumers who may be suffering from nutritional deficiencies.
Fish farming
Fish has an important role in world protein supplies, particularly in developing countries. Besides protein, fish provides energy, essential fatty acids from fat, vitamins and minerals. Fish species vary considerably in composition as well as in size and appearance. Marine fish are slightly more beneficial than freshwater species by virtue their higher iodine content. It was estimated that in continental Africa (excluding South Africa), 21 percent of the animal protein consumed came from fish and fishery products in 1990; this figure had remained stable since 1970 (FAO, 1992c).
It is often difficult to increase the availability of fish at affordable prices. Promotion of consumption is mainly relevant when low-priced fish is sufficiently available.
Aquaculture is practiced throughout the world; in the tropics it is probably most extensively developed in eastern and southeastern Asia, where animal protein consumed from fish and fishery products was estimated at 29 percent in 1990 (FAO, 1992c). Fish farming includes the production and rearing of fish in freshwater ponds, in the brackish water of mangrove swamps or in tanks and cages. In all cases the intent is to provide a regular, controlled supply of desirable species to supplement irregular quantities obtained from fishing. There are also some prospects for community-based aquaculture as pan of the household farming system. A practical guide for extension workers, technicians and teachers, the Handbook on small-scale freshwater fish farming (FAO, 1994d), is available from FAO.
Fish selected for farming must be able to breed and thrive under artificial conditions of environment and diet. Some freshwater species are overprolific in captivity; Tilapia nilotica, for example, breed more rapidly than they grow. Under conditions of confinement, individual fish attain maturity at a much smaller size than they would do under natural conditions. Thus at harvest time they are unacceptably small, with a high proportion of bone in comparison with flesh. Several techniques have been developed to overcome this problem of overpopulation. These include predator control, monosex culture, all-male hybridization and cage culture.
Box 21 summarizes some aspects of fish production, harvesting and consumption in the North-Western Province of Zambia. Seasonal competition for labour and inputs was particularly noted as a constraint to increased production, and about two-thirds of the fish consumed still came from outside the household.
Box 21 - Some aspects of production, harvesting and consumption of fish from ponds in Zambia
Production from fish ponds is low; in most cases 3 to 6 kg per pond are harvested annually. Semi-commercial farmers produce more fish than subsistence farmers; motivated by their higher returns, they expand farms more often, using their own means. New ponds, however, are smaller and have a shorter life span than the ponds built with subsidies provided by externally funded projects in the 1980s.
Ponds are inadequately fertilized. The main reason is scarcity of manure. The available manure is applied both to fish ponds and to vegetable gardens, mainly during the cold, dry season, not during the warm, rainy season when the fish grow. Seasonal shortage of labour to collect and apply manure is one reason. Semi-commercial farmers have better-manured ponds than subsistence farmers, the most apparent reason being their more numerous farm animals (cattle, goats and chickens).
Integration of ducks with fish farming, or any other method of pond fertilization, is not practiced.
For feed, fish farmers use exclusively on-farm products which are basically identical to the main relishes of the households. There is no difference between the two types of farmers in this respect. Cassava leaves in particular are used as fish feed. In the rainy season, greens are scarce and there is competition over their use. Feeding decreases considerably in quantity and frequency, and may for some farmers completely cease for a period before the rains. Semi-commercial maize growers have an advantage over subsistence farmers, through their access to maize bran as complementary fish feed during the dry season.
Two harvesting strategies are practiced: major and intermittent harvesting. Major harvests are carried out either with the assistance of extension workers who bring seine nets or by the households themselves using baskets managed by women. The average period between major harvests assisted by extension workers is 17.3 months.
Nearly one-third of any major harvest is consumed by the household or given to relatives and friends for consumption. The rest is used for sale (30 percent) or paid to people in exchange for work (20 percent) or for assistance during the fish harvest (20 percent).
Fish farmers ensure a local supply of broodstock and fingerlings either by not draining the ponds during the harvest or by taking some fish aside to be returned to the ponds after completion of the harvest.
Virtually all farmers practice intermittent harvesting, mostly with hook and line (children), followed by baskets (women). The proportion of fish removed by intermittent harvesting in relation to the amount removed in major harvests is twice as large for subsistence farmers (41 percent) as for semi-commercial farmers (21 percent). Fish taken out intermittently is used exclusively for household consumption. Consequently, cultivated fish has a greater significance as an additional food source for subsistence farmers than for semi-commercial farmers. Most fish consumed, however, derive from outside the household (60 to 70 percent).
Fish is considered the most important source of animal protein. It is consumed more than once a week in quantities that appear to change little over the year.
Fish farming has had two major implications for the households: one is that consumption of fish has gone up, the other is that cultivated fish has reduced purchase of fish (thereby reducing cash expenditures); it has also reduced the catches of fish in rivers and streams by household members, thereby preventing overfishing.
Sale of fish is in most cases the responsibility of women. Prices vary, depending on proximity to "urban" markets. Because of the meagre quantities harvested, returns (at June 1989) rarely exceeded 100 to 200 kwacha (US$8 to US$16) annually. There are some exceptions.
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1993e.
Processing of fresh fish (primarily drying and smoking) and marketing are often managed by women. In West Africa, smoked fish is a component of many traditional dishes. Proper smoking improves the keeping quality of dried fish and can also increase its acceptability. Education about the strict hygienic practices required in handling fish should be provided to fish traders (usually women) as well as to their clients. If food purchasers (who also tend to be female) are unaware of the health advantages - from improved food quality and safety - of fish sold on ice, they may be unwilling to pay more for it. Health and nutrition education should therefore often accompany fish promotion.
The influence of small-scale pond aquaculture on household food security, food consumption patterns and the nutritional status of children was examined in the Bembeke and Chinyama areas of Dedza District and in the Tsangano area of Ntcheu District, both in the central region of Malawi (Costa-Pierce et al., 1990). Data on household characteristics, frequency of consumption of different types of food, beliefs and knowledge related to fish consumption, aquaculture practices and incidence of water-borne diseases were collected using a scheduled and pre-tested questionnaire. It was concluded that fish farming could play a major part in enhancing household food security and nutritional status. However, it is essential to provide better education and extension on both fish farming and its potential role in nutrition, as well as low-cost harvesting tools, if small-scale fish farming is to be both sustained and expanded in Africa.
In addition, aquaculture entails potential health risks such as the breeding of mosquitoes in open standing water and the spread of schistosomiasis, a water-related parasitic infection that affects some 30 million people in Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria and Zambia (WHO, 1 995a). The risks should be assessed, and appropriate measures, such as controlling the breeding of snails and mosquitoes in ponds and keeping ponds clean from human waste, should be taken to control and prevent the spread of diseases.
Integrated crop/livestock/fish management
In several countries of eastern and southeastern Asia, most notably China, intensive household food production systems have been developed in which crop production is integrated with the production of poultry, especially ducks, and small livestock, particularly pigs. Such systems often include fish production from family fish ponds.
A number of attempts have been made to transfer integrated crop/ livestock systems to the African context to improve the productivity and household food security of small-scale farming units. The most notable of these interventions have been supported by the interregional Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (ALCOM), which has initially concentrated on nine countries: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Some areas of activity of ALCOM are described in Box 22.
One of the basic differences between Asian and African systems for the management of poultry and small livestock lies in the degree of restraint of the animals. In many of the intensive production systems adopted by farmers in Indonesia and China, the pigs and poultry are confined and fed on a regular basis. This does not usually happen in subsistence farming practice in Africa, where animals and poultry usually subsist on what they can find around the houses or among the crop residues in the fields and are confined only at night. In such systems, crop residues and animal manure are not usually collected on a daily basis, nor are they systematically utilized to fertilize gardens and fish ponds or to prepare mulch and composts.
In introducing an integrated crop/livestock/fish management system into an existing farm economy, changes must be made in the allocation of assets, time and labour. Even when the required inputs may be available on the farm as by-products of existing crops and livestock, farmers will not necessarily allocate them equitably among alternative outlets, unless they consider it in their interest to do so in terms of their investment of cash, time and labour. Table 31 shows the extent to which farmers in Zambia allocated agricultural by-products to the feeding and fertilization needs of their household fish ponds.
Intensive integrated management systems require regular inputs of household labour and usually entail some purchased inputs such as feed for poultry, fish and small livestock. Small-scale subsistence farmers often have very limited assets and are unwilling to risk credit unless the returns are both guaranteed and relatively attractive. It would be unrealistic to support an increase in fish pond production if the farmer would have to divert fertilizer to fish ponds when it could be more productively and profitably utilized in crop production.
If the family pond can be constructed in the vicinity of the household garden, it may serve as a source of irrigation water for vegetable plots during the dry season. Such integration between fish and plant production systems can increase land productivity and help to stabilize food supplies at the household level.
Box 22 - Integrating aquaculture into farming systems in Africa: some activities proposed by the Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (ALCOM)
Aquaculture and terming systems
· Review information on major farming systems in the region, and experiences in other regions.
· Carry out in-depth studies of selected mixed farming systems in the region.
· Identify possible aquaculture systems in relation to the main farming system.
· Study comparative returns from crops, animal husbandry and fish culture.
· Study the social impact of integrating farming with aquaculture - particularly the impact on male-female roles and the nutrition of children.
· Monitor social, economic, technical and environmental factors.
Involving women and youth in small-scale aquaculture
· Review current documentation on the work and roles of rural women and youth.
· Carry out in-depth field studies in at least two countries or cultural settings in the region at the village and household levels.
· Suggest ways of solving management problems concerning the role of women in fish pond operations.
· Try out participatory ways to monitor and evaluate methods to involve women in integrated farming systems.
Aquaculture in small water bodies
Many small reservoirs exist in rural areas of southern Africa. They generally have multipurpose uses - such as domestic water supply and irrigation. They are often controlled by government institutions. Fish production is not usually a primary function. ALCOM aims at developing, testing and demonstrating methods to improve production and distribution of fish in such reservoirs and other small water bodies in rural areas. Some proposed activities:.
· Carry out a survey of dams, which covers, inter alia, biological and physical parameters, management strategies, community orientation and socio-political issues relating to reservoir use.
· Identify methods to improve fish production in specific small reservoirs and to solve community problems concerning their implementation.
Source: FAO, 1988a.
Table 31 - Availability of agricultural by-products and their use in fish ponds in four districts of Luapula Province, Zambia^a
Kind of crop, product or livestock
Number of pond owners raising the crop/animal
By-product
Number of pond owners using the by-product
Mansa
Kawambwa
Samfya
Total
Mansa
Kawambwa
Samfya
Total
Cassava
Leaves
Peelings
Maize
Bran
Cobs
Pounded grains
Finger millet
Beer waste
Groundouts
Plants
Bambara nuts
Plants
Beans
Plants
Soybean
Plants
Sunflower
Plants
Sugar cane
Leaves
Potato
Peelings
Rice
Bran
Household leftovers
Remains
Vegetables
Waste
Fruit-trees
Spoiled fruit, leaves
Grass, weeds
Leaves, plants
Chickens
Manure
Ducks
Manure
Sheep/goats
Manure
Cattle
Manure
Source: FAO, 1989a.
^a Number of owners reporting: Mansa, 12; Kawambwa 15; Samfya, 9; Total, 36.
Trees and forest products to improve nutrition
Forests and trees provide foods that supplement and complement traditional agricultural sources. However, nutritionists and foresters have until recently paid insufficient attention to forest foods. In many parts of the world, non-wood forest products (NWFPs), defined as "goods of biological origin other than wood, as well as services, derived from forests and allied land uses" (FAO, 1995a), have an important biological and social role in local food systems. They can contribute substantially to nutrition, either as part of the family diet or as a means of achieving household food security. They can also improve health through their role in prevention and treatment of diseases. Poor households residing in and around forest areas. and particularly landless people, women and children, depend to a varying extent on the exploitation of common-property forest resources in daily life or in periods of crisis.
Forest foods can constitute an important element of sustainable diets. They can broaden the food base and diversify the diet, thus preventing nutrient deficiencies and ensuring dietary balance. They come from locally available natural resources which are part of or compatible with the local ecosystem. NWFPs also contribute to household food security and health. Wild leaves and fruits contain many essential nutrients. Seeds, nuts, roots and tubers found in forests supply fats and carbohydrates. Mushrooms, gums and saps provide protein and minerals. Wild animals from the forest often supply most of the meat consumed by people living in or near forest areas. Other forest resources have a major role in the economy of many households, not only contributing food, but also providing timber for building, fuelwood and inputs for agricultural production, as well as generating income, thereby contributing to household food security.
In some communities in Swaziland it was found that wild leaves supply as much carotene, vitamin C, calcium and iron as leaves from cultivated plants, and that 48 varieties of leaves were used by half of all adults. Children in lowland Kenya and Swaziland snack on forest foods which provide an important supplement to their diet, especially during cold months. In West Africa, from the Gambia to Cameroon, the seeds from locust bean (Parkia sp.), a perennial tree legume, provide a nutritious protein- and fat-rich food known as dawadawa or soumbara. Annual production figures are difficult to obtain, since locust bean does not enter regular commercial trade, but a 1980 estimate suggested that 200 000 tonnes of beans were gathered in northern Nigeria every year (Campbell-Platt, 1980). Home gardens combining trees and horticultural crops are an important form of agroforestry and provide a substantial amount of total dietary energy consumed by some farming communities. In
southeastern Nigeria, traditional compound farms can contain more than 60 species of trees that provide food products (Okafor and Fernandes, 1987). Forest foods are extremely important because they are frequently available to tide households over hungry seasons when other food crops are in short supply.
NWFPs have not received the required attention in development planning, and forest foods are overlooked in most nutrition programmes. Foresters have a major role to play in the promotion of NWFPs, and this role should not be limited to the design and promotion of sustainable exploitation techniques. It is increasingly recognized that the forest should be seen as a dynamic system and that the needs of indigenous people, and particularly their household food security and nutritional well-being, should be taken into account in discussing productivity and environment. The promotion of NWFPs should not be seen, however, as the sole responsibility of forest departments. All government and NGO development workers operating in or near forested areas, and particularly agricultural extension workers and health staff, should be made aware of the present and potential contributions of NWFPs and should be involved in a concerted effort to promote household food security and improved
nutrition of the local population on the basis of existing resources. The development of technological research and quality standards and the design of communication strategies for consumer information will be particularly important for the successful marketing of forest foods that have economic potential.
Preservation of foods
Seasonality is a major barrier to obtaining the benefits of fruits and vegetables, especially in tropical countries. Horticultural products mature during a short season, most of them simultaneously, in quantities much higher than local markets can absorb. Low prices during the harvest season cause farmers to refrain from selling their produce; as a result considerable amounts go to waste. Drying of nutrient-rich foods (e.g. mango and green leaves) can improve the nutritional status and income of families, since dried foods can bring a good market price.
In many African countries, from the Niger to Zambia, women use solar drying techniques for fruits, vegetables, mushrooms and tubers which contain important quantities of vitamin A and iron (Boxes 23 and 24). The sale of these products at local markets provides valuable income. Mango leather (concentrated mango pulp in sheets), often sold by women on the street, is being introduced for schoolchildren in the Niger. Practical information on preserving techniques and the construction and use of solar driers is contained in the FAO publications Rural processing and preserving techniques for fruits and vegetables (FAO, 1988e) and Fruit and vegetable processing (FAO, 1995c). Preservation is also discussed in Chapter 6.
Box 23 - Trying of vegetables in Mantapala, Zambia to overcome seasonal shortages
In Mantapala nearly all households preserve some local vegetables at the end of the rainy season between February and May. However, stocks vary, and for some people stocks of preserved vegetables begin to run out as early as May. The main method of preservation is sun drying, and the most common local vegetables that are preserved include bean leaves, pumpkin leaves, cowpea leaves, mulembwe, mankolobwe and mushroom. Preservation of local vegetables is increasing as other sources of relish, in particular local game meat [monkeys, duiker and holybeg (small goats) and water buck], are becoming less plentiful.
Source: FAO, 1992g.
Box 24 - Improved drying techniques preserve nutrients
Since ancient times the most common method of preserving fruits and vegetables, as well as meat and fish, has been sun drying. Reducing the moisture in food prevents the growth of microorganisms that cause foods to decay. At the same time enzymatic and biochemical activities are practically stopped or reduced to very low levels. Foods preserved by drying can be kept at ambient temperatures for long periods and provide nutrients when fresh produce is not available.
Open-air sun drying has disadvantages, such as infestation by insects, contamination from dirt, rodents and birds, and spoilage from occasional rains. The use of solar dryers, an alternative to sun drying, provides the benefits of higher air temperature and continuous air flow which substantially improve the drying rates. This results in a higher-quality product. Since closed cabinets are used for solar drying, the product is more protected.
The solar dryer is based on the principle of absorption of heat from solar radiation by a black surface. The temperature inside a solar dryer can be maintained at 60° to 70°C, which minimizes the damage to vitamins and other nutrients. Recent results obtained in the laboratory by using high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) to separate the carotenoids show that carotene retention after solar drying is around 40 to 80 percent depending on the product, which is much higher than retention following traditional methods of drying. For example, fresh cowpea leaves have 2 435 µg retinol equivalent (RE) per 100 g while solar-dried leaves have 2 071 µg RE per 100 g. Leaves dried in the traditional manner had only 847 µg RE per 100 g.
Solar dryers do not require sophisticated building materials. A family-type solar dryer can be built for as little as US$10, while the price of a community-sized dryer, which can be used by all members of a village, may reach US$250.
Source: FAO, 1993a.
Factors to consider in the diversification of food production
Two of the most important factors to consider in adopting any policy for food diversification are the acceptability of the output and the availability of markets for the surplus. Many small-grained cereals are nutritionally advantageous in terms of protein quality and have ecological advantages in terms of reliability of production under conditions of low inputs and poor distribution of rainfall. However, they are difficult to process in comparison with maize or rice, and although technology has been developed for mechanical processing using abrasion milling, this possibility is not often readily available at village level.
Other introduced foods, such as soybean, may initially meet with acceptability problems. In such cases a comprehensive programme of consumer education is needed to create a sustained local demand. The availability of markets for an increased flow of a wider variety of foods must also be ensured. For soybean, markets can be secured by promoting the use of locally grown soybean in feed products as well as for food uses, including oil extraction. Similarly, chipping and drying cassava for feed use can help stabilize market prices and stimulate production increases.
Governments, and more particularly local authorities, can facilitate marketing services by allocating infrastructure for local markets. Such markets can provide an assembly site where farmers can sell their produce to traders for onward transport to urban markets. Local markets are also important as food sources for rural agricultural and non-agricultural labourers, artisans and the rural poor. Market improvements can have a positive benefit on rural poverty alleviation and food security.
Labour requirements are another factor that should be carefully assessed when introducing new crops or production systems, such as home gardens, into a community. The labour consideration is especially important in regard to women's time and the investment of available resources into other activities with a comparatively greater advantage. For example, if the major objective of an intervention in a food diversification strategy is to improve the nutritional status of women and preschool children, in some circumstances this could be achieved most effectively by reducing the work burden of women through the provision of a new well and a grinding mill before trying to establish home gardens or to grow more millet. Thus it is helpful to understand fully the existing production processes and the gender division of labour and to appreciate the perceptions, priorities and constraints of the producers and the consumers through community participation in the planning stages of the
proposed strategy.
Often, the major interest of the producer is in securing a regular market and making maximum profit The marketing of fruits, vegetables and other horticultural outputs presents special problems because of the fragile and perishable nature of the produce. One way of avoiding surpluses for some crops is to stagger planting dates, where it is possible to do so. Extension services have a crucial role to play in providing appropriate crop, storage, marketing and consumer information tailored to the needs of groups of farmers and consumers. Good extension and marketing officers will listen to farmers in order to understand the constraints of the production area in terms of inputs, suppliers, transporters and buyers (Figure 21). They will also gain knowledge of what the customer wants by talking to intermediaries, wholesalers, market traders and urban consumers (see Figure 22).
Promoting diversification of diets
It is often said that food habits are difficult and slow to change; this may well be so if change is a voluntary act. Food has important psychological associations with family, community and security; familiar food is satisfying and reassuring, particularly the traditional foods of childhood which often evoke a deep-seated emotional response. Yet for many African countries, the past three generations have experienced extensive changes in family food supplies and in the household diet. In some urban areas, introduced foods now predominate: the accepted staple is maize flour, rice is the preferred cereal, and wheat-flour bread is a much sought-after luxury. Even in rural areas, the range of traditional domestic foodstuffs has been considerably reduced.
FIGURE 21 - Understanding the production area
FIND OUT GOOD AND BAD POINTS BY TALKING TO:
FARMERS
about
Crops
Prices
Yields
Seasons
Market
Information
Problems
SUPPLIERS
about
Packaging and equipment
Seeds
Problems
Availability
Costs
Quality
Variety
Knowledge and advice
TRANSPORTERS
about
Roads
Vehicles
Destinations
Volumes
Frequency
Return
Trips
BUYERS
about
Crops
Prices
Quality
Problems
Communication
Market
Days
Source: FAO, 1989b.
FIGURE 22 - What produce does the customer want?
GAIN PRODUCT KNOWLEDGE FROM TALKING TO:
WHOLESALERS
SHOPKEEPERS
CONSUMERS
AGRIBUSINESS
about
Prices
Grading standards
Packaging
Appearance
Shelf-life
Competition
Quality
Seasonality
Volumes
Source: FAO, 1989b.
People eat what they like, what is available and what they can afford. When traditional foods become scarce and expensive, and when time and labour are no longer available for their production, processing and domestic preparation, their contribution to the family diet is reduced. Do people still like and want traditional foods? There is evidence that they do, despite urbanization - or perhaps because of it. As described in the discussion of urban consumption patterns in Chapter 4, the products typically sold in some African city streets are largely traditional dishes and local food items. Accordingly, a campaign to diversify consumption patterns may well build on these preferences in the search for outlets and markets for a greater variety of crops.
The message to diversify the diet should be supported by a government campaign to diversify the meals provided in schools and colleges, in hospitals and at work sites through foreign subsidy and/or encouragement of the sale of traditional dishes, including an increased variety of snack foods. The provision of clean facilities for food vendors at such sites would help to reassure the more influential and affluent consumers that the prepared foods are safe and would encourage such consumers to set an example by purchasing them.
Nutrition information and education are needed so that people can make informed choices about the foods they grow, purchase and eat. Indeed, the success of food-based strategies to eliminate nutritional deficiencies will rest on the willingness of individuals to change their dietary habits. However, information and education must go beyond issues concerning individuals; they should also include social, economic and political factors that influence food patterns and choice by population groups.
Attitudes towards breastfeeding illustrate the effects of society on nutrition. Breastfeeding not only provides all of the nutritional needs of the infant in the first four to six months of life, but also protects the baby from illness, both during breastfeeding and after the baby is weaned. Poor weaning diets with too much bulk, too little variety, too much water, too little protein and too few micronutrients will jeopardize the child's development and nutritional status. Efforts to ensure mothers' good health and nutritional status are a must for preventing micronutrient deficiencies in women as well as in newborns. Where social influences are reducing the length of breastfeeding, teachers, health workers and extension workers should be encouraged to support breastfeeding and appropriate weaning practices.
Since women are usually the most responsible for food within a household, nutrition education is primarily addressed to them. However, male household members also influence which foods are consumed, as often they control the bulk of family income. Nutrition education and training should be given to men and women and introduced into the curricula of teachers' training colleges, primary and secondary schools, agricultural schools and universities. The use of mass media such as radio and television is also gaining increasing importance for informing and educating the public on nutrition and healthy lifestyles. Nutrition education is covered more extensively in Chapter 9.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 6 - Food storage and processing for household food security
The post-harvest system
Post-harvest practices at household level
Post-harvest handling and storage
Food processing
Reducing the labour of traditional food processing
Food quality and food safety
Ensuring an effective post-harvest system
Chapter 6 - Food storage and processing for household food security
The post-harvest system
This chapter focuses on storage, processing and distribution or marketing of food in sub-Saharan Africa. It stresses the importance of these functions and shows some of the ways in which they could more efficiently supply consumers with adequate and diversified food, thereby ensuring physical access and enhancing household food security. An efficient post-harvest and marketing chain promotes production and distribution in accordance with consumer needs and ensures that the costs of transfer from producer to consumer are kept to a minimum.
In many ecological zones crop production is seasonal, yet household food security depends on a regular and sustainable supply of food throughout the year. Thus an adequate crop and food system is needed, together with efficient processing and distribution of foods, to ensure equitable and adequate supplies at the national, district and household levels.
The following are the stages in the complete post-harvest system for cereals (UNIFEM, 1988):
· harvesting;
· pre-drying in the field;
· threshing;
· winnowing;
· drying;
· storage of grain;
· primary processing: cleaning, grinding, hulling, pounding, milling, grinding, tempering, soaking, parboiling, drying, sieving;
· secondary processing: baking, frying, cooking, extruding, blending, fermenting, roasting;
· packaging, marketing;
· utilization by customers.
Intervention points to improve food distribution and food and crop storage are identified in Box 25.
In general, potentially effective improved post-harvest technologies for grains have been identified. In future, the focus of post-production activities for grains should be on adapting the new technologies to specific environments and ensuring that they are economically and socially viable. For other crops, however, there is much potential for further technology development at the level of small- and medium-scale enterprises. For example, there is scope for derivation of new products with market prospects from traditional crops such as sweet potato.
Post-harvest practices at household level
Households make choices on how much to store and how much to sell depending on the market price, their own consumption needs, storage facilities and their needs for immediate cash. If the local distribution and marketing system is efficient, they can rely on food being available for purchase all the year round, but if they are isolated for at least part of the year through bad roads and lack of transport, their food security will be more at risk and home storage is likely to receive higher priority. A good marketing infrastructure, maintenance of rural roads and marketing services have profound effects on food availability, market prices and physical access to food at the community level.
The level of production is also affected by post-harvest prospects, market facilities and market information. Some perishable food crops such as roots and tubers may not be stored at all, but are simply left in the ground until they are needed. Other crops, if they are to be marketed, may be lifted at once and transported to market in fresh condition. Although in many countries central planning of production is now a thing of the past, there is still a need to orient producers on the needs of consumers. Inadequacies in information about demand, concerning quantity, location and product requirements, frequently lead to misallocation of resources and loss of markets. Under central planning or State purchasing arrangements the cost of such misallocation was absorbed by the government, but under a liberalized market system it is the farmer who suffers. The greater availability of market information should permit farmers to make more informed decisions about what and when to
plant.
Box 25 - Improving food distribution and storage for household food security
Improving food distribution
Food should be equitably distributed but often is not, even where sufficient food is available. More equitable distribution can be achieved by:
· improving communications to ensure that excess stocks in one area reach another area that is short of the commodity;
· better trading facilities, i.e. more food markets and shops, better stocks of nutritionally valuable manufactured and preserved foods in village shops at reasonable prices, improved marketplaces and more cooperative-type food shops;
· promoting equitable distribution within the family to ensure a fair share of food, especially nutritious foods, for children and increased supplies of food for pregnant and lactating women;
· instituting midday meals in day schools, encouraging children to take food to school and improving meals in boarding schools;
· making available special foods for young children and developing special recipes for toddlers;
· paying wages weekly instead of monthly and encouraging better family budgeting;
· ensuring availability of midday meals, subsidized canteens or rations for labourers.
Improving food and crop storage
In some developing countries an estimated 25 percent of all food produced is never consumed by humans. Instead it spoils or is eaten by insects, rats and other pests. Measures to correct this situation can be taken in fields, households, shops and warehouses. These may include:
· control of rats by trapping, poison, rat-proofing grain stores, etc.;
· control of insects by use of insecticides, better food stores and airtight food containers;
· control of fungi and food rot by storage of food in as dry a state as possible and by use of better containers;
· control of birds by destruction, especially in millet and wheat areas;
· protective measures against monkeys, baboons, porcupines, wild pigs and other destructive animals, even elephants;
· educating people about safe and hygienic food storage at home.
Source: FAO, 1997a.
The dependence of much food production on climatic fluctuations means that variability in food output can never be completely avoided. Adequate on-farm storage is therefore crucial, not only to enable storage of surplus food items, but primarily to provide farmers with a food supply beyond the harvest period to ensure year-round availability of needed food for family consumption.
Post-harvest handling and storage
Storage of roots, tubers, bananas and plantains
Roots, tubers, bananas and plantains account for some 40 percent of total food supplies (in terms of food energy) for about one-half of the population of sub-Saharan Africa, where overall food supplies are at very low levels. Production could be increased to meet future needs, although consumption has been tending to decline. The decline has been associated with increased urbanization, which does not favour highly perishable and labour-intensive products. Further research into converting starchy roots into less perishable and more convenient food products for the urban population could help reverse these trends (see also discussion of urbanization in Chapter 4).
Most farming families adjust their production of perishable products such as roots and tubers to minimize post-harvest risks. Women farmers in the North-West Province of Cameroon produced potatoes as a cash crop but limited their production to the estimated quantity that could be marketed before the roads were closed by the onset of the rainy season. The producers believed that they could not store potatoes through the rainy season when transport was impossible. If a bumper harvest resulted in low prices or if they were unable to get all of the crop to market, they left the surplus in the field to rot This transport constraint to increased production was overcome, to some extent, by improved storage (see Box 26).
Fresh cassava tubers, once harvested, deteriorate rapidly and therefore are best left unharvested until needed. Sweet potatoes and yams, however, exhibit a period of dormancy, and their storage life can thus be extended by curing (see Box 27). Alternatively, yams, cocoyams and cassava may be stored in underground pits after harvesting. In a study in southeastern Ghana (Box 28 and Table 32), 91 percent of farmers surveyed practiced underground storage of unharvested cassava, but only 5 percent of the respondent households used this technique for yams.
Box 26 - Reduction of post-harvest losses in cereals and tubers at the village level in Cameroon (September 1979 to January 1982)
In the highest areas of northwestern Cameroon, potatoes were grown by women farmers as a cash crop. The major crop was harvested in July, but thereafter followed a two-month period of heavy rains during which time the traders did not come to the villages to buy potatoes because the tracks and roads were largely impassable. The village women, with no experience of successful potato storage, had no means of bridging the gap until late September or October and thus harvested and marketed potatoes in July at the low prices typical of a glut period. The remainder would be left in the field to rot.
A two-year project under the Special Action Programme for the Prevention of Food Losses therefore allocated resources to pioneer potato storage, and an experimental store of 7 tonne capacity was constructed using local materials. The store employed a temperature regulation system based on natural nocturnal ventilation. Initial results were encouraging; potatoes were successfully stored and marketed after the rains when prices were higher.
Adequate preliminary analysis ensured that this project took a step away from the narrow approach to storage. Storage was seen as part of the post-harvest continuum, a link in the production-storage-marketing-consumption chain. It was seen as a means of overcoming what was essentially a transport constraint. The project also demonstrated that the yields of the local variety of potatoes could be trebled by planting improved seeds which were readily available from the local research station at Bamui. There was little doubt that production incentives were being constrained by post-harvest factors which successful arrangements for storage and marketing would overcome.
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1987.
Box 27 - Storage of fresh cassava and sweet potatoes
Cassava
Fresh cassava tubers deteriorate rapidly; therefore domestically grown cassava is sometimes left in the ground until the tubers are required for immediate consumption. This is an inexpensive and simple domestic storage strategy, but it imposes a constraint on the effective use of land for subsequent crops and reduces the processing quality of the tubers. Cassava should preferably be processed within 24 to 48 hours of harvesting.
If early processing is not possible, fresh, undamaged cassava roots may be stored for a short time by burying them in moist dust or sand. In Kerala, where 85 percent of India's cassava is produced, tests have shown that cassava roots, interlayered in 10-kg lots with cassava leaves, maintain their quality for four weeks. The interlayered cassava leaves not only provide an optimum temperature of 35° to 40°C and a humidity of 85 to 90 percent, but during drying they also slowly liberate small amounts of hydrogen cyanide, which may help to reduce microbial activity in the tubers.
Sweet potatoes
In most parts of the tropics, sweet potatoes are harvested as required. Like other tuber crops, sweet potatoes exhibit a period of dormancy, which enables them to be stored for short periods. The storage life of many varieties can be greatly increased by curing.
Favoured conditions for curing are relative humidity of 80 to 90 percent, at 30° to 32°C, over a period of four to seven days. Curing promotes wound healing and suberization.
Damaged sweet potatoes may become infected with mould, and from time to time outbreaks of poisoning have been reported in livestock fed on the larger coarse-textured varieties. The toxins, called isomeamaranol and ipomeamarone, are believed to be metabolites produced by the growth of a mould on the tubers after superficial damage to the surface layers.
Source: FAO, 1989d.
Box 28 - Preservation and storage of basic staples in southeastern Ghana
There is a tendency to view the preservation and storage of harvested foodstuffs as the duty of women. In fact, they constitute complementary tasks for both sexes in the household. While women are basically responsible for processing most foods for storage, especially vegetables, men are responsible for the tasks of constructing the special storage structures for most of the staple crops. Ayirebi farmers prepare their foodstuffs for storage in a variety of ways, foremost of which is drying. In drying, the objective is to remove as much water from the food item as possible, thereby making it keep longer. The drying process may be conducted directly as in sun drying, where the sun's energy and the wind are utilized to evaporate water from the foodstuff, or indirectly, as in drying over a wood fire.
With the exception of maize, yams and rice, there are no specially designed local structures for storage of the food crops grown in the community. Such staples as cassava, cocoyams and some varieties of yams are kept either by delaying harvest until the crop is required or by storing underground in pits. The preservation and storage techniques in use for some selected basic staples among the 412 research sample households in 1983 are shown in Table 32.
Source: Dei, 1990.
Post-harvest handling and storage of cereal and legume grains
The post-harvest handling of cereal and legume grains presents different problems. For these crops, the drying stage is all-important, to reduce attack and damage from insects and fungi. In a study on maize losses in Swaziland, by far the greatest loss - around 15 percent - was caused by grain rotting during the field drying stage (see Box 29). One of the recommendations to overcome this problem was to reschedule the school holiday period to enable children to assist the women in timely grain harvesting. This study demonstrates the need to appreciate fully the constraints and strategies of existing farming systems, together with the significance of involving the target communities in the selection and introduction of proposed interventions before changes are introduced.
Table 32 - Preservation and storage techniques for staples used by 412 Ayirebi households in the 1983 farming season
Technique
Number of households adopting technique
Percentage of households adopting technique
Maize
Barn storage
Kitchen ceiling storage
Room storage
None
Yams
Underground storage (unharvested)
Pit storage (harvested)
Buttress storage
None
Cassava
Sun drying/blanching for household receptacles
Underground storage (unharvested)
Underground pit storage (harvested)
Underwater storage (in household)
Cocoyams
Underground storage (unharvested)
Underground pit storage (harvested)
None
Source: Dei, 1990.
On-farm storage is becoming increasingly important now that the role of marketing boards has been reduced and farmers are having to store much of their surplus on the farm for many months.
Traditional grain cribs for maize and other grains, including legumes, are shown in Figure 23. In humid areas, traditional grain cribs are ventilated structures used for both drying and storing grain. For effective drying, the walls should comprise up to 40 to 50 percent open spaces, depending on the relative humidity in the drying area. The maximum width of the crib depends on the mean daily relative humidity; under exceptionally humid conditions the width of the structure should be reduced (see Table 33). The maximum moisture content for safe storage of selected cereals and legumes ranges from 7 percent for shelled groundnuts to 15 percent for beans, with an average of about 13 percent for cereals, as shown in Table 34. It is often not possible to achieve these levels in humid areas. In ventilated cribs losses caused by mould, rats and insects range from 3 to 10 percent.
Box 29 - Strengthening the food conservation and crop storage sector in Swaziland (September 1980 to September 1982)
In Swaziland, maize is grown by 94 percent of the farmers and occupies 70 percent of the total cropped area. Swazi farmers produce primarily for home consumption and will sell, when they have a surplus, to deficit families in their own area. Only in good years, perhaps in three years out of ten, is there any substantial surplus for sale in the organized market. Swaziland already had a Food Conservation and Crop Storage Section (FCCS) in the Department of Agriculture, illustrating existing government awareness and commitment to overcoming constraints in the post-harvest sector but indicating that they had assumed losses to be most serious in storage. As well as developing improved grain storage at both farm and cooperative levels, FCCS, with external assistance, developed an improved maize drying crib and was concentrating on introducing this to farmers. FAO and its Special Action Programme for the Prevention of Food Losses supported both these programmes of work and
undertook detailed loss assessment of the proposed interventions.
The maize loss assessment survey found average losses of 23 percent in drying and storage, of which by far the greatest loss was attributable to rotting of grain in the field drying period (~15 percent) prior to placing maize cobs in cribs for further drying and storage. Considerable loss reduction would be achieved by earlier harvesting and drying, but a shortage of family labour precluded this. The survey threw serious doubt on the usefulness of cribs when early harvesting does not take place.
The project's socio-economic survey covering 866 households found among other things that women were heavily involved in all aspects of maize handling and that harvests were frequently delayed to allow the participation of children during their school holidays. The following recommendations were based on this finding: "Early harvesting is important if major post-production food losses are to be avoided. As harvesting is done mainly by the women and children, the FCCS Section should reorient its extension efforts more directly to this target group. Early harvesting could also be promoted by giving school holidays in April. Beginning the first term in early January would still provide the required 62 to 65 days of schooling. The term should end in early April thereby releasing the children to assist their mothers with harvesting and storage. Early harvesting would also enable the cultivation of a second crop since the winter rains are generally sufficient for quick growing
leguminous crops". Thus the better loss assessment surveys, which broadened their scope to look at the whole post-harvest system, provided the justification for a more radical imaginative approach to the reduction of post-harvest losses.
Source: FAO, 1987.
In the Ebli-Va, the traditional maize storage structure of Togo shown in Figure 23, maize cobs are placed on top of each other on a platform to form a circular wall. To allow for good fitting, the cobs have to be of uniform size. Sometimes the cobs are also slightly wetted to improve adhesion. After the wall has been made, bulk maize is poured inside the wall and the whole structure is closed with a thatched roof. If the platform is sufficiently high, a fire can be lit under the structure for insect control by natural fumigation. The smoke enters through holes in the platform and escapes through the roof. Thus the wall must have few openings, so the structure will function as a chimney.
In arid zones grain may be dried in the field, on the stalk, spread on mats or bags along the roadside or on threshing floors made for this purpose. The dry grain is usually stored in solid-walled silos or bins built with local materials or cement. If the grain is to be used for daily consumption and is initially dry and insect free, the use of insecticides is often not cost effective or necessary, as storage time will probably not exceed six months. Cow dung, which is used in the plaster of traditional silos, has insect-repellent properties. In some areas leaves of neem (Azadirachta indica) or small quantities of palm oil or groundnut oil are added to the stored grain as an additional protection. Well-maintained silos offer a high degree of security against rodents, birds and insects.
FIGURE 23 - Traditional grain cribs
Source: FAO, 1985a.
Table 33 - Guidelines for crib selection based on mean relative humidity
Mean daily relative humidity
Recommended crib width
(m)
Source: FAO, 1993c.
Table 34 - Maximum moisture content for safe storage of selected cereals and legumes
Commodity
Moisture content
(% wet basis)
Cereals
Maize (shelled)
Maize, white
Maize meal
Paddy
Milled rice
Millet
Sorghum
Wheat
Bulgur wheat
Wheat flour
Legumes
Beans (haricot and horse)
Lentils
Cowpeas
Pigeon peas
Field peas
Green grams
Soybeans
Groundnuts (unshelled)
Groundnuts (shelled)
Source: FAO, 1993c.
Storage problems may sometimes arise with the introduction of new, high-yielding varieties. Traditional crop varieties are often more resistant to storage pests than improved varieties. In eastern and southern Africa maize was introduced as a cereal crop and gained rapid acceptance. Under suitable climatic conditions and through the use of intensive cultivation techniques, it has been possible to realize much higher yields for maize than for indigenous grains such as millets and sorghum. Maize is resistant to bird damage in the field, although some improved varieties present problems in storage. Some high-yielding varieties have a larger cob which is less tightly bound by its sheath than the cob of the original introductions. In traditional maize storage structures the grain is stored on the cob in maize cribs. High-yielding hybrid maize is much more susceptible to insect attack, which leads to higher storage losses in these traditional structures. In a cost-benefit analysis
in Zambia, the potential of building improved solid-walled bins to store the new grain varieties proved unconvincing (see Box 30). Thus the nutritional benefit to poor consumers of the introduction of high-yielding varieties is not a straightforward issue of increased yields.
Among cereals, the harder the grain the more resistant it is likely to be to pest attack. Traditional practices of storing unthreshed grains offer increased protection. For example, paddy rice is more resistant to pests than milled rice, and under village conditions, where fumigation or airtight storage is impractical, cowpeas are better stored unthreshed, as the intact, dry pods provide some protection against bruchids. Good husk cover can reduce field infestation in maize but only marginally reduces the rate of pest increase.
Improved storage methods
Where possible, post-harvest improvements in developing countries should be relatively simple and inexpensive. For small grain stores, simple improvements to make existing structures secure against rats and vermin and to facilitate the application of insecticides may be more appropriate than the construction of new, more sophisticated stores.
Box 30 - Introduction of solid-walled farm storage bins in Zambia November 1978 to October 1981) and village grain storage extension (October 1981 to October 1982)
In Zambia, the rain-fed maize crop was harvested once a year and therefore had to be stored for nine to 12 months for family use. About 65 to 70 percent (1 million tonnes) of the production was retained on the farm and the rest was handled by the National Agricultural Marketing Board. At farm level, the maize was stored on the cob in cribs. Each family stored about 1 to 2 tonnes for home consumption. No large-scale survey of storage losses of maize had been conducted, but a limited survey carried out earlier on selected farms showed a weight loss of 13 percent. The problem of storage loss was conceived to have increased with the introduction of hybrid maize varieties which are highly susceptible to insect attack in storage. FAO and the Special Action Programme for the Prevention of Food Losses trained extension workers and organized a series of demonstrations on how to build and use improved solid-walled bins (ferrumbu) which had been locally developed and tested for their
technical performance but mainly under research station conditions.
In 1983 and 1984, as a follow-up, a technical loss assessment exercise and a socioeconomic survey were undertaken to evaluate the efficiency and appropriateness of the bins that had been already installed as demonstrations on farmers" premises. Reductions in storage losses in the new structures were not convincingly demonstrated. The cost-benefit analysis suggested that purely financial benefits would only be substantial in the short term to farmers who could avoid buying the equivalent of two bags of maize as a result of improved storage practices. This was equivalent to a 10 percent reduction of storage losses.
An appropriate innovation may be defined as one that resolves what is perceived as a key constraint in a traditional system at an affordable cost and yields substantial benefits without involving unacceptable changes in practices. The appropriateness of the new solid-walled bins in terms of the above definition was not comprehensively demonstrated.
Source: FAO, 1987.
The improved cribs shown in Figure 24 are well ventilated, allowing harvest at high moisture content. (Early harvest also reduces field losses.) Metal baffles fitted on the crib legs can protect against rodents by hindering their access. Ventilation more or less eliminates the mould problem, but there may be superficial germination in very wet conditions. Husks must be removed because of the high moisture content, and their removal exposes grain to insect attack; insecticide treatment - dusting or spraying is therefore necessary in most localities. Insecticides admixed initially tend to break down rapidly, but they can be reapplied, at least to the outside of the crib. Penetration is thus improved. The capital cost of such improved cribs is low to moderate, depending on the materials chosen. The durability of the cribs also depends on the materials. The recurrent cost is the pesticide.
FIGURE 24 - Improved grain cribs
Source: FAO, 1985a.
Promotion of storage of cereals in solid-walled bins should also be accompanied by the introduction of improved shelling and threshing techniques, since in the bins cereals are stored in bulk. Hand shellers are too slow for the processing of large quantities of grain. An FAO project in the United Republic of Tanzania tested two manually driven maize shellers. By pressing the maize cobs against a rotating disc with spikes on both sides, it was possible to shell two cobs simultaneously. A bevel-shaped stripping wheel provided a rotary motion to the cob, ensuring an almost complete removal of grains. However, the manually driven shellers were not effective enough for village-level operations. Instead, small-scale farmers preferred to use hired labour to shell by hand, which proved to be more cost effective.
These studies illustrate the importance of examining the impact of changes on the whole food system from the point of view of the producer and the consumer. Labour costs at each stage must also be considered.
Despite stringent quarantine regulations, the introduction of new crops can also introduce new storage pests which render traditional storage structures inadequate. An example is the large grain borer in Tanzania (see Box 31). Traditional post-harvest grain handling and storage practices may need to be modified to reduce damage by such pests. Good storage practices are summarized in Box 32.
Box 31 - Larger grain borer control training project in the United Republic of Tanzania (May 1984 to April 1987)
The larger grain borer, Prostephanus truncatus (Horn), is a storage pest from the southern United States and Central America which was accidentally introduced into Tanzania during the late 1970s. By the mid-1980s, the larger grain borer had spread into 17 of the country's 20 regions. It can cause weight losses in farm-stored maize and dried cassava which are several times higher than losses caused by indigenous pests. After five months' storage, mean weight losses of 9 percent were found in maize, a much higher level than the losses of less than 1 percent which would be expected in areas of East and Central Africa that are free of larger grain borer.
A multi-donor-funded control and containment campaign coordinated by FAO, with aid-in-kind provided by the United States, the United Kingdom and the European Economic Community (EEC), recommended shelling the maize from the cob as soon as possible after the harvest, treating it with specified insecticides and storing it in a container which minimizes the risk of subsequent insect and rodent attack. These recommended practices are new to many small-scale Tanzanian maize growers who normally dry and store their maize on the cob in structures that have been adapted over many years to local conditions and customs and are constructed from locally available materials. The adoption of the recommendations involves small-scale farmers not only in major socio-economic changes but also in new untried (for them) practices of immediate shelling and the use of modified storage structures. The farmers' response to the extension message has varied widely, but the impact has been
significantly greater in those communities in which there has been an extension push.
An attempt to measure the effect of the recommendations on maize storage losses showed that when food removals for home consumption or for sale throughout the year were taken into account, the real food loss during a season was less than 2 percent. Compared with the mean of 8.9 percent weight loss when spot estimates were obtained in 1984, these losses were very low.
The programme has increased awareness at all levels of the seriousness of the larger grain borer problem, and during its course government support and participation increased more and more. In most areas there is full support from the administrative and political leaders, and the legislation introduced to facilitate containment and control has contributed much to the present results. A distribution system for pesticides has been set up and sales are monitored. Government inspectors, extension staff and village officials have been trained in the correct control methods.
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1987.
Box 32 - Good grain storage practice
The following points represent a suggested code of good storage practice, and thus offer a set of guidelines in the adoption of an appropriate storage system.
· Dry grain well before putting it in storage. The grain must be kept dry.
· Put only clean grain into containers which themselves have had all old grain, dust, straw and insects removed and burned, for they could recontaminate the new crop.
· Keep the grain cool and protect it from large changes in outside temperatures. This can be done in a number of ways - by using building materials (e.g. brick, mud, clay, wood) which do not easily pass on changes in outside temperatures to the stored grain, by keeping or building storage containers away from direct sunlight or by applying a coat of white plaster to the outside of the containers.
· Protect the grain from insects by following the rules for cleanliness and drying and putting the grain into an insect-proof store.
· Waterproof the buildings and containers as much as possible when the building is constructed. Storage buildings should be built on well-drained locations and not where they will be flooded by groundwater runoff during heavy rains. This can be achieved by raising the floor of the building off the ground.
· Make sure containers are rodent-proof in all possible ways.
· Check the grain regularly while it is in storage to make sure it is not infested. The farmer should put his hand into the grain to check for heating and should also smell the grain and look for dark kernels, signs of mould, which indicate that the moisture content is rising. If these signs are found, the grain should be tipped out and dried again.
· Provided they are used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and conform with local government regulations, insecticides mixed into the grain prior to storage may be used to control infestation.
Source: UNIFEM, 1988.
Community storage for improved household food security (see Box 33) can be very effective, especially in remote areas where people do not have ready access to markets, in areas where markets are not functioning properly or in areas that are periodically threatened by drought-induced food shortages. Cereal banks, if managed effectively, can provide a safety net, especially for poor farmers. Farmers can then sell surplus food immediately after the harvest to buy household necessities, to pay children's school fees or to repay input loans for seeds and fertilizer. They can also purchase needed food at the lowest possible price before the harvest period when food is scarce and market prices are high.
Box 33 - Community storage for food security in Burkina Faso
Food security is sometimes jeopardized by badly organized marketing and distribution. The parastatal cereal authorities frequently only serve the interest of urban consumers and may find it almost impossible to distribute grain in times of deficit to remote villages where there are no proper roads or storage facilities. In Burkina Faso, some non-governmental organizations took the initiative of creating food supply mechanisms at village level. Known as "cereal banks", they are essentially storage organizations managed by the small farmers themselves, who are responsible for purchasing the cereal immediately after the harvest, storing it and selling it back to the villagers at the lowest possible price in the period of shortage. Although these cereal banks were set up in marginal and deficit areas, in normal production years, the villagers - or at least some of them - had a certain surplus and others sold part of their meagre harvest because they needed cash. The cereal banks
ensured that cereals offered for sale did not actually leave the village, and savings were made on the cost of transport since cereals were purchased in the place where they were stored and distributed. Naturally, there had to be some organization, some storage infrastructure (small warehouses) and financial resources for the stocks, and villagers had to be trained to take over these new responsibilities. FAO's Special Action Programme for the Prevention of Food Losses was closely involved in these aspects and simultaneously encouraged the prevention of losses from the cereal banks through improved storage and handling techniques. Cooperative activities may provide one of several alternative channels through which post-harvest information can be extended to clients. Very likely, individuals will have an incentive to improve post-harvest methods in their own home.
Source: FAO, 1987.
Mycotoxins and the food supply
Mycotoxins are chemical substances that contaminate various agricultural commodities, either before or after harvest. Of these, aflatoxins are produced by the moulds Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus, which infect drought-stressed maize and groundnuts in the field. They also infect these crops and many others, including copra, cottonseed, pepper, other cereals, nuts, oilseeds, legumes and certain dried fruits, when the crops are handled improperly and stored under inadequate conditions. The toxic aflatoxin M1 can occur in milk from dairy cows fed contaminated feed.
Aflatoxins have been observed to cause liver cancer in laboratory animals. Together with the hepatitis B virus, they are seen as cofactors in the high incidence of primary liver cancer in tropical Africa. Chronic low-level exposure to mycotoxins may result in serious debilitating effects, especially for malnourished individuals. Animal studies indicate that youth and poor nutrition increase susceptibility to aflatoxins, as do certain specific vitamin and trace metal deficiencies. Protein supplementation of the diets of aflatoxin-exposed animals reduces toxicity. A speculated causal relationship between aflatoxin intake and the development of symptoms of kwashiorkor in malnourished children remains unproved despite considerable supportive information (Hendrickse, 1988).
International trade in agricultural commodities such as wheat, rice, barley, maize, sorghum, soybeans, groundnuts and oilseeds amounts to hundreds of millions of tonnes each year. Many of these commodities carry a high risk of mycotoxin contamination. Regulations on mycotoxin levels have been set by the Codex Alimentarius Commission and are enforced by most importing countries. Economic losses arising from the export of mycotoxin-contaminated food and feed are often very considerable. In domestic markets economic losses occur at various levels, from the commodity producers to the brokers, the processors and the animal producers.
Losses can be reduced by following good agricultural practices during pre- and post-harvest handling. Avoiding water stress, minimizing insect infestation and reducing inoculum potential are effective countermeasures, but it is often not practical for farmers with limited resources to implement them. The adoption of appropriate drying techniques, the maintenance of proper storage facilities and care not to expose the grains or oilseeds to moisture during transport and marketing can also help to reduce risks of contamination (see Box 34). Contamination and subsequent losses are often greatest at the national level, when the capacity for bulk transportation and storage of basic grains proves inadequate to meet the needs of a centralized distribution system.
Box 34 - Prevention of attack by fungi and development of mycotoxins during storage of grain
Prevention of attack by fungi, insects and other pests is of prime importance in post-harvest storage. The basic principles of grain storage are relatively simple. First, the product to be stored should be conditioned to a stable state in which respiration of the seeds and of associated microorganisms are reduced to a minimum. This is achieved by keeping the moisture content of the grain and the ambient humidity very low.
Second, the product should be placed in a container or structure that will maintain a suitable environment and prevent or restrict the entrance of insect and animal pests.
Last, the grain should be accessible throughout the storage period for additional treatment if necessary to maintain good condition, particularly with respect to heating and moisture absorption.
Since in many cases agricultural crops are seasonal, they must be stored from one season to the next. In rural areas, individual farmers have their own storage structures in which the grains are stored. The storage structures vary in construction type, size and materials used. Above-ground structures range from cubicles and small rooms to large warehouses. Masonry bins, wooden cubicles, straw and bamboo structures, and clay containers of baked and unbaked materials are used in the developing countries. For commercial purposes, storage structures may be silo-like elevators, large-scale bulk storage warehouses or bag-storage go-downs.
In order to prevent losses in quality or quantity, the product (crop) must be protected from insects, rodents, mould and biochemical deterioration. Protection from mould has become very important as a result of increased awareness of the hazards of mycotoxins to human and animal health. Temperature and moisture control are important considerations for prevention of moulding. Insect control is also important since insects may cause high-moisture pockets in the stored product, create sites for mould infection by penetrating the product and carry mould spores to infection sites. Processed products such as flour, meal and groundnut cake must be protected during storage since viable mould spores are present and if conditions are favourable for mould growth, mycotoxin may be produced.
Source: FAO/UNEP, 1979.
Food processing
Foods are processed to improve their digestibility and to enhance their appeal to the consumer. Processing also serves to extend the availability of foods beyond the area and season of production, thus stabilizing supplies and increasing food security at national and household levels. A particularly important aspect of food processing is that it permits great diet diversity, giving consumers access to a wider choice of products and hence to a better range of vitamins and minerals than they would otherwise consume. The most basic level of processing is food preservation, which in a variety of forms has been practiced by families in traditional societies for generations to provide food when sources of fresh food are scarce. In many societies, however, and in Africa particularly in urban areas, many people now have access to more convenient commercially processed foods, and many of the traditional ways of contributing to household food security are dying out. This is not
necessarily a desirable trend.
Village-based processing includes basic transformation activities such as milling as well as processing of products for which there is a potential market. Such processing, which can be done on an individual or group basis, provides employment for millions of rural people and is often one of the sources of income for rural women. The preparation of gari, a dried fermented cassava product, in West Africa and the smoking of fish in Ghana are examples of such processes, which transform highly perishable commodities into products that can be transported long distances and stored. Village groups, often with the support of donors and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), are now processing fruits and vegetables themselves. Where such ventures have been designed to preserve crops that would otherwise be discarded so that they can be consumed after the fresh season is over, few problems occur. Where village-based processing is designed to provide cash incomes, however. such schemes
have often run into marketing problems because of a lack of management and marketing expertise and the failure to research the potential markets adequately.
On a larger scale, agro-industries convert commodities into processed foods which are usually more stable and more marketable than the raw, untreated commodity. They can thus make available certain types of food, e.g. animal protein, often at low prices, to consumers who would not otherwise have access to them. They can also ensure year-round availability of seasonal, perishable products and provide food in a more convenient form than the raw material. Where urban populations require processed foods in large quantities, mechanized processes with high output capacities are generally efficient and economic. Widely dispersed populations, on the other hand, may be better served by smaller-scale technologies. Food processing industries may be concentrated in urban centres or spread among rural communities where they offer the twin advantages of processing perishable crops and animal products close to their source and providing income for rural people.
Handling stages in processing
Primary processing refers to the immediate post-harvest handling activities. For cereal and legume grains, such activities include drying, threshing or shelling. Such operations reduce the fibre content and may extend the storage life of the foodstuff.
Secondary processing, or transformation, usually involves some alteration in the form of the foodstuff to facilitate its subsequent use. Cereal and legume grains may be cleaned, graded, tempered or parboiled, dehulled and polished or split into halves. Tubers may be peeled and sliced and then sun dried. Many grains are ground, pounded or milled and sieved to give various grades of meal or flour
Tertiary processing involves the conversion of uncooked materials into products and food combinations for human consumption. The processing may take place at a commercial level, as in the extrusion cooking of cereal-legume mixes or the production of commercial weaning foods, or at the domestic level in the preparation of family meals. Figure 25 shows methods of processing for some cowpea products prepared in Nigeria as snacks for street food sale and for household consumption.
Home- and village-based food preservation
Food spoilage may be reduced by controlling the availability of water to the organisms causing the spoilage and/or by lowering the pH of the food (see Box 35). The most common preservation technique practiced at household level in the tropics is sun drying; its importance for grain storage has already been emphasized. Drying is also often used to preserve meat and fish, fruits, roots and tubers and green leafy vegetables. The preparation of cassava flour from dried cassava is described in Box 36. Banana flour may be prepared in a similar manner.
FIGURE 25 - Flow chart for the preparation of ewe, akara, moinmoin and gbegiri, products of cowpea
Source: Akinyele, 1989. Reprinted with the kind permission of Butterworth-Heinemann Journals, Elsevier Science Ltd. The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington 0X5 1GB, United Kingdom.
Box 35 - Processing for preservation
Foods may spoil in many ways: by internal reactions between components, by reactions of the components with water and air, or by the enzymic and toxic effects of growth of microorganisms. The purpose of food preservation is to reduce the extent of deterioration by interfering with those reactions and slowing down the rate of growth of undesirable microorganisms.
That purpose may be achieved by raising or lowering the temperature or the pH of the substrate and by controlling contact with water and air. Water control is one of the most effective methods of reducing deterioration. It is most simply practiced by drying the food and reducing its water activity, as measured by relative vapour pressure. Vapour pressure is also reduced by the addition of salt or sugar. At low water activities, biochemical reactions and microbial activity are greatly restricted; extremes of pH have a similar effect, and many traditional processing methods are based on lowering the pH of the substrate, followed by heating or drying.
Source: FAO, 1989c.
Cassava and banana may also be preserved by fermentation, followed by drying. The preparation of gari is outlined in Box 37. The preservation of ensete, a banana-type plant, is described in Box 38. In eastern Africa, cassava flour may or may not be fermented, and it is rarely consumed alone; the normal practice is to add varying proportions of it to a cereal such as sorghum or millet.
The preservation of leafy vegetables by sun drying is described in Box 39. In order to retain as much of the vitamin content as possible, the use of solar dryers is recommended (see also Chapter 5, Box 24). Pre-blanching of leaves and drying away from direct sunlight are also beneficial.
Box 36 - Preparation of cassava flour
Dried cassava
Fresh cassava roots are peeled, washed well, cut into large longitudinal strips, and thoroughly dried in the sun. These dried, split cassava strips are an important market product in Ghana, where they are called kokonte. They are a common sight drying on housetops, on small platforms, on the ground and along the edges of roads. The final product is light in weight and more or less white, depending on the care with which it has been prepared. Frequently, the surface is discoloured by fermentation and by mould infestation during the initial stage of drying.
Preparation of cassava flour
Cassava flour is made from dried cassava slices, either by pounding them in a mortar or by grinding them on a flat stone followed by sifting. It has a grayish-white colour and often has a rather acid and a faintly acrid flavour. The texture varies from coarse to fine, depending on the degree of milling and the extent of sifting. The flour is prepared for consumption by pouring it slowly into a pot of boiling water over a fire and continuing to cook it until the mixture forms a glutinous, translucent paste. The colour of the cooked product varies from cream to greenish-brown, depending on the mould infestation.
Cassava flour products: Ziga and mokale
In the Congo, cassava flour paste, called ziga, is an important local food. Usually it is allowed to cool and harden before it is eaten. It may be further processed by roasting or frying in coconut oil to make a variety of snack foods. A product called mokale is prepared in this way from a mixture of cassava and groundout flour. In Uganda, banana flour may be added to the cassava flour during the paste preparation.
Cassava flour In bread making
Cassava flour may be baked into a hard, flat bread, but the acceptability of such products depends on the quality of the flour. If it has high fibre content, it will adversely affect the texture of the product. Some varieties of cassava yield a flour with an acrid, bitter after-taste.
Source: FAO, 1989c.
Box 37 - Cassava fermentation and drying for gari preparation at the household and community levels
Gari production at the household level
Gari is produced at the household level in many Nigerian villages. The most common procedure is to harvest a few roots at a time so that they may be processed before they spoil. After cleaning and peeling, the roots are grated on a sheet of roofing iron roughened on one side by piercing with a large nail. The grated pulp is put into a cloth bag, which is tightly tied between wooden poles, and the bag is then set in the sun for the pulp to drain and to ferment. Heavy stones and logs are piled on top of the bag to press out the moisture. Drainage is slow, and it is necessary to leave the grated roots under pressure for three or four days. As a result, a certain amount of fermentation and souring takes place, which gives the product its characteristic flavour.
After drainage is complete, the meal is removed from the bag and sieved on a flat sitter made from palm fibre. The sieved material is placed, a little at a time, in wide, shallow metal pots over a wood fire. It is continuously turned and stirred; a lime palm oil may be added to prevent burning, and lumpy sections of the meal are beaten to disintegrate them. This method produces a cream-coloured product known as white gari, which has a better nutritional value. The final product, it carefully prepared, will keep for weeks or months depending on how well it is packaged.
Commercial production of gari
Production of gari has been mechanized in some West African countries, notably Nigeria and Togo. Use of hydraulic presses means that all the moisture can be expressed from the meal in a few minutes and no fermentation occurs.
This product was initially considered to be tasteless by consumers accustomed to the traditional preparation, and the texture was considered to be too uniform. A modified process, involving a rapid fermentation initiated by inoculation with a starter culture, has now been introduced to improve the acceptability of the product.
Source: FAO, 1989d.
Box 38 - Preservation of ensete by fermentation
Cultivation of ensete (Ensete ventricosum), also known as false banana, is limited to Ethiopia, where it is a staple food crop of the people of the Gurage and Sidamo areas in the southern highlands.
The parts of ensete prepared as food vary from place to place, but they generally include the starchy portions of the pseudo-stem pulp (which may be boiled fresh as a vegetable), the young shoot, the trunk of the tuberous rootstock and in some cases the upper part of the root.
The young root may be cut up and cooked like a potato, but the other vegetative materials are usually pulverized and fermented in a type of silage pit for periods ranging from a few weeks to several months before consumption. The circular pits are about 1 m in diameter and about 1 m deep. They are lined with ensete leaves and filled with the starchy portions of the "stem", selected for fermentation. The top is covered with another layer of leaves and weighed down with heavy stones.
After three or four weeks the pit is opened and a starter from a strongly fermenting order silo is added to accelerate the fermentation. After a further period of several weeks the silo is again inspected and its contents are rearranged to give an evenly fermenting mixture. The ensete is ready for use after three to four months but can also be kept for one year or more.
Source: FAO, 1989e.
Box 39 - Preservation of leafy vegetables by sun drying
Some leafy vegetables are preserved for use in the dry season by sun drying. Slippery mucilaginous vegetables, such as okra, are never blanched or boiled. The leaves are simply stripped from the stems and dried in the sun. Other leaves may be blanched or parboiled; tree leaves may also be pounded to soften them before drying. Dried baobab leaves are particularly appreciated.
The dried leaves may be added directly to soups and stews as required. Dried cowpea leaves may be fried, as well as boiled. They can be fried in oil, crumbled and sprinkled over maize porridge as a relish. During drying, nutrients such as vitamin A and ascorbic acid are often greatly reduced. The extent of the vitamin loss depends on the pre-treatment and the temperature and duration of the drying process.
Source: FAO, 1990a.
Fish and meat may be preserved by salting, smoking and drying. Some types of fish are also fermented. Table 35 lists the major cured fish products of Senegal and their processing methods. The fermented product guedj is prepared by stacking unsold fresh fish in heaps in the open air for 24 hours. During this time some fermentation occurs because of enzymes in the fish viscera as well as bacterial contamination. After stacking, the fish are eviscerated and large fish are filleted. The fish meat is then soaked in sea water in wooden buckets. The water is changed weekly when it becomes foul. Finally, the partially fermented fish is spread on straw for two to four days to dry in the sun and wind.
The traditional preservation of meat by salting, smoking and drying is outlined in Box 40. Milk may also be preserved by combinations of fermentation and drying (see Box 41).
Table 35 - Major cured fish products of Senegal
Product
Fish type
Processing method
Market
Fermented fish (guedj)
Mainly demersal species but also sharks, rays and large mackerel
Fermented, split and dried
Senegal
Fermented shellfish (yete)
Large shellfish
Fermented, split and dried
Senegal
Dried oysters (yokhoss)
Oysters
Information not available
Information not available
Split, salted and dried fish (saly, salé-séché)
Sharks, rays, tuna
Heavily salted (often pickle cured) and dried
Exported to West Africa
Salted and dried whole fish (tambadiang)
Small pelagic species
Lightly to moderately salted (pickle cured) and dried
Senegal, especially eastern areas
Hot-smoked smoke-dried fish chunks
Sharks, rays
Smoked very hot to cook and seal, then smoked to dry
Exported to West Africa
Smoked and dried fish (methora)
Small pelagic species, demersal species
Hot smoked to cook, then smoke dried and/or sun dried (large fish split, small fish processed intact)
Exported to West Africa and also consumed in Senegal
Braised and dried fish (ketiakh)
Small pelagic species
Smoked or more usually braised (charred), skinned and dried
Senegal especially the central areas
Source: FAO, 1990b.
Food processing and nutrient content
Different forms of processing may alter the nutrient content of foods (see Box 42). For example, nutrients are usually distributed unevenly throughout the different parts of grains, so there is considerable nutrient loss during milling. The effects of processing on the nutritional content of cereal grains are discussed in Box 43. Tables 36 and 37 show the results of different extraction rates on the chemical composition of wheat flour and the influences of different processing methods on the nutrient content of milled rice.
Box 40 - Preservation of meat
Meat drying
Although fresh meat is preferred when available, dried meat is prepared to ensure a supply to distant markets and to preserve meat that is not required for immediate consumption. A combination of sun and air drying is the most common technique for the preservation of meat from domesticated animals. Game, and the meat of small rodents, is often dried and smoked in situ over a log fire.
Preparation of biltong
Biltong is a traditional dried meat product of southern Africa which is prepared by air drying salted meat strips. Lean meat, usually beef or game, removed from the larger muscles of the hindquarters, is cut along the grain into thin strips about 20 to 30 cm long and 2.5 x 4 cm in section. The strips are rubbed with dry salt (2.5 to 4 percent) mixed with spices, including allspice, coriander, pepper and garlic. Sugar is also added, which helps to counteract the toughening effect of the salt. The prepared strips are left for several hours for the salt coating to penetrate and are then air dried for one to two weeks, to a water content of 10 to 15 percent. Lean biltong is microbiologically stable below a moisture content of 24 percent. Some surface spoilage may occur by contamination with moulds and yeasts, but aflatoxin production is not a problem as the water activity is too low for the development of Aspergillus flavus. Biltong may be attacked by beetles from four to six
weeks after drying. Smoking of biltong increases resistance to beetle attack for about three months.
Other dried meat products
In some North African communities, dried camel meat is similar to that used for biltong. Smoking of meat is often combined with drying; most cured meats are smoked to improve their flavour and appearance and to increase their storage life.
Source: FAO, 1990b.
Box 41 - Preserved milk products
Ethiopian fermented milk products
In Ethiopia, a type of yoghurt, called ergo, is prepared by incubating milk at room temperature for two days in a vessel that has been smoked with olive wood. Butter and buttermilk may be produced by churning ergo which has been fermented for four to five days. The fluid remaining after removal of the butter is used to make a curd cheese, ayib, by gently heating it for 30 minutes. The curds are strained off, pressed and served with chicken or vegetable stew and enjera. The whey from ayib cheese is drunk as a beverage.
Preparation of wagashi
In northern Ghana, the juice from the leaves of Calotropis procera is extracted and used like rennet to precipitate the curds from heated cow's milk. The curds are drained, squeezed and sun dried. A natural red dyestuff that is extracted from sorghum leaves is used to colour the cheese, which may subsequently be further dried and smoked over the cooking fire. This cheese, called wagashi, is usually cut into slices, which are fried in oil and eaten with the addition of chili pepper.
Source: FAO, 1990b.
Although some whole-grain products may contain a higher percentage of nutrients, this advantage is not necessarily matched by an increase in the amount of nutrients available to the consumer. A high fibre content in the diet reduces the efficiency of digestion of starches, lipids and proteins. In addition, the phytates associated with the fibre of cereal grains may interfere with the absorption of calcium, iron and zinc. This consideration is particularly significant for young children who may find it difficult to digest and assimilate meals containing bulky cereal and vegetable fibres. The needs of young children in terms of meal composition and frequency are discussed in Chapter 7, as are beneficial aspects of fibre in adult diets.
Box 42 - How processing alters the nutrient content of foods
Carbohydrate, fats and protein
Milling may reduce the amount of fat, protein and fibre and increase the proportion of starch.
Fermenting and malting alter the proportions of starch and sugar. Fermenting may add alcohol.
Bottling and canning may add sugar.
Frying increases the fat content.
Cooking at very high temperatures can spoil fats and proteins.
Vitamins
Vitamin A decreases with:
· drying, especially in the sun;
· boiling for a long time in contact with air (without a lid on the pan);
· frying for a long time or at high temperatures.
Vitamin A is increased by fortification.
Thiamine decreases when rice is washed.
Riboflavin decreases if milk is left in daylight.
Folate decreases during:
· cooking (for example, in green leaves 35 percent and in potatoes 25 percent of folate may be lost);
· storage.
Vitamin C decreases in fresh roots, vegetables and fruits during:
· storage (but not of citrus or baobab fruits);
· drying;
· canning and bottling;
· cooking, when some vitamin C passes into the water and some is destroyed by heat (for example, 40 percent of vitamin C in green leaves may be lost);
· reheating.
Vitamin C also decreases if the foods are:
· chopped into small pieces;
· prepared long before cooking;
· cooked long before eating.
Vitamin C increases when seeds (for example, of legumes) germinate.
Minerals
Fortification may increase the amount. For example, salt may be fortified with iodine.
Fermentation and germination increase the absorption of non-haem iron and other minerals.
Other effects
Drying foods reduces the water content and so increases the concentration of other nutrients.
Milling and cooking break down cell walls so that nutrients are digested more easily.
Source: Adapted from King and Burgess, 1993.
Box 43 - Effects of processing on the nutritional content of cereal grains
Consideration must be given to the effect of processing on the chemical composition of cereal products and hence their nutritional value. The various nutrients are distributed unevenly throughout the different parts of the grain (germ, endosperm, seed coat and fruit coat layers, etc.), and there are also different patterns of distribution among different types of cereal grains. There is therefore no strict rule regarding loss of nutrients upon processing. It should be borne in mind that the most important effects of processing on nutritional value are brought about by:
· the separation and removal of parts of the grain, leaving only a fraction of the whole grain as the product (any loss in volume constitutes a loss in nutrients);
· parts of the grain being discarded, bringing about a concentration of certain nutrients (i.e. increasing their proportion by weight in the product);
· processing treatments which may themselves bring about changes in nutrients (e.g. germination, fermentation, parboiling);
· the removal of the outer layers of the grain, which may be desirable although causing a loss in some nutrients (for example, tannin is concentrated in the outer layers of sorghum and its removal is nutritionally essential, and the milling of brown rice to white rice produces a product which is far easier to prepare).
Source: Adapted from UNIFEM, 1988.
Table 36 - Nutrient composition of wheat flour at different extraction rates
Rate of extraction
Protein
Oil
Ash
Fibre
Vitamin B[1]
(µg/g)
Nicotinic acid
(µg/g)
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1970.
Table 37 - Vitamin and mineral content of rough rice and its milling fractions at 14 percent moisture
Rice fraction
Thiamine
(mg)
Riboflavin
(mg)
Niacin
(mg)
_-Tocopherol
(mg)
Calcium
(mg)
Iron
(mg)
Zinc
(mg)
Rough rice
Brown rice
Milled rice
trace-0.30
Rice bran
Source: FAO, 1993b.
Germination or malting of grain provides a convenient method of increasing the energy density and digestibility of infant foods. During germination, starches are degraded by amylase into dextrin and maltose. These smaller molecules absorb and hold less water than starches. When porridge is prepared from ground, malted grain, it is thinner in consistency than normal porridge made with the same concentration of unmelted flour. It is therefore possible to increase the energy content of malted grain porridge without making it too thick, and children can digest it more easily.
In some food preparations germination is combined with fermentation to produce a sour, malted flavour, which is preferred in many communities (see Box 44).
Reducing the labour of traditional food processing
In most African countries women are largely responsible for food processing. At harvest time they undertake the threshing, winnowing, drying, husking and shelling required to prepare the grain, and in almost all cultures they are in sole control of grain storage. Whole grains store better than ground flour, so many rural women grind and pound small amounts of grain every day for immediate family consumption. The tasks of pounding, winnowing and grinding are often tiring, monotonous and time consuming; output is estimated at 1 to 3 kg of sorghum or millet flour per woman per hour (see Box 45). Box 46 outlines the process of parboiling, winnowing and milling paddy rice. The method is very slow and laborious, and output rarely exceeds 5 kg per worker per hour. Maize may be milled either wet or dry; these techniques are described in Box 47.
Box 44 - Germination and fermentation of cereals
In Africa, germination and fermentation are traditional practices in the preparation of cereal porridges. These techniques improve the flavour and digestibility of the product.
In Uganda, a thin porridge called obushera is popular; it is prepared by using germinated fermented grain flour. The millet or sorghum is mixed with wood ash and water; it is then left to germinate and ferment. This process produces enzymes which partially break down the grain starch. Acid-forming bacteria grow on the substrate during fermentation. The grain is subsequently washed, dried and ground to a fine flour which may be cooked with banana paste, crushed sesame seeds and sugar.
Nutritional aspects
The combined germination and fermentation improve the digestibility of the cereal and increase the content of vitamins in the prepared food. The initial enzymatic changes, which precede germination, result in both transfer and increase of the B vitamins and, at the same time, somewhat break down the higher carbohydrates and other storage molecules such as calcium magnesium phytate. As a result of these changes, it is possible to produce a more nutritious flour with a low fibre content.
Fermented, malted cereal pastes are less glutinous and sticky than those prepared from the unmelted grain, which is an important factor in preparing food for infant feeding. The digestive capacity of infants is limited. Therefore, it is desirable to provide for them a weaning food of high energy density. The energy content of porridge or gruel can be increased by using malted grains without a corresponding increase in its viscosity.
Source: FAO, 1989c.
Numerous attempts have been made to introduce improved technology into traditional food processing to reduce the labour demands on women. Sometimes these measures have worsened the situation of women instead of improving it, as men have taken over the labour-saving technology to make money and not only have deprived women of needed income, but also have diverted the technology from the purpose for which it was intended. This deviation is particularly noticeable when machinery is introduced at an intermediate scale for community use. Box 48 shows how technological innovation in gari processing in rural Nigeria had the result of pushing women out of this economic activity altogether.
Box 45 - Traditional processing of sorghum and millets
The outer layers of certain varieties of sorghum seed contain tannins which are slightly toxic, have a bitter taste and inhibit protein digestion when consumed. For these reasons sorghum is generally dehulled (i.e. the outer layers are removed) and then pounded into flour.
Red or brown sorghum continues to be grown in many parts of Africa because of its bird resistance, in spite of the availability of white non-tannin varieties. Traditionally, the processing of sorghum and millet has been carried out by grinding the whole grain in querns [hand-driven stone mills] or between stones or by pounding the grain using a pestle and mortar. The latter process is the commonest method for sorghum. Once the seed has been winnowed to remove foreign matter, it is put in a large mortar and wetted. It is then pounded to strip the bran or shell from the grain, followed by winnowing to remove the bran entirely. Pounding and winnowing are repeated several times before a good-quality milled seed is obtained. The milled seed is then washed with water to remove any small pieces of bran and soaked in water for 24 hours to condition or temper it. This is followed by drying to the correct moisture content and then regrinding with a pestle and mortar. In order to
obtain a good flour, sifting and pounding have to be repeated several times. The flour obtained contains a large proportion of the oil-rich germ and the nutrients of the grain. Grains are moistened to facilitate the removal of the bran, but this can result in a slightly fermented flour. Although the keeping quality of this type of flour may be diminished because of femmentation, the resulting flour has a modified flavour which is often considered desirable. The objective of hand-pounding is thus twofold. In the first stage, the bran and pigmented layers are removed, and in the second stage the grain is pounded progressively with intermittent sieving into flour suitable for various end products.
Source: UNIFEM, 1988.
Box 46 - Household processing of paddy rice in West Africa
In some countries paddy is parboiled before it is dehusked. Parboiling is partial cooking which causes the starch of the kernel to gelatinize, making it tougher. There is also a slight change in flavour which is preferred by some people. The toughening process makes the seed more resistant to insect attack, to shattering during husking and to the absorption of moisture from the air. Paddy that has been parboiled has a better nutritional quality owing to the migration of nutrients towards the centre of the grain during the process. The parboiling process involves three stages:
· soaking or steeping of the paddy in cold or hot water to increase its moisture content;
· treatment by steaming to gelatinize the starch in the kernel;
· drying.
Traditional parboiling techniques differ greatly from country to country. In West Africa paddy is frequently parboiled in small quantities in earthenware pots or oil drums after soaking in cold water overnight.
Sometimes the soaking water is brought to the boil, the fire extinguished and the pot left overnight. The next day the water is drained off, a little fresh water added and the pot put over a fire until all the water evaporates. The paddy is then sun dried. Traditional paddy parboiling techniques are slow and can only handle small quantities at a time. Off odour produced during prolonged steeping of the paddy in the first stage of parboiling has been a recognized problem. Two methods of eliminating the offensive smell, which is caused mainly by microbial fermentation, have been:
· to reduce the steeping time by hot soaking (60° to 80°C);
· to pre-steam the paddy before soaking, which reduces both the steeping time and the number of microorganisms in the paddy.
It is stressed that careful drying after parboiling is essential to minimize post-harvest losses.
Dehusking of paddy, which is sometimes referred to as milling, is the process of removing the outer husk. Dehusked paddy is referred to as brown rice. Further milling of the brown rice results in white rice. The most widespread traditional method uses a mortar and pestle. This may be done by one woman working by herself or by a number of women working rhythmically together.
Hand-pounding produces an undermilled rice which is of greater nutritional value since it retains part of the bran with high thiamine and also protein content. Hand-pounding also results in a high proportion of broken kernels. Winnowing is carried out at intervals during this process.
Source: UNIFEM, 1988.
Box 47 - Dry and wet milling of maize
Maize may be either dry or wet milled. In dry milling, maize is usually ground between stones or by using a small hand-powered plate mill; otherwise custom or cooperatively owned power-driven hammer or plate mills are used. At other times, the grain is milled wet after it has been soaked and allowed to ferment slightly to improve its flavour. In Latin America maize is partially cooked in alkaline conditions to facilitate the removal of bran before it is milled. [As the whole grain is used in this preparation, more of the original nutrients in terms of oil and protein content are retained. In addition, the alkali treatment liberates niacin from its bound form, niacytin, thus improving its big-availability and reducing the risk of niacin deficiency disease (pellagra) in maize-based diets.] Where very small quantities are needed, the wet maize may be ground at home using a saddle stone or similar device. More commonly today, hand- or power-driven plate mills are used either to
break the grain roughly or to mill it further to a smoother paste.
Maize grain is either pounded using a wooden pestle and mortar or ground by hand on a stone by a quern (a rotating hand-driven stone mill). The amount of maize required for several meals is taken off the cob and transferred to a wooden mortar. One or two cups of water are added and the whole is pounded.
If the meal is not used whole, it is transferred into a flat basket and, by shaking, the bran is separated from the floury endosperm. The flour is again collected into the mortar and pounded in the same way as before for three or four shorter periods followed by the traditional separation of the bran. The resulting product is called "pure" and the bran is often used to feed chickens.
Some of this "pure" meal may be cooked as it is or together with beans, but most undergoes further processing, starting with soaking in water for one or two days until an odour develops owing to fermentation. Fermentation produces acidic conditions which inhibit the growth of undesirable bacteria. The water is then poured off, the soaked "pure" meal is washed up to three times with fresh water, decanted and again pounded in the mortar. It is then separated, as before, from the finer parts. The bigger particles are kept for further pounding until everything is reduced to a semolina-like flour. This product is ready for preparing into foods such as uji and ugali. It cannot be kept for more than a day; if dried it may be stored for a few weeks. The shelf-life of maize meal is very low because maize has a relatively high fat content, and the meal tends to go rancid quickly.
Source: UNIFEM, 1988.
Box 48 - Improved gari processing technologies in Nigeria
In selected rural villages in Bendel State, where the processing and sale of gari are predominant sources of income for women, the introduction of improved gari processing technologies on an intermediate and industrial scale has had a profound effect on women's income.
Traditionally, cassava farms have been ploughed, planted and weeded by men. Few women cultivate their own farms. More often, women buy the unharvested tubers from men and harvest the tubers themselves. The peeling and grating of cassava is done by hand. Gari processing provides the main source of income for women in this area.
Diesel-engine-powered mechanical graters and hydraulic dewatering presses have replaced hand grating methods and reduced the time needed for pressing. Because of the high purchase cost of these technologies, only men own and operate these machines. All the men belong to a union which fixes prices for operations and organizes work schedules for members. These work schedules are determined by the number of machines available in any village and the length of market days. Such a system was intended to avoid conflicts and disagreements over individual economic gains.
The mechanical grater and press introduced at village level increased gaff productivity. The time needed for grating, considered one of the most laborious steps in the process, was greatly reduced. The dewatering step, which normally took five to eight days, was reduced to half an hour.
The introduction of the gari processing machinery resulted in several adverse effects for the women in these areas. With the introduction of mechanical graters and presses, work traditionally done by women became the work of men. This transfer of control resulted in a transfer of income.
Women lost an important income source. A set of four gari processing machines produced by a private Nigerian company were installed in one village in Bendel State. The system consisted of a cassava grater, dough sifter, mechanical press and garifier. Another component of the system, the peeler, was not bought. The factory employed 48 workers to operate the machinery. Eleven of these were women whose tasks were to hand peel the cassava tubers and keep the factory clean. Gari produced from this factory was of very high quality and was only sold in urban markets in places such as Lagos and Ondo.
The sophisticated technology used by the factory is capable of producing very high-quality gari. The garifier has the dual purpose of toasting and drying; heat supply can be regulated. A cylindrical machine fitted with prodders for stirring enables the operator to avoid burns and eliminates contact with steam during stirring.
The operations in the factory that were mechanized employed only male labour. Female labour was minimal and women were employed for a step in the process that was not mechanized. Women were employed for this work because available peeling machines in Nigeria were seen to be ineffective and women's labour was less costly.
From these experiences in Bendel State, the introduction of improved gari processing technologies was seen to be more beneficial to the men in the area than to the women. At an intermediate level, the high capital cost of the machinery makes it unavailable to the women while at the same time pushing them out of this economic activity altogether.
Source: Adapted from Williams, 1982.
When interventions are planned to reduce the labour of traditional processing, the processing activity should be seen as part of a set of interlocking systems: first, a food system of growing, processing and marketing; second, an economic system of production and exchange of assets, including labour; and third, a social system of bargaining and responsibilities within the household and within the community. Evaluating the situation in this way may make it possible to assess more accurately who will benefit and who will lose from the introduction of improved technology.
Box 49 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the introduction of grain mills at community level in five different projects in Africa under FAO's Special Action Programme for the Prevention of Food Losses. All mills were power operated; three projects introduced plate mills, while the other two introduced hammer mills. The problems encountered ranged from poor maintenance and frequent breakdown to complaints about the quality of the flour and social problems regarding mill management. The overall conclusion was that the mills were not economically feasible unless they were in use for at least 300 hours per year. This level of use would normally require a village target user group of at least 1 000 to 1 200 inhabitants and a sustainable supply of grain, with no major droughts affecting the local production system.
The case-studies examined in this chapter exemplify the difficulties of reducing the labour involved in traditional processing and present some of the successful solutions to the problem. However, although food processing, especially pounding, grinding and milling, occupies a significant proportion of the working time of rural women, it is not the major labour in their working day. The time and effort spent in the collection of fuelwood and water dominate the waking hours of most rural women. A study in southern Tanzania showed that well over half of women's annual load carrying (in terms of tonnage) consists of fuelwood and water collection as an integral part of their food preparation work (Figure 26). Men spent only about 25 percent of the time women did in transport and performed approximately 11 percent of the load carrying. This heavy labour could be reduced through the extended provision of potable water and the introduction of more efficient cooking stoves, as well
as through education in the health and safety dangers of physically overloading women with household transport tasks. Such improvements would make a considerable impact on the well-being of women and their children, in addition to optimizing their time and effort by freeing them for child care and more economically productive activities.
Box 49 - Some advantages and disadvantages of the introduction of grain mills at the community level in five African countries
The group responsible for the mill is in most cases a farmers' and most frequently a women's group. These mills are run by management committees and operated by a specially employed "operator".
The advantages of a mill are the following.
· It enables a reduction of workload for women, both in terms of energy and in terms of time. With the traditional way of milling it takes a woman 2 hours to mill a certain quantity of millet and 3.4 hours to mill the same quantity of sorghum. Women can occupy the time gained with collecting water and wood, trade, the children and resting.
· Time is saved.
· The mill produces a better quality of flour.
· Women learn to appreciate the benefits of communal effort.
· If certain conditions are met, the mill can bring financial gain to the group.
The following disadvantages were mentioned.
· Quite number of farmers complain that the quality of the flour is not like that which they are accustomed to.
· Women do not have the cash to pay for the milling.
· Milling involves a certain cost, either in cash or in kind. Where it is not easily accessible, it ties up time which could be used more productively elsewhere.
· The distance to the mill is often too long to allow for its use; 2 km seems to be a practical limit.
· Financial management is often bad, so that no money is available for spare parts.
· In some countries (e.g. the Gambia) it is reported that the female-dominated management committee, being new to the community, is not accepted, not even by the women themselves.
· Mills break down frequently. A technical survey brought to light that at any time 37 percent of the mills are out of operation, mostly because of problems with the drive belts and shaft bearings.
· Some groups (e.g. in Mali) are not able to make any profit because the variable costs cannot be kept in control.
· Maintenance and accountancy are a problem.
· The village élite may make decisions to its own benefit, since it is often overrepresented in the management committee and not all decisions are as democratic as could be wished for.
· The milling charge is often much higher than that of private mills.
· If the mill proves not economically viable, entire village groups can end up discouraged and (even worse) further indebted.
Source: FAO, 1993c.
Food quality and food safety
Globally, an estimated 1500 million episodes of diarrhoea occur every year in children under the age of five years, and as a result over 3 million die. The serious nature of diarrhoea in infancy is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7. The majority of cases occur in developing countries, where it is estimated that up to 70 percent are of water- or food-borne origin.
Some of the factors that affect food quality and safety in African markets, shops and homes include:
· poor physical quality;
· chemical contamination;
· bacterial or parasitic contamination;
· mycotoxin contamination;
· rapid rotting;
· other biological contamination, e.g. by rodents and insects;
· poor quality control of industrial or cottage-industry food products.
FIGURE 26 - Comparison of transport activities of able-bodied females and males in southern Tanzania:
Time per person per annum (hours)
Weight x distance per person per annum (tonne km)
Source: Barwell, Howe and Zille, 1987 (quoted in Bryceson and Howe, 1992).
An important element in the food marketing chain is the control procedures necessary to ensure that the food - whether raw, semi-processed, manufactured or prepared - is safe, of high quality (meeting established official standards and buyers' expectations) and nutritionally sound. Implementing food control practices to ensure food safety, quality and nutritional value is of paramount importance. Food moving in international trade must meet established international food standards, i.e. those set by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (see Box 50).
Much of the responsibility for food safety lies in the hands of women, who have a major role in food production, procurement, processing, preparation and presentation at both the market and household levels. A substantial proportion of transmission of food-borne disease occurs in the home, so the education of those involved in domestic food preparation is of crucial importance. Some fundamental rules for domestic food safety are given in Box 51.
Box 50 - Codex Alimentarius: standards for food composition, quality and safety
Standards for food composition, quality and safety have been developed and applied over many years to protect consumers and to eliminate unfair trading practices. The largest number of such standards is contained in the Codex Alimentarius, a collection of food standards, codes of hygienic practice and other recommendations prepared by FAO and WHO through the Codex Alimentarius Commission. Codex Alimentarius simply means "food code" in Latin. The Codex food safety and quality standards are recognized internationally by the World Trade Organization as the basic reference points for internationally traded food commodities. Food that conforms to Codex requirements can be freely traded between countries.
Codes of hygienic practice developed by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, which protect consumers from mishandling and poor storage of food. can also be applied to locally traded commodities such as street foods. A special code has been developed for application in the Africa region.
Codex standards and codes cover hygiene, labelling, the use of chemical additives (such as colourants), pesticide residues and many other factors important in ensuring the protection of consumers and fair practices in the food trade.
Environmental improvements related to food safety, housing, water supply and sanitation are important steps towards preventing infection. Such improvements may well occur independently of any improvement in socio-economic status, but nutrition and health benefits are unlikely to be realized without an improvement in socioeconomic status. Primary education can have an important role in improving nutritional status by stressing basic nutrition principles, including dietary diversification, and basic food safety practices that minimize the risk of food contamination.
Box 51 - The most important ways to keep domestic food safe and clean
· Eat meals as soon as possible after they are cooked, so that bacteria do not have time to breed.
· Use a safe water supply if possible. If not, boil drinking-water for babies for at least three minutes. Boil the drinking-water for the whole family if there is an epidemic of diarrhoea or cholera in the area or if the water quality is doubted.
· Wash your hands with soap and water:
- before you eat or prepare food or feed a child, and after visiting the toilet;
- especially after you pass faeces or clean a baby's bottom or touch animals or soil.
· Use a toilet and keep it clean. If small children pass faeces on the ground, put the faeces into the toilet and then wash your hands. Then flies and other pests cannot reach the faeces and get bacteria on their legs.
· Keep food covered, especially cooked food and food for children, so that dust cannot fall on it and flies with bacteria on their legs cannot land on it. Covering with a cloth may allow food to cook more quickly than covering with a plate, so bacteria have less chance to breed.
· Cook food very well so that you kill any bacteria or worms in the centre of the food.
· If you must keep cooked food for another meal:
- cover it and keep it in a cool place;
- if possible heat the food again just before you eat it, so that the centre of the food is boiling or very hot.
· Clean eating and cooking utensils thoroughly:
- wash utensils thoroughly with soap to remove any food that bacteria could breed in;
- dry them on a rack in the sun if possible, as the sun kills microorganisms;
- cover the utensils with a cloth if the area is dusty.
Source: King and Burgess, 1993.
In urban areas food habits include higher consumption of processed foods and of meals and snacks that may be prepared and marketed under unhygienic conditions which can lead to food contamination. Studies on street foods carried out in Nigeria (FAO, 1991a), Uganda (FAO, 1992a) and other countries (FAO, 1992h) noted that freshly cooked foods were generally free of bacterial contamination but that some ready-cooked foods such as meat and milk products and ice-cream were often found to be contaminated.
Water handling practices also contribute to contamination; food and beverages may be contaminated during their preparation, and serving plates and dishes during washing. Inadequate environmental conditions associated with a lack of sewage and garbage disposal were an additional factor in the possible transmission of food-borne infections, as were the personal health and hygienic practices of the food processors and vendors.
Both producers and consumers of street foods would benefit from appropriate training in food hygiene and sanitation. The provision of safe water for food preparation and utensil washing and the provision of clean surroundings to reduce environmental pollution are required to improve street food quality and safety. Improvements in food preparation, handling and vending practices would assist in preventing food contamination and in protecting the health of the consumer. Official recognition of the street food sector by local and/or national authorities will assist in organizing the street food sector, will provide vendors with legal and administrative facilities to develop their businesses and will encourage the use of improved food handling practices.
Ensuring an effective post-harvest system
The above sections call for greater priority to be attached to aspects of storage, processing and marketing of foods. Priority areas for action include increased awareness by government of the importance of the post-harvest sector with regard to the contribution it makes to household food security and improved nutrition in both rural and urban areas. An effective food processing, distribution and marketing system will require an appropriate and well-maintained infrastructure, including markets, road networks and extension services to advise farmers on improved storage techniques or on how to bulk their produce as a group to reduce marketing costs. This requires interventions by both government and the private sector, which could work hand in hand in the establishment of marketing information systems and training in marketing management, accounting and business methods. With regard to the special needs of the many women involved in food processing and marketing, governments
can assist by providing information and training on the use of appropriate processing technology and by providing extension support for marketing of fresh and processed produce.
<section>8</section>
Chapter 7 - Food, nutrients and diets
Food groups
The major nutrients and their functions
Micronutrients: vitamins and minerals
Food and nutrient requirements for different ages and groups
Factors affecting energy and nutrient requirements
Vulnerable periods in the life cycle and special energy and nutrient needs
African diets and diet composition
Planning a diet and feeding a family
Chapter 7 - Food, nutrients and diets
This chapter gives information on different foods, their nutrient content and their physiological role in the body, in addition to nutrient requirements and the factors affecting them. It reviews the composition of African diets and the different factors that may affect meal preparation and eating patterns. The chapter may be helpful for those wanting more detailed nutrition information. Some people concerned with agriculture and food-related nutrition issues, for example agriculturists and agricultural extension workers, may not need all of this information. Similarly, the public will not need all of the information provided here in order to prepare wholesome meals and maintain good nutritional and health status. A practical approach to healthy eating is simply to advocate consumption of a mixture of foods, focusing on a staple with added energy and protein sources and relish foods providing essential micronutrients.
Food groups
Foods, like crops, can be classified and grouped in various ways. Agriculturists divide crops into field crops, plantation crops, commercial crops, horticultural crops, forage crops and grasses. Such groups usually overlap, and particular plants may appear in more than one group.
In nutrition, a number of different ways of grouping foods have been tried. Food groups may be based on the major nutrient content (e.g. fatty foods, starchy foods, protein foods); the role of the foodstuffs in human nutrition (e.g. energy foods, protective foods, body-building foods); individual nutrients (e.g. carbohydrates, fats, vitamins, protein); or commercial value (e.g. cereals, roots and tubers, nuts and seeds, fruits, leafy vegetables).
All foods from plants and animals contain a mixture of nutrients. Refined white sugar, which consists of 100 percent carbohydrate (sucrose), is the exception. While it is possible to classify some foods according to major nutrients, most foods fall into several categories (see Table 38).
The need for diversity in both production and consumption has been discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, especially in relation to household food security. Individual food security, expressed as a balanced and adequate diet, also depends on diversity. The basis of the advice often given in nutrition education for family meal planning is: "Select at least one food from each of the food groups". However, other factors including cost and acceptability must also be considered (see Box 52).
Table 38 - Nutrients in different types of foods
Food
Rich source of
Moderate source of
Cereals
Starch, fibre
Protein, B vitamins, many minerals
Starchy roots and fruits
Starch, fibre
Some minerals, vitamin C if fresh, vitamin A it yellow or orange
Beans and peas
Protein, starch, some minerals, fibre
B vitamins
Oilseeds
Fat, protein, fibre
B vitamins, some minerals
Fats and oils
Fat
Vitamin A if orange or red
Dark- to medium-green leaves
Vitamins A and C, folate
Protein, minerals
Orange vegetables
Vitamins A and C
Fibre
Orange fruits
Vitamins A and C
Fibre
Citrus fruits
Vitamin C
Fibre
Milk
Fat, protein, calcium, vitamins
Eggs
Protein, vitamins
Fat, minerals (not iron)
Meat
Protein, lat. iron
Fish
Protein, iron
Liver
Protein, iron, vitamins
Source: King and Burgess, 1993.
Box 52 - Why teaching about the three food groups is not recommended
In the past, health and nutrition workers used the idea of the "three food groups" (energy foods, body-building foods and protective foods) when they taught mothers how to plan meals. Now teaching about food groups is not believed to be the best way to help families improve their meals and prevent undernutrition, for the following reasons.
Many foods belong to more than one group
Most foods are mixtures of nutrients. Cereals are in the energy food group, but they are an important source of protein and B vitamins as well as starch. Milk is usually in the bodybuilding group, although it contains as much fat as protein, and it contains calcium and several vitamins. Groundnuts are also rich in both energy and protein.
People need to eat both starch and fat
Starchy foods and fatty foods are both in the energy food group, so it is not clear that people need both.
A meal of one food from each group may not be balanced
The concept of the three food groups suggests that a balanced meal could be made from margarine (an energy food), cheese (a body-building food) and a banana (a protective food), or from sugar, an egg and a lemon. These would be strange meals, and they would lack several nutrients.
Important problems are left out
The concept of the three food groups only addresses the mixture of foods. It does not explain about the amounts of food that people need, or about bulky weaning foods, or about feeding children often.
Most women do not use the idea of the three groups
Many women know about the three food groups, but most admit that they do not regard them, because they often cannot afford to buy the foods and they do not plan meals in that way.
Source: Adapted from King and Burgess, 1993.
The major nutrients and their functions
Eating is a natural and essential activity. When there are constraints in the food system and access to food is restricted on economic, social or cultural grounds, basic nutritional needs for energy and essential nutrients may not be satisfied.
To understand human nutrition it is necessary to know the nutrient requirements and to understand the function of food and nutrients in promoting and maintaining growth, health, activity and reproduction. An understanding of nutrient functions is particularly relevant in the prevention and control of nutrient deficiency diseases and protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) (see Chapter 8).
Most animal species require a number of essential dietary factors which can be classified under chemical groupings such as carbohydrates, proteins, tats, vitamins and minerals. Dietary fibre and water are sometimes added to this list. A simple classification of dietary constituents is given in Table 39. Vitamins and minerals may also be described as micronutrients. A healthy diet supplies adequate but not excessive quantities of all these nutrients. Personal requirements vary depending on individual body size, age, sex, physiological status and lifestyle.
Table 39 - Simple classification of dietary constituents
Constituent
Use
Water
To provide body fluid and to help regulate body temperature
Carbohydrates
As fuel for energy for body heat and work
Fats
As fuel for energy and essential fatty acids
Proteins
For growth and repair
Minerals
For developing body tissues and for metabolic processes and protection
Vitamins
For metabolic processes and protection
Indigestible and unabsorbable particles including fibre
To form a vehicle for other nutrients, add bulk to the diet, provide a habitat for bacterial flora and assist proper elimination of refuse
Source: FAO, 1997a.
Nutrients as energy sources
Some nutrients are interchangeable for meeting certain of the body's needs, depending on the metabolic state of the body. Carbohydrates are often divided into starches and sugars, which are both classified as "energy sources". Fats are also very concentrated sources of energy, as is clear to any fanner who includes sunflower seed, groundnut cake or soybean meal in livestock rations. Protein may also be converted into energy if the body is starved of food, but this is an inefficient use of protein. Therefore, nutritionists normally classify only starches, sugars and fats as energy foods.
Fibre, especially in the form of cellulose, is not digested in the same way as other nutrients. Most fibre stays in the gut to facilitate the digestive and excretory processes and subsequently passes out of the body in the faeces. Soluble fibre, of which there is little, ferments in the large intestine and produces fatty acids and other substances which the body absorbs and uses for energy.
Starchy staples
For most African populations carbohydrates supply most of the energy needed by the body. They yield 4 kcal per gram on complete oxidation. When carbohydrate is synthesized in a green plant, much of it is stored in the plant cells as cellulose, starch or sugar. Food crops, including grains, roots, tubers and plantains, are therefore the major sources of energy for most people in Africa and have the highest yield of energy per unit of land.
Because the body tissues require a constant supply of glucose to fuel most metabolic reactions, the digestive process eventually converts all carbohydrates (except those that make up dietary fibre) to three simple forms of sugar: glucose, fructose and galactose. The latter two are finally converted to glucose. Carbohydrates also make an essential contribution to the effective conversion and use of other nutrients, through the energy they supply. For optimum utilization of proteins, for example, carbohydrates must be supplied simultaneously, i.e. in the same meal. Similarly, carbohydrates are necessary for normal fat metabolism. The traditional African meal pattern, i.e. a carbohydrate staple complemented by relishes containing a variety of other foodstuffs, is therefore a good basis for a nutrient-efficient diet.
Starchy staples are generally eaten in larger quantity than any other dietary component in African meals. Although such foods as cereals, roots and tubers are mainly sources of energy, they also contain other nutrients, including a significant quantity of protein, especially in the case of cereals. Cereal grains are about 10 percent protein on a dry matter basis, whereas roots and tubers contain much less protein, about 1 to 3 percent (see Table 22 in Chapter 5). Legumes and oilseeds also contribute energy to the diet, from their carbohydrate and oil content; they may be 20 to 30 percent protein. When enough staple food is available to meet people's energy requirements, their protein requirements are also likely to be met. Conversely, protein undernutrition is usually associated with energy deficiency resulting from an insufficient overall intake of food. Dietary protein deficiency on its own is therefore fairly uncommon, except in circumstances where children are weaned on
to non-cereal staples.
Fats and oils
Fats and oils are concentrated forms of energy. The energy yield from the complete oxidation of fatty acids is about 9 kcal per gram, in comparison with about 4 kcal per gram for carbohydrates and proteins. In addition, fats are stored in a nearly anhydrous form; animal fats contain only a small proportion of water, while refined oils contain virtually no water. People store energy in their bodies for future use in the form of fat. Some plants, in addition to storing energy as carbohydrate, also store oil in their nuts, seeds, seed germs and fruits. In Africa, much of the fat content of traditional diets comes from plant oils such as red palm oil, groundnut oil, coconut oil and sesame oil. Whole-grain cereals also contribute oil to the diet, but much of the oil may be lost if the cereal germ is separated before milling. For example, the oil content of maize drops from 4.5 percent in the dried whole grain to as low as 0.8 percent in degermed maize grits after milling.
Fats occur in foods mainly as triglycerides, which are fatty acid esters of glycerol. Fats are mixtures of various triglycerides; no fat found in nature consists of a single triglyceride. In the body, each triglyceride is broken down into glycerol and three fatty acids, all of which play a major part in energy metabolism. Over 40 fatty acids are found in nature. Naturally occurring fatty acids are classified into three groups: saturated, mono-unsaturated (with one double bond) and polyunsaturated (with two or more double bonds). The degree of saturation of any fat affects its physical and biological properties. Fats containing mainly saturated fatty acids are solid at room temperature, while those with a high proportion of unsaturated fatty acids are liquid, i.e. they are oils.
During periods of light or moderate work carbohydrates are generally a sufficient energy source. However, during extended periods of energy expenditure the body will need to use fat as an energy source once the carbohydrates have been exhausted. It is also necessary to have a certain proportion of fat in the diet to ensure an adequate energy density. It is particularly important to add small quantities of oil to weaning foods and to the diets of young children to increase the energy density of bulky foods such as cereal flours and roots and tubers.
There are other nutritional reasons to include fats in a well-balanced diet. Dietary fats are carriers of essential fatty acids and of the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K. Fats also aid in the absorption of these vitamins and transport them and their precursors around the body. Fats enhance the taste of food, and they take longer to digest in the stomach than carbohydrates or proteins. They prolong the satisfaction of a meal, thus causing a delay in the onset of hunger. In addition to providing energy, tats are the building blocks of phospholipids and glycolipids, which are essential components of cell membranes.
The dietary intake of fats and oils in African meals tends to be low, as refined oils and animal foods which are sources of fats are expensive. A recent study showed that the fat consumption of women in Swaziland over a complete farming season averaged only 25 g per day, or 14 percent of their total intake of food energy (Huss-Ashmore and Curry, 1991). A general guideline for most active adults is that from 15 to 35 percent of dietary energy intake should be supplied by fats or oils and not more than 10 percent of this energy should come from saturated fat, whether derived from animal or vegetable sources. Women of child-bearing age should obtain at least 20 percent of their energy from fats to encourage adequate utilization of essential fatty acids. During weaning and at least until two years of age, children should obtain 30 to 40 percent of their dietary energy from fat, and their diet should provide about the same levels of essential fatty acids as are found in
breastmilk (FAO/WHO, 1994). It would be difficult for households that do not consume enough tat to follow these guidelines. Concerted efforts must be made to ensure adequate consumption of fat among populations where less than 15 percent of the dietary energy supply is from fat. Annex 5 gives national indexes of dietary fat supplies in sub-Saharan Africa.
Essential amino acids and complementary proteins
Proteins have a crucial role in virtually all biological processes. Proteins are very large molecules made up of many amino acids linked together in different sequences. Of the large number of amino acids, 20 are common in plants and animals and are known to have a role in human nutrition. All proteins in all species, from bacteria to humans, are constructed from these amino acids, in different combinations. Nine of these amino acids are known as essential amino acids because the human body cannot synthesize them. Thus the required amounts of these amino acids must be obtained from the diet. The other 11 amino acids are also needed by the body but are considered non-essential because the human body is able to synthesize sufficient amounts of them. The relative proportions of the various essential amino acids in animal foods such as meat, fish, eggs and milk are very similar to those in human proteins, but plant proteins have them in different proportions. Proteins contain
hundreds of linked amino acids, and each protein has a unique, precisely defined amino acid sequence which is genetically determined.
Proteins are the major components of muscle. The protein collagen is responsible for the high tensile strength of skin and bone. The control of growth and of cell differentiation is also a function of proteins. In the immune system, highly specific proteins - antibodies - recognize and combat foreign cells including bacteria and viruses. The response of nerve cells to specific stimuli is linked through receptor proteins, which are triggered to transmit nerve impulses at junctions between the nerve cells. In the blood, the protein molecule haemoglobin transports oxygen and carbon dioxide, while the related protein myoglobin transports oxygen in muscle tissues. Proteins include enzymes and are also essential components of body secretions and fluids such as hormones, milk and semen. Plasma proteins of the blood, particularly albumin, are important in the maintenance of the normal osmotic balance among the various body fluids.
Proteins also serve as a secondary source of energy when amounts of carbohydrates and fat in the diet are inadequate to provide sufficient energy. Thus a child given a diet with adequate protein but with intake levels below his or her energy needs will not derive full benefits for growth from the protein, but will use it as an energy source.
During digestion, dietary proteins are broken down into polypeptides and peptides and finally into amino acids, which are then reassembled to make the many different types of protein required by the body. The body uses the amino acids in making growth tissue and in repairing worn-out cells and injured tissue. Thus there is an increased requirement for protein in the diet during periods of rapid growth such as infancy, childhood and adolescence, as well as during pregnancy and lactation and during convalescence.
Proteins from animal sources contain almost the same proportions of each essential amino acid as human protein. Therefore the synthesis of human protein from animal protein is relatively straightforward. However, proteins do not all have the same value in supporting growth. Depending on the balance of their component amino acids, some have higher quality than others. Protein quality indexes, such as net protein utilization or amino acid score (see Box 53 for a definition of these and related terms), are estimates of the percentage of the total protein that can be expected to be utilized for growth and maintenance in a young animal or child. The efficiency of the protein in animal foods, including meat, fish, eggs and milk, is close to 100 percent. A food or a diet with a protein quality of 70 percent will evidently contribute more of its amino acids to growth than one with protein quality of 40 percent. However, the amino acids that are not used for protein metabolism will
not be wasted; rather, they will be diverted for use as an energy source.
Proteins in plants often contain much smaller amounts of one or more essential amino acids than animal and human proteins. For example, bean protein has less methionine and maize protein has less lysine than egg or human protein. However, if maize and beans are eaten together in the same meal, the mix of amino acids produced for use in the body is improved (see Figure 27). This response has served as a basis for the formulation of high-quality-protein food mixtures containing 70 percent maize and 30 percent common beans.
Thus the nutritional quality of a meal can be maximized by combining different but complementary protein sources in the right proportions. This concept is already familiar to animal nutritionists who are engaged in balancing rations for the most effective growth of their stock animals, at the lowest cost, by using a variety of plant products. Indeed, the animal feed industry in the developed world is based on computerized mixes of complementary proteins, combined with energy foods and topped up with minerals and vitamins. Some of the principles of animal nutrition also apply to human nutrition, although components of the diets of humans and animals may differ, as their enzyme systems and the bacteria in their digestive systems differ. In any practical situation, it is necessary to assess whether the quantity of protein eaten, in conjunction with the balance of amino acids, i.e. the protein quality, is such that the requirements of the consumer for most of the limiting amino
acids are met. Most evidence appears to show that although cereals are limited in protein quality by their content of certain amino acids (mainly lysine, threonine and tryptophan), conventional varieties of most cereals, if consumed in sufficient quantities to meet energy and total protein needs, contain enough of these amino acids to meet the protein requirements of preschool children. However, given the children's high requirements for both protein and energy, it is difficult for them to eat enough cereals to meet their needs. Their diets should be complemented with additional energy sources and high-protein foods such as meat, dairy products and legumes.
Box 53 - Definition of terms used in evaluating protein quality
Amino acid score
It the composition of an "ideal" protein - i.e. one containing all the essential amino acids in amounts sufficient to meet requirements without excess - were known, it should then be possible to compute the nutritional quality of a protein or mixture of proteins by calculating the deficit of each essential amino acid below the amount in the "ideal" protein. This approach forms the basis of the so-called amino acid scoring procedure, by which one can evaluate the capacity of a given protein or mixture of proteins to meet the essential amino acid require" meets. An amino acid score can be calculated according to the most limiting amino acid.
Limiting amino acid
The limiting amino acid is the amino acid in greatest deficit for the age group whose protein requirements are to be met. Only four essential amino acids are likely to limit the protein quality of mixed human diets: lysine, the sulphur-containing amino acids (methionine plus cystine), threonine and tryptophan.
Digestibility of protein
Large intakes of dietary fibre (e.g. cereal bran) increase the excretion of nitrogen in the faeces, reducing apparent protein digestibility by about 10 percent. Thus the overall composition of the diet must be taken into account when assessing digestibility.
Protein efficiency ratio
The simplest method for determining nutritive value is to measure the growth rate of young animals fed on test food. The weight gain is then related to the amount of protein eaten. The index obtained is called the protein efficiency ratio (PER). This ratio varies with the level of protein in the diet. The conventional level of 10 percent dietary protein was in general use, but the official standardized level is 9.09 percent protein.
Biological value
The biological value (BV) of a protein is the proportion of the absorbed nitrogen that is retained for maintenance and/or growth. It is calculated from an analysis of nitrogen intake in the diet and nitrogen output in the urine and faeces.
Net protein utilization
The net protein utilization (NPU) of a protein is the product of the biological value and the digestibility of a protein, i.e. the proportion of ingested nitrogen that is retained in the body under specified conditions. NPU is a combined measure of digestibility and the efficiency of utilization of the absorbed amino acids.
Source: WHO, 1985.
FIGURE 27 - Protein efficiency ratio of combinations of common or opaque-2 maize and black beans
Source: FAO, 1992i (reproduced from Bressani, 1988).
In Chapter 5 the concept of complementary proteins was related to patterns of intercropping in mixed farming systems. Household production of cereal crops together with legumes provides a nutritionally effective mix of complementary proteins for the household diet, especially when the cereals and legumes are supplemented with vegetables from a home garden or with gathered leafy vegetables (FAO, 1992i).
The protein content of different foods can be compared using food composition tables such as those shown in Table 40 and Annex 4. Such tables do not indicate the amino acid score of the protein or the proportion of it utilized in the human body, i.e. the protein quality. However, they are still useful in assessing the nutritional value of foods and diets.
Assessment of protein quality and the biological utilization of proteins
Nutritionists have traditionally used experimental animals, usually rats, to assess the protein efficiency ratio and net protein utilization of different food proteins. Assessment tests, however, are usually conducted at levels of protein intake that are below the optimum for maximum growth. Figure 28 shows that the biological value of egg protein is at a maximum, around 100 percent, at an intake of 0.2 g per kilogram per day. If this intake is doubled to 0.4 g per kilogram per day the biological value falls to about 60 percent. This study shows that utilization of the protein depends on the level of feeding; beyond the level of feeding corresponding to maximum utilization of protein, any excess goes to waste.
Table 40 - Approximate composition of some cooked foods^a
Cooked food^b
Water
(g)
Energy
(kcal)
Protein
(g)
Iron
(mg)
Vitamin A^c
(RE)
Vitamin C^c
(mg)
Maize, stiff porridge
Maize, thin porridge
Rice, polished, boiled
Rice, parboiled, boiled
Pasta, boiled
Cassava, fresh, boiled
Gari (fermented, dried, pounded cassava), boiled
Plantain, cooked
Potato, boiled
Potato, fried/chips
250-562^d
Sweet potato boiled
Beans/peas, boiled
Groundnuts, boiled
Groundnuts, roasted
Soybean, boiled
Medium green leaves, boiled and drained
Cabbage, boiled
Chicken, boiled (% EP = 67)
Fish, boiled or steamed (% EP = 52)
Source: King and Burgess, 1993.
^a Calculated from values for raw foods, allowing for different water content; allowance made for some loss of vitamins during cooking.
^b Percentage edible portion (% EP) = 100 unless stated otherwise.
^c Content varies with the cooking method. RE = retinol equivalent.
^d Varies according to how the chips are prepared.
FIGURE 28 - Biological value of egg protein at different levels of protein intake in young adult men
Source: Pellet and Young, 1980
Another factor that affects human utilization of protein is the amount of other nutrients in the diet. If the diet contains insufficient carbohydrate or fat to meet energy needs, the protein in the diet will be converted into energy to make up the deficit. The result is a wasteful use of an expensive nutrient. The amount of fibre in a meal may also adversely affect the digestibility of the proteins present and hence lower their biological availability.
The basic lesson mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, "eat a variety of foods", can be used to promote good intakes of complementary protein and the addition of high-energy foods to the basic staples.
Micronutrients: vitamins and minerals
Vitamins are a chemically unrelated group of organic molecules needed in small amounts in the diets of higher animals. These molecules have nearly the same functions in all forms of life, but higher animals appear to have lost the capacity to synthesize most of them. Vitamins are classified as fat soluble or water soluble. Fat-soluble vitamins can, to some extent, be stored in the body and are not normally excreted in the urine. Water-soluble vitamins, however, are largely excreted, and little is retained by the body for immediate use; a daily dietary intake is therefore desirable.
Thirteen vitamins are currently recognized: vitamins A, C, D, E, K, B[12] (cyanocobalamin) and the seven vitamins of the vitamin B complex. The vitamins referred to as the vitamin B complex are water soluble and are almost all components of co-enzymes which, together with enzymes, are catalysts of various body processes. These vitamins include: thiamine (B[1]), riboflavin (B[2]), niacin (nicotinic acid), pyridoxine (B[6]), pantothenic acid, folic acid (also called folate or folacin) and biotin (sometimes called vitamin H). Vitamins A, E, K and D are fat soluble. Each vitamin is present in many different foods (see Table 41). Vitamin D is produced in the skin when it is exposed to sunlight, and niacin is made by the body from tryptophan, one of the essential amino acids.
Table 41 - Vitamins and main food sources
Vitamin
Good sources
Fat -soluble
Vitamin A
Liver, fish-liver oils, egg yolk, milk and dairy products, green leafy vegetables (especially kale, amaranth, sweet potato, cowpea and cassava leaves), yellow- and orange-coloured fruits and vegetables (carrots, pumpkin, mango, papaya, oranges), orange-coloured sweet potato, palm oil
Vitamin D
Cod-liver oil, oily fish, liver, egg yolk
Vitamin E
Vegetable oils (such as maize, soybean and sunflower oils), nuts, soybeans, cereals, egg yolk
Vitamin K
Green leafy vegetables, vegetable oils, egg yolk, beef, mutton, poultry
Water-soluble
Thiamine (vitamin B[1])
Millets, sorghum, wheat, maize, dried beans, rice, liver, kidney, beet, nuts
Riboflavin (vitamin B[2])
Green leafy vegetables, liver, kidney, milk, cheese, eggs, whole grains
Niacin (nicotinic acid and nicotinamide)
Lean meat, poultry, fish, groundnuts, dried beans, wheat, yam, potato
Pantothenic acid
Kidney, fish, egg yolk, most vegetables, most cereals
Pyridoxine (vitamin B[6])
Meat, poultry, fish, egg yolk, whole grains, banana, potato, dried beans, lentils, chickpeas
Biotin (vitamin H)
Groundnuts, dried beans, egg yolk, mushrooms, banana, grapefruit, watermelon
Folic acid
Green leafy vegetables (losses from cooking can be high), fresh fruits (especially orange juice), dried beans, peas, nuts, egg yolk, mushrooms, banana, liver
Vitamin B[12] (cyanocobalamin)
Liver, kidney, chicken, beef, fish, eggs, milk, cheese
Vitamin C
Citrus fruits, guava, baobab, mango, papaya, green leafy vegetables, green chili, potato, green peppers, tomatoes
Not all of the vitamins present in food are available in an absorbable form. For example, most of the niacin in cereals is bound in such a way that it is not absorbed from the gut. Fat-soluble vitamins also may not be absorbed if the digestion of fat is impaired. For example, children with diarrhoea or other gut infections, including worms, absorb less vitamin A than normal.
Minerals are another group of chemical compounds used by the body that must be provided by the diet Minerals occur in varying quantities within the food system. Some of them, such as calcium and iron, are often, like vitamins, found in a bound form and are thus not easily absorbed from the human gut. Most minerals are required in minute amounts and have very specific functions in the human body. To be discussed here are those whose deficiencies tend to precipitate a disease, for example iron and anaemia.
Vitamin A in foods and Its role in the body
Vitamin A activity in foods can occur in two forms: retinol (already formed vitamin A), which is colourless and found only in animal products, and carotene (provitamin A), which is an orange pigment found in many foods including red palm oil, carrots, sweet potato, tomato, oranges, mango, papaya and dark-green leafy vegetables (e.g. kale and leaves of cassava, sweet potato and amaranth). Carotene is converted to retinol in the walls of the intestine. There are several forms of carotene, but the most important is beta-carotene. Six molecules of carotene provide the nutritional equivalent of one molecule of retinol. Fat, protein, zinc and vitamin E all help in absorption and utilization of vitamin A by the body.
The concentration of vitamin A in foods is measured as retinol equivalents (RE) in micrograms (µg), where 1 RE = 1 µg of retinol or 6 µg of beta-carotene. Sometimes international units (IU) are used to express vitamin A concentration; 1 µg = 3.3 IU. When food tables are used to calculate values for retinol equivalents, it should be noted that vitamin A and carotene are often overestimated, since they are often determined by methods that do not separate beta-carotenes from other biologically less active or inactive carotenoids.
Vitamin A is involved in vision, as it helps to keep the front of the eye (the conjunctive and the cornea) strong, clear and moist. It is also involved in cell differentiation, reproduction and growth and in the immune response. It helps to keep all the cells on the surface of the body (epithelial cells) in a healthy condition, so that it is difficult for microorganisms to enter the body. These body surfaces include the skin, the surface of the eye, the inside of the mouth, the cells that line the gut and the cells that line the respiratory tract. When there is a deficiency of vitamin A in the body, symptoms show in the eyes and in the surface tissues.
Xerophthalmia is an eye condition in which the conjunctive and cornea become abnormally dry. Without treatment, xerophthalmia may progress to keratomalacia, a condition in which there is severe damage to the cornea, which becomes opaque and ulcerated. This condition can lead to blindness, and 50 to 80 percent of untreated children who become blind because of vitamin A deficiency usually die within a few months of becoming blind. The main determinant of mortality is their initial nutritional status.
Vitamin A also has an important role in reducing sickness and death from respiratory and diarrhoeal diseases, especially in young children. Its effect is particularly significant in cases of measles, a common disease of childhood which is still not adequately controlled in Africa.
Daily vitamin A needs for different sex and age groups are shown in Table 42. Amounts of different foods that contain approximately 500 RE of vitamin A, a quantity close to the recommended daily intake for adults, are shown in Figure 29. Fresh red palm oil is one of the richest sources of vitamin A in African diets.
Vitamin A deficiency is a serious public health problem in many countries, and its elimination is a high priority for many governments and international agencies. In this endeavour the importance of the agriculture sector, including fisheries and forestry, is paramount, as it is now generally recognized that food-based strategies offer the only safe, sustainable approach to overcoming vitamin A deficiency (and indeed micronutrient malnutrition in general, iodine deficiency being the only exception). In countries or areas where vitamin A deficiency is a problem, agricultural production policies need to be developed to encourage the increased production, processing, marketing and consumption of vitamin A-rich foods. Attention should also be given to production in household vegetable gardens and fruit orchards and in school and community gardens, as well as to commercial farming of micronutrient-rich vegetable and tree crops (see also Chapter 5).
Table 42 - Estimated daily requirements for some vitamins
Group/age
(years)
Vitamin A
(µg RE)
Thiamine
(mg)
Riboflavin
(mg)
Niacin
(mg)
Folate
(µg)
Vitamin C
(mg)
Children (both sexes)
0-6 months
-^a
6-12months
1-3 years
Boys
Girls
If pregnant
Men, active
Women, active
Child-bearing age
Pregnant
Lactating
Sources: FAO, 1988b; FAO/WHO, 1974.
^a -: No value available: it is assumed that breastmilk covers needs.
FIGURE 29 - Amounts of different foods that contain approximately 500 RE vitamin A (roughly the recommended daily intake of vitamin A for an adult)
Source: King and Burgess, 1993.
Vitamin D and its function in metabolism
Vitamin D has an essential role in the control of calcium and phosphorus metabolism. It helps to control the level of calcium in the blood and the amounts absorbed from the diet, deposited in the skeletal tissue and excreted through the kidneys. A deficiency of vitamin D causes a condition of bone deformities called rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults. Vitamin D is derived from cholesterol by the action of sunlight, and vitamin D deficiency is not common in Africa, where the skin is normally exposed to strong sunlight. Food sources of this vitamin are limited, and the amounts contained are variable. Vitamin D is found in whole milk, cream, butter and cheese. There is some in the flesh of fatty fish and in eggs, but these foods are perishable and expensive. Most children get all the vitamin D they need from the action of the sun on their skin, but women who live in seclusion and cover their bodies completely when outside the home may need an increased intake from
their diet.
Other fat-soluble vitamins and their functions
The other fat-soluble vitamins are vitamins E and K. Vitamin E is found in all cell membranes in the body, and it is believed that there it prevents the oxidation, by molecular oxygen, of polyunsaturated fatty acids. This action is similar to that of many anti-oxidants used in the food industry to protect fats from rancidity. Vitamin E is also essential for normal cell structure, for maintaining the activities of some enzymes and for the formation of red blood cells. This vitamin also protects the lungs, the heart and other tissues from damage and helps to prevent red blood cells from being destroyed. In addition, it is believed to reduce the rate of cell ageing. A deficiency of vitamin E causes sterility in rats and can lead to spontaneous abortion in pregnant women.
The principal dietary sources of vitamin E are vegetable oils, nuts, meat, green leafy vegetables, cereals, wheat germ and egg yolk. In view of its wide distribution in foods it is unlikely that dietary shortages of this vitamin will arise. Deficiency usually occurs only through impaired intestinal absorption and is clinically manifest as anaemia. However, the most likely cause of dietary anaemia is a deficiency of iron.
Vitamin K, like vitamin A, exists in two forms. Vitamin K, is found in plants, and vitamin K2 is produced by many species of bacteria, including Escherichia coli, which inhabits the human large intestine. It is often assumed that this biosynthesis in the gut provides for the vitamin needs of the body, which would explain why human beings, with the exception of newborn infants, appear not to depend on their diet for the supply of vitamin K. Vitamin K is found in green leafy vegetables, egg yolk, vegetable oils, cheese and liver. Dietary deficiency is rare, but a shortage may arise from malabsorption during certain liver disorders or chronic diarrhoea. One of the functions of vitamin K is to facilitate blood clotting in open wounds.
The water-soluble vitamins
The water-soluble vitamins include vitamins C and B[12], together with the seven vitamins of the vitamin B complex.
Vitamin C is also known by its chemical name, ascorbic acid. It was the first of the vitamins to be isolated and synthesized. Chemically it is a simple sugar, and it is the most active reducing agent known to occur naturally in living tissue. Its exact biological action in the body is not fully understood.
Vitamin C is important for the growth and maintenance of healthy bones, teeth, gums, ligaments and blood vessels. It is also involved in the production of chemicals responsible for the transmission of nerve impulses between nerve cells (neurotransmitters) and in the production of adrenal gland hormones, including the corticosteroids. Hydrocortisone, the most important of the human corticosteroids, controls the body's use of fats, proteins and carbohydrates.
Vitamin C is also involved in the response of the immune system to infection and in wound healing. In addition, it assists in the absorption by the body of non-haem iron, the form of dietary iron found in plants, eggs and milk, which is not easily absorbed through the gut wall. Citrus fruit, for example, which contains vitamin C together with citric acid, increases the percentage of non-haem iron absorbed from a meal of maize and beans or other cereal and legume mixture, as long as these are eaten at the same time.
Prolonged deficiency of vitamin C in the diet causes scurvy, a disease in which the body's immune system is weakened. The epithelial cells lose their binding power, which makes wound healing difficult and bruising easy.
The principal dietary sources of vitamin C are fresh fruits and vegetables, especially citrus fruits, guava, baobab fruits, papaya, mango, tomato, peppers, green chili, fresh animal milk and breastmilk. Vitamin C is extremely labile and is easily destroyed by heat and air. Considerable amounts of vitamin C are therefore lost if the fruits and vegetables are processed or are kept warm after cooking. Drying of fruits and vegetables also often destroys much of their vitamin C (see Chapter 6 on food storage and processing).
The most important vitamins of the vitamin B complex are thiamine, riboflavin and niacin. The main functions of these water-soluble vitamins are in the metabolism of carbohydrates during energy production and in regulating the body's use of protein.
Thiamine deficiency causes beriberi, which is not often seen today. It was associated with diets in which most of the energy came from polished rice or from highly refined flours, with very little other food. It was most common in women of child-bearing age and their children. Thiamine, riboflavin and niacin usually occur together in foods, but in different proportions depending on the food source. The richest sources are meats, fish, eggs and milk, and there are good supplies in all legumes, groundnuts and whole-grain cereals. Oilseeds have useful quantities, and small amounts are obtained from regular intake of fruits and green leafy vegetables.
A deficiency of riboflavin is more likely to occur than a deficiency of thiamine because sources of the former are more limited. Particularly good sources are liver and milk, eggs, whole grains and brewer's yeast. Prolonged deficiency of riboflavin causes soreness of the tongue, cracking of the lips and corners of the mouth and certain eye disorders, including an abnormal sensitivity to bright light (photophobia).
Niacin, which consists of nicotinic acid and nicotinamide, is involved in the production of sex hormones and the maintenance of healthy skin. Niacin is present in cereals in a chemically bound form which is not absorbed by the body. Part of the niacin is liberated and becomes available when the cereal is baked. Niacin can be made in the body from tryptophan, one of the essential amino acids of protein. This synthesis can only take place when there is excess tryptophan; 60 mg of tryptophan is equivalent to 1 mg of niacin.
The principal dietary sources of niacin include liver, lean meat, poultry, fish, groundnuts and dried beans. Seasonal deficiencies occur when adult diets are based mainly on maize or sorghum, but adults may obtain additional niacin from fermented cereal-based beverages such as beer. Prolonged niacin deficiency causes pellagra, in which the parts of the skin that are exposed to the sun develop a dark, peeling rash. Some people with pellagra may also have severe diarrhoea or mental changes.
Consumption of a diversified diet provides the best safeguard against a shortage of B vitamins.
Folic acid and vitamin B[12]
Folic acid and vitamin B[12] are considered together as a group because they are essential for normal blood formation. Red blood cells are formed in the bone marrow; their formation requires an adequate supply of nutrients including iron, amino acids, vitamin B[12] and folic acid.
Folic acid (or folate) is contained in a variety of foods, particularly liver and raw dark-green leafy vegetables. During pregnancy folic acid plays an important part in foetal growth - in the development of the nervous system and in the formation of blood cells. The body stores only a little folate in the liver, and folate, unlike iron, cannot be reused when a red blood cell dies. Thus a daily intake from the diet is desirable. Folic acid is stable in acid medium but is destroyed fairly rapidly when it is heated in neutral or alkaline conditions. Food preparation can cause serious losses, especially if green leafy vegetables are treated with alkaline soda ash and boiled for long periods to soften them before consumption as is the normal practice in some communities. The form of folic acid present in animal liver is most easily absorbed. Other foods contain most of the folate as polyglutamates and are less reliable as dietary sources. The proportion of free folate is
relatively high in lentils, beans and orange juice.
A varied diet that includes fresh vegetables and fruit generally provides enough folic acid for the body's needs. Mild deficiency is relatively common but can usually be corrected by increasing the daily consumption of foods containing folate. More severe deficiency may occur during pregnancy and breastfeeding, in premature or low-birth-weight babies and in people taking certain drugs, including some antimalarials.
Vitamin B[12] is found only in foods of animal origin such as meat, fish and dairy products. It is absorbed from the small intestine after first combining with a chemical called "intrinsic factor", which is produced by the stomach lining. Vitamin B[12] exists in most diets in greater amounts than the body requires; the excess is stored in the liver, where it can last for several years. If a person on a normal diet acquires a vitamin B[12] deficiency, it results probably not from lack of the vitamin, but from an inability to absorb it. The most common cause is an inability of the stomach lining to produce intrinsic factor. The deficiency leads to pernicious anaemia which cannot be corrected by dietary improvement.
Iron and nutritional anaemia
Iron is a mineral nutrient which is essential for the formation of haemoglobin and certain enzymes in the body. Haemoglobin is the red pigment in red blood cells and is responsible for oxygen transport. Iron is also involved in the formation of myoglobin, which is the oxygen-carrying pigment in muscle cells. Iron is contained in a variety of foods such as liver, meat, cereals (especially whole grain), fish, green leafy vegetables, nuts and beans.
Red blood cells have a life span of only about four months, so the body has to replace them throughout life. The nutrients required to replace red blood cells include iron to make haemoglobin, together with folate and protein. The body can store some iron in the tissues and can also recycle some of the iron when red blood cells die. However, a continual supply of iron must be absorbed from the diet to retain health.
There are two types of iron in food, haem iron and non-haem iron. Haem iron is obtained from the blood and meat of animals, birds and fish. However, the amount of iron ascribed to the raw form of these foods in food composition tables may be misleading. Although haem iron is relatively accessible, only IS to 35 percent of all haem iron consumed in the diet is finally absorbed through the gut wall.
The iron in plants, eggs and milk is in a form called non-haem iron and is usually present as inorganic ferric complex salts. During digestion, this inorganic iron is partly reduced to the more readily absorbed ferrous form. The conversion is markedly assisted by the presence of vitamin C. However, the human body may actually absorb less than 5 percent of the non-haem iron consumed. About 10 percent of the iron in cow's milk is absorbed. However, babies absorb about 50 percent of the iron from breastmilk, even though it is non-haem iron, possibly because infants may have a more efficient absorptive mechanism for breastmilk. The supplementary iron added to some processed foods is also usually absorbed quite well. Daily iron needs for men, women, children and infants on different diets are shown in Table 43.
Other components of a meal may alter the amount of non-haem iron that is absorbed. Absorption and assimilation of non-haem iron is increased by including foods rich in vitamin C, especially fruits, which also contain citric acid. Sources of haem iron such as liver, meat, chicken or fish, eaten in the same meal, can also increase the absorption of non-haem iron. Coffee and tea contain tannins which may reduce iron absorption from foods if these beverages are taken together with meals; therefore coffee and tea are best consumed between meals.
Fermenting and germinating grains and legumes may help to increase availability of non-haem iron. Germination may also increase the level of folate in the foodgrain (see Table 44). During germination antinutritional factors such as phytates, trypsin inhibitors and haemagglutinins may be partially degraded and may thus make non-haem iron more available. Availability of phosphorus and iron usually increases, while lysine and tryptophan may be synthesized.
Table 43 - Estimated dietary requirements for iron for people on different diets
Group/age
(years)
Iron availability of diet.
High
Medium
Low
Children (both sexes)
6-12 months
1-3 years
Boys
Girls
If pregnant
38^b
76^b
Men, active
Women, active
Child-bearing age
Pregnant^b
38^c
76^b
Lactating
Source: FAO, 1988b.
^a High diet contains non-haem iron + haem iron, e.g. rice and peas + fish: iron absorption about 15 percent. Medium: diet contains non-haem iron + vitamin C, e.g. rice and peas + pumpkin: iron absorption about 10 percent. Low: diet contains only non-haem iron, e.g. rice and peas; iron absorption about 5 percent.
^b Iron requirements during pregnancy are an estimate of the minimum needs over the whole nine months.
^c Supplements are usually needed to provide enough iron.
Table 44 - Folate content of germinated foodgrains
Germination period
(hours)
Folate content
(pa per 100 g)
Chickpea
Finger millet
Source: Babu, 1976.
Iron and/or folate deficiency, leading to anaemia, is exacerbated by conditions causing regular loss of red blood cells. Malaria parasites (protozoa known as plasmodia) destroy the body's red blood cells, which may lead to haemolytic anaemia. Some of the iron released from the ruptured cells can be reused, but the body has to replace the red cells at a faster rate than usual; this condition requires a higher dietary intake of folate. Internal and external parasites, including worms, flukes, leeches, lice, ticks and mites, all satisfy their own nutritional requirements from human blood or tissues or from the host's dietary intake, thus reducing the nutrients available to the body. Hookworm, guinea worm, bilharzia (schistosomiasis) and filariasis infections may all contribute to the loss of red blood cells and subsequent development of anaemia.
Iodine and its physiological functions
Among the minerals present in the human body iodine must be considered as a trace element or micronutrient. The adult body contains 20 to 50 mg of iodine; about 8 mg of this amount is concentrated in the thyroid gland, in the hormones T[3] (tri-iodothyronine) and T[4] (thyroxine), which contain 64 percent iodine. The thyroid secretions determine the level of metabolism in many cells. If the secretion is deficient, as in hypothyroidism, the basal metabolic rate falls, the circulation is reduced and the whole speed of life is slowed down. A dietary shortage of iodine may lead to enlargement of the thyroid gland (goitre). Iodine deficiency in newborns can lead to cretinism, a condition characterized by mental retardation, stunted growth and coarse facial features in infants.
Endemic goitre is usually geographically determined, as it is found in areas where the soil is deficient in iodine. Food plants that grow in such soils will also be deficient in iodine. Shortages may occur in mountainous limestone areas, in floodplains and in localities where the diet does not contain any good sources of this nutrient. The amount of iodine in food depends on the amount contained in animal feed and on the availability of iodine in the soil. Foods rich in iodine include seafoods, fish, shellfish and seaweed. The addition of iodine to cooking salt (fortification) can help to increase iodine intake. Daily estimated iodine requirements are shown in Table 45.
The availability of dietary iodine in human metabolism may be reduced if the diet contains goitrogenic agents, which interfere with the metabolism of iodine and subsequent formation of the thyroid hormones. Goitrogens may be a contributory cause of iodine deficiency disease (IDD) in areas where iodine intake is low or marginal. One important goitrogen is the toxin in poorly processed bitter cassava roots or leaves. If the cassava product contains a significant amount of residual cyanide, the cyanide may react with sulphur-containing amino acids during digestion to produce thiocyanate. Thiocyanates show marked antithyroid activity. Data from animal experiments show that goitrogens occur in a wide variety of other foods, including millets, soybean, vegetables of the genus Brassica (including cabbage and turnip) and other plants of the family Cruciferae. However, there is evidence that moderate consumption of these foods does not contribute significantly to the development of
IDD, as the foods are usually cooked sufficiently to inactivate their goitrogenic components.
Table 45 - Recommended daily intake of iodine
Group
Iodine intake
(µg)
0-6 months
6-12 months
1-3 years
3-7 years
7-10 years
10 years to adulthood
Pregnant women
Lactating women
Source: WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD, 1993.
Other mineral nutrients
Other mineral nutrients include sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, sulphur, zinc, selenium and molybdenum. Salts of sodium and potassium are widely found in foods and are also easily absorbed from the alimentary canal and from the main cations of the body fluids.
Calcium, magnesium, phosphorus and sulphur are important components of bone and other supporting tissues. The calcium content of the diet as calculated from food composition tables is not a precise index of the amount used by the consumer, as between 70 and 80 percent of the calcium in the diet is excreted in the faeces. Absorption is facilitated by the presence of vitamin D, which is essential to calcium utilization. In addition, the calcium level in the body maintains a 2:1 ratio with phosphorus, as the two minerals tend to function and to be found together within the body. The normal secretion of parathyroid hormone also aids in the absorption of calcium, as does the presence of an adequate but not excessive intake of protein in the diet. Excessive protein intake can interfere with calcium balance. Lactose or milk sugar also enhances the digestion of calcium in animals; in humans this action appears to be related to the hydrolysis of lactose by the enzyme lactase. Phytic
and oxalic acids and their salts tend to inhibit calcium uptake. Growing children and pregnant and breastfeeding women require extra amounts of calcium in the diet, as they absorb and retain more calcium for the formation of new bone.
Problems related to a lifelong lack of calcium in the diet, such as osteoporosis (bone mineral loss), are increasingly being recognized in North America and northern Europe as an important contributing factor to fractures in old age, especially among women. At present there are gaps in knowledge about the incidence of fractures in many regions, including Africa. The lifelong dietary intake of many older women in developing countries may have been deficient in the components necessary to build and protect bones, and this insufficiency, combined with a lifetime of hard physical labour, is more likely to damage than to protect musculoskeletal tissue. Adequate calcium intake throughout life and regular physical activity help to prevent osteoporosis. Good sources of calcium are milk of all types including breastmilk, cheese, small fish containing bones that can be eaten, beans and peas, finger millet and dark-green leaves.
As phosphate is a major constituent of all plant and animal cells, phosphorus is present in all natural foods, and primary dietary deficiency of phosphorus is unlikely to occur in humans. Similarly, since magnesium is a component of chlorophyll, it is present in most foods, especially those of plant origin, and dietary deficiency is rare. The main dietary sources of sulphur are the sulphur-containing amino acids cysteine and methionine. The importance of the amino acids in the diet has already been discussed in the section on proteins. The vitamins thiamine and biotin (vitamin H) also contain sulphur.
Zinc, selenium and molybdenum are trace elements that have received increased attention in recent years. However, their precise functions are still not fully known. Zinc has been recognized as essential for normal growth. There is increasing evidence of zinc deficiency in developing countries and further evidence that this deficiency is an important contributor to poor growth, reduced resistance to infectious diseases, increased incidence of stillbirths and possibly impaired cognitive development. The richest sources of bioavailable zinc are flesh foods. People whose diets consist primarily of whole-grain staple foods, as is the case in many countries of Africa, risk developing zinc deficiency, not only because such diets are low in zinc, but also because the high phytate intake tends to inhibit zinc absorption from the gut. Improved food processing techniques may in the future enhance the big-availability of zinc in cereals and legumes.
Selenium deficiency occurs mainly in places where soils are selenium deficient. Selenium is believed to have an important role in the prevention of cancer and other degenerative diseases. Recent evidence also suggests that deficiency may have a role in the pathogenesis of endemic cretinism.
Molybdenum is easily absorbed from the gut. Food sources rich in molybdenum include milk and milk products, dried legumes, cereals and red meat (especially liver and kidney). Lack of molybdenum in the diet of pregnant and lactating women is believed to contribute to impaired growth and brain development of the foetus and infant.
Food and nutrient requirements for different ages and groups
Setting standards
An adequate and nutritionally well-balanced diet is essential for a healthy and vigorous life. The major conditions defining an adequate diet have been discussed in Chapter 3. Numerous tables setting out standards of dietary needs have been prepared by official bodies, and some countries have developed their own national standards for nutrient requirements during the life cycle.
Such standards have three main uses. First, they provide a means of assessing the adequacy of dietary intake for different sections of the community and thus help to identify vulnerable groups at risk of malnutrition. Second, standards serve as a guide for people planning large-scale feeding programmes, as in feeding centres, schools or refugee camps. Third, they are necessary for any planned food and nutrition policy at the national or international level.
For planning purposes, dietary needs are often equated with energy needs in the preparation of national food balance sheets (see Chapter 2). Dietary intake of specific nutrients is often calculated from chemical values in food composition tables. Examples of food composition tables include Table 26 (Chapter 5), Table 40 and Annex 4.
Although nutrition experts and planners think in terms of food and nutrient requirements when planning a country's food needs and a population's dietary needs, in daily life people do not think of their meals in terms of nutrients, but in terms of different cooked foods. Box 54 shows food requirements in terms of meal requirements, as frequency of eating is an important factor in nutrition, especially for young children, who have limited stomach capacity.
Limitations of food composition tables
In order to meet the nutritional needs of a community and plan adequate diets, consumption patterns need to be reviewed together with current and accurate food composition data. Food composition data are needed, for example, to evaluate the nutritional adequacy of diets and of the food supply in a country and to assess food balance sheets and food consumption surveys. In addition, nutritional considerations are becoming increasingly important in agricultural production planning. Food composition tables can assist in crop selection, development of new varieties and traditional crop trade. However, food composition tables currently in use have significant limitations, which must be recognized if they are to be used intelligently.
Calculations of the nutrient contents of food must be based not only on representative samples of the food supply but on foods as actually eaten by a population. However, sampling error is very common, as there is potential for large differences in nutrient composition depending on the variety or strain of a food, conditions of culture or husbandry, and maturity or freshness (which can influence water content, for example). Errors may also arise from the nutrient analysis methods used, for which there are, to date, no global standards.
Box 54 - The meals that different members of the family need
Men need at least two mixed meals every day and some snacks. They can get enough energy from a few large meals and from bulky foods.
Women need at least two mixed meals every day and some snacks. If they are pregnant or lactating, they need almost as much food as men - especially if they are also doing hard physical work. They need much more iron and folate than men, especially when they are pregnant.
Old people need at least two and if possible more meals each day as they may not eat much at each meal. They need less energy than young people but about the same amount of protein and other nutrients. Women who have stopped menstruating need less iron than child-bearing women. Old people may need soft food.
Adolescents need at least two large mixed meals and some snacks each day. They can eat bulky food. Boys need a lot of energy. Girls need plenty of iron. Pregnant adolescent girls are still growing so they need more food than pregnant women.
School-age children need at least two to three mixed meals and some snacks each day.
Children one to five years old need breastmilk until they are at least two years old. They need at least three mixed meals and two snacks each day. They cannot eat large bulky meals. It is especially important for meals to be clean and not to contain parasites or microorganisms that could cause diarrhoea or other infection.
Babies six to 12 months old need breastmilk eight to ten times or more each day. They need small meals, which are not bulky, three to five times a day.
Babies under six months of age need only breastmilk at least ten times each day.
Source: King and Burgess. 1993
As a general rule, figures for the composition of foods that contain a high percentage of water are always uncertain. Cereal grains contain relatively little water, and therefore tables give reliable figures for most of them. Variation in the vitamin and mineral content of foods is usually much greater than the variation in energy and protein content. The differences are especially large for all vegetables and fruits, particularly for vitamin A, ascorbic acid and minerals.
Nutrient intakes calculated from food composition data do not necessarily represent nutrients actually absorbed from the gut. For minerals and vitamins, estimates of net big-availability are not incorporated in food tables because so many constituents of food may promote or inhibit absorption. Most tables currently available also provide inadequate information about amounts of fibre, trace elements, specific fatty acids, carotenoids, tocopherols and contaminants, which are subjects of great current interest. In estimating individual nutritional status and designing treatments, a combination of dietary, biochemical, clinical and anthropometric methods will continue to be necessary. However, the improvement of food composition data worldwide and their standardization across countries are under way as part of a collaborative effort by FAO, United Nations University (UNU) and other international and national organizations (FAO, 1994c).
Factors affecting energy and nutrient requirements
Energy and nutrient requirements differ at different times during the life cycle from infancy to old age. Factors influencing these requirements include age, weight, sex, basal metabolic rate, level of physical activity, physiological status (for example, whether a woman is menstrual, postmenstrual, pregnant or lactating), state of physical health (for example, disease or parasitic infection or inherent weakness because of low birth weight) and the presence or absence of various food combinations in the diet.
About half the energy needed by the body is required to activate the muscles used in daily life. The rest is used up in the growth, renewal and maintenance of the body. Individual energy requirements vary widely. Some people use over three times more energy each day than others. Most of these differences are the result of differing physical activities, but there are also differences in the speed with which energy is released and utilized by the individual. The basal metabolic rate (BMR) (for definition see footnote 1 on page 20) varies from person to person and depends on a person's level of activity, body weight, age and sex (see Table 46).
The interaction of health and nutrition is of particular significance in many African countries, where parasitic infections and childhood diseases including measles and diarrhoea, together with PEM, are major causes of childhood deaths (see Table 47). These conditions may be followed, in young adulthood, by repeated episodes of fever and malaise associated with malaria, bilharzia (schistosomiasis) and filariasis, during which appetite is reduced and absorption of nutrients is impaired.
For women, early and frequent pregnancies may contribute to poor nutritional status, especially low levels of iron and folate leading to anaemia.
Seasonal food shortages may coincide with increased physical demands in the agricultural calendar. Malnourished and anaemic children and adults lack energy and initiative, are unable to study or work intensively, and generally fail to realize their full productive capacity, including their capacity to produce, process and consume more food. Thus a continuous cycle of malnutrition leading to low production leading to further malnutrition is established.
Table 46 - Basal metabolic rate (BMR) of men and women of different weights
Weight
(kg)
Men, aged:
Women, aged:
Source: WHO, 1985.
Table 47 - Top ten causes of deaths in paediatric wards, Mbeya Referral Hospital, Tanzania, 1985
Disease
Number of cases
Percentage of all deaths
All forms of PEM
Pneumopathies
Isolated diarrhoea
Measles
Cerebral malaria
Anaemias
Bacteria, meningitis
Septicaemia
Poisonings and drug overdoses
Congenital malformations
Others
Total
Source: Mduma, 1987.
FAO has developed a methodology and computer software to calculate population energy requirements, called ENREQ2. This methodology takes account of recommended allowances for children and pregnant or lactating women, levels of physical activity for adolescents and adults, level of infection and basal metabolic rate. Database files contain demographic, weight and height data pertaining to FAO member countries with populations exceeding 300 000, permitting the calculation of human energy requirements for populations in different situations. The software offers a flexible tool for decision-makers wishing to calculate energy requirements for populations of known composition or with special characteristics, including refugee populations containing a high proportion of women and children and requiring food assistance.
Vulnerable periods in the life cycle and special energy and nutrient needs
Pregnancy and lactation
A woman needs extra energy and protein during pregnancy to build up her body in preparation for breastfeeding and to provide for the growing demands of the foetus. Her additional needs depend on her activity levels and on her initial state of nutrition. Well-nourished women with light to moderate activity levels should aim to increase their intake by 100 kcal and about 6 to 7 g of extra protein per day. A well-nourished woman performing heavy activity, such as subsistence farming, may need an additional 200 kcal per day. Undernourished women should increase their intake by 200 to 285 kcal per day to reduce the risk of delivering an underweight baby and to ensure a good supply of breastmilk.
A breastfeeding mother needs about 500 kcal and 18 to 21 g of extra protein each day. Energy and nutrients to make breastmilk come partly from the mother's food intake and partly from the reserve stores of nutrients that she built up before and during pregnancy. Building up good stores is more important for making breastmilk than eating more food after the baby is born.
Approximate daily energy and protein needs for pregnant and lactating women are included in Table 48. Pregnant and lactating women also need an increased supply of iron, folate and vitamins A and C to meet the increased demands made on their bodies for these nutrients.
Infancy and weaning
During infancy, breastmilk provides all the nutrients that a baby needs. If the mother's nutrition has been satisfactory, these nutrients will be present in her milk in exactly the right proportions. The nutrients in breastmilk are more easily digested and absorbed and are more efficiently used by the baby's body than those in artificial milk mixtures (bottle feeds). Breastmilk also contains living anti-infective factors which protect a baby against infection. Some of the many advantages of breastfeeding are that it helps to delay a new pregnancy, it costs less than artificial feeding and it strengthens the bond between mother and baby.
Table 48 - Daily requirements for energy and protein
Group/age
(years)
Energy
(kcal)
Protein
(g)
Diet A^a
Diet B^b
Children (both sexes)
0-6 months
-^c
6-12months
1-3 years
Boys
Girls
If pregnant
Men, active
Women, active
Child-bearing age
Pregnant
Lactating
Source: WHO. 1985.
^a A mixed balanced diet with little fibre and plenty of complete protein, digestibility factor 100%, amino
acid score 100 for all ages.
^b A high-fibre diet containing a large amount of cereals, starchy roots and pulses and little complete
(animal) protein; digestibility factor 85%; amino acid scores 70 for ages 1 to 5 years 80 for ages 5 to
17 years and 100 for adults.
^c -: No value available; it is assumed that breastmilk covers needs.
Provided that the mother's own diet is good, her baby will thrive and grow steadily on her supply of breastmilk for the first four months of life. If solid foods are introduced to the infant too early, there is a risk that the infant's demand for breastmilk will be reduced. As a consequence of this reduced demand the mother will produce less milk, and early weaning will follow. The recommended gradual weaning process goes from exclusive breastfeeding (complete dependence on breastmilk), through partial breastfeeding plus weaning foods, to token breastfeeding, when the infant is able to eat family foods and will finally give up breastfeeding altogether.
Frequent meals and a high nutrient density in the infant's diet will help to ensure a safe and successful weaning period. In order to provide a child with more frequent meals or denser weaning foods, increased care-giving time and effort are needed. A good solution is a community-based care programme developed by a group of mothers, providing care in one of their homes and staffed by one or more mothers under the guidance of a visiting supervisor. Such programmes will be more effective if they form part of an overall development programme with official assistance and government support.
School-age children and adolescent girls and boys
The foods provided for school-age children should satisfy the high demands of rapid growth, intense physical activity and mental development. Between the ages of 11 and 16 years children grow very quickly and need extra food in the form of snacks in addition to regular meals (see Box 55). Snack foods can often be quite nutritious and high in energy, especially if they are fried in oil.
Children who arrive at school in a state of hunger will not be able to concentrate on their lessons, and their learning will suffer. The provision of school breakfasts may be an appropriate intervention in this case. Research findings indicate that mild to moderate malnutrition acts synergistically with social and environmental factors to reduce the educational performance of schoolchildren (Levinger, 1989). Low energy levels lead to inactivity and short attention span; a chronic state of undernutrition will prevent a child from achieving his or her full potential, both mentally and physically.
Box 55 - Snacks for school-age children
Examples of good snacks
These snacks are often good value for money:
· boiled, pasteurized or soured milk;
· bread or chapati (fried wheat bread), especially with an energy-rich food such as margarine or groundnut paste or simsim (sesame) paste;
· doughnuts, bean cakes, biscuits;
· boiled or fried cassava, plantain, yam or potato (e.g. chips);
· boiled or roasted maize cobs;
· bananas, pawpaw, avocado, mango, oranges and other fruits;
· coconut flesh;
· boiled egg;
· cooked groundnuts, soybeans and other oilseeds;
· small fried fish;
· insects such as locusts or termites;
· sugar cane.
Examples of poor snacks
These snacks are often poor value for money, and their frequent consumption can be bad for the teeth, so they should be kept for special treats:
· sodas;
· sweets and follies;
· ice-cream;
· glucose powder and tablets;
· crisps and other similar snack foods.
Source: King and Burgess, 1993.
Old age
As humans grow older, throughout adulthood, their need for food and nutrients declines as activity diminishes. There may also be a small reduction in the basal metabolic rate, associated with reduced cell mass. Further changes in dietary patterns may occur when illness restricts physical activity. Tables 42, 43 and 48 can be used to compare the energy and nutrient needs of women of child-bearing age and women aged over 60. Iron requirements are reduced in postmenopausal women, as they no longer experience blood loss through menstruation, and energy requirements are less when activity is limited. However, requirements for other minerals such as calcium remain the same, as do those for vitamins. If energy intake is reduced it is probable that the intake of vitamins and minerals will also suffer. It is therefore important to ensure that the diets of older people do not become too monotonous and limited. Whenever possible, they should include daily intakes of fresh vegetables
and fruit and particularly those foods that supply vitamins A, C and D.
A policy of encouraging families to care for their elderly, in keeping with African cultural traditions, has tremendous advantages and imposes far less burden on national resources. Family care provides emotional satisfaction to the elderly and could prove far more conducive to the maintenance of their health, nutritional status, productivity and dignity. A good proportion of elderly people between 60 and 70 years of age can continue to function as valuable members of society. In African societies the senior members of extended families traditionally enjoy a respected position and continue to have a dominant role in family decision-making.
African diets and diet composition
Relations among diet, ecology and the food supply system
In relation to nutrition, not only the composition of the diet is significant, but also the meal frequency patterns and the distribution of foods within the family. The food habits and dietary patterns of a community are often closely related to its ecological zone.
Domestication of plants, in response to natural ecosystems, has led to two main cropping systems. Seed culture (raising of crops from seeds) is the indigenous mode of agriculture in the drier regions of Africa. Root and tuber culture, dependent mainly on vegetative reproduction, is more highly developed in the humid tropical lowlands of Africa. Plant domestication can also lead to dependence on a single staple, such as rice, maize, cassava or plantain. If this staple is low in certain nutrients, nutritional deficiencies may result.
Nomadic pastoralists do not normally cultivate crops. Their traditional diets are based largely on animal products from their own herds, supplemented seasonally by a variable range of wild gathered foods in most communities. Increasingly, however, cereal products such as sorghum and millets are now included in their diets. See Chapter 4, Box 17 for a discussion of the food supply system and its nutritional consequences for a pastoral family in the Malian Sahel.
Other changes in the food supply system which are reflected in the diet are related to the increasing urbanization of African populations. Such dietary modifications include consumption of different dietary staples and an increase in the purchase of snack foods (see Chapter 3). There has been a shift away from sorghum, millets and yams towards modern foods such as maize, rice, wheat and wheat products, particularly in the cities.
Composition of African diets
Generalizations are rarely helpful in describing a subject as complex as diets, which depend on many economic, ecological, social and cultural factors and tend to be location and community specific. African diets are usually based on a carbohydrate staple served with soups, relishes and sauces, which may or may not be spicy, prepared from a wide variety of other foodstuffs. Figure 30 shows the proportions of different food groups in the consumption patterns of women and children in Swaziland.
Most of the dietary energy comes from the staple, which may also make a considerable contribution to the protein content of the meal. Staple cereals such as maize, sorghum, millets and rice contribute 40 to 60 percent of the total dietary energy supply (DES) in most countries. The relish provides oil, protein, vitamins and minerals. It makes the starchy staple more palatable and satisfies the appetite. The components and the nature of the starchy staple will remain fairly constant within a community, while the relish (usually composed of vegetables, pulses or nuts and fish or meat if available) will vary in components, flavour and consistency depending on the season, household resources and dietary habits. Few data are available on vegetable consumption in Africa, as the assessment is complicated by the fact that vegetables are obtained as wild crops.
FIGURE 30 - Composition of the diet of women and children in Swaziland:
WOMEN
CHILDREN
Source: Huss-Ashmore and Curry. 1991.
The oil or fat content of many African diets tends to be very low (see Annex 4). Total dietary fat provides on average 18 percent of total food energy in sub-Saharan Africa, but populations in some countries obtain as little as 7 to 15 percent of food energy from fat. The content of animal protein also tends to be quite low. Meat (primarily sheep and goat meat) and meat products provide an average of only 3 percent of DES. Milk is scarcely consumed in Africa (except in some countries in the Sahel such as Kenya, Mauritania, Somalia and the Sudan), because of the very low production of milk per animal and the lack of preservation technology. Another factor may be the high lactose intolerance among the population.
Given their limitations of resources and of access to different foods, most African communities have developed diets that maximize the use of local foodstuffs. Dietary deficiencies are often the result of lack of money, of resources, including labour and land, and of time, especially for women.
Table 49 shows examples of family diets that might be eaten in different localities in East Africa. They are not average diets in these areas, but suggestions for diets that would be satisfactory if the component foods are available and accessible to the family. These diets and the meals shown in Box 56 may provide guidance to extension and home economics officers who wish to advise households on feeding their families. If the household has access to land and to labour, these guidelines may also influence advice on horticultural and agricultural production for domestic consumption. In poor circumstances the most appropriate advice is probably to ensure a more equitable distribution of the available food and to improve the situation for children by encouraging breastfeeding and more frequent feeding of infants and weaning-age toddlers.
Table 49 - Dietary suggestions for daily food intake in seven localities in East Africa
Food
Amount
(g/person/day)
Kenya coast
Rice
Fish
Beans
Amaranth
Mango
Coconut
Oil
Salt
Uganda village
Plantains
Sweet potatoes
Meat
Beans
Sweet potato leaves
Tomatoes
Oil
Salt
Morogoro Region, Tanzania
Maize
Dried sprats
Cowpeas
Amaranth
Oranges
Onions
Oil
Salt
Nairobi, Kenya
White wheat-bread
Rice
Eggs
Meat
Carrots
Green leaves
Butter or margarine
Fresh bananas
Milk (in tea)
Sugar
Salt
Mozambique, rural
Millet
Cassava
Sour milk
Tomatoes
Cassava leaves
Groundnuts
Bambara nuts
Baobab fruit
Salt
Lake Victoria shore
Maize
Fish
Cowpeas
Papaya
Vegetables (mixed)
Groundnuts
Oil
Salt
Masailand (pastoralists)
Milk
Blood (animal)
Maize
Wild leaves
Wild fruit
Bananas
Salt
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1979.
^a Amounts given are those for an average man.
Box 56 - Family use of vegetable mixtures to improve the quality of the diet
Where foods of animal origin are not often available the quality of the protein in the diet can be improved by providing a mixture or variety of vegetable products at each meal. Thus if a household has maize and beans available it is far better nutritionally to eat some of both at each meal rather than to eat maize for two weeks and then beans for two weeks. The former is frequently practiced by many people in East Africa. For example, trio, a traditional Kikuyu food, includes maize, beans, potato and green leaves, and the Kamba food isyo is a mixture of whole-kernel maize with beans and sometimes vegetables. The various foods do not have to be physically mixed together, but can just as well be eaten separately at the same meal. Examples of vegetable mixtures are given below, some of which are traditional dishes:
· rice and bean stew;
· beans and boiled maize (nyoyo);
· maize, beans and green leafy vegetables;
· baked sweet potatoes served with peas or beans and amaranth leaves;
· uji or ugali made from one part cassava flour, two parts maize flour and served with sauce made from cowpeas and tomatoes;
· sorghum gruel and bananas with groundnut paste;
· millet served with onion, yam, peas and tomato relish;
· groundnut soup with potatoes;
· sesame (simsim) or groundnuts served with ugali;
· vegetable stew (green leaves, tomatoes, beans and onions) served with rice or ugali;
· cassava with bean mush;
· plantains with beans and cabbage.
Source: FAO, 1979.
Frequency of meals and distribution of food within the family
Meal frequency in most households is adapted to the lifestyle and work patterns of the family. In many rural households the main family meal is prepared and served in the evening, after the adults have returned from the fields and the children have walked home from school. Breakfast often consists of reheated (or cold) leftovers from the previous day's main meal, together with tea. In urban areas bread and tea or coffee are taken at breakfast. In some cases, if the workplace or school is distant, adults or children may leave home before breakfast and carry with them some cold food to be eaten on arrival. Many children walk to school without having eaten anything.
In urban areas men and women may eat a midday meal at the workplace, purchased either from vendors or from a workers' canteen. For men living alone in rented accommodation with limited cooking facilities, this may be the main meal of the day. In the evening the men may congregate in local eating houses for snacks, roasted meat and beer. In rural areas the midday meal may be carried to the farming areas and eaten in the fields during the planting, weeding and harvesting seasons. Schoolchildren are sometimes given a small sum of money to purchase a snack at midday. Alternatively, they may contribute food or cash for a prepared meal at school if facilities and helpers are locally available to cook it.
Preschool children and infants may travel with their mothers to the farm, to the workplace (if permitted) or to the local market if the mother regularly sells or buys produce. When the child remains with the mother throughout the day, he or she is likely to be fed regularly with breastmilk and/or snacks. Small children left at home may be cared for by older siblings, grandparents or other relatives. Ensuring adequate food intake for such children is often difficult, and breastfeeding may be reduced or abandoned at an early stage when the mother faces this situation.
When family meals are eaten together, often in the evening or at weekends, the manner of serving the meal and the distribution of the different food items may markedly affect the dietary intake of different family members. In some households it is customary for everyone to eat from communal bowls. When this is the case, children are trained not to be greedy, but to give preference to their elders, especially regarding the meat content of the soup or relish. Young children may find it difficult to consume sufficient foods to meet their needs, and all children will be expected to concentrate their attention on the starchy staple until their father has been satisfied from the soup pot. In other communities, the mother will serve her husband and any adult males first. She will then join her children in eating after the men are satisfied. Sometimes male children are fed before the mother, the female children and the babies. Thus the order of feeding reflects the family's priority
for feeding the main wage earners, but this may result in undernutrition for the most vulnerable members. Box 57 and Table 50 show results of a study regarding the effect of food distribution patterns on nutritional status within Nigerian families. It is important to note that although unequal distribution of foods within the household was often a problem, the main problem was usually an inadequate supply of available food.
Planning a diet and feeding a family
A woman does not plan a diet in terms of nutrient requirements when she is feeding her family. Food production, processing and preparation are so much a part of a her daily life that she probably would find it difficult to say how she feeds the family. Certainly, if she is a farmer she will try to grow and store the foods that her family will enjoy and that she is used to cooking. However, her preferences in this respect may be limited by the type and area of her land, the amount of assistance she can expect from her children and the storage facilities at her disposal. If she has to purchase food, her cash income will often be the limiting factor in her choices for the family diet. Other factors may also be important. What is the fuelwood and water situation? How much time does she have in which to cook the meal? Should some of the vegetables from her home garden be set aside to sell next day in the market? These questions are all relevant to the choices of meal patterns in
family cooking. Add to these concerns the breastfeeding demands of the new baby or the needs of the two-year-old for frequent, energy-dense feeds, and it is easy to understand why many women can answer the health worker's questions about the composition of balanced meals but do not conscientiously apply this knowledge to the family's diet.
Box 57 - Intrafamilial distribution of food and nutrients in a rural Nigerian population
The study revealed that the young male child had preferential treatment over his female counterpart with respect to food intake, thereby pointing to discrimination in matters of diet in the young male and female child. Children up to the age of five years certainly need less energy than adults; but a six-year-old consumes the same amount of energy as a smallish moderately active adult. Teenagers consume more. Wheeler (unpublished observations) has pointed out that in poor rural households, there were differences of the order of 30 to 50 percent between energy intakes of adults and children as well as between sexes. In this study, the differences were in the order of 20 to 50 percent between energy intakes of adults and children. This could be attributed to important socio-cultural factors observed influencing food distribution in the homes, such as who was first served food. The father was served first followed by children in order of seniority. In this male-dominated
society, the influence extended to who got the first choice of food; the sequence in which meals were served; and the attitude towards food which was often positive for preferred foods. Prestige foods were often reserved for men to attend to first before women and children. Most times, as observed in this study, Ibos serve a visitor more food than members of the household, showing the importance attached to hospitality in this culture.
Cultural practices - for example, the intrafamilial food distribution pattern in which the adult male has priority in servings of meat and fish - may have a deleterious effect on the vulnerable groups.
It is important to note that most times it was not unequal distribution of food within the households that might be the main problem, but that the available food supply was simply inadequate. In this study, the adult male was in negative nutrient balance except for iron and ascorbic acid. The implications of the study were that all members of the households were not getting enough food to eat, and some members, especially the vulnerable ones, consumed less than the FAO and WHO requirement values, which consequently led to poor nutritional status.
Source: Okeke and Nnanyelugo, 1989.
Table 50 - Person first served food in two Anambra State communities in Nigeria
Person
Opi
Odageri-edda
Total
Number
Number
Number
Father
Mother and children
Oldest children
Total
Source: Okeke and Nnanyelugo, 1989.
Perhaps the most useful general rule in African family feeding is to give everyone (except babies) different amounts of the staple but the same share of the relish. As a general rule, a small amount of animal food can be added to the relish to provide a complete protein, so that even a small amount will improve the protein value of the meal. The animal food may also help to provide fat for energy, haem iron and vitamins, especially vitamin A and folate (from liver). Where foods of animal origin are not often available, the quality of the protein in the diet can be improved by providing a mixture or variety of vegetable products at each meal (see Box 56). The family may need to adjust its food habits, within the family's resources, to ensure that the food eaten by individual members matches their nutrient requirements more closely.
<section>9</section>
Chapter 8 - Malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies
Extent of the problem and its consequences
Protein-energy malnutrition
Assessing malnutrition and its causes
Food and nutrition interventions
Micronutrient malnutrition: mineral and vitamin deficiency disorders
Iron deficiency anaemia
Iodine deficiency disorders
Vitamin A deficiency and nutritional blindness
Preventing and combating micronutrient malnutrition through a comprehensive approach
Chapter 8 - Malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies
Extent of the problem and its consequences
Chapter 7 provided a brief survey of the nutrient content of foods, the nutrient requirements of people at different stages of the life cycle, certain aspects of the African diet and food habits in relation to nutritional status. In the discussion of these topics, attention was drawn to some of the effects of malnutrition and micronutrient deficiencies on health and productivity. The present chapter discusses the four main forms of malnutrition and their assessment: protein-energy malnutrition (PEM), xerophthalmia resulting from vitamin A deficiency (VAD), iron deficiency anaemia, and endemic goitre and cretinism resulting from deficiency of iodine.
Tables 51 and 52 show some estimates of prevalence rates of PEM (as indicated by underweight) and micronutrient deficiencies for Africa. Such assessments are never precise, and wide variations occur among countries, but nevertheless the order of magnitude indicates the severity of the problems. It should be noted that the data reflect the situation in normal times; in some countries, severe human-caused or natural disasters have led to extensive undernutrition and even famine.
As shown in Chapter 1, Table 1, the proportion of the population chronically undernourished has risen by 5 percent (from 38 to 43 percent) in sub-Saharan Africa since the 1970s, but because of the region's annual population growth rate of approximately 3 percent, the number of people affected has doubled. Similarly, in continental Africa the total percentage of children under the age of five years who are malnourished dropped from 1975 to 1990 and has remained more or less constant at about 27 percent from 1990 to the present,^1 but owing to the rapid rise in population the actual number of malnourished children has risen dramatically from about 23 million in 1975 to 35 million in 1995 (Table 51).
^1 Current data from the World Health Organization (WHO) global database for 13 countries in sub" Saharan Africa suggest an overall increase in the prevalence of malnutrition from the early 1980s to the early 1990s (see also FAO, 1 996a).
Table 51 - Prevalence and number of underweight children under five years of age in continental Africa
Year
Percentage underweight
Number underweight
(millions)
Source: WHO, 1995b.
Table 52 - Estimated populations at risk and affected by iodine deficiency disorders, vitamin A deficiency and anaemia
Region
Iodine deficiency disorders^a
Vitamin A deficiency
Iron deficiency or anaemia
At risk^b
Affected (goitre)
At risk^c
Affected (clinical VAD)^d
Africa
Americas
Southeast Asia
Europe
n.a.^e
n.a.
Eastern Mediterranean
Western Pacific
Total
Sources: WHO, 1994; WHO/UNICEF, 1995.
^a There are a number of differences between these figures and previous global IDD estimates. Apart from increasingly better IDD surveillance in many countries, the differences include: use of United Nations updated population projections for 1992, use of different methodology for estimating populations at risk; and availability of prevalence data for countries for which previously no data were available.
^b Persons are considered to be at risk of IDD, although they may not necessarily suffer or manifest direct consequences, if they reside in a geographical region where the total goitre rate (TGR) in school-age children is 25%. Previous estimates of at-risk populations were based on a TGR prevalence of 210%. However, at a recent WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD consultation it was agreed that a TGR of 5% or greater in school-age children is associated with functional impairment directly due to iodine deficiency. and therefore the 5% cut-off point has been designated for classifying populations at risk of IDD (WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD, 1993).
^c Severe subclinical (prevalence of 220% with blood values <1).70,umol per line, with or without clinical eye signs or symptoms) and moderate subclinical (prevalence of >=10% to <20% with blood values <= 0.70 µmol per litre, with or without clinical signs or symptoms).
^d Total xerophthalmia or other clinical eye signs, i.e. Bitot's spots, corneal xerosis, keratomalacia and corneal scars, and/or symptoms, i.e night blindness.
^e n.a.: not available.
Poverty, which results in low food availability, overcrowded and unsanitary living conditions and improper child care, is a frequent cause of malnutrition. For affected individuals and households, the consequences of malnutrition are grave. In addition to the human suffering, the loss in human potential translates into social and economic costs that no country can afford. Undernutrition and micronutrient deficiencies, whether in their mildest or most severe form, may adversely affect the health and well-being of individuals. Poor nutrition and health lead to reduction in the overall quality of life and severe curtailment of development of human potential. In addition, poor health related to malnutrition reduces the resources and earning capacity of households that are already poor, thus increasing their social and economic problems.
Malnutrition and poverty often exacerbate problems of unsustainable agricultural practices as a result of the desperate efforts of the poor to obtain adequate food. There is also evidence that poor nutrition has a significant impact on reproduction, physical activity, child growth and development, learning capacity and work performance. In addition, malnutrition lessens an individual's ability to fight infectious disease, thus compounding the extent and severity of illness among the poorly nourished.
Protein-energy malnutrition
PEM results when the body's needs for energy and protein or both cannot be satisfied by the diet. It has a wide spectrum of manifestations, and its severity ranges from weight loss to growth retardation to distinct clinical syndromes, frequently associated with deficiencies of vitamins and minerals (e.g. vitamin A, iron and zinc). The most severe clinical manifestations of PEM are kwashiorkor and marasmus.
Symptoms of marasmus include:
· apathy;
· growth failure, with weight below 60 percent of expected weight for age;
· wasted muscles (muscles that are visibly thinner and less developed than normal) and very little fat under the skin;
· diarrhoea.
Marasmus is commonly seen in babies whose mothers had inadequate breastmilk and occurs most clearly during the child's first year. It may also occur when there is too long a reliance on breastmilk without complementary solid foods. Improper use of bottle-feeding is closely associated with marasmus, especially in urban areas.
Symptoms of kwashiorkor include:
· fine, reddish-brown, lustreless hair with loose curls;
· apathy;
· growth failure, with weight usually below 60 percent of expected weight for age, but this depends on the degree of oedema;
· oedema (excess fluid under the skin, causing puffiness);
· blotchy skin;
· prominent stomach;
· diarrhoea;
· wasted muscles.
Kwashiorkor usually occurs later than marasmus and is uncommon under one year of age. It occurs most frequently when children are taken off a diet of breastmilk and have to rely only on the starchy staple. On the same kind of diet and in the same household, one child may develop marasmus and another kwashiorkor. The causes of kwashiorkor are still not fully known; however, it has often been found to occur in association with diarrhoeal infections, which indicates that the causes go beyond nutritional factors.
Infants and young children are the most severely affected by PEM because of their high energy and protein needs relative to body weight and their particular vulnerability to infection. Children's health is most in danger from about three months of age until they can feed themselves, perhaps at about three years of age. During this period several weaning practices can have an adverse effect on child nutrition. One factor is the age at which food supplements are introduced into the child's diet; others include the method of food preparation, the frequency of feeding and the energy density of weaning foods. In all circumstances, but especially during illness, young children need to be fed frequently during the day. Mothers may have difficulty in feeding children often enough if they are working in the fields; thus the limited time available to mothers may be an important constraint on children's food intake.
Assessing malnutrition and its causes
Food and nutrition assessment is necessary for the identification of the poorest and most vulnerable people in a community and the selection of appropriate interventions aimed at preventing malnutrition and improving people's access to food. Food and nutrition situations may be assessed by various methods and indicators. Quantitative methods range from assessment of the availability of, access to and consumption of food to surveys of indicators of nutritional status such as body measurements, mortality rates and clinical and biochemical signs. These quantitative methods are often complemented by collection of qualitative information, which is useful in the interpretation of statistical results and for gaining a better understanding of the causes of malnutrition.
Indicators for PEM include children's body weight and height, infectious disease rates, food intake relative to need and body mass index (BMI) for adults.
Chronic dietary energy deficiency
Assessment of the extent of chronic dietary energy deficiency at the national level is usually based on an estimate of dietary energy supplies (DES) calculated from food balance sheets combined with information about the distribution of food supplies. However, the use of food balance sheet data to assess nutrition situations is problematic, as it does not provide a direct assessment of food consumption (see Box 58). Given the limitations of using aggregate supply figures to assess nutritional well-being, FAO has developed a methodology that estimates the number and percentage of people who over a period of one year do not have access to enough food to meet their energy needs. This proportion of the population may be referred to as the "chronically undernourished". However, since these figures do not take into account those persons facing problems of intrahousehold food distribution, seasonal or acute malnutrition or infections, the actual number of undernourished people is
likely to be higher. The methodology is based on estimates of the distribution of available food supplies among households and the application of a cut-off point relating to energy requirements.
Anthropometry
The most accurate and rapid way of assessing the nutritional and health status of a population, a community or an individual is by means of anthropometry. Anthropometric measurements are measurements of the body (weight and height), often in association with age, which permit the development of certain indexes reflecting individual or population characteristics. "Wasted" (thin), "stunted" (short) and "obese" are terms that describe the nutritional status of individuals, and they are quantitatively expressed in various anthropometric indexes as discussed in Box 59, which summarizes the use of anthropometry as a method of assessing nutritional status. In children, body weight and height are among the most important indicators of PEM.
In adults, most anthropometric studies using weight for height have centred on health clinic patients, particularly pregnant women. Use of the body mass index (BMI), as defined in Box 59, has generally been limited to studies of adult obesity. A review of available data on BMI from various regions (FAO, 1994e) suggests that an adult's BMI is closely related to health status and may also provide an index of functional disability. Decreasing BMI (less than 18.5) is linked to increasing illness and consequent reduced work capacity (see Figure 31). As BMI falls, community-related productive work and strenuous activity may be reduced to reserve energy for vital agricultural and other domestic activities. At the same time, leisure pursuits and interests within the family may also be sacrificed, including adult interaction and stimulus for young children. In assessing the overall food adequacy within a community it would be useful to combine a measure of adult BMI with assessments
of children's nutritional status, in order to select the most effective and appropriate interventions.
Box 58 - Using food balance sheet data to assess nutrition situations
Precise assessments of national nutritional levels are difficult to make. National surveys of nutritional status and actual levels of food consumption are perhaps the most accurate sources of information, but they are costly, time-consuming and often impractical, especially for low-income countries. An alternative and frequently more feasible approach is that based on FAO's food balance sheets, which examine each nation's food situation. Food balance sheets provide information about a country's average per caput dietary energy supply (DES), which indicates the amount of food available for human consumption in the country, among other data.
DES is an imperfect tool and it may be misleading since it does not provide a direct assessment of food consumption. For instance, people may be too poor to buy the food that is available. Attempts to assess food adequacy by comparing DES with requirement figures sometimes fail for these reasons. Furthermore, the answer to the question of which requirement figures to use is not always obvious. Should the requirement figure be that for mere survival, or should it refer to a particular level of activity?
Despite such limitations, when DES is combined with information about the distribution of food supplies, it is possible to estimate the number of people whose energy intake is too low. DES also correlates closely with other indicators of health and socio-economic development.
Recently, in connection with the FAO World Food Surveys, there have been refinements in the concepts used to estimate the number of people in developing countries who do not have access to enough food to meet their energy needs on average during a year. While this group is actually classified as chronically dietary-energy deficient, this is commonly taken to reflect the proportion of the population chronically undernourished. The modifications incorporate concerns of inequitable distribution and variations among households in relation to estimates of energy needs.
Additional conceptual modifications to the methodology have occurred since the Fifth World Food Survey in 1986. These include modifications to the previous cut-off points (1.2 and 1.4 BMR) used to define energy needs. Basal metabolic rate (BMR) refers to the energy expenditure of an individual while in the fasting state and lying at complete rest. A higher, more realistic energy level (1.54 BMR) has now been adopted which represents energy required to maintain body weight and to support light activity. Increasing the energy requirement level used consequently increased the estimated absolute number of persons affected by dietary energy deficiency.
Source: FAO/WHO. 1992g.
Box 59 - Anthropometry as an indicator of nutritional status
Anthropometric indexes provide an approximate reflection of nutritional status. The indicators used most often are the body's weight and height, in relation to a subject's age and sex. Others include arm, head and thigh circumferences and skinfold thicknesses. The main anthropometric indexes used are: weight for height, height for age, weight for age and body mass index (BMI). BMI = W/H2, that is, weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in metres. WHO uses United States National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) data as a standard since many studies have shown that the growth of normal, healthy and adequately nourished children almost always approximates these reference values. Preferably, anthropometric data for children are quoted in terms of "Z-scores" based on standard deviations (SDs) above or below the median reference value for a person of a given age. The level of median minus 2 SD is usually taken as the cut-off point or threshold, below which the
status is considered unsatisfactory. that is, undernutrition exists.
Weight for height
This index is used for both adults and children in relation to accepted reference values. In acutely undernourished people (those who have had inadequate dietary intakes or an acute infection within recent weeks), decline in body weight is relatively rapid; height remains unchanged in adults and changes very slowly in children. Weight for height is a measure of "acute undernutrition" or "wasting" and is the index most used in nutritional emergencies as well as in long-term situations of undernutrition, such as famine. Weight for height is useful in assessing nutritional status of children and adults. In children, weight for height ratios can be used without knowing the individual's age. In most circumstances less than 2 percent of children under five years of age are below the median minus 2 SD. If 5 to 10 percent of the population group is below this level, the degree of acute undernutrition may be described as moderate; if the proportion is beyond 10 percent, this is
generally considered to be a severe situation.
Height for age
This parameter is used for assessing "chronic undernutrition" in children. Prolonged undernutrition causes retardation of growth in both height and weight, to a roughly comparable degree. Impaired gain in height is called "stunting". Gain in height is most affected by long-standing environmental and socio-economic factors, hence it reflects general socio-economic conditions. In developing countries, widespread chronic undernutrition is common and the proportion of individuals below the median minus 2 SD is often in the range of 20 to 60 percent, with an average near 40 percent. Populations in which 25 to 50 percent of the children under five years of age have height for age below the median minus 2 SD are commonly considered to be moderately affected, while those with more than 50 percent below the cut-off are considered to be severely affected.
Weight for age
The proportion of children under five years of age who are below the median minus 2 SD (weight for height) ranges from 10 to 50 percent with an average around 20 to 30 percent in many developing countries. Populations with 20 to 40 percent of children who are underweight for age can be considered moderately affected, and those with more than 40 percent are severely affected. The weight for age indicator is available more often than weight for height or height for age but is more difficult to interpret because it can be affected by either acute or chronic undernutrition. Serial weighings indicate incremental changes in weight, giving a more dynamic picture of growth velocity and the nutrition situation. This is, in fact, a much better way of assessing nutrition although it is more difficult to carry out.
Body mass index (BMI)
This index, defined as W/H2, provides a measure of body mass, ranging from thinness to obesity. Empirically, it has been found that the normal range of BMI is from 18.5 to 25.0. Individuals with a BMI above 30 are considered obese, and those with a BMI below 18.5 are considered underweight. Some studies have shown increased mortality rates in both underweight and overweight subjects.
Source: WHO Working Group, 1986.
FIGURE 31 - Body mass index and "equivalent days" of illness among Rwandese women, 1982
Source: FAO, 1994e.
Infant and child mortality
Among infants and young children, poor nutritional status and infection, as well as other environmental and socio-economic factors, can lead to death The infant mortality rate (IMR) is strongly influenced by nutritional factors such as foetal undernutrition stemming from maternal undernutrition, infections and/or anaemia during pregnancy. Specific mortality data for infants are often difficult to obtain because population information for infants is unknown and deaths may not be reported in many countries.
In countries where the prevalence of infectious and parasitic diseases is high, about one-half of all deaths occur before five years of age, and one-third of these deaths occur after the first year of life. The under-five mortality rate (U5MR) for the least-developed countries is about 200 per 1000 live births. In sub-Saharan Africa, the IMR fell from 152 to 109 per 1000 live births between 1960 and 1993 (UNICEF, 1995).
Low birth weight
Low birth weight (LBW), a major health problem in most African countries, is associated with neonatal (age 0 to 28 days) and post-neonatal (age 29 days to one year) mortality. A baby who weighs less than 2.5 kg at birth is considered to be of low birth weight. LBW is associated with prematurity (i.e. gestational age below 37 weeks) and intra-uterine growth retardation. The causes of LBW are multiple and interrelated. Important factors are the mother's low intake of food energy or low weight gain during pregnancy, low pre-pregnancy weight, short stature and diseases such as malaria. Continual cycles of pregnancy and lactation, combined with the seasonal stress of heavy agricultural work, place strain on the nutritional status of women and reduce their capacity for caring activities within the family.
In a study in the Gambia, feeding a high-energy supplement to underweight pregnant women markedly reduced the incidence of LBW babies, from 28.2 to 4.7 percent (see Box 60 and Table 53). However, in controlled clinical trials on the effects of energy and protein intakes on pregnancy outcome, balanced protein and energy supplementation was demonstrated to result in only modest increases in maternal weight gain and foetal growth, even in undernourished women, and did not confer long-lasting benefits in terms of infant and child growth and health performance (Kramer, 1993). Increasing evidence suggests that pre-conception nutritional status is closely related to pregnancy outcome. Although more work on the effects of maternal supplementation on birth weight is necessary, these studies suggest that a shift of focus may be required from maternal health care to providing better nutrition and health services for women in general, especially for teenage girls and young women. An
increased emphasis on young women's well-being would be a cost-effective intervention for improvement of the health and nutritional security of the whole household.
Box 60 - Prenatal supplementary feeding of African women and birth weight
Providing supplementary food to pregnant women may be an efficient and cost-effective form of nutritional intervention aimed at improving child growth and survival prospects in chronically undernourished populations. However, the maximum achievable benefit of prenatal supplementation has not yet been defined.
We report here the effects on birth weight of a groundnut-based biscuit supplement given to pregnant Gambian women which resulted in a substantially higher net energy increment than did any previous supplementation studies. A threshold effect was apparent in which the supplement was only effective when women would otherwise have been in negative energy balance.
The pre-supplement dietary energy intake of pregnant women in Keneba varied from an average level of only 1 480 kcal per day in the dry season to a minimum of 1 300 kcal per day in the wet season. Despite this the women were in positive energy balance in the dry season (February to June) as judged by satisfactory weight gain and deposition of subcutaneous fat. In the wet season (July to January) women were in marked negative energy balance due to the combined stresses of a reduction in energy intake and a high energy expenditure on agricultural tasks. Maternal protein intakes were not grossly deficient before supplementation and were slightly in excess of recommended intakes after supplementation.
Methods
The supplement consisted of groundnut-based biscuits and a vitamin-fortified tea drink. The supplement was offered six days each week, and consumption was carefully supervised and measured in a purpose-built supplementation centre. Birth weights, to the nearest 10 g, were usually recorded immediately after birth, and always within 24 hours.
Summary of results
Gambian women, who show marked seasonal fluctuations in energy balance, were offered a dietary supplement during pregnancy. This resulted in a net energy increment of 431 kcal per day. In the wet season, when the women were normally in marked negative energy balance due to food shortages and a high agricultural work load, the supplementation improved birth weight by a mean of 224 9 and reduced the incidence of low-birth-weight babies (<2.5 kg) from 28.2 to 4.7 percent [see Table 53]. In the dry season, when the women were previously in positive energy balance despite an energy intake of only 60 percent of the recommended dietary allowance, the supplement had no beneficial effect on birth outcome. This threshold effect indicates the need to identify truly at-risk groups for prenatal supplementation programmes in developing countries.
Source: Prentice et al., 1983.
Table 53 - Effect of prenatal dietary supplementation on birth weight distribution, the Gambia (% of total births)
Birth weight
(g)
Dry season
Wet season
Combined
Pre-supplementation
Post-supplementation
t test
NS^a
P<0.01
P<0.01
Source: Prentice et al.. 1983.
^a Not significant.
Qualitative assessment of food and nutrition situations
Anthropometric indexes, mortality rates and low birth weight are quantitative indicators which describe the nutritional and health status of individuals and population groups but do not provide an explanation of the underlying causes of the problems. To provide a better understanding of the causes of malnutrition and the most effective ways of combating them, information is needed about many aspects of life within and around the community. It will often be necessary to collect information that is qualitative and that reflects people's opinions and perceptions of malnutrition and its causes.
Rapid rural appraisal is one of a number of approaches to collecting mainly qualitative information. It is based on a number of techniques including secondary data review, direct observation, semi-structured interviews, workshops, analytical games, diagrams and maps. Field workers use checklists of information needs to structure guided yet informal discussions with rural people (see Box 61). A related method is participatory rural appraisal, which is a type of rapid rural appraisal in which the emphasis is shifted towards greater participation and involvement of the local community. It involves people in assessing and analysing their own food and nutrition situation and in prioritizing and selecting actions and projects which the community can implement independently or with partial external assistance. Participatory rural appraisal envisages a dialogue of equals, with the advisory team and the rural people sharing experiences and learning from one another. It is usually the
beginning of a longer-term development process in which the community members are active participants from the start to the end of a project, i.e. from problem assessment and analysis, to prioritization and selection of activities and projects, to implementation and finally to monitoring and evaluation of progress towards stated goals.
Food and nutrition interventions
As discussed in earlier chapters, the underlying causes of chronic malnutrition are multifaceted, and to improve nutrition sustainably simultaneous action may be required in many areas. In many cases poverty and restricted access to food are the underlying causes of malnutrition. The pursuit of household food security must start, therefore, in making food more accessible to the poor. This can be achieved by increasing food production and availability, incomes and ownership of assets or by providing a safety-net of social security for the needy.
Promotion of small-scale community-based agriculture and food processing is central to improving household food security among the rural poor. It offers increased food, employment and income. In general, increases in real income translate into higher food consumption and improved nutrition. Gains from a combination of cash crops and livestock can also reach into the community, providing opportunities for off-farm employment. Making credit available to the poor, particularly women and others lacking any form of collateral, can result in new sources of income and improve household food security. Women tend to spend a significant part of any additional income on food and other necessities for the family.
Box 61 - Participatory appraisal of community food and nutrition problems
The following checklist includes a number of questions that might be explored to find out more about the causes of food and nutrition problems in a community. It is meant to stimulate a dialogue about similarities and differences among households and/or social groups. The checklist is not complete but provides examples of the types of issues that might be included.
Local food system and recent changes
· How do households obtain their food?
· What do they produce? What do they purchase? Other sources?
· Has the situation changed in the last years? How? Why?
· How are these changes perceived?
Production for household consumption
· Which foods are produced by the household?
· How many months do staples last?
· What are the months of food scarcity?
· What coping mechanisms or activities do households employ to get food in months of scarcity?
Food habits, preferences and related beliefs
· How many meals do the different household members eat per day? Are there seasonal differences?
· What do they eat? Any snacks in between?
· Do children eat differently? How? Which age groups (infants, school-age children)?
· How do eating patterns change as a coping mechanism in times of scarcity? How is food obtained in such situations?
· If the household had more resources, what foods would its members like to eat more of, or more often?
· Which foods are considered especially good or to be avoided? When? By whom?
Food preparation and usage
· How is food prepared at household level? Where? On what kind of stove? How often per day?
· Are any special foods prepared for small children? What types of food?
· How is food portioned out within households? Who eats first?
Nutritional status
· Is malnutrition a familiar notion to the community?
· What does the community perceive as malnutrition?
· How important is it?
· How many thin children or adults are there in the community?
· How do people describe or explain this? What do they do about it?
Social aspects
· Which are the poorest households within the community? Why?
· Do they suffer from food scarcity? Do they have malnourished children?
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1993f.
Agricultural projects and small-scale, labour-intensive food processing industries often offer the greatest opportunity for socioeconomic development and consequently for sustained improvement in the nutritional status and food security of the poor. Because of past failure to include nutrition objectives in agricultural development policies and programmes, opportunities to combine efforts to enhance household food security and to improve human welfare through sustainable development have generally been missed. Sustained improvements in nutritional well-being can best be achieved by accelerating agricultural production; expanding food supplies; integrating nutrition considerations into agricultural development policies and programmes and larger-scale investment projects; implementing targeted nutrition interventions; and empowering local communities to address their own food and nutrition problems.
If in the nutritional assessment of a community the anthropometric evidence indicates that adult BMIs are adequate but children's growth is poor, attention should also be directed towards nutrition education, reducing infection and promoting parental care, rather than just enhancing agricultural productivity and economic conditions. Appraisal of intrafamilial food distribution might also be indicated.
If morbidity and mortality in the under-five population is identified as a major problem, attention could be directed to the promotion of breastfeeding and improved weaning practices. If low birth weights are the major evidence of malnutrition, care must be given to the improved health and nutrition of women, including assessment and treatment of iron deficiency anaemia. However, it is not possible to prescribe specific interventions to prevent chronic undernutrition; interventions must be case specific, and they must be assessed, analysed and selected through constant dialogue and communication with the affected communities.
Micronutrient malnutrition: mineral and vitamin deficiency disorders
Micronutrient malnutrition is the term now commonly used to refer to the three main vitamin or mineral deficiencies of public health significance: iron deficiency anaemia, iodine deficiency disorders (IDD) and vitamin A deficiency. Micronutrient deficiencies substantially affect the nutritional status, health and development of a significant percentage of the population in many countries, both developed and developing. These deficiencies contribute to growth retardation, morbidity, mortality, brain damage and reduced cognitive and working capacities among both children and adults.
Iron deficiency anaemia
In Chapter 7 some biochemical aspects of iron in human metabolism were discussed in relation to the availability and assimilation of haem and non-haem iron from the diet. Attention was drawn to the important effects of interacting components in the diet, especially vitamin C, in increasing the availability of non-haem iron. The particular needs of women and children were identified, as well as the effects of parasites and infection on the iron status of the body.
Iron deficiency anaemia decreases individual potential and has adverse effects on learning, productivity and earnings. Anaemia leads to reduced physical activity and decreased work performance because of the reduced transportation of oxygen from lungs to tissues and of carbon dioxide in the reverse direction. Iron deficiency may also result in muscle dysfunction.
A normally nourished individual placed on a diet that is deficient in iron undergoes first a loss or depletion of body stores. There is increasing evidence that stored iron may have a role in human susceptibility to, and morbidity from, infections.
Anaemia, together with malnutrition, is among the major causes of childhood morbidity and mortality in many developing countries. When anaemia occurs in infancy or childhood it is associated with significant loss of cognitive abilities as well as decreased physical activity and reduced resistance to disease. Providing iron supplements to schoolchildren with iron deficiency results in improvement in selective learning and school achievement tests. Iron supplementation can also improve appetite in undernourished children and thus speed up their rate of recovery from malnutrition and their subsequent physical growth.
Iron deficiency in women of child-bearing age increases the hazards associated with complications of pregnancy, premature birth and low birth weight and causes infants to enter life with sub-optimal iron reserves. Frequent pregnancies often compound this problem and result in further deterioration in the health and nutrition status of the mother and her subsequent children.
Assessment of the prevalence and causes of anaemia
The assessment of the prevalence of anaemia in a community is often based on surveys of women and children, as these are the groups most at risk. Figure 32 shows the prevalence of anaemia in pregnant women, assessed on a global basis. It is estimated that 60 percent of pregnant women and 45 percent of non-pregnant women in developing countries are anaemic (Figure 33).
The symptoms of anaemia vary significantly and can be caused by conditions other than iron deficiency. The most practical form of assessment is therefore based on the determination of the blood haemoglobin level. Table 54 shows the haemoglobin levels generally accepted to indicate anaemia in different members of the family. Haemoglobin levels rarely exceed 16 g per 100 ml. Blood tests are normally taken at health clinics and are carried out routinely for pregnant women. Children may be tested at school during special surveys or as an initial action before the definition of a treatment and control programme for a number of nutritional disorders.
FIGURE 32 - Prevalence of anaemia in pregnant women, 1988
Source: WHO, 1992 (quoted in UN ACC/SCN, 1992).
FIGURE 33 - Proportion of people in developing countries who are anaemic
Source: DeMaeyer et al., 1989.
Analysis of the causes of anaemia may involve dietary surveys to establish the level and type of iron intake from the diet, together with analysis of the health situation to determine the causes of loss of iron or of poor assimilation from the diet. The analysis may also include a study of the social and environmental situation, including the educational and income levels of the population and the local sanitation conditions such as availability of clean water and use of latrine facilities.
Table 54 - Haemoglobin levels in anaemia
Group
Haemoglobin level^a
(g/100 ml)
Children 6 months 10 5 years
Children 610 14 years
Men
Women (not pregnant)
Women (pregnant)
Source: UN ACC/SCN, 1991.
^a Haemoglobin below these levels means anaemia Mild: below the values given but more than 10 Moderate: 7 to 10. Severe: below 7.
On the basis of this analysis, and within the constraints of the programme's financial resources, a number of actions may be proposed. Whenever possible, the target community should be involved at all stages of the assessment and analysis of the community's nutritional situation. The final choice of priorities in the actions to be taken should also rest with the community, under guidance from the programme staff and from local organizations.
Selecting interventions for control and prevention of iron deficiency anaemia
One of the primary strategies available for intervention is nutrition and health education to improve dietary intake of foods rich in iron, folate and vitamin C and to reduce the consumption of interfering substances. In a nutrition education programme, topics that should be covered in relation to the prevention of iron deficiency anaemia in young children include support for breastfeeding and home preparation of suitable weaning foods. Other supporting interventions include supplementation, which is the provision of medicinal iron to the individual, and fortification, which is the addition of the micronutrient, in this case iron, to a suitable food (see Box 62). In areas where parasitic diseases and malaria are major contributors to anaemia, their control will form an important part of the overall strategy. Where hookworm infections are prevalent, regular, periodic deworming will help reduce iron losses.
Depending on the extent of the problem, a medical supplementation programme may be appropriate. However, large-scale supplementation requires an adequate support and delivery programme, which is often expensive. A supplementation programme may be possible for a limited period under project financing, but for sustainability it must be incorporated into an effective community health care system. Otherwise, it risks collapse when project funds are withdrawn. A further challenge involves ensuring that the medication is taken for the four to five months of treatment that are often prescribed.
Improving dietary intake is a more long-term approach and is the preferred and more sustainable strategy. The production and consumption of food plants rich in iron and folic acid, particularly green leafy vegetables, together with fruits rich in vitamin C to enhance iron absorption, should be promoted. Production and consumption of animal and dairy products should also be encouraged whenever possible. Poor diets result more often from poverty than from ignorance, however, and the ultimate solution lies in economic and social measures that can ensure a more equitable distribution of resources, including food.
Box 62 - Considerations in the selection of an intervention programme for the control of iron deficiency anaemia
· Supplements. Usually medicinal supplements to at-risk groups such as pregnant and lactating women, children or occasionally labourers.
· Fortification with iron, or ascorbic acid, or both. A suitable food and a suitable nutrient preparation must be found.
· Nutritional and health education. More difficult with iron than with some other nutrients.
· Parasite control. Treatment of those infected with hookworms, with Schistosoma haematobium, S. mansoni or S. japonicum, or with other parasites; plus improved sanitation, water supplies and knowledge of transmission of infection.
· Socio-economic measures. Interventions to improve economic status and levels of living.
Source: WHO, 1977.
In the medium-term perspective, the most cost-effective intervention for the alleviation of iron deficiency anaemia in urban and rural areas is food fortification. This strategy requires identification of a suitable food, which should already be in use by the majority of the target groups on a regular basis. For example, iron-fortified salt has been used in India. A major advantage is that no special distribution system is necessary, as distribution is provided through the existing food markets for the selected commodity.
Box 63 provides a brief review of the national programme for the control of nutritional anaemia in the United Republic of Tanzania.
Iodine deficiency disorders
The nature and causes of IDD, including endemic goitre and cretinism, have been examined from a dietary viewpoint in Chapter 7. The cause of these disorders, and potential methods for their control and elimination, have been known for many decades. Nonetheless goitre, often accompanied by crippling endemic cretinism in the community, still affects millions of people throughout the world. The characteristics of hypothyroidism are described in Chapter 7.
The immediate cause of IDD is a deficiency of iodine in the diet. The underlying cause is a deficiency of iodine in the local soil on which vegetation grows, animals graze and crops are cultivated, which results in a shortage of iodine in local foodstuffs. The effects of iodine deficiency are most seriously manifest during pregnancy and parturition. Iodine deficiency disorders also have economic and social consequences for development (see Box 64).
The severity of IDD is classified on the basis of the prevalence of goitre and the mean level of urinary iodine in the test population.
Box 63 - Causes and control of nutritional anaemia in the United Republic of Tanzania
The cause of iron deficiency anaemia in Tanzania has been found to be a combination of low dietary intake; low big-availability due to the plant origin of the iron; poor absorption due to the presence of inhibitors such as phytates, tannins and caffeine; and increased losses due to the presence of blood-depleting parasites like hookworm. Folic acid deficiency is mainly due to the increased requirements during pregnancy which are not balanced by adequate dietary intake, and the high prevalence of malaria.
The programme for the prevention and control of nutritional anaemia in Tanzania has a national coverage but is targeted mainly to pregnant women and children under five years of age. The programme aims at addressing the major causes of anaemia in a fashion which ensures sustainability. The dietary approach aims at iron and folic acid deficiency anaemia (IFADA) and consists of the promotion of the production and consumption of iron and folic acid rich foods, particularly green leafy vegetables and vitamin C rich foods like fruits which enhance iron absorption. Animal and dairy products are also encouraged whenever possible. A pharmaceutical approach through the supplementation of iron folate tablets targeted to the most vulnerable group, pregnant women, through the Essential Drug Programme (EDP) and the Maternal and Child Health (MCH) system has also been implemented for a number of years. General public health measures aimed at the strengthening of control measures against
malaria, schistosomiasis and intestinal parasites like hookworm form an important component of the programme. The integration of these measures with the vitamin A programme and in particular with other existing health and nutrition programmes, coupled with adequate research, information, communication and education and management information systems, ensures community participation and programme sustainability.
Source: Kavishe, 1991.
In many areas of the world, particularly in Africa, iodine deficiency occurs but has not yet been fully recognized. According to recently revised estimates of the Micronutrient Deficiency Information System (MDIS), about 1 572 million people globally are at risk of iodine deficiency: 486 million in Southeast Asia, 423 million in the Western Pacific, 168 million in the Americas, 181 million in continental Africa, 141 million in Europe and 173 million in the Eastern Mediterranean (WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD, 1993). In Africa alone, 86 million people (13.1 percent of the total population) are estimated to have goitre. Figure 34 indicates the estimated national status of IDD prevalence for countries in continental Africa.
Box 64 - Why combating iodine deficiency disorders is important
Iodine deficiency delays social and economic development in the area because:
· There are more handicapped people who need care from the community.
· Cattle, goats, chickens and other domestic animals are also iodine deficient. They grow more slowly and reproduce less.
· Local people are mentally slower and less energetic than healthy people. It is more difficult to motivate them.
· Iodine-deficient children are difficult to educate and are less likely to get good jobs when they grow up.
· Children with cretinism often die young. Severely disabled children who survive can be a burden on their families and communities. Less disabled people, if they are physically strong, may be able to do simple manual tasks.
· A large goitre may reduce a person's chances of marriage or employment.
Source: King and Burgess, 1993.
In Tanzania, an estimated 6.25 million people (25 percent of the total population) are affected by IDD (Kavishe, 1987). Pregnant and lactating women have the highest incidence of IDD, 52 percent, and children under five years of age have the lowest incidence, l 3 percent. In an Ethiopian study, the overall prevalence of goitre in seven provinces of Shoa Region was found to be 32.7 percent, while the incidence in the female population of Merhabete Province was as high as 60 percent (see Table 55).
Interventions for control of IDD
The treatment and prevention of IDD depend on increasing the intake of iodine in the affected population, either by medicinal supplementation or by fortification of a component of the diet. Iodization of salt has greatly reduced the prevalence of goitre in Argentina, Colombia, Mexico and Guatemala, but this approach may not always be easy to implement. Tanzania chose to use a targeted distribution of iodinated oil capsules as a short-term measure. The results and costs of that programme are given in Box 65. Table 45 in Chapter 7 shows the daily needs for iodine.
FIGURE 34 - Prevalence of iodine deficiency disorders in Africa: total goitre rate (TGR) in school-age children
Source: WHO/UNICEF/ICCIDD, 1993.
Table 55 - Prevalence of goitre, xerophthalmia (Bitot's spots) and anaemia in seven provinces of Shoa Region, Ethiopia
Province/gender group
Number examined
Goitre
Xerophthalmia
Anaemia
(No.)
(%)^a
(No.)
(No.)
Chebona-Gurage
Men
Women
Both sexes^b
Merhabete
Men
Women
Both sexes
Selale
Men
Women
Both sexes
Kembatana-Hadya
Men
Women
Both sexes
Tegultna-Bulga
Men
Women
Both sexes
Yifatna-Timuga
Men
Women
Both sexes
Menzena-Gishe
Men
Women
Both sexes
Total
Men
Women
Both sexes
Source: Wolde-Gebriel et al., 1992.
^a *: Prevalence was significantly higher than in the opposite sex, P < 0.001.
^b The prevalence values for the sexes combined expressed as a percentage have not been corrected for the unequal number of males and females in the sample studied.
In remote areas, a long-term intervention in the form of injection of iodized oil may be justified. The advantage of the treatment is its prolonged effect, lasting for three or more years, but there are also associated problems such as high cost and the risk of transmission of needle-borne infections.
Vitamin A deficiency and nutritional blindness
On a global basis, it has been estimated that at least 251 million children of preschool age are at risk of VAD, as shown biochemically, and 2.8 million are clinically affected (WHO/ UNICEF, 1995). In Africa 52 million children are at risk of VAD, and an estimated 1.04 million of these have clinical signs of the deficiency. Figure 35 shows the geographical distribution of vitamin A deficiency in Africa in 1995.
Every year, 250 000 to 500 000 children become partially or totally blind from VAD, and two-thirds of these children die within a few months of going blind. Apart from these victims, many more children - ten to 20 times more - are at risk in terms of health and survival because VAD impairs resistance to infection.
Causes of vitamin A deficiency and nutritional blindness
Xerophthalmia comprises a range of disorders in which the mucous membranes of the eye become abnormally dry. It is caused most immediately by a deficiency of vitamin A in the diet, and if it is not promptly treated it can lead to blindness. More than 50 percent of children who develop xerophthalmia become very ill with other infections because lack of vitamin A reduces their natural resistance, and many die. See Box 66 for the clinical signs used in the assessment of the prevalence of xerophthalmia.
Box 65 - The use of iodinated oil capsules in the United Republic of Tanzania
Tanzania chose to use iodinated oil in areas of severe IDD because a salt iodation programme had taken a long time to implement. The objective was to eliminate severe IDD areas by 1993. The advantage with the oral preparation is that it can be delivered by even non-medical personnel and avoids the use of needles which have a potential and real risk in spreading diseases such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and hepatitis B.
The target group for the iodinated oil capsule distribution is everybody aged one to 45 years in districts severely affected by IDD. The younger age group, below one year, was excluded in the hope that since there is nearly universal breastfeeding for children under one year of age, they will get their iodine from breastmilk. For the older age group, above 45 years, the requirements for iodine are low, and members of this group are more prone than the younger age groups to the effects of excessive iodine which the programme wanted to avoid. The dose given is 380 mg of iodine (two capsules) for the target population once every two years.
The criteria for choosing the severely affected districts was initially based on a visible goitre rate (VGR) of 10 percent or more, but owing to political and public pressure this was lowered to a prevalence of combined grade 1 b and VGR of 10 percent or more. According to these criteria 30 districts were categorized as having severe IDD. On average, the 30 districts have VGR of 11 percent, VGR+1 b of 31.3 percent and total goitre rate (TGR) of 57.1 percent.
The population involved is about 5 million. The iodinated oil capsules are distributed through the primary health care (PHC) system or in a campaign using the primary schools and the government and Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM) Party infrastructure for mobilization and compliance.
The iodinated oil capsule supplementation programme has been shown to have had a positive impact on the problem of IDD. For example, in three primary schools in Mahenge, Ulanga District, Morogoro Region, the VGR dropped by 71.7 percent and the TGR by 30.7 percent. Specific studies have also shown a normalization of urinary iodine excretion and thyroid hormone levels in those given the capsule within 56 days.
An estimate of the costs involved showed that they are modest. If all costs including the capsule, distribution, training, operational research, monitoring and evaluation, advocacy and personnel are considered, the cost amounts to about US$0.40 per case of IDD prevented or per person treated for severe IDD. The value of one iodinated oil capsule in Dar-es-Salaam is equivalent to about US$0.10, which adds up to US$0.20 per dose. The estimated direct cost for distribution is less than US$0.01 per capsule. If all the other overhead costs are added, the cost per dose works out at about US$0.30. By any standards, this cost is a modest one for preventing the birth of cretins and for increasing the educability and productivity of a population.
Source: Adapted from Kavishe, 1991.
FIGURE 35 - Prevalence of vitamin A deficiency in Africa, April 1995
Source: WHO/UNICEF. 1995.
Notes: The designations do not necessarily imply that VAD seventy is uniformly distributed throughout each country. See Table 52 for definition of levels of severity.
Box 66 - Signs of xerophthalmia
The signs of xerophthalmia occur in approximately the following order.
Night blindness
The child cannot see in the dim light of evening (dusk). Families describe how the child falls over things or knocks them over when he or she moves around. The child cannot see to eat. Often there is a local name for night blindness - such as "chicken blindness". It is an important sign because families recognize it and because it can easily be cured. To find out if a child has night blindness, ask the relatives. Night blindness is cured in one to two days by vitamin A.
Bitot's spots
These are foamy, soapy whitish patches on the white part of the eye. Bitot's spots may not disappear completely after treatment, especially in older children and adults, but they do not affect the sight.
Conjunctival xerosis
Xerosis means dryness. The conjunctive (the covering of the white part of the eye) looks dry and slightly rough or wrinkled, instead of wet, smooth and shiny. It is difficult to recognize conjunctival xerosis without special training. Bitot's spots, which usually occur at the same time, are easier to see. Conjunctival xerosis is cured in one to two weeks by vitamin A.
Active corneal lesions
The cornea is the clear part of the eye which you see through, in front of the brown iris. If the cornea is damaged, the person cannot see properly and may be blind.
Corneal xerosis
The surface of the cornea is cloudy and dry. Some people call this condition "fish scales over the eye". Early corneal xerosis can be cured in one to two weeks. However, it can become more serious very quickly, in hours or days. More serious lesions are incurable. Thus a child with corneal xerosis needs treatment urgently with large doses of vitamin A.
Corneal ulcers
If xerosis is not treated early enough, ulcers (holes) may form on the surface of the cornea. Vitamin A can cure the ulcers, but usually a scar remains which may affect the eyesight.
Keratomalacia
It xerosis or ulcers are not treated, the whole cornea becomes cloudy and soft. The cornea may burst and part of the inside of the eye may come out. Often one eye is worse than the other. Giving vitamin A immediately stops keratomalacia becoming worse and may save some sight, especially in the better eye.
Corneal scars
The cornea is white, and the person can see little through it. There are several causes of corneal scarring, and it can be difficult to know which is responsible. If the family can tell you that the scars appeared after the child had measles or another infection or undernutrition, then they are probably due to vitamin A deficiency.
Source: King and Burgess, 1993.
Prevalence of VAD in affected communities is also assessed by analysis of the level of retinol in the blood serum. However, serum retinol levels are difficult to interpret since most vitamin A is stored in the liver, and ideally it is these stores that should be estimated. Costly laboratory techniques exist for this estimation. Where these techniques are not available, it is better to use an assessment based on food consumption surveys to provide further information on the intake level of vitamin A and of beta-carotene in the diet of specific population groups (IVACG, 1989).
The reasons for low vitamin A intake vary among countries; therefore situational analysis is necessary to understand and subsequently to design and implement appropriate intervention programmes. However, most situations where VAD occurs as a public health problem share some common characteristics. Poverty is in most cases the root cause, as VAD primarily occurs in countries, areas and families that cannot afford the quantity and variety of foods needed to meet their vitamin A requirements. Particular problems include lack of dietary fat and of foods of animal origin that contain preformed vitamin A (beta-carotene) and the seasonal fluctuations in the availability of many beta-carotene-rich fruits and vegetables. Ecological factors are also important, as foods rich in vitamin A require sufficient water supply and/or moderate temperature to grow. An inadequate water supply may often limit home and community gardening and as a consequence the availability of inexpensive sources
of vitamin A. Thus countries or parts of countries with long dry periods and relatively constant hot temperatures are more likely to have vitamin A deficiency problems. Poor living conditions and inadequate hygiene and sanitation often contribute to the problem of VAD. Numerous studies have shown a drop in serum vitamin A as a result of infections, and blindness following measles may also be a result of VAD (WHO/UNICEF, 1995).
FAO food balance sheets indicate that the supply of vitamin A has improved in most developing countries over the past 20 years. In the late 1980s countries in the Near East, North Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean achieved levels substantially above the minimum base per caput requirement of 250 µg retinol equivalents (RE) per day and probably above the per caput safe level of intake of 550 µg RE per day. To assess vitamin A supplies in sub-Saharan Africa a clear distinction has to be made between countries in West Africa, where red palm oil is produced, and the rest of the region. Per caput vitamin A supplies in East Africa are generally low and even decreasing. Levels in southern Africa are below the per caput safe level of 550 µg RE per day. In West Africa and the Sahel regions vitamin A supplies are high but decreasing, and VAD does occur. One of the major reasons is that red palm oil is not marketed widely in many of these countries and does not reach vitamin
A-deficient areas (see Box 67).
Preventing and combating micronutrient malnutrition through a comprehensive approach
In recent years, many activities to reduce micronutrient deficiency disorders have been implemented in developing countries, but these have mainly consisted of traditional health-based approaches focusing on supplementation, i.e. capsule and pill distribution. Longer-term preventive interventions have also been implemented by the agriculture, education and food technology sectors, but the widespread application of these interventions has been constrained, primarily because of a lack of awareness by donors and affected countries regarding their effectiveness and sustainability and a consequent lack of funds committed to such activities.
Box 67 - The vitamin A supply situation in Africa
The vitamin A situation in Africa requires careful examination. First, it is essential to distinguish between those countries where red palm oil is produced - in West Africa - and the other countries. When this is done, it becomes clear that East and southern Africa have very low availability of vitamin A. In southern Africa availability is probably on average below requirements, so that vitamin A deficiency is likely to be widespread. In addition, there are some indications that the overall supply is actually decreasing in East Africa, which would exacerbate the problem. In West Africa and the Sahel the apparently high availability does not preclude the coexistence of deficiency. As noted above, this is related to the fact that red palm oil is not marketed widely in a number of these countries.
The retinol supply assessed from food balance sheets should, however, be treated only as potential supply. Effective levels of physiological intake are determined by many factors including the state of maturation of certain fruits and vegetables, effects of dietary fats on the intestinal absorption of vitamin A, and intake of enriched foods. In the period 1986 to 1988, the developing regions of the world derived more than 70 percent of vitamin A from plant sources. These include green leafy vegetables, carrots, various fruits, sweet potatoes and palm oil. In contrast, developed countries obtained only 45 percent of vitamin A from food of vegetable origin. The proportion coming from animal products tends to be higher in higher-income countries.
Source: Adapted from UN ACC/SCN, 1992.
In order to combat micronutrient deficiency diseases effectively and in a sustainable manner, governments and decision-makers need to be made aware of all the different approaches for reducing micronutrient deficiencies. The World Summit for Children, held in New York, USA, in 1990, drew greater attention to micronutrient deficiencies and called for new integrated strategies to solve this problem. The 1992 International Conference on Nutrition translated this awareness into a coherent strategy, making a real commitment to the use of sustainable food- and agriculture-based actions to ensure access to food and increased food consumption by the at-risk groups. The implementation of this strategy will require improved coordination and integration between health measures and activities in food and agriculture and will also require the allocation of adequate resources for undertaking food-based activities.
The strategy of choice to prevent and combat micronutrient malnutrition should be based on promotion of the production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods, on food fortification and on nutrition education and related activities. This is the only effective and sustainable solution to the problem. Supplementation also has to be considered as a component of the strategy for areas or populations with clinical vitamin A deficiency, but there should be a clear commitment to withdraw this activity (except in special conditions, e.g. where refugee or displaced populations depend on relief foods supplying inadequate micronutrients) as soon as food-based activities are in place and are effectively providing the population at risk with enough foods rich in micronutrients to prevent and control micronutrient deficiencies. The importance of each component of the strategy will vary according to the situation of the country, with account taken especially of the sustainability of
the programme, the availability of personnel and cost-effectiveness.
Promoting the production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods
In many African countries agricultural policies have for the past 30 years largely focused on income generation for the farmer, foreign exchange earnings from exported foods and national food security (see also Chapter 2). Food policies have been most concerned with promoting increased production of staple grains. While all of these considerations are important for good nutrition, food and agriculture policies have done too little to improve dietary diversity and increase consumption. Work is needed in this area, specifically to promote desirable nutrition outcomes through such means as land tenure, diversification of production, access to small-scale credit and nutrition education.
Food and agriculture policies can also directly affect the consumption of micronutrient-rich foods by altering their availability and price. In particular, these policies can promote horticultural crops, legumes, small animals, fish and edible tree crops as well as social forestry and cropping patterns and preservation practices that alleviate seasonal food shortages and lead to greater availability and intakes of micronutrient-rich foods at household level (see also Chapter 5, on food diversification). Nutrition objectives should also be integrated into the agricultural research agenda. Ways of maximizing the micronutrient output of agricultural systems should be explored through research to enhance the big-available micronutrient content of major crops and to develop integrated small-scale farming systems that maximize production of micronutrient-rich crops, small-scale environmentally sustainable livestock enterprises and agro-forestry techniques for the production of
both food and fuel (Combs et al., 1996). Horticultural-sector development can be used to increase production of fruits and vegetables, legumes and tree crops bearing edible leaves. In areas with inadequate rainfall, this development can be enabled through the provision of small-scale irrigation facilities and/or groundwater harvesting techniques. Box 68 provides an account of observed relationships between cropping patterns and the prevalence of vitamin A deficiency in Ethiopia as a guide for food-based intervention programmes.
More households could be encouraged to grow dark-green leafy vegetables, such as amaranth, and orange or yellow fruits and vegetables such as pumpkin, papaya and mango for family use. Promotion of home gardens, fish ponds and poultry rearing, as well as small animal production, is also seen as a viable strategy to improve the consumption of beta-carotene and of retinol on a long-term basis. In areas of West Africa where red palm oil is widely consumed there is no deficiency of vitamin A. Promotion of oil-palm cultivation in other climatically suitable areas should be encouraged.
Box 68 - Vitamin A deficiency in Ethiopia: a recommendation for food-based intervention programmes
Clinical and biochemical data from the nationwide survey indicated that the prevalence of vitamin A deficiency was very low in the ensete staple areas. Dietary studies carried out previously have shown that ensete foods are supplemented with kale and cheese which can supply provitamin A and vitamin A, respectively. The cereal staple areas, referred to as the cropping zone, and the pastoral areas are those most affected as they have the highest prevalence of vitamin A deficiency. An even higher prevalence of vitamin A deficiency was found in Melkaye village which is in the cereal cropping zone in Hararge Region. This village does have the potential to grow coffee and chat (Khat edulis) which would enable it to have a cash-crop economy. The prevalence of vitamin A deficiency in the area was high not only because of the crops grown but also because of the failure of rains over a six-year period which resulted in total dependence of the inhabitants on relief food supplies.
The food distributed contained very little vitamin A. From these studies we can conclude that vitamin A deficiency is a problem of public health significance in the cropping and pastoral zones of the country and was exacerbated in the relief-food-aid-dependent areas. On the other hand, the ensete staple areas are relatively non-affected.
Distribution of vitamin A capsules should not overshadow other approaches that could be used to control vitamin A deficiency. Until now, most efforts have been directed towards the use of vitamin A capsules, but food-based intervention programmes are more appropriate in countries like Ethiopia. The relatively low prevalence of vitamin A deficiency in the ensete areas, as a result of the consumption of kale and cheese, provides an indication of the approach that could be followed in combating the problem of vitamin A deficiency. For example, in Kobo and Robi in the cropping area, the prevalence of vitamin A deficiency was not particularly high, probably because of the establishment of small irrigation schemes which enable production of vegetables that are rich in provitamin A.
Source: Wolde-Gebriel et al., 1992
Some green leafy vegetables may also be gathered regularly from wild plants. Early arable weeds are a particularly valuable source of "pot-greens", as they grow very quickly with the first rains and are harvested before there is any serious competition with the growing crops. In addition to these herbaceous plants, a wide variety of trees and shrubs are often used, especially the baobab, Adansonia digitata. Many of these shrubs and trees are identified only by their local names which vary from country to country. In Upper Shaba, former Zaire, it was found that leaves from 50 different tree species were eaten (Malaise and Parent, 1985), and in Swaziland more than half the adults interviewed reported that they ate wild leaves at least twice weekly when they were in season (Ogle and Grivetti, 1985). The nutritional values of selected East African green leafy vegetables are shown in Table 56.
In addition to increases in production, major improvements are also needed in the preservation, processing, distribution and marketing of micronutrient-rich foods to reduce waste, post-harvest losses and the effects of seasonality. Particular attention needs to be paid to marketing of perishable foods. The vitamin content of harvested vegetables and fruits is inevitably substantially lowered, especially if they have been exposed to direct sunlight for extended periods. In harvesting green leaves from legume and root crops, care must be taken to avoid overdepletion of the photosynthetic resources of the plant. Many farmers have developed their own well-tried methods of leaf harvesting that minimize risks of crop reduction for the main food product.
Table 56 - Nutritional values of selected East African green leafy vegetables
Vegetable
Energy
(kcal)
Protein
(g)
Fat
(g)
Calcium
(mg)
Iron
(mg)
_-carotene^a
(µg)
Vitamin C
(mg)
Amaranth (raw leaves)
Cassava (raw leaves)
Cowpea (raw leaves)
Pumpkin (raw leaves)
Sweet potato (raw leaves)
Source: West, Pepping and Temalilwa. 1988. a 6 µg _-carotene = 1 retinol equivalent (RE).
In general, traditional methods for processing, preservation and storage of vegetables cause significant losses of nutrients. Much food is wasted because of the lack of appropriate village-level food preservation technologies. However, there is good evidence that careful preservation and processing helps fruit, especially mangoes, retain good vitamin A activity. Results of a study from Senegal show that sun-dried mangoes can be an excellent source of both beta-carotene and vitamin C as well as a relatively good source of iron (Ranking, Hopkinson and Diop, 1989). Beta-carotene retention after solar drying using specially designed low-cost solar dryers was found to be much higher than retention following traditional methods of drying (see Chapter 5, Box 24). Solar drying can be readily adapted to developing environments. It offers good potential for improving family nutrition, especially during seasonal shortages of vegetables and fruits, and for improving family income, since
dried foods can fetch a good market price.
Nutrition education is a complementary activity and is fundamental for ensuring the effectiveness of a food-based approach. The consumer should understand that in order to achieve and maintain good health, several principles should be followed. These include eating a variety of food; preparing and eating diets to meet physiological requirements; maintaining food safety and hygiene in food preparation; and finally keeping active and fit. These basic messages are part of FAO's nutrition education and information package for the general public Get the best from your food (FAO, 1995e). The package acknowledges that while local food habits and traditional dietary customs and practices can vary, virtually all local food systems can supply the food necessary to prevent micronutrient malnutrition. A comprehensive list of different food-based approaches and activities that can be implemented to increase the supply and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods in the community is given
in Box 69. See also Chapter 9 for details on nutrition education.
Food fortification
Food fortification - the addition of essential nutrients to foods offers another element of the food-based approach to the prevention and control of dietary micronutrient deficiencies. Fortification is not the appropriate solution in all situations, and it must generally be used in combination with other techniques in order to obtain the best results. It may be especially useful and appropriate in those cases (e.g. IDD) where deficiencies cannot be corrected through growing or purchasing fresh and high-quality nutritious foods (fruits, vegetables, meat and fish) or in emergency situations. Fortification should be viewed as part of a range of measures influencing the quality of food, including improved agricultural practices, better processing and storage methods and consumer education.
Several foods - cereal products, rice, salt, sugar, milk, oil and condiments - have been identified as vehicles for fortification. In industrialized countries a wide range of foods are fortified with many different micronutrients including vitamin A, vitamin B complex, iron and iodine. Iodization of salt has been highly effective in both developed and developing countries for decades. Cooking oil is an obvious candidate for fortification, but as indicated in the section on African diets in Chapter 7, the consumption of oils and fats in the African diet is usually low, especially for poorer consumers, as these items are expensive. Vitamin A fortification of sugar was successfully implemented in Guatemala, and after years of interruption it has been resumed. In the United Republic of Tanzania efforts are under way to fortify tea with vitamin A. The World Food Programme (WFP), the European Community (EC), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and other
national and international organizations involved in humanitarian assistance distribute foods fortified with a wide range of micronutrients. These include dried skimmed milk powder enriched with vitamin A and various blended foods [e.g. corn (maize)/soybean/milk (CSM)] that are targeted for distribution to children and pregnant and lactating women.
Box 69 - Food-based approaches to micronutrient deficiency
The following list presents possible food-based approaches and activities that may be taken into account to combat micronutrient deficiencies. Activities should be selected based on geographic, demographic and socio-economic conditions. Community participation in design and implementation is a crucial component of successful, sustainable programmes.
Agriculture
· Train extension agents and other trainers about food and nutrition.
· Train farmers to make them aware that growing micronutrient-rich plants not only enriches their families' daily diet but may bring extra income.
· Develop home, community and school gardens.
· Promote mixed farming systems that supply families with a more varied diet.
· Introduce higher-yielding vitamin A-rich varieties.
· Promote fruit and vegetable cultivation throughout the year to overcome seasonality of food supply.
· Support small-scale animal husbandry as a source of micronutrient-rich food and extra income.
· Promote aquaculture, including skill training for community members and extension agents.
· Prevent post-harvest losses through proper food handling, transport, storage, preservation or processing techniques and facilities.
· Strengthen collection of horticultural statistics including those for micronutrient-rich and traditional crops (vegetables and fruit).
· Integrate micronutrient activities into rural and agricultural development programmes, horticulture production projects, women's activities, projects to reduce food losses, communication and information programmes and community forestry and fishery activities.
· Establish small-scale credit systems accessible to low-income producers.
Education and training
· Prepare materials or guidelines on safer methods of processing and preserving micronutrient-rich foods. These materials and guidelines should be addressed to the general public as well as specifically to women, farmers, small-scale merchants and community workers.
· Train nutrition or agricultural extension workers, community workers, health personnel, religious leaders, schoolteachers, students, women and family members on the following topics:
- the importance of vitamin A, iron, vitamin C and fat in the diet and identification of micronutrient-rich foods;
- safe methods of processing and preservation of micronutrient-rich foods, e.g. cooking methods, storage places and use of solar dryers;
- home gardening as a rich source of vitamin A, vitamin C and other micronutrients;
- small-scale animal husbandry and aquaculture as rich sources of vitamin A, iron and calcium;
- the importance of using salt fortified with iodine.
· Integrate nutrition, with special emphasis on prevention of micronutrient deficiencies, into curricula of primary and secondary schools as well as teachers' training colleges and training institutes responsible for adult education and youth groups.
· Promote breastfeeding by emphasizing the richness of mother's milk and the importance of breastmilk in preventing infectious diseases.
· Use social marketing to promote production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods.
Marketing
· Establish local markets to ensure availability of micronutrient-rich foods.
· Improve the local infrastructure system to allow distribution of micronutrient-rich foods even in remote areas.
· Provide economic credits to women's groups producing and marketing fruit and vegetables.
Research
· Assess food availability of micronutrient-rich foods, including traditional foods in local markets.
· Assess food consumption patterns of different age groups and reasons why and when certain foods are not eaten.
· Evaluate existing nutrition interventions.
· Identify international and national organizations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), voluntary groups, women's groups and others working on micronutrient programmes.
· Identify traditional foods rich in micronutrients and develop national food composition tables.
· Support research institutes developing plant varieties with higher vitamin A and other micronutrient values.
· Evaluate training curricula for nutrition and health staff regarding micronutrients.
Food industry, trade and commerce
· Fortify appropriate foods with needed micronutrients and promote these foods to specific groups that lack access to high-quality, nutritious foods.
· Package micronutrient-rich foods economically for poor consumer groups.
· Improve labelling and advertising of micronutrient-rich processed foods.
· Institute food regulatory systems to enable nutritionally appropriate fortification.
· Train food inspectors and food control laboratories to analyse fortified foods for the added micronutrients.
Special considerations
· Set up intersectoral groups to coordinate activities among sectors.
· Provide information about the importance of preventing micronutrient deficiencies to decision- and policy-makers in commerce, education and communications.
· Organize women's groups to give special attention to home production and preparation and to small-scale animal rearing.
· Involve the community in programme design, implementation and evaluation.
· Involve NGOs in providing technical support and training.
· Provide short-term training for professional staff.
· Develop or strengthen existing surveillance systems to monitor the effectiveness of micronutrient programmes.
Source: FAO/ILSI, 1997.
Fortification does not usually require changes in people's dietary habits. Although it may be sustainable over a long period and is often considered a cost-effective means of overcoming micronutrient malnutrition (World Bank, 1994), caution should be applied in adopting this strategy, as the maintenance of fortification programmes in developing countries in the past has often required long-term financing by donor governments.
Ensuring that fortification is effective and sustainable is not simple. To be effective, fortification requires informed decisions about such aspects as foods that are suitable as vehicles for fortification (i.e. foods that are consumed widely and in sufficient quantities); the nutrient to be added (i.e. the fortificant); the process of fortification to be adopted, for example mixing, coating, infusion or extrusion; and the proper level of enrichment. It is also important that the identified vehicle be consumed in roughly constant quantities throughout the year by the majority of the population in need and that the addition of fortificants at the required level does not affect the organoleptic qualities of the food. In some countries it may be difficult impossible to identify a food item that is suitable for fortification, especially in the non-industrialized countries of Africa, where only salt has been found to be suitable for wide distribution. Attention must be given to
the price and marketing systems for fortified foods to enable the poorest and most affected population groups to obtain them. Key steps required in planning a national fortification programme are listed in Box 70.
Every fortification programme needs to monitor carefully the health implications of the various fortificants from different sources that may be consumed by an individual. In many developing countries supplements of micronutrients in the form of pills or capsules are provided to populations at risk, i.e. small children and pregnant women, under various conditions and in different programmes. It must be ensured that the cumulative intake does not exceed the safe level of intake, thus causing toxicity. In addition, in some cases fortification programmes may need to be accompanied by nutrition education to avoid the risk of overconsumption of the carrier. This is especially so in the case of salt and sugar, whose overconsumption can contribute to causing or can exacerbate noncommunicable diet-related diseases in at-risk groups (particularly persons suffering from cardiovascular disease, high blood pressure or diabetes).
To ensure that fortification is effective and sustainable, that the health of the consumer is protected and that fortified foods comply with certain measures of quality, it is essential that a surveillance system be set up to monitor the dietary intake of consumers. A food control system also needs to be established to ensure that fortified foods are monitored officially through inspection and analysis for compliance with nationally accepted quality and safety requirements. Without well-functioning dietary surveillance and food control systems, it is almost impossible to have an effective national micronutrient fortification programme.
Box 70 - Steps in the development of food fortification programmes
The steps in developing a fortification programme include the following:
· Determine the prevalence of the micronutrient deficiency.
· Segment the population if prevalence indicates the need.
· Determine the micronutrient intake from a dietary survey.
· Obtain consumption data for potential vehicles.
· Determine micronutrient availability from the typical diet.
· Seek government Support (policy-makers and legislators).
· Seek food industry support.
· Assess the status of potential vehicles and the processing industry chain (including raw material supply and product marketing).
· Choose the type and amount of micronutrient fortificants or mixes.
· Develop the fortification technology.
· Perform studies on interactions, potency, stability, storage and organoleptic quality of the fortified product.
· Determine big-availability of the fortified food.
· Conduct field trials to determine efficacy and effectiveness.
· Develop standards for the fortified foods.
· Define final product and packaging and labelling legislation.
· Develop legislation and regulation for mandatory compliance.
· Promote campaigns to improve consumer acceptance.
Source: Lofti et al., 1996.
Health system improvements and medicinal supplementation
Improving the efficiency and coverage of health care systems should have a positive effect on micronutrient malnutrition, through improved health and hygiene, early intervention in disease and monitoring of growth and development. In a good health system, personnel are trained to promote preventive health care, to detect and treat nutritional deficiencies, to manage pharmaceuticals efficiently and, most importantly, to reach out to the most vulnerable economic groups. To treat severe deficiency states, health care providers need to be able to diagnose the deficiencies, to provide the appropriate therapeutic pharmaceutical supplies, equipment and counselling materials and to have access to a referral system for intractable or severe cases.
Although vitamin A deficiency can be treated by high-dose vitamin A capsules, this strategy must be regarded as a therapeutic or short-term intervention for at-risk groups in areas of endemic VAD. In these areas hospitals and outpatient clinics can provide supplementary doses of vitamin A to all children with cases of diarrhoea, malnutrition and measles. Vitamin A may also be given to malnourished mothers immediately after delivery, both for their own health and to ensure an adequate level of the vitamin in their breastmilk, following WHO guidelines (WHO/UNICEF/IVACG Task Force, 1997).
Large-scale prophylactic supplementation programmes using high doses of vitamin A for prevention of the deficiency are not recommended. They tend to be expensive and unsustainable, to foster dependency on donor support and to divert political and government support away from establishment of more sustainable, food-based approaches. Serious health complications can also arise from the use of large doses of vitamins, ranging from birth defects in infants if the treatment is given to women who are pregnant or could soon become pregnant, to toxicity in infants (and possible retardation of their brain development) if it is given in early infancy (de Francisco et al., 1993).
Often the actual cost of supplementation programmes goes much beyond the cost of the supplement itself, which has been estimated at less than US$0.02 per person from the producer, although very few studies have evaluated the cost of distributing capsules (if delivered at all) in remote areas where the populations that are most at risk tend to be located.
A 1989 evaluation found that a large-scale supplementation programme initiated in Bangladesh in 1973 as an interim measure to prevent and control VAD was not effective in reducing the problem (Greiner, 1992). Bangladesh still faces a very high rate of VAD. Experiences in many other Asian and African countries have shown similar problems to those in Bangladesh. Although outreach has often been very positive at the onset of programmes (reaching up to 75 percent of the target population), after two or three years the percentage of the population reached has markedly declined (only 30 to 40 percent of the target population). The decline is not surprising, especially considering that large-scale programmes are often generously subsidized during the initial stages by donor agencies or governments, which both supply capsules free of charge and provide logistical support such as vehicles, fuel and staff allowances. Once such support is reduced or withdrawn, developing countries
often do not have the resources or the health infrastructure extending to more remote areas to sustain such programmes in the medium to long term.
By giving priority to strategies based on pharmaceutical supplements, donor agencies have often given government technical staff and policy-makers a false signal regarding the crucial importance of food-based actions, continuing to delay the necessary shift in their approach towards food-based solutions. This is damaging in the long run.
Emphasis should now be given to food-based activities, namely the production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods and fortification of foods, especially with iron and iodine. The main types of strategies for overcoming the three micronutrient deficiencies discussed in this chapter and possible interventions, including the main types of foods involved in dietary diversification and food fortification, are summarized in Tables 57 and 58.
The major micronutrient deficiency diseases, including xerophthalmia, iron deficiency anaemia and endemic goitre, could all be largely controlled if present knowledge were applied and sufficient resources were provided. PEM, which often occurs in association with micronutrient deficiencies, also needs to be tackled. In addition to implementing programmes aimed specifically at combating and preventing micronutrient deficiencies, there is a need to develop comprehensive food security programmes and to promote broad-based development in agriculture, including fisheries, forestry and related rural industries, so as to create better food supplies and access to food through stable and increased income and employment. The prevalence of all four major nutritional deficiency conditions could be greatly reduced by increased attention, at policy level, to consumer demand and to household food security aspects of agricultural policies, research and investment programmes.
Table 57 - Main types of strategies for overcoming micronutrient deficiencies
Deficiency
Dietary diversification
Fortification
Supplementation
Public health and control measures
Iodine deficiency disorders
Promotion of the consumption of iodine-rich foods
Production, distribution and consumption of fortified foods
Delivery of supplements to target group population (i.e. primarily at-risk groups such as refugees)
Improvement of primary health care
Food quality control, legislation and enforcement
Improved processing of goitrogenic foods
Vitamin A deficiency
Promotion of the production and consumption of vitamin A-rich foods
Production, distribution and consumption of fortified foods
Delivery of supplements to target group population (i.e. primarily at-risk groups such as refugees)
Improvement of primary hearth care
Nutrition education
Food quality control, legislation and enforcement
Prevention of infections:
Improved distribution system
- environmental health
Improved food preservation and processing
- immunization
- oral rehydration therapy
- antiparasitic measures
Anaemia
Promotion of the production and consumption of iron-rich foods
Production, distribution and consumption of fortified foods
Delivery of supplements to target group population (i.e. primarily at-risk groups such as refugees)
Improvement of primary health care
Nutrition education
Food quality control, legislation and enforcement
Prevention of infections:
Improved distribution system
- environmental
Improved food preservation and processing
health
- immunization
- oral rehydration therapy
- antiparasitic measures (especially against hookworm and malaria)
Source: Adapted from FAO/WHO, 1992e.
Table 58 - Main types of foods and supplements in interventions for overcoming micronutrient deficiencies
Deficiency
Dietary diversification
Fortification
Supplementation
lodine deficiency disorders
Seafoods
Salt
Iodized oil
Other iodine-containing foods (reduce goitrogens)
Water
Potassium iodide tablets
Baby foods
Condiments
Flour
Milk
Vitamin A deficiency
Green leafy vegetables
Sugar
Capsules (oil) in massive or small doses
Orange-coloured vegetables and fruits
Salt
Red palm oil
Milk powder
Animal foods
Baby foods
Breastmilk
Condiments
Anaemia
Green lealy vegetables
Salt
Iron/folate tablets
Pulses
Cereals or cereal flour
Parenteral iron
Fruits and vegetables (vitamin C)
Condiments
Liver, red meat (avoid tea and coffee with meals)
Source: FAO/WHO, 1992e.
<title>Agriculture food and nutrition for Africa - A resource book for teachers of agriculture</title>
Chapter 9 - Nutrition education
Goal and purposes of nutrition education
Nutrition education approaches
Planning a community nutrition education programme
Messages, media and support materials
Nutrition education in schools
Training the change agents in nutrition education, and the role of different sectors
Chapter 9 - Nutrition education
Nutritional problems broadly fall into two categories, i.e. those resulting from insufficient intake relative to nutritional needs and those resulting from excessive and unbalanced intake of food or a particular dietary component. The main problems in Africa and elsewhere in developing countries pertain to the first group. One of the principal aims of nutrition education must therefore be to provide people in rural and urban areas with adequate information, skills and motivation to procure and to consume appropriate diets. Such education should cover improvement of family food supplies and more efficient utilization of available food and economic resources to provide nutritious diets and better care for the most vulnerable groups. For those richer sectors of society where diseases of affluence are taking an increasing toll, nutrition education should be directed to proper food selection, consumption and lifestyle.
Nutrition education programmes should have at least three components which should be directed at the various social groups.
· Increasing the nutrition knowledge and awareness of the public and of policy-makers. This can be achieved by providing information on the relationship between diet and health; the relationship between nutritional and health status and individual productivity and national development; the nutritional needs of the population and of individuals; the importance of ensuring the quality and safety of the food supply; the causes and consequences of nutritional disorders; and the benefits of food labelling and legislation.
· Promoting desirable food behaviour and nutritional practices. This can be achieved by providing information on the nutritional value of foods; the components of an adequate diet; making appropriate food choices and purchases from available resources; hygienic food preparation and handling of food; storage, processing and preservation of food; and equitable intrahousehold food distribution according to the nutritional needs of family members.
· Increasing the diversity and quantity of family food supplies. This can be achieved by providing information on methods of improving food production; crop selection and diversification; proper storage, preservation and processing; conservation of nutrients during food preparation; and the prevention of food waste.
Each of these components makes a special contribution to nutritional improvement. All three are important and need to form part of nutrition education and training programmes for personnel in agriculture, education and health in African countries. At the community level the people affected by nutritional problems should participate in determining which components should receive most emphasis to bring about lasting improvements in local food and nutrition conditions.
Goal and purposes of nutrition education
Household food security, as discussed in previous chapters, is a prerequisite for people to have an adequate and balanced food intake. However, to attain good health and nutritional status, people also need sufficient knowledge and skills to grow, purchase, process, prepare, eat and feed to their families a variety of foods, in the right quantities and combinations. This requires a basic knowledge of what constitutes a nutritious diet and how people can best meet their nutritional needs from available resources. Undesirable food habits and nutrition-related practices, which are often based on insufficient knowledge, traditions and taboos or poor understanding of the relationship between diet and health, can adversely affect nutritional status. However, people can adopt healthier diets and improve their nutritional well-being by changing their food and nutrition attitudes, knowledge and practices, if sufficient motivation is provided to do so.
The goal of nutrition education is to reinforce specific nutrition-related practices or behaviours to change habits that contribute to poor health; this is done by creating a motivation for change among people, to establish desirable food and nutrition behaviour for promotion and protection of good health. People are given help to learn new information about nutrition and to develop the attitudes, skills and confidence that they need to improve their nutrition practices.
Nutrition education provides people with correct information on the nutritional value of foods, food quality and safety, methods of preservation, processing and handling, food preparation and eating to help them make the best choice of foods for an adequate diet. The provision of correct information is not in itself a sufficient objective to improve nutrition. Successful nutrition education goes beyond the simple accumulation of knowledge, towards positive action. A change in behaviour leading to desirable nutrition practices could include, for example, beginning to grow and eat dark-green, orange and yellow fruits and vegetables to protect the body from infectious diseases, or learning how to store maize or other food more safely to reduce nutrient losses and thereby increase household food reserves. Effective nutrition education programmes must therefore be planned and executed in such a way as to motivate beneficiaries to develop skills and confidence for the adoption of
positive and lasting practices.
Successful nutrition education often entails the active participation of the people, their awareness of their nutrition problems and their willingness to change. To be effective, a comprehensive nutrition education programme also requires intersectoral collaboration among different professionals (in agriculture, education, health and communication) and should be based on a well-planned communication strategy, often using a multimedia approach. It has been shown that in addition to technical assistance, contributing factors to the success of a programme include strong political and government support, external funding and the strengthening of local managerial and community capacities.
Nutrition education programmes will not work in situations of severe resource constraints. For example, advising people on the establishment of home gardens in drought-prone areas is inappropriate if facilities for irrigation do not exist. Similarly, it is inappropriate to teach a mother to give her child high-energy foods to which she has no access.
The sections that follow discuss the advantages and limitations of different approaches towards nutrition education, including conventional and current methods; the content; and key features that contribute to the success of nutrition education programmes.
Nutrition education approaches
For the past 20 years there has been intense debate on the strategies, objectives and methods of nutrition education (Andrien, 1994). Conventional education methods consisted mainly of talks given at health centres. Today this approach is considered largely ineffective unless it is fully integrated into a broader nutrition education strategy. The conventional method has largely given way to approaches based on modern communication sciences.
Conventional approach
A review of nutrition education programmes in developing countries (Cerqueira, 1990) concluded that many nutrition education efforts implemented during the 1970s and early 1980s brought few changes in nutrition-related behaviour or nutritional status. Programme failure can be attributed largely to the ineffective communication methods used and the inappropriate content of the messages, which often ignored the specific cultural context of the community.
Most nutrition education activities have been implemented within the health sector, especially in primary health care. Conventional strategies for education focused on face-to-face contact with the patient, using didactic methods of education and one-way transfer of information. Nutrition messages were considered as treatment, like medicine, for curing a nutrition problem. Within this context nutritional science, rather than the concerns of the participants, dictated the content of nutrition education. Common examples of this approach are telling mothers to eat more green vegetables or to breastfeed their children and teaching the three food groups in health clinics (see Chapter 7).
Today, such a top-down method of nutrition education is considered largely ineffective for a number of reasons: it often makes use of only one channel of communication (i.e. face-to-face) instead of using a multimedia approach, with the result that very few people are reached, especially in Africa, where less than half the population is within the catchment area of health facilities; it addresses mainly women, who are not always able to remove the causes of nutritional problems by themselves, as their husbands and other family members often influence decisions regarding food purchasing and food allocations within the family; it focuses on the promotion of individual behaviour change rather than fostering active community participation; it emphasizes technical and scientific information about nutrients and nutrient deficiencies; and it pays little attention to people's social and cultural context, instead of building on indigenous knowledge about local foods and food
preparation and promoting healthy eating patterns.
Current approaches
More recent experiences, in contrast with the conventional approach, show that nutrition education is concerned not only with imparting knowledge, but also with finding ways to work with individuals or groups in the community in a systematic manner that will stimulate their participation in and commitment to the learning process. Nutrition education undertaken in this spirit is interactive, encourages an exchange of information between the educator and the community and empowers people to make appropriate choices using both scientific and local knowledge. Moreover, it leads to the adoption of improved behaviour and contributes to lasting effects and changes.
Social marketing approach. Social marketing is defined as the promotion of socially responsible products, behaviour and ideas. It is based on strategies to change human behaviour through the application of commercial marketing principles. Consumer research is used to identify the cultural norms, aspirations and needs of the target group, and then specific messages are designed to promote changes in attitudes and behaviour believed to be socially beneficial to the individual or the target community. Social marketing has contributed substantially towards the development of modern communication approaches in the past 20 years.
At the heart of the social marketing philosophy is the belief that consumer decisions involve choices among alternative behaviour patterns. The alternatives vary in the benefits that they offer and the sacrifices that they entail. For each set of alternatives (e.g. breastfeeding versus bottle-feeding) the consumer will weigh the perceived benefits against the costs, in terms of economic assets, time, energy or personal and social value. The challenge for the social educator is to imagine himself or herself in the position of the focus group (e.g. a group of mothers, schoolchildren or teenage girls) or individual in order to understand more fully how to make the proposed behaviour more attractive than any competing alternatives.
The planning and implementation of a social marketing nutrition education programme follow an accepted pattern in which an initial field investigation is used to assess the current nutrition situation and the knowledge, attitudes and practices of consumers on, for example, infant feeding practices. The emphasis on community-oriented information then helps to determine the specific needs and expectations of the community or the target audience. As a second step, the information is used to construct and produce receiver-oriented messages. The messages are then used to promote a few key behaviour changes within a chosen population group, with the locally available resources and the cultural context taken into consideration.
An important part of the strategy is audience segmentation. Instead of addressing an audience as a single unit, social marketing specialists divide a community into various groups with similar interests in relation to the behaviour under consideration. Then the benefits of the proposed behaviour most relevant to each interest group are identified, together with those behaviours that adversely affect a group's household food security or nutrition ("resistance points"). Each sector of the population is thus treated according to its members' characteristics, needs, wants and predisposition. Box 71 discusses some social and economic constraints to the adoption of new behaviour as perceived by social marketing experts.
Selecting the channels of communication to deliver a message is the third step. Combined use of interpersonal communication and mass media (radio, television and the printed press) is often synergistic and can help in the attainment of different objectives. The mass media can bring new ideas to large audiences, encourage favourable attitudes and generate support among opinion leaders. Interpersonal communication can provide the intimate, interactive contact with clients necessary for final habit change.
Development and pre-testing is the fourth step in social marketing, followed by monitoring and evaluation, which includes measurement of the overall impact of the communication programme (degree of habit change, number of people adopting the change, etc.).
A great deal of experience has been documented in the social marketing of childhood immunization, breastfeeding and the use of oral rehydration solution. However, social marketing also has limitations, as reliance on mass media has not always led to sustained behavioural changes.
Community-based approach. Evidence from different countries shows that combining interpersonal programmes at community level with the support of the mass media is the most effective way to educate people. It is increasingly recognized that unless people are offered the opportunity to participate actively in seeking solutions for their nutritional problems, the long-term impact of an intervention will be marginal.
Box 71 - Identifying social and economic constraints to the adoption of new behaviour
Identifying constraints to change or "resistance points" adoption of new behaviour is essential. An educational campaign's success in large measure depends on the capacity of social marketing to address constraints with appropriate educational and motivational techniques. The major types of constraint that can be addressed by education and communications are: gaps in knowledge; gaps in skill; cultural or ideological constraints; and social constraints with changing importance for each audience group.
A long experience of poverty and deprivation can condition people psychologically. A chronic lack of resources and opportunities may lead to an almost fatalistic acceptance of their condition. This kind of attitude, which in some ways represents a successful adaptation to poverty, has important implications for social and behavioural change. Individuals living in highly deprived circumstances frequently attribute their fortunes and misfortunes to uncontrollable outside agents and do not perceive themselves as being capable of effecting desirable changes in their environment through their own actions. Overcoming this kind of environmentally induced and culturally reinforced passivity requires a long, slow process of sensitization and learning.
From an economic point of view, certain kinds of problems may not be immediately resolvable even though their existence and nature are not in question. It is ill advised to develop a campaign to teach people to boil water if there is not sufficient fuel. In such cases, it is unwise to attempt a change through education.
There are also economic trade-offs which require careful consideration in promotion of behavioural change. Taken out of context, extended breastfeeding sounds like an intrinsically healthy and desirable activity. Even where bottle-feeding is becoming more and more widespread, many mothers are still willing to acknowledge that breastmilk is best for babies. Breastfeeding, however, takes place within a certain economic and social environment. More time spent breastfeeding will probably mean less time available to spend working in the garden, attending other family members or participating in economically desirable activities. A mother who is truly committed to breastfeeding may have to forego possibilities of wage employment altogether in order to be constantly within reach of her infant. Many mothers, particularly those who are single heads of household, are not free to make this choice. Most people cannot be expected readily to accept or to support a change in behaviour that
they perceive to be against their own self-interest. In such environments, educators using social marketing techniques have two choices: to attempt to sensitize the community to the value of a proposed behaviour change objective; or to promote strategies that work within a given socio-economic context (e.g. in the case of breastfeeding to convince employers to set up creches or to allow ample maternity leave).
Source: Adapted with permission from UNESCO, 1987.
The community-based approach to nutrition education, which encompasses the best elements of the two approaches, emphasizes the importance of active community participation in making decisions and finding solutions for nutritional problems. The community-based approach addresses the need for increased coverage, with widespread training of community workers and members; the importance of building on indigenous knowledge by incorporating community members as partners in programmes; and also the need for actions to transform the socio-economic conditions of the community (Cerqueira, 1992).
With a strong participatory approach, the nutrition educator acts as a facilitator who assists the community in identifying and examining the factors that influence malnutrition and helps people to suggest solutions and implement actions to overcome nutritional problems. Community-based nutrition education thus becomes part of a much wider programme aimed at improving health and nutritional status within the context of socio-economic development, and is not an end in itself.
In the community-based approach the communication strategy involves face-to-face group interaction between the nutrition educators and the community members, yet learning is not restricted to the moment of delivery of the message; it also takes place in the context of many other activities. The involvement of the community members with nutrition educators in planning and carrying out these activities is an important part of the learning process. An example would be a feeding programme to care for children while a group of mothers engage in income-generating activities such as production of vegetables or other foods to sell or consume.
Although community participation in nutrition activities and education programmes is considered vital to their success and sustainability, there are also recognized limitations to this approach. As community participation changes the structure and relations of power in decision-making about the use and control of resources, it is often seen as threatening to established institutions and groups such as ministries of agriculture and health or village leaders. Changing from a top-down to a consultative style of leadership requires basic, continuous training and time. The goal of participation is to build a community's capacity to recognize its own problems and begin to solve them; nevertheless, participation needs an initial stimulus and continued support, technical expertise and funding from outside sources. Although the possibility of short-term behaviour change has been demonstrated in the literature, its sustainability is doubtful. Generally, among experts in nutrition
education it is now recognized that changing food and nutrition behaviours in a sustainable manner is a long process requiring many steps by different sectors and at different levels. Nutrition education needs to be comprehensive and coordinated for effectiveness, to be participatory and to encourage ownership by the community.
Planning a community nutrition education programme
As in all programmes, proper planning is crucial for the success of a nutrition education programme. Nutrition education is effective only when it is based on adequate analysis of the nutritional problems and clear and concise definition of the objectives and the methods of communications.
The social communication approach to nutrition education promoted by FAO combines elements of the social marketing and the community-based approaches. It emphasizes community participation in programme planning and implementation and recommends the use of multimedia strategies, i.e. several channels of communication, to influence undesirable behaviour patterns related to nutrition. A schema has been developed which divides programme planning into four phases: problem identification, formulation, implementation and evaluation (Figure 36).
FIGURE 36 - A schema for planning nutrition education programmes
Source: FAO, 1994a.
Intersectoral and interdisciplinary collaboration
Analysis of the causes of malnutrition shows that many factors contribute to nutritional outcome. Therefore, an effective nutrition education programme should ideally be developed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of a nutrition educator, a communication specialist, a community leader and representatives of the beneficiary groups, all working together. The multimedia approach in itself requires intersectoral collaboration, as the use of several channels of communication generally implies the participation of different ministries. Intersectoral activities need to be well coordinated to ensure that all groups (e.g. health, agriculture and education departments, nutrition units and the food industry) and media (e.g. posters, booklets, radio and television) deliver consistent messages on a problem at all levels - national, regional and local. This aim also requires collaboration among non-governmental organizations (NGOs), government ministries and institutions, the private
sector and external assistance agencies. Government ministries are in the best position and have the mandate to facilitate coordination and collaboration among the different partners. Governments can, moreover, assess how the respective nutrition education activities planned fit into their development plans and into the nutrition education component of their national plan of action for nutrition, developed following the International Conference on Nutrition in December 1992.
Problem identification
Planning and developing a nutrition education programme should begin with the systematic analysis of nutrition and health-related problems in a community. The use of focus groups within a community (e.g. rural women of child-bearing age, health workers or male subsistence farmers) can be particularly effective in such an analysis.^1 A situation analysis examining the factors that give rise to nutrition problems can be carried out through a combination of direct and indirect methods. Possible methods include literature review; nutrition surveys to analyse the epidemiology of the nutrition problems; and participatory nutrition appraisal, during which the people concerned, with the assistance of the nutrition education team, identify and analyse the food and nutrition issues of greatest interest to the community and of specific groups within it; such issues may include high levels of infant malnutrition, childhood illness and infant deaths.
^1 A focus group discussion usually involves a minimum of six and a maximum of 12 people at a time. The discussion is focused on a certain topic by a facilitator using a well-prepared guide, but it is then allowed lo run as freely and widely as possible. The intention is that members of the group spark ideas off each other while the facilitator takes a back seat and notes the main points of view and opinions that emerge. A skilled facilitator will also be able to assist people in gaining greater awareness awareness of their own behaviour patterns and motivations.
Once the nutrition problems have been identified, the nutrition educator can facilitate a discussion about the factors (e.g. social, economic and cultural) that contribute to the problems. The discussion is an interactive process between the participants and the nutrition education team. Participants are asked to describe the nutrition problems they see and how they perceive their own social and economic circumstances, including income, employment and resource problems. They are also encouraged to share information regarding household food security (including problems such as hunger, insufficient money to buy food or too little land and water to grow food) and to consider which sections of the community are most affected and why. The group constructs and prioritizes a chain of causal factors and behaviour patterns affecting nutritional status (see Figure 37).
Among the factors influencing a course of action, a distinction has to be made between those that can be tackled by the people concerned and those that are out of their control. In any event, understanding of why people behave as they do is crucial to the ability to influence or change certain types of behaviour. This understanding can be acquired through audience analysis using in-depth interviews or individual or focus group discussions which aim to elicit the factors that motivate people to behave in certain ways.
Formulation and implementation
Once the factors and behaviour patterns on which action needs to be taken have been identified and discussed with the community, the next step is to formulate an action plan and a communication strategy. The questions to be considered when developing a communication strategy are shown in Box 72. To plan a strategy, it is necessary to define clear objectives. The nutrition education team determines the goals and objectives of a communication campaign, which should be defined for each group of beneficiaries (see Box 73). During this stage messages are designed, materials are field tested, and the media are selected (see section on "Messages, media and support materials", below). A multimedia plan is formulated in which all communication activities are integrated.
FIGURE 37 - Analysis of nutritional status: the underlying causes
Source: FAO, 1944a.
Box 72 - Development of a communication strategy
An overall communication strategy provides a framework for developing and delivering messages aimed at changing nutrition practices.
A communication strategy should provide answers to six questions:
· To whom should the message be directed?
· What message should be communicated?
· How can the message best reflect the audience's attitudes and beliefs?
· Which media should be used?
· What settings are most appropriate for effective communications?
· What times are best suited to successful communications?
The choice of a communication strategy must be linked to the planned intervention.
The development of an appropriate communication strategy must follow a systematic field investigation into the knowledge, attitudes and practices of the beneficiary population.
Source: Adapted with permission from IVACG, 1992.
The implementation phase begins with the production of the support materials. In addition, field staff or "change agents" (e.g. health and agricultural extension workers and teachers) need to be trained to ensure that all persons involved in the various communication activities carry out their roles adequately. They must be very familiar with the communication activities to be able to communicate messages effectively. Since a single medium cannot by itself significantly alter nutrition-related habits, nutrition education normally entails the use of different media, which calls for training of all involved and effective coordination.
Once the materials and training have been established and ensured, communication with the people can begin.
Evaluation of nutrition education programmes
Evaluation of a communication programme is important but is often done inadequately. The evaluation should be conducted with the participation of the beneficiary population and the field workers or change agents, as the actions to be evaluated concern them directly and the evaluation may help them improve their performance. Government representatives should also participate so they can see the impact of the activities they have promoted and consider further expansion of the programme.
Box 73 - Examples of goals, objectives, outputs and activities of a targeted community-based programme
Goal
Improvement in the health and nutritional status of infants at risk of malnutrition.
Objective
Increase by 50 percent the number of infants, identified at risk of malnutrition, receiving energy-dense weaning foods by six months of age on a daily basis, two years after the start of the infant feeding nutrition programme.
Outputs
· A knowledge, attitude and practices (KAP) study on infant feeding carried out by the national nutrition institute with regard to beliefs, knowledge and practices of mothers or caretakers by month 4 of the programme.
· Training materials for trainers and nutrition education materials and messages for the public, based on the findings of the KAP study, prepared, field-tested and published by month 9 of the programme.
· Four one-week training courses on infant nutrition and processing and preparation of local weaning foods held by the institute of food and nutrition by month 12 of the programme.
· Ten trainers and 60 health and home economics workers trained and competent in infant nutrition, home processing and preparation of locally available weaning foods by month 12 of the programme.
· Sixty groups of mothers of infants at risk of malnutrition (ten mothers per group) identified in the programme area who are ready to participate in the infant feeding nutrition programme.
· For each group of mothers one training, demonstration and consultation session on infant feeding and processing and preparation of weaning foods held by each health or home economics worker on a weekly basis, from month 13 to month 24 of the programme.
Activities
For the third output above, for example:
· Assess the training and capacity building needs of health and home economics staff to enable the effective implementation of the infant feeding nutrition programme by month 5 of the programme.
· Prepare a training plan and programme for training of trainers and community members on infant nutrition and the processing and preparation of locally appropriate weaning foods by month 8.
· Select ten trainers and conduct one training of trainers course on infant nutrition and weaning food processing and preparation by month 11.
· Conduct three practical field-based training courses for community health and home economics workers on infant nutrition and weaning food processing and preparation by month 12 of the infant feeding nutrition programme.
A main weakness in the evaluation of nutrition education programmes is that often quantitative changes are not assessed. Well-defined programme objectives, however, allow measurement of success. For example, if the programme goal was to increase the number of mothers who produce green leafy vegetables and add them to their children's porridge, then the evaluation should measure the number of mothers who have adopted this practice as a result of the project's communication and extension activities. To provide guidance for expanding or continuing a programme, it is also important to examine why changes did or did not occur and which aspects of the communication and other activities were most effective in promoting change. If the attitudes of a significant number of mothers did not change, the evaluation must determine whether the mothers understood the message as intended and whether they encountered difficulties in finding, growing or cooking vegetables.
It is necessary to define the degree of behaviour change that is considered successful. If the programme objective was to increase the number of mothers feeding their children vegetables daily, then feedings taking place only once or twice a week indicate a failure. Regardless of the results, however, the outcomes of the evaluation must be made known to the proposed beneficiaries and discussed with them so as to help improve and reinforce newly adopted behaviour.
Beneficiary groups for nutrition education
The beneficiary population for a nutrition education intervention is normally made up of several groups. The vulnerable group may not be among the groups to whom the messages are directed. For example, a group at risk of vitamin A deficiency may be weaning-age children. In this case the educational intervention will be directed at all those involved in or interacting with those involved in the care and feeding of weaning-age children, such as mothers, grandmothers, adolescents and the family.
The primary group is composed of people whose behaviour is to be modified; the secondary group comprises people who act as intermediaries, i.e. those who will deliver the message to the first group, such as health workers, nutritionists, horticulturists, agricultural extension officers, teachers, broadcasters and journalists. The composition of the secondary group depends on the type of communication network that will be used. The tertiary group is made up of people who can help to make the programme a success through their influence and authority. These may include community leaders, financial donors and politicians, together with members of the extended family of the at-risk child (see Box 74). An example showing the different beneficiary groups for the prevention of protein-energy malnutrition is given in Box 75. The approach and the message wild vary for the different groups, depending on language, interests, educational level and socio-economic status.
Importance of local cultural inputs In developing nutritional messages
Messages addressing problems that are not perceived as problems by the community wild not make much impact, even if the nutrition worker knows that these problems exist. The different perceptions may result from lack of information in the community or from widely held cultural beliefs. For example, a condition of tiredness and dizziness during pregnancy may be so common as to be considered normal, although it may be attributable to low food intake and anaemia. Similarly, traditional customs regarding the order of serving food or the best foods for weaning-age children may be so well established that the possibility of any ill-effects arising from the practices will never be considered. In these circumstances, before change can be expected it will be necessary to explain convincingly the reasons why change is needed.
Box 74 - Extended family members and public persons influence nutrition behaviour
Many nutrition communication programmes focus on mothers as the main providers of food and child care in many households. However, other family members, especially fathers, are often influential in decisions regarding food purchasing and intrafamily food allocations. Mothers have the prime responsibility for feeding and caring for their children; yet when there are breaks in culturally established patterns of feeding, other family and community members often play a key role. For example, in Mali men often provide millet (the main staple food) for their family and sometimes purchase other foods in the market. The Mali Nutrition Communication Project is designing messages to encourage men to provide their wives with more millet (which the wife can barter for other food commodities), more nutritious market foods (such as fried bean cakes or carrots) and additional food during pregnancy.
Family members, including in-laws, influence dietary practices not only by their opinions and their financial contribution to food purchases, but also by the amount of labour they contribute to the household. Changes in nutrition behaviour often entail shifts in time allocation among household members. For example, if women are devoting more time to breastfeeding or food preparation, other household members may have to take on additional responsibilities such as carrying water or fuelwood. Therefore, it is important to direct some messages to them and to involve them in efforts to improve family diets.
Source: Adapted from FAO/WHO, 1992f.
Box 75 - Identification of different groups of beneficiaries for nutrition education
For the prevention of protein-energy malnutrition, the beneficiary groups may be defined as follows.
· Vulnerable group: children under five years
· Target population: persons caring for these children
· Primary group: mothers of the children
- Segment A: illiterate mothers living in rural areas
- Segment B: illiterate mothers living in urban areas
- Segment C: literate mothers
· Secondary group: health workers, social workers, teachers in secondary school, journalists from the local radio station
· Tertiary group: administrative and technical officers from the various sectors concerned, fathers of the children
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1994a.
In challenging established traditions, care must be taken to avoid the implication that others have been providing "wrong" information and to avoid blaming mothers and care-givers for believing "old-fashioned" ideas. It will be profitable first of all to convince the local people so that they are able to identify the need for change; the community will then be likely to support the proposal for change when it comes.
However, it is often possible to adapt existing traditions, habits and customs without drastic change, if the nutrition worker understands not only the pattern of action to be adopted, but also the reasons behind it. All communities have evolved methods of dealing with health and nutrition problems and with seasonal food insecurities, and some of these are both relevant and effective. For example, in many societies special nutrient-rich foods are reserved for newly delivered and nursing mothers. Finger millet, Eleusine coracana, is the preferred cereal for lactating women in the Kikuyu culture in Kenya. Sorghum is relatively high in protein and also contains large amounts of calcium. In many African countries germination and fermentation are traditional practices in the preparation of cereal porridges. The use of these "culture-friendly" preparations as weaning foods and the improvement in nutritional quality of germinated and fermented grains were discussed in Chapter 6.
Encouragement of these culturally established practices will form an acceptable message for nutrition communication.
Local farming systems provide other culture-based practices that are nutritionally sound and ecologically sustainable, such as the intercropping of cereals, beans and pumpkins. Social support systems of food sharing, hospitality and strong extended family obligations can all be enlisted in ensuring the cultural acceptability of nutrition messages. Some further aspects of the effects of local customs and practices on food supplies and consumption patterns are included in Box 76.
Messages, media and support materials
To avoid confusion, a clear distinction should be made between the concepts of message, media and supports. The media are the channels of communication through which messages are transmitted (e.g. talks at a health centre or school lessons by radio). The message is the formulation of an idea or concept to be transmitted to a specific population (e.g. "Fish is a healthy food for children"). Supports are the materials on which the message is transmitted (e.g. posters, radio programmes or flip charts).
Design and pre-testing
In designing nutrition education materials, the first consideration is to catch the attention of the audience; people must want to listen to or look at the message if it is to affect them. This aspect is of particular importance in designing materials that are to convey messages through visual means. Posters, for example, rely on their "stopping power" to attract attention, especially if they are displayed without presentation through face-to-face communication.
Box 76 - Effects of local customs and practices on food supplies: how old and new customs and practices affect the food paths
Old customs that help enough good food to reach people
· Traditional methods of agriculture and fishing which preserve the soil, fish stocks, etc.
· Giving special foods such as chicken or fermented porridge to women who are pregnant or recently delivered
· Giving newly delivered women a rest from work for some time
· Breastfeeding for two years or more, and breastfeeding at night
· Eating fresher whole foods instead of highly processed foods (for example, consuming dark-green leaves instead of cabbage, and fresh fruit instead of bottled drinks)
· Having two or more years before birth of the next baby
Old customs that may block food paths
· Having large families
· Men controlling the family food budget
· Bulky weaning foods
· Giving men the biggest and best share of the family food
· Not sending girls to school
New practices that help food move along food paths
· Sustainable methods of agriculture which increase yields
· Appropriate methods of large-scale food storage, processing and marketing
· Use of grain mills which reduce women's work
· More girls going to school (women with more education are likely to feed and care for their families better and have fewer children than those with no or little education)
· More families using electricity, piped water and other modern technology which makes food preparation easier and cleaner
· More families listening to the radio and reading newspapers and magazines, from which they get useful new information about budgeting, food production and preparation and about feeding children and prevention of infections
· More families using effective methods of contraception to space children and reduce family size
· Women having more control over the money that they earn
· More children attending clinics for immunization, growth monitoring and early treatment of infection
New practices that may block food
· Bottle-feeding
· Women going out to work and leaving babies with young, inexperienced care-givers
· Fewer extended families and many women, including adolescent girls, raising families on their own
· People preferring foreign foods, such as wheat (for bread), which may not be easy to produce locally
· Practices which lead to babies being born too close together, i.e. starting sex soon after giving birth or breastfeeding only partially or not at all before the baby is six months old
· Eating poor-value convenience foods instead of fresh whole foods
What you can do
· Discuss with people local customs and practices that influence the way in which food moves along the food path, and help them to identify the customs and practices that help everyone have enough food and those that may block food paths
· Help people plan ways to change customs and practices that block food paths
· Encourage customs and practices that help food to move, e.g.:
- Encourage breastfeeding and discourage bottle-feeding
- Encourage families to share food by nutritional needs
- Encourage men to give women more control over the family budget
- Encourage girls to attend school and stay at school as long as possible
Source: King and Burgess, 1993.
Pre-testing is an important stage in the development of posters, as pictures may cause offence or be misinterpreted, and technical words such as "vitamin A" and "nutrient" may not be familiar to viewers. The pre-testing of messages focuses on five characteristics:
· attention (does the message have stopping power?);
· comprehension (is it clearly understood?);
· relevance (is the message of concern to the audience?);
· credibility (are the message and the source believable?);
· acceptability (is the message free from offensive references?).
Family trials are useful for pre-testing messages concerned with practical activities, such as the best way to prepare a boiled cereal food for weaning. Such trials will help to determine the best ingredients and methods in terms of family income, the mother's work pattern, family eating habits, the type of utensils and cooking facilities available and the infant's taste preferences. Development of a product that can be marketed in the community may follow.
In the Niger, the Birni N'Konni Vitamin-A Mini-Project, which promoted specific seasonal foods rich in vitamin A, used role play and traditional theatre to draw out the community's responses regarding the feasibility of various options for behaviour change (Academy for Educational Development, 1995). The use of drama is also particularly suitable for nutrition communication through radio messages. In a second-phase project, village dramas from 42 communities were broadcast by a regional station over a ten-month period.
Messages for radio should be short and specific so that they are easily recalled by the casual listener. The use of popular, catchy tunes to accompany the words of the message make it more attractive, and the use of two or more distinctive voices adds variety and interest. The message can be woven into a dramatic dialogue between a credible authority, such as a teacher or doctor, and a "learner" with whom the audience can identify. The message should emphasize one or two simple phrases, such as "Green leaves for bright eyes" or "Palm oil prevents blindness". These messages should be repeated frequently, with slight variations in the dialogue and speakers to reduce listener fatigue. Box 77 presents an example of a radio spot on the prevention of night blindness.
The ways of presenting ideas for change will vary with the preconceptions of the target communities. The message must offer a benefit that is visible and valued. Box 78 describes the process of developing a message from a fact and modifying it based on the results of pre-testing. Some guidelines for designing messages well are given in Box 79. An effective communication strategy will often utilize a variety of messages at different stages in the nutrition education programme. In the initial stages, messages will serve to arouse attention and interest; later, as the changed behaviour is adopted, more supportive and encouraging messages will be appropriate.
Box 77 - Radio spot on vitamin A: "Yellow fruit and green vegetables - the light of the eyes"
Girl: (Memorizing) Carrots, papaya, pumpkin, saag (spinach)...
Teacher: This is correct, Jyoti. We should try to eat carrots, papaya, saag and pumpkin. A nutrition factor called vitamin A is found in great amounts in these fruits and vegetables. What should we do to prevent night blindness, a disease when a person cannot see in dim light?
Boy: We should eat carrots, papayas, mangoes and green vegetables every day.
Teacher: Yes. Do you all eat these things every day?
Students: Yes, we do, Miss, every day.
Teacher: When you cannot get yellow fruits such as these, you should eat green leafy vegetables instead. Yellow fruits and green leafy vegetables make your eyes healthy and your body strong. You have all understood this, haven't you?
Students: Yes, we have all understood, Miss.
Teacher: From now on, you will eat these things every day, won't you?
Students: Yes, we will eat them, Miss, every day.
(School teen rings)
Voice: To prevent night blindness, every child should eat dark-green leafy vegetables and yellow fruits every day.
Slogan: For the light of the eyes - green leafy vegetables.
Source: IVACG, 1992.
Choosing the appropriate medium or combination of media
In communication programmes, a distinction is made between two channels of communication: face-to-face and mass media. Face-to-face oral communication may involve, for example, an agricultural extension worker and a farmer, or a health worker facilitating a group discussion on infant feeding. Most development programme personnel are involved in interpersonal communication. They can reinforce the messages broadcast or disseminated through radio or other mass media. A selection of appropriate themes for face-to-face communication in agricultural and rural development is presented in Box 80.
Box 78 - Developing messages and modifying them after pre-testing
A problem in the area is that many young children do not grow well. One reason is that weaning foods are too bulky; they are not energy-rich, so children lack calories for growth. The nutrition fact that families need to know is: "Adding fat or oil to porridge gives children more energy and helps them to grow well."
Together with other nutrition workers and local women, develop a message from the fact. Make the message simple, e.g.: "Add oil or fat to your child's porridge. Oil is full of energy and helps to make children grow well."
Pre-test the message to find out if people can understand it and do what it suggests. For example, you may find that:
· people do not have fat but they have groundnuts;
· they believe that fatty foods give children diarrhoea;
· they do not understand the link between "full of energy" and "growing well", but they do believe that fatty food gives strength and energy;
· they do not find the message very interesting or know for whom it is meant;
· they want to know how much oil to add.
Write and pre-test the message again until it is right. An example of the new message could be: "Mother - you want your baby to be strong and active? Add a spoonful of pounded groundnuts to each cup of his or her porridge. Groundnuts are easy to digest and do not upset a child's stomach."
Source: Adapted from King and Burgess, 1993.
Communication in a group situation has been the principal means of nutrition education for a long time. In the past, such encounters were referred to as "discussions" but often turned out to be monologues. However, communication in a group situation has improved. A significant amount of material has been developed for training leaders of group discussions, including methods for group participation and visual and audiovisual supports. Forms of interpersonal and group communication include demonstrations, training sessions, exhibits, dramas and outdoor shows. Dull traditional talks are replaced by lively and entertaining audience participation (see Box 81). This approach is more likely to result in positive action for solving community problems.
Box 79 - Guidelines for well-designed messages
In designing a message, the following points should be kept in mind:
· Keep them short and simple; include only a few key ideas.
· Give reliable, complete information.
· Repeat the idea many times.
· Recommend precise behaviour change.
· Show the relation between the nutritional problem and the recommended behaviour.
· Make use of a slogan or theme.
· Ensure that the message is presented by a credible source (as perceived by the target group).
· Present the facts in a direct manner.
· Make use of positive expressions, not negative ones.
· Use humour without being offensive to anyone.
Source: FAO, 1994a.
The mass media include radio, television and video, the printed press and posters. Radio and television programmes can have many formats, such as talks, debates, soap operas and advertisements. Radio is a very popular medium throughout the world and can be a powerful tool for disseminating messages and information. In some of the poorest countries an estimated 2 to 4 percent of the population has access to radio. In most developing countries in Africa, however, the proportion of the population using radios exceeds 10 percent, and in some countries, such as Kenya, it is estimated to be as high as 75 percent. The radio is primarily non-interactive; messages are generally transmitted in one direction, from the transmitter to the audience, with the transmitter having no feedback on the impact of the programme. However, recent experiences with rural radio have demonstrated its potential to stimulate lively interactions among people in the villages. Although radio is an excellent
medium for motivating people and drawing attention to new ideas and techniques, it is weak for providing detailed knowledge and training. However, in some projects radio listening, if followed up by extension staff providing more in-depth information and training, can be integrated into a broader multimedia approach.
Box 80 - A selection of appropriate themes for face-to-face communication with participants in agricultural and rural development
Nutritional communications play a key role in development since improved nutrition is not an automatic consequence of increased food availability. Food marketers know that it is cost-effective to invest in consumer education and promotion. Without nutritional communications, development project outputs such as seeds or food supplements tend to have little or no effect on the food practices of the groups for whom they are intended.
The common themes of nutritional communications can be divided into those related to agriculture and those related to health and child development.
The agricultural themes concern the following:
· household food cropping and purchasing patterns, with special regard to the adoption of new varieties and to the nutritional consequences of cash cropping;
· consumption of nutritious foods produced with the assistance of the project;
· home production and consumption of vegetables and other protective foods that are not the primary focus of the agricultural project;
· food storage and preparation, using appropriate local construction materials, fuel, etc.
Themes relating to health and child development concern the following:
· special nutritional needs of vulnerable groups, including pregnant and lactating women, infants and growing children, and especially breastfeeding and weaning practices;
· adequate diet and how to achieve it with available foods;
· feeding during illness, especially the need to rehydrate and nourish young children who have diarrhoea.
Source: FAO, 1983b.
Box 81 - Community members promote micronutrient-rich foods
Involving all members of a community facilitates dietary change. As part of an FAO nutrition project, a village in the Niger organized a recipe competition in which traditional foods rich in micronutrients were used. Men, children, schoolteachers and community workers were invited to be the judges of the foods produced. The competition was widely promoted, and women were motivated to do their best. Many villagers were surprised to find that they actually enjoyed foods that until that time they would not have eaten. This alone made it easier for them to accept suggestions to change their eating habits. At this point, they were ready to support changes in the family diet.
By involving everyone in the community, the organizers created a supportive environment in which changing behaviour became desirable. Because the activity educated various segments of the population in addition to the primary target group, its results became a stimulus for further change.
Source: FAO, 1993a.
Television's strength lies in its combination of moving images and sound. Although messages transmitted through television may be persuasive, this medium is not easy to use for agricultural and rural development in most developing countries because it is not accessible to most people in rural areas. However, it has begun to exert enormous influence in urban areas of most developing countries.
Video has become the medium of choice in the minds of many. Indeed, it is highly effective, but it calls for a careful strategy, skilled producers and access to post-production facilities. Despite the higher costs, video has largely taken over from slide sets and filmstrips, which have proved an invaluable training aid in rural and agricultural development but which lack the appeal of video. Video is similar to television, but its electronic recording of images and sound enables immediate playback and production flexibility.
The printed press also has its shortcomings, which are linked to problems of limited literacy and circulation. Newspapers can be used in communication projects if the aim is to mobilize a literate population in towns. Newsletters, brochures and leaflets and T-shirts may be appropriately used for the sensitization of professionals in agriculture, education and health. However, posters using images without text, in conjunction with other media, can serve as an effective means of communication also for non-literate persons.
The choice of media for a nutrition communication programme will ultimately depend on many factors, including the amount of funding available, the literacy level of the target audience, the availability and level of training of extension personnel and the geographic coverage of the programme. An important consideration which is sometimes overlooked is that even in households with access to certain media, such as radio, women may not have access to the media when needed. Although a radio set may be considered household property, it is often the head of the household who determines the listening time and chooses the programmes.
A multimedia approach, such as a radio campaign combined with face-to-face communication by an outreach group of well-trained extension workers to support the campaign at community level, is the most effective way of conveying nutrition messages. The different media reinforce each other in terms of the number of people reached, the frequency with which an individual hears or sees a specific message and the content of the messages received within a given period.
Timing is vital, especially for mass media messages, which are usually expensive and often of short duration. Broadcasting a message to an agricultural community at a time when the people are all working on their farms would be a waste of resources. Similarly, open-air film or slide shows and dramatized theatre performances will be better attended in dry weather, after the main harvest period, than during the early rains. A talk to women on the best foods to buy for family meals would probably be more effective if presented at the village market when the women were making their purchases, rather than at a health centre during a baby-weighing session.
Nutrition messages for urban communities will be based on the recognized problems encountered by many families and individuals in making the transition from a largely self-sufficient food supply system, based on home production, to an urban cash-oriented food system. The gap between the rate of urban migration and the creation of urban employment opportunities is widening, and as a result urban poverty is increasing in many countries. Food purchases, consumption of processed and canned food and dining outside the home are more frequent in urban than in rural areas. Nutrition messages may address problems of hygiene, food safety, food labelling, economic marketing, snack foods, soft drinks and alcohol and drug abuse, as well as directing attention to benefits available through targeted food subsidies and direct food distribution programmes. Governments will need to address seriously the issues and problems in the urban setting in order to enable consumers to make
nutritionally sound and affordable food choices.
Radio can provide a cost-effective medium for nutrition messages targeted to urban consumers. In the major towns and cities, use of television can also be considered, perhaps employing live appearances of well-known public figures and entertainment personalities or soap opera-type series for video transmission of relevant messages.
Some guidelines for effective nutrition communication programmes drawn from an analysis of some successful programmes are provided in Box 82.
Box 82 - Effective nutrition communication programmes
Through an analysis of nutrition communication programmes that have already demonstrated impact, nine generalizations can be made:
· In-depth research is needed to develop an effective communication strategy.
· The most effective nutrition communication campaigns and products are based on consumer preferences.
· Specific, action-based behaviours have the best chance of being adopted.
· Identifying and reaching other influential target audiences may be critical to influencing the primary target audience.
· Community leaders and networks are often an effective channel to promote solutions to nutrition problems.
· Frequent exposure to messages is essential.
· Interpersonal and mass media channels must be evaluated for their potential to reach sufficient numbers of the target audiences with sufficient frequency to cause impact. Most programmes need a combination of interpersonal and mass media to be effective.
· Outreach workers must be trained in counselling and communication skills and supervised regularly.
· Long-term effort is required to sustain behaviour change.
Source: Adapted from FAO/WHO, 1992f.
Nutrition education in schools
Schools provide a special medium for nutrition education and for intervention to improve children's health and nutritional status. The basic aim is to help children acquire nutrition knowledge and to develop and encourage desirable eating habits and food choices. Children can also help change the eating habits of their families by demanding desirable food, and when they themselves become parents in the future, they can impart good dietary habits to their children. Therefore, a common maxim about how to bring about a real change in dietary habits is "Go to school".
Available evidence on the effectiveness of nutrition education programmes in schools shows that nutrition knowledge is most effective if there is a supportive environment and if nutrition education is linked with practical food- and nutrition-related activities (Lytle and Achterberg, 1995). Lunch, feeding, gardening and health programmes in schools offer special opportunities for practical teaching in nutrition. Student participation in school gardening, menu planning, food selection (ideally from locally grown and processed foods) and food preparation offers pupils first-hand experience in learning nourishing and hygienic dietary practices. The classroom can thus serve as a "laboratory" where proper eating habits can be demonstrated and reinforced in practice. Another important way to build a supportive environment for nutrition education in schools is to involve the parents. The Child to Child Programme, for example, is based on the concept of children as social educators
and as effective intermediaries for messages directed at their parents. However, in this programme it is important to engage the parents and other family members in the activities and the learning experience as much as possible. For example, parents can become involved in food production, especially in school gardening.
In the Eastern Province of Sierra Leone, an innovative approach to nutrition education was adopted through restructuring of the teacher training programme of the Bunumbu Teachers' Training College, with the cooperation of the Ministry of Education and the assistance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). The objective was to train a new type of primary schoolteacher, who would be able to assist the local communities in identification, analysis and improvement of their own nutritional situation, in addition to providing a more relevant and appropriate curriculum for home economics teaching at the primary school level. Examples of the instructional materials prepared for this course are given in Box 83.
School programmes have greater impact and can be sustained longer if they are tied to community activities. A school gardening programme provides an excellent opportunity for community involvement where water availability does not pose a constraint, and agricultural extension can support the programme by providing the necessary inputs and advice. This type of programme helps gradually to replace "nutrition education" by the promotion of a "nutritional environment", which involves everyone from the educational authorities to the village community. The aims of such programmes are therefore not only to transmit knowledge to children, but also to improve the quality of school and village life.
Box 83 - Nutrition education materials prepared for the training of primary schoolteachers in Bunumbu Teachers' Training College, Sierra Leone
The following instructional materials on nutrition education were prepared for college students in order to facilitate the respective teaching-learning situations in which the students found themselves.
· Food and nutrition handbook
· Chart on baby food, "Make your benniseed mix"
· Poster, "Mother's milk is the best for your baby"
· Chart, "Legumes", with their various nutritional contents
· Chart, "Preparation of diarrhoea medicine at home"
· Instruction on the use of local food preservation
· Food wheel chart based on locally available foods
· Guidelines to plan balanced meals for the rural family of limited income
· Teacher's guidebook on nutrition education for primary schools
Source: UNESCO, 1983.
Schools provide a long-term perspective for change in social communication in nutrition. The messages disseminated at social centres, dispensaries and elsewhere will find a fertile ground with the future adults of the society if the schools undertake their training in nutrition now when they are young.
Training the change agents in nutrition education, and the role of different sectors
Attention has been drawn to the interdisciplinary nature of nutritional problems and also to the advantages in looking at the entire food chain from producer to consumer in planning interventions. Accordingly, the implementation of a social communication programme in nutrition requires the collaboration of specialists in different sectors, including agriculture, education, communication, nutrition and health, and each must have a clear understanding of his or her role as a team member.
Most professionals, apart from health personnel and nutritionists, lack even basic knowledge about human nutrition. To participate effectively in nutrition education activities, such professionals require some basic training in nutrition. It is important that the training also incorporate training in participatory problem assessment as well as participation in multidisciplinary activities. Enabling project staff to involve community members in a genuine dialogue about their food and nutrition concerns and to coordinate nutrition programme activities among different sectors and levels is crucial for programme success.
Agricultural extension workers
Most agricultural extension workers have close and regular contact with farmers, including women farmers, in the community. Therefore, personnel in agricultural extension, including home economics extension, have a vital role in the dissemination of nutrition information and the content and messages of programmes in nutrition education and communication. Agricultural extension agents are well placed to promote the production and consumption of a varied diet to improve the nutritional security of farm households. Similarly, the complementary improvement of agricultural productivity, leading to improved incomes, and the creation of more employment opportunities, especially in the post-harvest preservation and processing of farm products, will provide overall benefits to agricultural communities.
The role of the agricultural extension officer is to work in partnership with community health and nutrition officers and encourage the farming community to make the best use of its agricultural assets and opportunities. Agricultural extension officers can provide guidance on message development regarding what crops can be grown in the area and which are the most preferred and profitable. They can also help local farmers select the varieties and landraces of local seeds best suited to the environmental constraints of the area, and they can advise the community on seed propagation and distribution through the nutrition education communication network Through attendance at farmers' clubs and credit organizations, they can advise and assist farmers on the best procedures for securing loans and increasing productivity, and they can develop messages to communicate this advice and information to a wide audience.
Agricultural extension officers can also devise technical messages to encourage farmers to produce and to market a wider variety of crops to extend the cropping period, and they can develop and promote, in collaboration with local farmers, more extensive mixed cropping systems to maximize use of the available land. By listening to the farmers, agricultural extension officers can identify farmers' constraints and problems and can ensure that nutritional messages are relevant, realistic and feasible. These workers are thus in a very good position to guide the nutrition sector to address the priority food problems, as judged by the communities themselves.
In Africa, home economists, often also working in the ministry of agriculture, are an important group dealing with the improvement of household food security and nutrition, particularly in rural areas. They advise households on how to improve family resources and how to make efficient use of what is available to them. They educate families on improving methods of cooking to preserve the nutritional value of food and to save fuel, on improving traditional methods of food preservation and storage, on feeding different members of the family according to their nutritional needs and on other aspects of family life. Nutrition is usually taught as a subject in home economics training. It is important that such training include field experience and be practically oriented, so as to make trainees more competent to deal with the situations prevailing in the rural areas of Africa.
Having acquired broader understanding of food and nutrition security, agricultural and home economics extension officers will appreciate the need for messages to promote nutrition-oriented home gardens to prevent micronutrient deficiencies. They will encourage the community to adopt a more production-oriented approach to the raising of small animals and the establishment of fish ponds, not only for commercial purposes, but also for home consumption. In all of these activities, agricultural extension officers will help to secure a regular and sufficient supply of a wider variety of foods for household use.
It is often only an ideal to envisage a village community well served at regular intervals by a whole team of extension officers in community health, nutrition, fisheries, agriculture, education and family planning. In reality, the "man on the spot" (or sometimes "the woman on the spot"), often an agriculturist, is frequently called upon to give advice on a wide range of problems. Thus, providing agricultural field staff with background and training that include experience and exposure to human problems including malnutrition, as well as to crop and animal production, will be a valuable investment in human resources for the benefit of the public.
The converse is also true: nutritionists also need to learn about aspects of agriculture and to experience at first hand some of the problems involved in feeding a family with food produced on family land. Thus it may be desirable not only to introduce nutrition into agricultural training, but also to train rural development officers in different technical subjects, including nutrition, community development and agriculture, through a people-centred approach to rural life. In some African countries, ministries of agriculture and ministries of education are already well aware of the need for closer integration of the production and consumption aspects of food and nutrition and are running educational programmes to promote this integration in both extension and training.
In several Sahelian countries, the agricultural information department of the ministry of agriculture runs special programmes intended to ensure the population's satisfactory nutritional status by increasing and diversifying food production and by promoting the improved utilization of foods. National teams of nutritionists and communicators are trained to use rural radio programmes and films of village life to convey nutritional messages to farming communities (see Box 84).
Health workers
Health workers are the key group attending to mothers and children who are most vulnerable to malnutrition. They have for a long time had a special role in imparting nutrition education. Only recently has their training been modified to go beyond the simple treatment of disease towards promotion of better nutrition and public health and hygiene. In Africa, as elsewhere, the prevention of malnutrition and the promotion of good dietary habits should take precedence over treatment. Thus more emphasis on food is called for during training, so that the health worker can recommend locally available nutritious foods and explain how to introduce them and how to prepare diverse mixtures using them. Collaboration with agricultural extension workers will help in the development of realistic messages and skills.
Communication specialists and media journalists
Communication specialists are important in the modern world with its complex communication systems. They have a special role in designing and formulating nutrition messages and translating them into appropriate materials. Communication technicians are responsible for audiovisual materials and aspects of sound and editing. Media journalists are also needed. However, there is a shortage of media specialists in developing countries, especially working in association with ministries of health, agriculture and education. Media journalists tend to be trained as generalists; few have the expertise to communicate health and nutrition information to the public correctly. Therefore, more training programmes such as the one presented in Box 84 are necessary to promote effective and successful nutrition education programmes.
Box 84 - FAO training programme to improve social communication in nutrition in the Sahel
Nutrition-related action is a delicate undertaking that requires an integrated approach involving the health, agricultural, educational and social sectors at all levels. Nutritional communication has an essential role in social mobilization and encourages the behavioural changes needed to improve nutritional status. Communication is an important feature of daily life involving the sharing of knowledge, ideas and techniques. With this in mind, FAO implemented a regional communication support programme entitled "Communication Support for Sahelian Programmes against Malnutrition and Vitamin A Deficiency". Multisectoral teams were formed in Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger to support the implementation of social, educational and institutional communication campaigns. The emphasis was on radio programmes, audiovisual aids and video, the final objective being to involve the village communities as the leading players in the process of enhancing household
nutritional status.
The project's main activity is the training of multisectoral communication teams. The training comprises three participatory workshops: the first on rural radio, the second on audiovisual aids and the third on video. The project brings together the national contact points and the representatives of the other partners.
One important project output has been the listing of ten priority areas for a multimedia campaign against vitamin A deficiency and malnutrition in the Sahel, including: pointing out the link between diet and disease; encouraging production of locally appropriate foods; diversification; conservation and processing throughout the year to ensure household food security; increasing consumption of foods rich in vitamin A and iron among vulnerable population groups; and involving the village community in the identification and management of nutrition problems.
Source: Adapted from Rokia Ba Touré, 1993 (English summary).
Advocacy and training for policy- and decision-makers
Policy- and decision-makers are another category of personnel requiring nutrition information. Government officials responsible for development are the most powerful actors because their decisions and actions determine the welfare of their nations. It is therefore of great importance that they understand the nutritional implications of their policies and plans. Nutritional advocacy at the political level and specialized training or "awareness raising" of planning personnel should be an integral part of any national programme, including nutrition education programmes.
Planners and decision-makers must understand the nutritional needs of the population as a whole, the need in poor communities for adequate, safe and appropriate diets, and the consequences of overconsumption. This understanding will enable them to take appropriate measures when planning national food production and processing and import and export marketing in order to improve access to food by the most vulnerable groups. They also have a part to play in approving appropriate nutrient levels and safety standards for manufactured foods. They must recognize the negative effects that structural adjustment policies and programmes and the removal of agricultural subsidies can have on the nutritional status of vulnerable groups.
Some examples of nutrition communication programmes directed at policy-makers are described in Box 85. Advocacy at policy level should include messages regarding the magnitude and economic costs of national malnutrition problems and their consequences such as nutritional blindness, physical infirmity and mental retardation. Messages should stress the detrimental effects of nutritional deprivation on the national budget and at the same time should explain how these problems could be prevented at minimum cost, with consequent gains to national development.
Box 85 - Some nutrition communication programmes directed at policy-makers
Policy-makers constitute a powerful audience for nutrition communication. In Brazil, the support of policy-makers was indispensable in a massive national breastfeeding campaign during 1981 and 1982. To enlist their support, breastfeeding advocates prepared a hard-hitting slide presentation which stressed not only the nutritional and health benefits of breastfeeding but also the cost and loss of hard currency associated with use of breastmilk substitutes. The slide presentation motivated cabinet ministers and other high-level officials at the national and state levels to make a major commitment to breastfeeding promotion.
Not only do policy-makers set budget priorities, they also have the power to make broad legislative changes that can have a major impact on nutrition behaviour. For example, policies regarding maternity leave, provision of child care facilities and breastfeeding equipment at the workplace and work breaks for breastfeeding could help working mothers to continue breastfeeding and avoid use of breastmilk substitutes. Similarly, laws requiring fortification of specific foods (e.g. iodization of salt and vitamin A supplementation) can greatly simplify the problem of adding micronutrients to deficient diets. For example, in Guatemala, following strong lobbying efforts by nutrition specialists, a law was passed during the 1970s requiring all centrally processed sugar to be fortified with vitamin A. This greatly simplified the problem of distribution.
Even after laws are passed, nutrition communication can play a role in ensuring that they are enforced. For example, in Santa Catarina State, Brazil, the proportion of industries having child care facilities increased from less than 10 percent to 85 percent within one year following a 1982 to 1983 media campaign explaining the legal requirements. Another underutilized role for nutrition communication programmes is to educate policy-makers on the nutritional impact of other development policies pertaining to agricultural production and prices, macroeconomic factors, population growth and distribution and environmental quality.
Source: Adapted from FAO/WHO, 1992f.
<title>Agriculture food and nutrition for Africa - A resource book for teachers of agriculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Annexes
Annex 1 - International organizations and sources of materials
Annex 2 - Countries included in Sub-Saharan Africa (FAO) and in the Africa region (WHO)
Annex 3 - World declaration on nutrition
Annex 4 - Proximate composition of foods (per 100 g edible portion)
Annex 5 - Countries ranked by fat energy ratio^a of national food supply, 1992
Annexes
Annex 1 - International organizations and sources of materials
International organizations/United Nations agencies
Administrative Committee on Coordination - Subcommittee on Nutrition of the United Nations (ACC/SCN)
The Technical Secretary, ACC/SCN, c/o WHO, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
Sales and Marketing Group, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy
Copies of FAO publications quoted in the text can be obtained by writing to this address. Publications on nutrition, including this resource book, can also be obtained by writing directly to the Food and Nutrition Division of FAO at the same address.
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
107 Via del Serafico, 00142 Rome, Italy
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
Palais des Nations, Box 2500, 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
3 UN Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA
UNICEF Regional Office for Eastern and Southern Africa
Box 44145, Nairobi, Kenya
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
One United Nations Plaza, New York, NY 10017, USA
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
Nutrition and Health Education, UNESCO, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, France
World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA
World Food Programme (WFP)
Via Cristoforo Colombo 426, 00145 Rome, Italy
World Health Organization (WHO)
Nutrition Unit, WHO, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland
WHO Regional Office for Africa
Box 6, Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo
Bilateral aid agencies
The European Community, many Western countries and Japan have offices of their official aid agencies in most countries. These agencies can be contacted through their embassies. Examples of such agencies include the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA), the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), the Inter-American Committee for Agricultural Development (CIDA), the Finnish International Development Agency (FINNIDA) and the German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ).
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
There are many NGOs, but in many countries they all belong to a national organization. The following list gives headquarters addresses for some NGOs that are important for nutrition workers. A number of these organizations also have country offices.
African Medical Research Foundation (AMREF)
Box 30125, Nairobi, Kenya
Christian Aid
Box 100, London SE1 7RT, UK
Catholic Relief Services (CRS)
209 West Fayette Street, Baltimore, MD 21201-3443, USA
Helen Keller International (HKI)
15 West 16th Street, New York, NY 10011, USA
International Children's Centre (ICC)
Carrefour de Longchamp, 75016 Paris, France
Oxfam
274 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 7DZ, UK
Save the Children Fund (SCF), UK
Mary Datchelor House, 17 Grove Lane, Camberwell, London SE5 8RD, UK
International Baby Food Action Network for Africa (IBFAN)
c/o GIFA, Box 157, 1211 Geneva 19, Switzerland
International Council for Control of iodine Deficiency Disorders (ICCIDD)
The Secretary, ICCIDD, CSIRO Division of Human Nutrition, Kintore Avenue, Adelaide 5000, Australia
International Vitamin A Consultative Group (IVACG)
c/o Nutrition Foundation, 888 17th Street NW, Washington, DC 20006, USA
World Federation of Public Health Associations (WFPHA)
PO Box 99, 1211 Geneva 20, Switzerland
American Public Health Association (APHA)
1015 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005, USA
Other sources of resource materials
Appropriate Health Resources and Technology Action Group (AHRTAG)
1 London Bridge, London SE1 9SG, UK
Teaching Aids at Low Cost (TALC)
Box 49, St Albans Al1 4AX, UK
Annex 2 - Countries included in Sub-Saharan Africa (FAO) and in the Africa region (WHO)
Country
Continental Africa
(WHO)
Sub-Saharan Africa
(FAO)
Algeria
X
Angola
X
X
Benin
X
X
Botswana
X
X
Burkina Faso
X
X
Burundi
X
X
Cameroon
X
X
Cape Verde
X
Central African Republic
X
X
Chad
X
X
Comoros
X
Congo (Republic of)
X
X
Côte d'Ivoire
X
X
Equatorial Guinea
X
Eritrea
X
Ethiopia
X
X
Gabon
X
X
Gambia
X
X
Ghana
X
X
Guinea
X
X
Guinea-Bissau
X
Kenya
X
X
Lesotho
X
X
Liberia
X
X
Madagascar
X
X
Malawi
X
X
Mali
X
X
Mauritania
X
X
Mauritius
X
X
Mozambique
X
X
Namibia
X
X
Niger
X
X
Nigeria
X
X
Rwanda
X
X
Sao Tome and Principe
X
Senegal
X
X
Seychelles
X
Sierra Leone
X
X
Somalia
X
South Africa
X
Swaziland
X
X
Tanzania, United Republic
X
X
Togo
X
X
Uganda
X
X
Former Zaire
X
X
Zambia
X
X
Zimbabwe
X
X
Annex 3 - World declaration on nutrition
1. We, the Ministers and the Plenipotentiaries representing 159 states and the European Economic Community at the International Conference on Nutrition (Rome, December 1992), declare our determination to eliminate hunger and to reduce all forms of malnutrition. Hunger and malnutrition are unacceptable in a world that has both the knowledge and the resources to end this human catastrophe. We recognize that access to nutritionally adequate and safe food is a right of each individual. We recognize that globally there is enough food for all and that inequitable access is the main problem. Bearing in mind the right to an adequate standard of living, including food, contained in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we pledge to act in solidarity to ensure that freedom from hunger becomes a reality. We also declare our firm commitment to work together to ensure sustained nutritional well-being for all people in a peaceful, just and environmentally safe world.
2. Despite appreciable worldwide improvements in life expectancy, adult literacy and nutritional status, we all view with the deepest concern the unacceptable fact that about 780 million people in developing countries - 20 percent of their combined population - still do not have access to enough food to meet their basic daily needs for nutritional well-being.
3. We are especially distressed by the high prevalence and increasing numbers of malnourished children under five years of age in parts of Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean. Moreover, more than 2 000 million people, mostly women and children, are deficient in one or more micronutrients: babies continue to be born mentally retarded as a result of iodine deficiency; children go blind and die of vitamin A deficiency; and enormous numbers of women and children are adversely affected by iron deficiency. Hundreds of millions of people also suffer from communicable and non-communicable diseases caused by contaminated food and water. At the same time, chronic non-communicable diseases related to excessive or unbalanced dietary intakes often lead to premature deaths in both developed and developing countries.
4. We call on the United Nations to consider urgently the issue of declaring an International Decade of Food and Nutrition, within existing structures and available resources, in order to give additional emphasis to achieving the objectives of this World Declaration on Nutrition. Such consideration should give particular emphasis to the food and nutrition problems of Africa, and of Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean.
5. We recognize that poverty and the lack of education, which are often the effects of underdevelopment, are the primary causes of hunger and undernutrition. There are poor people in most societies who do not have adequate access to food, safe water and sanitation, health services and education, which are the basic requirements for nutritional well-being.
6. We commit ourselves to ensuring that development programmes and policies lead to a sustainable improvement in human welfare, are mindful of the environment and are conducive to better nutrition and health for present and future generations. The multifunctional roles of agriculture, especially with regard to food security, nutrition, sustainable agriculture and the conservation of natural resources, are of particular importance in this context. We must implement at family, household, community, national and international levels, coherent agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries, food, nutrition, health, education, population, environmental, economic and social policies and programmes to achieve and maintain balance between the population and available resources and between rural and urban areas.
7. Slow progress in solving nutrition problems reflects the lack of human and financial resources, institutional capacity and policy commitment in many countries needed to assess the nature, magnitude and causes of nutrition problems and to implement concerted programmes to overcome them. Basic and applied scientific research, as well as food and nutrition surveillance systems, are needed to more clearly identify the factors that contribute to the problems of malnutrition and the ways and means of eliminating these problems, particularly for women, children and aged persons.
8. In addition, nutritional well-being is hindered by the continuation of social, economic and gender disparities; of discriminatory practices and laws; of floods, cyclones, drought, desertification and other natural calamities; and of many countries' inadequate budgetary allocations for agriculture, health, education and other social services.
9. Wars, occupations, civil disturbances and natural disasters, as well as human rights violations and inappropriate socio-economic policies, have resulted in tens of millions of refugees, displaced persons, war-affected non-combatant civilian populations and migrants, who are among the most nutritionally vulnerable groups. Resources for rehabilitating and caring for these groups are often extremely inadequate and nutritional deficiencies are common. All responsible parties should cooperate to ensure the safe and timely passage and distribution of appropriate food and medical supplies to those in need, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
10. Changing world conditions and the reduction of international tensions have improved the prospects for a peaceful solution of conflicts and have given us an opportunity as never before to redirect our resources increasingly towards productive and socially useful purposes to ensure the nutritional well-being of all people, especially the poor, deprived and vulnerable.
11. We recognize that the nutritional well-being of all people is a precondition for the development of societies and that it should be a key objective of progress in human development. It must be at the centre of our socio-economic development plans and strategies. Success is dependent on fostering the participation of the people and the community and multisectoral actions at all levels, taking into account their long-term effects. Shorter-term measures to improve nutritional well-being may need to be initiated or strengthened to complement the benefits resulting from longer-term development efforts.
12. Policies and programmes must be directed towards those most in need. Our priority should be to implement people-focused policies and programmes that increase access to and control of resources by the rural and urban poor, raise their productive capacity and incomes and strengthen their capacity to care for themselves. We must support and promote initiatives by people and communities and ensure that the poor participate in decisions that affect their lives. We fully recognize the importance of the family unit in providing adequate food, nutrition and a proper caring environment to meet the physical, mental, emotional and social needs of children and other vulnerable groups, including the elderly. In circumstances where the family unit can no longer fulfil these responsibilities adequately, the community and/or government should offer a support network to the vulnerable. We, therefore, undertake to strengthen and promote the family unit as the basic unit of society.
13. The right of women and adolescent girls to adequate nutrition is crucial. Their health and education must be improved. Women should be given the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process and to have increased access to and control of resources. It is particularly important to provide family planning services to both men and women and to provide support for women, especially working women, whether paid or unpaid, throughout pregnancy and breast-feeding and during the early childhood period. Men should also be motivated through appropriate education to assume an active role in the promotion of nutritional well-being.
14. Food aid may be used to assist in emergencies, to provide relief to refugees and displaced persons and to support household food security and community and economic development. Countries receiving emergency food aid should be provided with sufficient resources to enable them to move on from the rehabilitation phase to development, so that they will be in a position to cope with future emergencies. Care must be taken to avoid creating dependency and to avoid negative impacts on food habits and on local food production and marketing. Before food aid is reduced or discontinued, steps should be taken to alert recipient countries as much in advance as possible so that they can identify alternative sources and implement other approaches. Where appropriate, food aid may be channelled through NGOs with local and popular participation, in accordance with the domestic legislation of each country.
15. We reaffirm our obligations as nations and as an international community to protect and respect the need for nutritionally adequate food and medical supplies for civilian populations situated in zones of conflict. We affirm in the context of international humanitarian law that food must not be used as a tool for political pressure. Food aid must not be denied because of political affiliation, geographic location, gender, age, ethnic, tribal or religious identity.
16. We recognize the fact that each government has the prime responsibility to protect and promote food security and the nutritional well-being of its people, especially the vulnerable groups. However, we also stress that such efforts of low-income countries should be supported by actions of the international community as a whole. Such actions should include an increase in official development assistance in order to reach the accepted United Nations target of 0.7 percent of the GNP of developed countries as reiterated at the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.^1 Also, further renegotiation or alleviation of external debt could contribute in a substantive manner to the nutritional well-being in medium-income countries as well as in low-income ones.
^1 "Developed countries reaffirm their commitments lo reach the accepted United Nations target of 0.7 percent of GNP for ODA and, to the extent that they have not yet achieved that target, agree to augment their aid programmes in order to reach that target as soon as possible and to ensure prompt and effective implementation of Agenda 21. Some countries have agreed to reach the target by the year 2000. ...Those countries that have already reached the target are to be commended and encouraged to continue to contribute to the common effort to make available the substantial additional resources that have to be mobilized. Other developed countries, in line with their support for reform efforts in developing countries, agree to make their best efforts to increase their level of ODA." (Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 1992, Paragraph 33.13).
17. We acknowledge the importance of further liberalization and expansion of world trade, which would increase foreign exchange earnings and employment in developing countries. Compensatory measures will continue to be needed to protect adversely affected developing countries and vulnerable groups in medium- and low-income countries from negative effects of structural adjustment programmes.
18. We reaffirm the objectives for human development, food security, agriculture, rural development, health, nutrition and environment and sustainable development enunciated in a number of international conferences and documents.2 We reiterate our commitment to the nutritional goals of the Fourth United Nations Development Decade and the World Summit for Children.
^2 The World Food Conference, 1974; the Alma Ata Conference on Primary Health Care, 1978; the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, 1979; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, 1979, especially Articles 12 and 13; the Innocenti Declaration on the Protection, Promotion and Support of breastfeeding 1990; the Montreal Policy Conference on Micronutrient Malnutrition, 1991; the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, 1992.
19. As a basis for the Plan of Action for Nutrition and guidance for formulation of national plans of action, including the development of measurable goals and objectives within time frames, we pledge to make all efforts to eliminate before the end of this decade:
· famine and famine-related deaths;
· starvation and nutritional deficiency diseases in communities affected by natural and man-made disasters;
· iodine and vitamin A deficiencies.
We also pledge to reduce substantially within this decade:
· starvation and widespread chronic hunger;
· undernutrition, especially among children, women and the aged;
· other important micronutrient deficiencies, including iron;
· diet-related communicable and non-communicable diseases;
· social and other impediments to optimal breast-feeding;
· inadequate sanitation and poor hygiene, including unsafe drinking-water.
20. We resolve to promote active cooperation among governments, multilateral, bilateral and non-governmental organizations, the private sector, communities and individuals to eliminate progressively the causes that lead to the scandal of hunger and all forms of malnutrition in the midst of abundance.
21. With a clear appreciation of the intrinsic value of human life and the dignity it commands, we adopt the attached Plan of Action for Nutrition and affirm our determination to revise or prepare, before the end of 1994, our national plans of action, including attainable goals and measurable targets, based on the principles and relevant strategies in the attached Plan of Action for Nutrition. We pledge to implement it.
Annex 4 - Proximate composition of foods (per 100 g edible portion)
Food
Waste
Moisture
Energy
Protein
Total fat
Total carbo- hydrates
Ca
Fe
Retinol
Provitamin A
B vitamins
Folic acid
Vitamin C
(g)
(kcal)
(g)
(g)
(g)
(mg)
(mg)
(µg)
_-carotene
Other
B[1]
B[2]
B[6]
B[12]
Niacin
(µg)
(mg)
(µg)
(µg)
(µg)
(mg)
(µg)
(µg)
(mg)
Cereals and grain products
Maize, white, whole kernel, dried
Maize, yellow, whole kernel, dried
Maize, white, flour, 60-80%extraction
Maize, yellow, meal (unga wa mahindi)
Maize, white, meal (dona)
Millet, finger, whore grain
Millet, finger, flour
Millet, bullrush, whole grain
Millet, bullrush, flour
Rice, lightly milled, parboiled
Rice, milled, polished
Sorghum, whole grain
Sorghum, flour
Wheat, whole, parboiled
Wheat, flour, 85% extraction
Starchy roots, tubers and fruits
Breadfruit, pulp, raw
Cassava, bitter, fresh
Cassava, meal
Plantain, ripe, raw
Potato, raw
Sweet potato, yellow, raw
Sweet potato, pale, raw
Taro or cocoyam, raw
Yam, fresh
Yam, flour
Grain legumes and legume products
Beans, dried
Chickpeas, whole seeds, raw, dried
Cowpeas, mature pods, dried
Cowpeas, young green pods, raw
Lentils, dried
Pigeon peas, dried
Soybeans, dried
Nuts and seeds
Bambara nuts, fresh
Cashew nuts, dried
Coconut, mature kernel, fresh
Groundnuts, dry
Melon seeds, without coat
Pumpkin seeds, withoutcoat
Sunflower seeds, without coat
Vegetables and vegetable products
Amaranth leaves, raw
Amaranth leaves, cooked
Baobab leaves, raw
Bean sprouts, raw
Carrots, raw
Cassava leaves, raw
Cauliflower, raw
Cowpea leaves, raw, fresh
Cowpea leaves, raw, dried
Eggplant, raw
Mushrooms, fresh
Okra, pods, raw
Okra, leaves, raw
Pepper, capsules, sweet green, raw
Pepper, capsules, sweet red, raw
Pepper leaves, raw
Pumpkin, raw
Pumpkin leaves, raw
Sweet potato leaves, raw
Taro leaves, raw
Tomato, raw
Fruit
Avocado, raw
Baobab, ripe, raw
Banana, ripe, raw
Orange or tangerine, raw
Grapefruit or pomelo, raw
Lemon or lime, raw
Dates, dried
Guava, raw
Mango, ripe, raw, without skin
Mango, unripe, raw, without skin
Papaya, raw
Pineapple, fresh
Tamarind, dried
Watermelon
Sugars and syrups
Soft drinks, commercial
Sugar cane
Sugar
Meat, poultry and eggs
Beef, moderately fat
Egg, hen
Goat, moderately fat
Heart, beef
Kidney, beef
Liver, beef
Mutton, moderately fat
Pork, moderately fat
Poultry, e.g. chicken
Fish and fish products
Fish, average fillet
Fish, dried
Small dried fish (dagaa)
Milk and milk products
Milk, cow, whole
Milk powder, cow, whole
Milk powder, cow, skimmed (DSM), vitamin A enriched
Milk, goat
Oils and tats
Butter, from cows' milk
Coconut oil
Fish-liver oil
Ghee, clanged butter
Lard or animal fat
Red palm oil, fresh
Red palm oil, stale
Salad oil
Sunflower oil
Other
Beer, local
Caterpillars, dried
Coconut milk
Termites, fresh
Yeast, baker's dry
Source: West, Pepping and Temalilwa, 1988.
Notes: As values reported for the proportions of waste in individual foods as purchased vary widely. the data presented in the first column should be considered only as estimates.
The values for waste are expressed as g per 100 g food "as purchased" (that is, including the waste). Therefore. the edible portion can be estimated by multiplying the amount of food as purchased by the factor 100(100 + x) where x is the value for waste in the table.
The reported values for the moisture content of a particular food item vary from one to another, particularly for foods with a high moisture content such as fruits and vegetables.
Reported differences in nutrient content are often due largely to differences in moisture content rather than to differences in the nutrient content of the dry matter of the food.
Thus. when data for foods with a high moisture content were derived from a number of sources, correction was made for the moisture content.
-: Unknown. 0: Trace.
Annex 5 - Countries ranked by fat energy ratio^a of national food supply, 1992
Country
Fat energy ratio
Average total fat available
(g/caput/day)
Average dietary energy supply (DES)
(kcal/caput/day)
Burundi
Rwanda
Malawi
Zambia
Uganda
Niger
Namibia
Madagascar
Lesotho
Tanzania, United Republic of
Ethiopia
Former Zaire
Ghana
Côte d'Ivoire
Mali
Burkina Faso
Comoros
Togo
Swaziland
Benin
Gabon
Guinea
Cameroon
Mozambique
Mauritania
Liberia
Kenya
Angola
Seychelles
Nigeria
Gambia
Chad
Zimbabwe
Senegal
Sudan
Congo (Republic of)
Mauritius
Somalia
Guinea-Bissau
Botswana
Central African Republic
Cape Verde
Sierra Leone
Sao Tome and Principe
Source: FAO, 1996e.
^a The proportion of dietary energy supply derived from fat.
<section>2</section>
Bibliography
Bibliography
Academy for Educational Development. 1995. Nutrition Communication Project. Final report: Niger Vitamin A Promotion Project. Washington, DC, USA.
Akinyele, I.O. 1989. Effects of traditional methods of processing on the nutrient content and some anti-nutritional factors in cowpeas (Vigna unguiculata). Food Chem., 33: 291-299.
Andrien, M. 1994. Les interventions dans la communication sociale en nutrition. Food Nutr. Agric., 10: 9-17. (Summary in English).
Asare, E.O., Oppong, S.K. & Twum-Ampofo. 1985. Home gardens in the humid tropics of Ghana. In K. Landauer & M. Brazil, eds. Tropical home gardens. Selected papers from an international workshop held at the Institute of Ecology, Padjadjaran University, Bandung, Indonesia, 2-9 December 1985. United Nations University Press.
Babu, S. 1976. Effect of germination on folic acid content of Bengalgram and ragi. Indian J. Nutr. Diet., 13: 139-141.
Barwell, I., Howe, J. & Zille, P. 1987. Makete, Tanzania survey. Household time use and agricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa: a synthesis of I.T. Transport research. Oxon, UK, I.T. Transport Ltd.
Biswas, M.R. 1994. Nutrition, food production, and the environment. In M.R. Biswas & Mamdouh Gabr, eds. Nutrition in the nineties: policy issues. New Delhi, India, Oxford University Press.
Bressani, R. 1988. Protein complementation of foods. In E. Karmas & R. Harris, eds. Nutritional evaluation of food processing. New York, USA, Van Nostrand Reinhold. 3rd ed.
Brown, L.R. & Haddad, L. 1994. Time allocation patterns and time burdens: a gendered analysis of seven countries. Washington, DC, USA, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Bryceson, D.F. & Howe, J. 1992. African rural households and transport: reducing the burden on women? IHE Working Paper IP-2. Delft, the Netherlands, International Institute for Infrastructural, Hydraulic and Environmental Engineering.
Campbell-Platt, G. 1980. African locust bean (Parkia species) and its West African fermented food products, dawadawa. Ecol. Food Nutr., 9: 123-132.
Cerqueira, M.T. 1990. Recent approaches to nutrition education in developing countries. Paper prepared for the nutrition education workshop, FAO, Rome, 3-5 December 1990.
Cerqueira, M.T. 1992. Nutrition education: a proposal for a community-based approach. Food Nutr. Agric., 4(2): 42-48.
Combs, G.F., Welch, R.M. Jr., Duxbury, J.M., Uphoff, N.T. & Mesheim, M.C., eds. 1996. Food-based approaches to prevent micronutrient malnutrition: an international research agenda. Summary report of an international workshop. Ithaca, NY, USA, Cornell International Institute for Food, Agriculture and Development (CIIFAD).
Cooper, P.J.M., Gregory, P.J., Tully, D. & Harris, H.C. 1987. Improving water use efficiency of annual crops in the rainfed farming systems of West Asia and North Africa. Exp. Agric., 23(2): 113-158.
Costa-Pierce, A., Lightfoot, C., Ruddle, K. & Pullin, R.S.V., eds. 1990. Aquaculture research and development in rural Africa. Summary report on the ICLARM-GTZ Malawi Fisheries Department, University of Malawi Conference, Zomba, Malawi, 2-6 April 1990. Manila, the Philippines, international Centre for Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM).
de Francisco, A., Chakraborty, J., Chowdhry, H.R., Yunus, M., Baqui, A.K., Siddique, A.K. & Sack, R.B. 1993. Acute toxicity of vitamin A given with vaccines in infancy. Lancet, 342: 526-527.
Dei, G.J.S. 1990. The food crop cultivation, preservation and storage methods of a West African community. Ecol. Food Nutr., 25: 1-19.
Delisle, H. 1989. Urban food consumption patterns in developing countries. Some issues and challenges. Rome, FAO (Unpublished consultancy report).
DeMaeyer, E., Dallman, P., Gurney, J.M., Hallberg, L., Sood, S.K. & Srikantia, S.G. 1989. Preventing and controlling iron deficiency anaemia through primary health care. A guide for health administrators and programme managers. Geneva, Switzerland, World Health Organization (WHO).
FAO. 1970. Wheat in human nutrition, by W.R. Aykroyd & J. Doughty. FAO Nutritional Studies No. 23. Rome.
FAO. 1979. Human nutrition in tropical Africa A textbook for health workers with special reference to community health problems, by M.C. Latham. Rome.
FAO. 1983a. Report of the eighth session of the Committee on World Food Security Rome, 13-20 April 1983. CL 83/10. Rome.
FAO. 1983b. Selecting interventions for nutritional improvement. A manual. Nutrition in Agriculture No. 3. Rome.
FAO. 1985a. Prevention of poet-harvest food losses: a training manual. FAO Training Series No. 10. Rome.
FAO. 1985b. The Fifth World Food Survey. Rome.
FAO. 1986. African agriculture: the next 25 years. Annex 11, The land resource base. Rome.
FAO. 1987. Investing in sustainable post-harvest programmes. Guidelines for the development of post-harvest efforts to improve food supply based on 10 years' experience of the FAO Special Action Programme, by R.H. Booth, A.J. Toet & L. Bevan. Rome.
FAO. 1988a. Helping rural communities through aquaculture: the role of Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programmes (ALCOM). Lusaka, Zambia.
FAO. 1988b. Requirements of vitamin A, iron, folate and vitamin B[12]. Report of a joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation. Rome.
FAO. 1988c. Traditional food plants - a resource book for promoting the exploitation and consumption of food plants in arid, semi-arid and sub-humid lands of eastern Africa. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 42. Rome.
FAO. 1988d. Under-exploited traditional food plants: an important resource for improving nutrition and food security. Rome.
FAO. 1988e. Rural processing and preserving techniques for fruits and vegetables, by G. Amoriggi. Rome.
FAO. 1989a. Integration of fish farming into the farm-household system in Luapula Province, Zambia, by A. de Kartzowi, P. Heijden & J. van der Schoot. Report of a mission, 13 August - 10 October 1989. FAO Project GCP/INT/555/SWE. Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (ALCOM) Field Document No. 16. Rome.
FAO. 1989b. Horticultural marketing - a resource and training manual for extension officers. FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin No. 76. Rome.
FAO. 1989c. Utilization of tropical foods: cereals. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 47/1. Rome.
FAO. 1989d. Utilization of tropical foods: roots and tubers. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 47/2. Rome.
FAO. 1989e. Utilization of tropical foods: trees. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 47/3. Rome.
FAO. 1989f. Utilization of tropical foods: tropical beans. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 47/4. Rome.
FAO. 1990a. Utilization of tropical foods: fruits and leaves. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 47/7. Rome.
FAO. 1990b. Utilization of tropical foods: animal products. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 47/8. Rome.
FAO. 1991a. Street foods in Nigeria. Comparative study of the socioeconomic characteristics of food vendors and consumers in Ibadan, Lagos and Kaduna. Food Basket Foundation International. Ibadan, Nigeria.
FAO. 1991b. Integration of gender issues into fish farming in Chibate, Zambia, by E.H. Mbozi. FAO Project GCP/INT/436/SWE. Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (ALCOM) Field Document No. 17. Harare, Zimbabwe.
FAO. 1992a. Study on street foods in Kampala, Uganda, by G.W. Nasinyama. Rome.
FAO. 1992b. Integrating diet quality and food safety into food security programmes, by M.F. Zeitlin & L. V. Brown. Nutrition Consultants' Reports Series No. 91. Rome.
FAO. 1992c. Fish and fishery products. World apparent consumption statistics based on food balance sheets (1961-1990), compiled by Edmondo Laureti. FAO Fisheries Circular No. 821, Rev. 2. Rome.
FAO. 1992d. Database on the inland fishery resources of Africa (DIFRA). A description, by R.C.M. Crul. CIFA (Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa) Occasional Paper No. 17. Rome. 21 pp.
FAO. 1992e. Agricultural price policy: government and the market, by J. Harrigan, R. Loader & C. Thirtle. Training Materials for Agricultural Planning No. 31. Rome.
FAO. 1992f. Population education and nutrition: version for Africa. Rome.
FAO. 1992g. A rapid rural appraisal of household food security and nutrition in four villages in Luapula Valley Zambia in June /992, by H. Young. Rome.
FAO. 1992h. Report of the Intercountry Workshop on Street Foods in Africa, Accra, Ghana, 27 April - 1 May 1992. Accra, Ghana, FAO Regional Office for Africa.
FAO. 1992i. Maize in human nutrition. FAO Food and Nutrition Series No. 25. Rome.
FAO. 1993a. Preventing micronutrient deficiencies: food abundance and diversity are fundamental. Food Nutr. Agric., 7: 8-17.
FAO. 1993b. Rice in human nutrition, by B.O. Juliano. Rome.
FAO. 1993c. Development and introduction of post-harvest techniques in Africa, by E. Visser. AGS Working Paper. Rome.
FAO. 1993d. Report of the Technical Consultation on Aquaculture, Inland Fisheries and Nutritional Well-Being. Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (ALCOM) internal discussion paper. FAO Project GCP/INT/436/SWE/REP/6. (Draft).
FAO. 1993e. A study of fish-farmers in North-Western Province, Zambia, by R. Larson. Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme (ALCOM) Field Document No. 15. FAO Project GCP/INT/555/SWE. Harare, Zimbabwe.
FAO. 1993f. Guidelines for participatory nutrition projects. Rome.
FAO. 1994a. Social communication in nutrition: a methodology for intervention, by M. Andrien. Rome.
FAO. 1994b. What has AIDS to do with agriculture? Rome.
FAO. 1994c. Report, FAO/UNU Discussions on Food Composition Data for Developing Countries, Tunis, Tunisia, 21-24 March 1994. Rome.
FAO. 1994d. Handbook on small-scale freshwater fish farming. FAO Training Series No. 24. Rome.
FAO. 1994e. Body mass index - a measure of chronic energy deficiency in adults, by P.S. Shetty & W.P.T. James. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 56. Rome.
FAO. 1995a. Report of the International Expert Consultation on Non-Wood Forest Products, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 17-27 January 1995. Non-Wood Forest Products No. 3. Rome.
FAO. 1995b. FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics 1993 - Commodities. Vol. 77. Rome.
FAO. 1995c. Fruit and vegetable processing, by M.E. Dauthy. FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin No. 119. Rome.
FAO. 1995d. World agriculture: towards 20]0. An FAO study, ed. N. Alexandratos. Rome, FAO/Chichester, UK, John Wiley & Sons.
FAO. 1995e. Get the best from your food. Rome.
FAO. 1995f. FAOSTAT database.
FAO. 1996a. The Sixth World Food Survey. Rome
FAO. 1996b. Food, agriculture and food security: developments since the World Food Conference and prospects. World Food Summit technical background document 1. World Food Summit technical background documents, Vol. 1. Rome.
FAO. 1996c. Food security and nutrition. World Food Summit technical background document 5. World Food Summit technical background documents, Vol. 1. Rome.
FAO. 1996d. Study on the impact of armed conflict on the nutritional situation of children. A report. Rome.
FAO. 1996e. FAOSTAT database.
FAO. 1997a. Human nutrition in the developing world, by M.C. Latham. Rome.
FAO. 1997b. FAOSTAT database.
FAO/International Life Sciences Institute (ILSI). 1997. Preventing micronutrient malnutrition: a guide to food-based approaches. Washington, DC, USA, ILSI.
FAO/United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 1979. Prevention of mycotoxins - recommended practices for the use of mycotoxins in food,feed and their products. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 10. Rome.
FAO/United States Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, Health Services and Mental Health Administration, National Center for Chronic Disease Control. 1968. Food composition tables for use in Africa, compiled by W.-T. Wu Leung with the cooperation of F. Busson & C. Jardin. Rome, FAO.
FAO/World Health Organization (WHO). 1974. Handbook on human nutritional requirements. FAO Nutritional Studies No. 28/WHO Monograph Series No. 61. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992a. International Conference on Nutrition. Final Report of the Conference. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992b. Major issues for nutrition strategies: improving household food security. International Conference on Nutrition Theme Paper No. 1. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992c. Major issues for nutrition strategies: earing for the socio-economically deprived and nutritionally vulnerable. International Conference on Nutrition Theme Paper No. 3. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992d. Major issues for nutrition strategies: preventing and managing infectious diseases. International Conference on Nutrition Theme Paper No. 4. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992e. Major issues for nutrition strategies: preventing specific micronutrient deficiencies. International Conference on Nutrition Theme Paper No. 6. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992f. Communicating to improve nutrition behaviour: the challenge of motivating the audience to act, by M. Parlato, C. Green & C. Fishman. Case-study prepared for the International Conference on Nutrition. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992g. Nutrition and development - a global assessment. International Conference on Nutrition. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992h. Food insecurity, famines and coping mechanisms: lessons from Ethiopia, Sudan and Burkina Faso, by J. von Braun, P. Webb, T. Reardon & T. Teklu. ICN case-study. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1994. Fats and oils in human nutrition. Report of a joint expert consultation, Rome, 19-26 October 1993. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 57. Rome.
Frankenberger, T., Peña-Montenegro, A., Tilakaratna, N., Velarde, N. & Eide, W.B. 1993. Rural poverty alleviation and nutrition: IFAD's evolving experiences. IFAD Staff Working Paper No. 14. Rome, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
Greiner, T. 1992. Combining short- and long-term vitamin A deficiency control programs. Nytt Om U-Landshälsovard (News on health care in developing countries). Special issue: Vitamin A. International Child Health Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Uppsala University, Sweden.
Hendrickse, R.G. 1988. Kwashiorkor and aflatoxins. J. Paediatr. Gastroenterol. Nutr., 7(5): 633-636.
Huss-Ashmore, R. & Curry, J.J. 1991. Diet, nutrition and agricultural development in Swaziland. Part 2. Ecol. Food Nutr., 26: 167-185.
Igbedioh, S.O. 1990. Macroeconomic adjustment, food availability and nutrition status in Nigeria. Food Policy, 15(4): 518-524.
International Development Research Centre (IDRC). 1993. Farming in the city: the rise of urban agriculture. IDRC Rep., 21(33.
International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA). 1990. Development and introduction of improved utilization technology for use in households and small-scale processing enterprises in rural Nigeria. Ibadan, Nigeria.
International Vitamin A Consultative Group (IVACG). 1989. Guidelines for the development of a simplified dietary assessment to identify groups at risk for inadequate intake of vitamin A. Washington, DC, USA.
IVACG. 1992. Nutrition communications in vitamin A programmes: a resource book. Washington, DC, USA.
IVACG. 1994. Two decades of progress: linking knowledge to action. Report of the 16th International Vitamin A Consultative Group Meeting, Chiang Rai, Thailand, 24-28 October 1994. Washington, DC, USA.
Kavishe, F.P. 1987. The food and nutrition situation in Tanzania. TFNC Report No. 1215. Dar-es-Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania, Tanzania Food and Nutrition Centre (TFNC).
Kavishe, F.P. 1991. The control of micronutrient malnutrition: the experience of Tanzania. In Ending hidden hunger, p. 89-115. Proceedings of a Policy Conference on Micronutrient Malnutrition, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 10-12 October 1991. Atlanta, Georgia, USA, Task Force on Child Survival and Development.
Kennedy, E. & Haddad, L. 1992. Food security and nutrition, 1971-91. Lessons learned and future priorities. Food Policy 17(1): 2-6.
King, F.S. & Burgess, A. 1993. Nutrition for developing countries. Oxford, UK, Oxford Medical Publications, Oxford University Press. 3rd ed.
Kramer, M.S. 1993. Effects of energy and protein intake on pregnancy outcome: an overview of the research evidence from controlled clinical trials. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 58(5): 627-635.
Kumar, S.K. 1994. Adoption of hybrid maize in Zambia: effects on gender roles, food consumption, and nutrition. Research Report No. 100. Washington, DC, USA, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Lawrence, M., Lawrence, F., Cole, T.J., Coward, W.A., Singh, J. & Whitehead, R.G. 1989. Seasonal pattern of activity and its nutritional consequence in Gambia. In D.E. Sahn, ed. Seasonal variability in Third World agriculture: the consequences for food security, p. 47-56. Baltimore, Maryland, USA, Johns Hopkins University Press, for the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Levinger, B. 1989. Malnutrition, school feeding and educational performance. Child, Family, Community: Notes, Comments, No. 186. Paris, France, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
Lofti, M., Manner, M.G.V., Merx, R.J.H.M. & Naber-van den Heuvel, P. 1996. Micronutrient fortification of foods. Current practices, research and opportunities. Ottawa, Canada, International Development Research Centre (IDRC)/Wageningen, the Netherlands, International Agricultural Centre (IAC).
Longhurst, R. 1985. Secondary crops, seasonality and women's work: implications for household food security and nutrition. Sussex, UK, Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex.
Lytle, L. &Achterberg, C. 1995. Changing the diet of America's children: what works and why. J. Nutr. Educ., 27(5): 250-260.
Malaise, F. & Parent, G. 1985. Edible wild vegetable products in the Zambezian woodland area: a nutritional and ecological approach. Ecol. Food Nutr., 18: 43-82.
Marsh, R.R. 1994. Household food security through home gardening. Evidence from Bangladesh and Central America. Presented at the Rockefeller Foundation Biennial Meeting of Social Science Research Fellows, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 14-18 November 1994.
Maxwell, S. & Frankenberger, T.R. 1992. Household food security: concepts, indicators, measurements. A technical review New York, USA, United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)/International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). 274 pp.
McGuire, J. & Popkin, B. 1990. Helping women improve nutrition in the developing world: beating the zero sum game. World Bank Technical Paper No. 114. Washington, DC, USA, World Bank.
Mduma, B.G. 1987. The Tanzania national control of diarrhoeal diseases programme. Paper for student presentation, International Course on Food Science and Nutrition. Wageningen, the Netherlands, International Agricultural Centre (IAC).
Moris, J.R. 1989. Indigenous versus introduced solutions to food stress in Africa. In D.E. Sahn, ed. Seasonal variability in Third World agriculture: the consequences for food security, p. 209-234. Baltimore, Maryland, USA, Johns Hopkins University Press, for the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Mwalemba, G.F. 1995. Impact on Majenje and Mahango villages. Participatory rural assessment report. FAO Project GCP/URT/103/NET (Women in irrigated agriculture and related activities).
Nigerian Economist. 1989. Nigeria's $3() billion debt: history and structures. 2(17): 36. Tanzania.
Ogle, B.M. & Grivetti, L.E. 1985. Legacy of the chameleon. Edible wild plants in the Kingdom of Swaziland, S. Africa. A cultural, ecological, nutritional study. Ecol. Food Nutr., 16(3): 193-208 (Part 1); 17(1): 1-61 (Parts II-IV).
Okafor, J.C. & Fernandes, E.C.H. 1987. Compound farms of southeastern Nigeria: a predominant agroforestry homegarden system with crops and small livestock. Agrofor. Syst., 5(2): 153-168.
Okeke, E.C. & Nnanyelugo, D.O. 1989. Intra-familial distribution of food and nutrients in a rural Nigerian population. Ecol. Food Nutr., 23: 109-123.
Okigbo, B.N. 1983. Plants and agroforestry in land use systems of West Africa. In PA. Huxley, ed. Plant research and agroforestry, p. 25-43. Nairobi, Kenya, International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF).
Okigbo, B.N. 1994. Farming systems in Africa. In V. Ravichandran & R.R. Daniel, eds. The role of science in food production in Africa, p. 3-31. Proceedings of a seminar, Accra, Ghana, 5-6 April 1994. Madras, India, Committee on Science and Technology in Developing Countries International Biosciences Network (COSTED-IBN)/Vinkaar Publishing Pvt. Ltd.
Pariser, E.R. 1987. Post-harvest food losses in developing countries. In J.P. Gittinger, J. Leslie & C. Hoisington, eds. Food policy: integrating supply, distribution, and consumption, p. 309-325. Baltimore, Maryland, USA, Johns Hopkins University Press, for the World Bank.
Pellet, P.L. & Young, V.R. 1980. Nutritional evaluation of protein foods. Tokyo, Japan, United Nations University (UNU).
Prentice, A.M., Whitehead, R.G., Watkinson, M., Lamb, W.H. & Cole, T.J. 1983. Prenatal dietary supplementation of African women and birth weight. Lancet, 1: 489-492.
Rankins, J., Hopkinson, M. & Diop, M. 1989. Palatability and nutritional significance of solar dried mangoes for Senegal. Ecol. Food Nutr., 23: 131-140.
Rokia Ba Touré. 1993. Communication et nutrition: l'exemple des pays du Sahel. Food Nutr. Agric., 7: 41-46.
Rosenfield, P.J. & Bower, B. 1978. The incorporation of health parameters into engineering design. Washington, DC, USA, Resources for the Future.
Sam-Aggrey, W.G. 1983. Agroforestry in animal-based farming systems in Botswana and Swaziland. In PA. Huxley, ed. Plant research and agroforestry, p. 125- 128. Nairobi, Kenya, International Council for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF).
Sanyal, B. 1985. Urban agriculture - who cultivates and why: a case study of Lusaka. Food Nutr. Bull., 7(3): 15-24.
Schultink, W.J., Klaver, W., Van Wijk, H., Van Raiij, J.M.A. & Hautvast, J.G.A.J. 1990. Body weight changes and basal metabolic rates of rural Beninese women during seasons with different energy intakes. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 144(Suppl. 1): 31-40.
Siegel, A. & Fawcett, B. 1976. Food legume processing and utilization. Ottawa, Canada, International Development Research Centre (IDRC).
Thovesson, D. 1988. Report from household survey in Nchelenge District, 25-29 January 1988. Mansa, Zambia, Integrated Rural Development Project (IRDP). (Mimeo).
Timmer, C.P., Falcon, W.P. & Pearson, S.R. 1983. Food policy analysis. Baltimore, Maryland, USA, Johns Hopkins University Press, for the World Bank.
Truscott, K. 1986. Socio-economic factors in food production and consumption: a study of 12 households in Wedza communal land, Zimbabwe. Food Nutr. (FAO), 12(1): 27-37.
United Nations. 1994a. The sex and age distribution of the world populations: the 1994 revision. New York, USA.
United Nations. 1994b. World urbanization prospects: the 1994 revision. New York, USA.
United Nations Administrative Committee on Coordination, Sub-Committee on Nutrition (UN ACC/SCN). 1990. Women, food and nutrition issues in need of a global focus, by H. Ghassemi. In Women and nutrition. UN ACC/SCN Symposium Report. Nutrition Policy Discussion Paper No. 6. Geneva, Switzerland.
UN ACC/SCN. 1991. Controlling iron deficiency, by S. Gillespie, J. Kevany & J.B. Mason. Nutrition Policy Discussion Paper No. 9. Geneva, Switzerland.
UN ACC/SCN. 1992. Second report on the world nutrition situation, Vol. 1, Global and regional results. Geneva, Switzerland.
UN ACC/SCN. 1994. Update on the nutrition situation, 1994. Geneva, Switzerland.
UN ACC/SCN. 1995. Report on the nutrition situation of refugee and displaced populations. No. 13. Refugee Nutrition Information System. Geneva, Switzerland.
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). 1995. The state of the world's children 1995. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). 1987. Oil extraction. Food Cycle Technology Source Book No. 1. Rome.
UNIFEM. 1988. Cereal processing. Food Cycle Technology Source Book No. 3. Rome.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 1983. Nutrition education: case study experiences in schools. Nutrition Education Series No. 1. Paris, France.
UNESCO. 1987. Operational guidelines for social marketing projects in public health and nutrition, by R.C. Israel, D. Foote & J. Tognetti. Nutrition Education Series No. 14. Paris, France.
Vietmeyer, N. 1975. The winged bean: a high protein crop for the tropics. Washington, DC, USA, National Academy of Sciences.
West, C.E., Pepping, F. & Temalilwa, C.R., eds. 1988. The composition of foods commonly eaten in East Africa. Wageningen, the Netherlands, Wageningen Agricultural University.
Williams, C.E. 1982. The effect of technological innovation among rural women in Nigeria: a case study of 'gari' processing in selected villages of Bendel State, Nigeria. J. Rural Dev., 5: 247-257.
Wolde-Gebriel, Z., West, C.E., Gebru, H., Tadesse, A.-S., Fisseha, T., Gabre, P., Aboye, C., Ayana, G. & Hautvast, J.G.AJ. 1992. Interrelationship between vitamin A, iodine and iron status in school children in Shoa Region, Central Ethiopia. In Z. Wolde-Gebriel, Micronutrient deficiencies in Ethiopia and their inter-relationships, p. 73-97. Wageningen, the Netherlands, Wageningen Agricultural University.
World Bank. 1989. Sub-Saharan Africa: from crisis to sustainable growth. A long-term perspective study Washington, DC, USA.
World Bank. 1994. Enriching lives: overcoming vitamin and mineral malnutrition in developing countries. Washington, DC, USA.
World Health Organization (WHO). 1977. Guidelines for the eradication of iron deficiency anaemia. A report of the International Nutritional Anaemia Consultative Group. Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO. 1985. Energy and protein requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation. WHO Technical Report Series No. 724. Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO. 1992. The prevalence of anaemia in women: a tabulation of available information. WHO/MCH/MSM/92.2. Geneva, Switzerland. 2nd ed.
WHO. 1994. Nutrition: highlights of recent activities in the context of the World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition. NUT/94.5. Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO. 1995a. Bridging the gaps. Report of the Director-General. The World Health Report 1995. Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO. 1995b. Forty-Eighth World Health Assembly. A48/8. Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO/United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). 1985. Gardening for food in the semi-arid tropics. A handbook for programme planners. New York, USA.
WHO/UNICEF. 1995. Global prevalence of vitamin A deficiency. MDIS (Micronutrient Deficiency Information System) Working Paper No. 2. Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO/UNICEF/International Council for Control of iodine Deficiency Disorders (ICCIDD). 1993. Global prevalence of iodine deficiency disorders. MDIS (Micronutrient Deficiency Information System) Working Paper No. 1. Geneva, Switzerland.
WHO/UNICEF/International Vitamin A Consultative Group (IVACG) Task Force. 1997. Vitamin A supplements: a guide to their use in the treatment and prevention of vitamin A deficiency and xerophthalmia. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO.
WHO Working Group. 1986. Use and interpretation of anthropometric indicators of nutritional status. Bull. WHO, 64: 929-941.
Young, H. & Jaspars, S. 1995. Nutrition matters: people, food and famine. London, UK, Intermediate Technology Publications Ltd.
<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
Elevating levels of nutrition and the standards of living of the people of Africa requires a combination of key initiatives including agricultural development, strengthening of food systems, social and economic progress and nutrition, health and education programmes. This resource book will assist teachers in agricultural institutions to explain why these factors are important and how they are related to each other. It focuses specifically on ways to incorporate food and nutrition topics into agricultural training programmes.
The need for a comprehensive source of resource materials based on African food systems has long been recognized. To address this need, the FAO Food and Nutrition Division has prepared this text. The book is a rich source of practical information drawn from the scientific literature, nutrition databases and field experiences from Africa.
Many individuals have made contributions to this text. The Food and Nutrition Division would like to acknowledge the important contribution of Dr Joyce Redhead, who compiled the book's wealth of information, drawing from her years of teaching in Africa. We also thank Professor Ruth Oniang'o of Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, who acted as technical editor. Appreciation is also expressed for the valuable comments and suggestions made by the technical staff of FAO in the Agriculture, sustainable Development, and Economic and Social Departments and the special Action Programme for the Prevention of Food Losses.
Teachers of agriculture should find this resource book useful in creating effective and innovative training programmes. We are confident that the training activities they develop will enable those working in rural development and agriculture to contribute to long-term improvements in the food and nutritional situation of Africa.
John R. Lupien
Director
FAO Food and Nutrition Division
