<title>Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Dry-Zone Africa. UNEP/FAO Expert Meeting. Nairobi, Kenya, 21-24 November 1995. UNEP/FAO Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest </title>
<section>1</section>
Acronyms
ATO
African Timber Organization
CIFOR
Centre for International Forestry Research
CILSS
Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel
COFO
Committee on Forestry (FAO)
CSD
United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (also UNCSD)
CSCE
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
ECE
Economic Commission for Europe
FSC
Forest Stewardship Council
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
IIED
International Institute for Environment and Development
IGADD
Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development
IPF
Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests
ITTO
International Tropical Timber Organization
IUCN
World Conservation Union
IUFRO
International Union of Forestry Research Organizations
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
SADC
Southern African Development Community
UNEP
United Nations Environmental Programme
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNSO
Office to Combat Desertification and Drought (UNDP)
WWF
World Wide Fund for Nature
<section>2</section>
Recommendations
The meeting recommended that FAO and UNEP bring to the attention, as soon as possible, the recommendations and conclusions of the meeting to their regional intergovernmental bodies for their review and possible endorsement, and particularly at the 10th Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and at the Sixth Session of the African Ministerial Conference on Environment ( §21).
The meeting also recommended that FAO and UNEP inform the CILSS and IGADD Secretariats and the Forestry Sector Technical Coordination Unit of SADC of its conclusions and recommendations in order for them to take appropriate action to pursue the process at sub-regional level for the formulation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management ( §22).
The meeting recommended that each country be involved in the internalization of the process and that this process be promoted simultaneously at regional, sub-regional and national levels ( §23).
The meeting underlined the importance of an effective coordination in this field among the three sub-regional organizations ( §24).
The meeting recommended that the process be actively pursued at regional, sub-regional and national levels in order to be taken into account in the programme of work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests of the Commission on Sustainable Development ( §25).
The meeting recommended that the criteria agreed on at regional, sub-regional and national levels be the same and that for each criterion, indicators be added at the sub-regional and national levels to those adopted at the regional level to reflect the specific conditions of the sub-regions and countries concerned ( §26).
The meeting further recommended that the process identifies first a minimum set of simple indicators which can be later on complemented and refined gradually on the basis of the experience obtained through testing and application ( §27).
The meeting finally recommended that every effort be made by all concerned to promote the exchange of information and experience with the relevant on-going processes in this field, through, in particular, the participation of their experts in meetings organised within the framework of this process; and that the various stakeholders, including NGOs and the private sector, be involved at the various levels and in the various phases of this process, in a participatory and transparent manner ( §28).
<section>3</section>
I. Introduction
1. The Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Dry-Zone Africa, was jointly organized by FAO and UNEP, and held at UNEP Headquarters in Nairobi from 21 to 24 November 1995. The Agenda of the meeting is given in Annex 1.
2. The attendance at the Expert Meeting is shown in Annex 2. The 14 experts invited by the organizers were selected on the basis of their specialized knowledge and their role in the management of forest resources in their country. They were from dry-zone African countries presently not involved in any international initiative on formulation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. Observers included representatives from ongoing initiatives on the development of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management at national level (Helsinki Process) and at the forest management, unit level (CIFOR, ATO), intergovernmental organizations (IGADD, UNDP/UNSO) and from NGO's (IUCN, Ecoterra, etc.).
3. The focus of the meeting was on the sustainable management of the mixed forest/grassland formations and other woody vegetation types in dry zone Africa, south of the Sahara. FAO plans to organize in 1996 a similar expert meeting in collaboration with other, concerned international organizations to address the same issues in the Near East and North Africa region.
4. The objectives of the expert meeting were to review, discuss and report to the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission, and/or any other fora as appropriate, on the following issues:
(i) Relevance for the dry-zone African countries of the general aims and objectives of the on-going international initiatives for the formulation of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management at the national level, and their applicability to the ecological, economic, social and cultural needs and aspirations of the countries in the region.
(ii) Specific aspects of, and conditions for, sustainable forest management in dry-zone African countries not presently covered in such initiatives.
(iii) Validity for dry-zone African countries of existing, defined criteria and national level indicators of sustainable forest management, identified in ongoing international and regional initiatives.
(iv) In light of prevailing needs and management objectives in the ecological region under review, identification of additional or complementary criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in dry-zone African countries applicable at national level.
(v) Strategy, modalities and a proposed time-frame for the promotion of action at regional and national level of a process aimed at facilitating possible efforts in the start-up of initiatives for the formulation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in dry-zone african countries.
<section>4</section>
II. Opening of the Meeting
(Agenda Item 1)
5. The meeting was opened by Mr. Jaime Hurtubia, Biodiversity Programme Manager at UNEP. In his Opening Statement, Mr. Hurtubia welcomed the participants on behalf of Ms. E. Dowdeswell, Executive Director of UNEP.
6. Mr. Hurtubia stressed that the meeting was timely planned, as it underscored the importance the international community attached to sustainable forest management in the region. He also emphasized that the meeting was designed to facilitate an open dialogue among experts, and that it would make a direct contribution to the technical discussions in moving towards the development and utilization of shared criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in sub-Saharan dry-zone Africa.
7. Mr. Hurtubia reiterated the call made in both the Forest Principles and in Chapter 11 of Agenda 21, to identify measurable criteria and indicators for the evaluation of how countries are progressing in their efforts to follow the principles of sustainable forest management. The meeting was informed that the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests of the Commission on Sustainable Development placed this activity as a top priority during its first session (11-15 September 1995). The speaker also briefly recalled the many activities and initiatives on this subject before and after the Earth Summit in Rio, such as the Montreal and Helsinki processes and the ITTO Guidelines.
8. Mr. Hurtubia underlined the importance of the FAO/ITTO Expert Meeting on the Harmonization of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management, which was held in Rome in February 1995, and of the Rome Ministerial Meeting on Forestry (16-17 March 1995) to involve those countries which had not to date been part of any of the ongoing international initiatives on this subject, in a process for developing criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. In particular, the speaker emphasized on dry-zone sub-Saharan Africa.
9. Mr. Lanly, Director of FAO's Forest Resources Division, welcomed in his opening statement the participants in the name of Mr. D. Harcharik, Assistant Director-General of the Forestry Department of FAO, and informed them of Mr. Harcharik's participation at the closing session, underlining hereby the importance given by FAO to this meeting. Mr. Lanly further expressed his appreciation for UNEP's continuing and constructive collaboration with FAO in the furtherance of sustainable forest management, in the spirit of agreements reached at the Earth Summit, and the follow-up recommendations from the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF).
10. Mr. Lanly noted that, since the Earth Summit, the issue of sustainable forest management was a much debated topic within the international community. The forestry concept of sustained yield, considered in a broad sense, covering wood and other goods and services, was germane to that of sustainable forest management. He noted that society had the right to challenge foresters on their performance in managing forest resources. Such performance had to be assessed on the basis of well-identified criteria and indicators, which were acceptable to all parties involved with the conservation and utilization of forest resources. Hence the importance of defining and developing criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at both the national and the forest management unit level.
11. Mr. Lanly mentioned further that dry-zone Africa was the most important eco-region presently not yet involved in current ongoing international initiatives in this field. He emphasized the ecological and socio-economic specificity of this region and underlined the importance of the meeting as the initial step of a process of development and utilization of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management by the countries of the region. He informed the participants that the deliberations of the meeting would be made available to forthcoming high level inter-governmental meetings, including the 10th Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission (27 November - 1 December 1995).
<section>5</section>
III. Election of Chairman and Rapporteurs
(Agenda Item 3)
12. The meeting elected Mr. Papa N. Sall as Chairman and Messrs. Cyrille Kabore and R.E.L. Ole-Meiludie as Rapporteurs. Mr. J.P. Lanly of FAO and Mr. B. Taal of UNEP served as Secretaries for the meeting.
<section>6</section>
IV. Adoption of Agenda
(Agenda Item 2) 13. The Provisional Agenda as proposed by the Secretariat was adopted (see Annex 1).
<section>7</section>
V. Overview of Existing International Schemes of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management
(Agenda Item 4)
14. FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note, Part I: "General Review of the International Initiatives on the Formulation of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management at National Level"^/1 was presented by Mr. B. Taal from UNEP. The meeting was thoroughly briefed on subsequent developments so far in the four international initiatives covered by the paper, which are: the Helsinki Process, the Montreal Process, the "Tarapoto Proposal on Criteria and Indicators of Sustainability for the Amazon Forest", and the initiatives taken by the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) regarding sustainable forest management.
1/The full version of this FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note (Part I and II) is available from the Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO and from UNEP (in English and French). A shortened version of this Note is given in Annex 3.
15. The meeting was further informed about activities carried out by a number of both governmental agencies and national and international non-governmental organizations, including those of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) in developing principles and standards for sustainable forest management at the forest management unit level.
16. In addition, the meeting was briefed on the support provided by FAO and UNEP to the process of developing criteria and indicators and on the role these two organizations played in facilitating a dialogue among on-going initiatives. The participants were fully informed on: (i) the outcome of the FAO/ITTO Expert Meeting on the Harmonization of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management; (ii) the recommendations of the 12th Session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO) on the report of the above expert meeting; (iii) the "Rome Statement on Forestry" by the Ministerial Meeting on Forestry regarding the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management and the need to involve countries and eco-regions presently not participating in any of those initiatives; (iv) the work programme of the recently established Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF) by the CSD regarding its role in the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable
forest management and its support to help promote a dialogue and compatibility among the existing international initiatives. Information on an expert meeting on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in the Near East Region (Cairo, October 1996) and on a similar meeting planned for the Central American countries (venue and timing of meeting still to be decided) was also provided to the participants.
17. The participants were briefed by a representative from the Helsinki Process on the experience gained so far by the European countries in the development and use of national level criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. The meeting was also informed by a representative from CIFOR on the objectives and preliminary findings of the research work promoted and coordinated by the Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) in the field testing of criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level.
<section>8</section>
VI. Discussion on the Relevance, Development and Utilization of Criteria and Indicators for Dry-zone African countries
(Agenda items 5, 6 and 7)
18. To facilitate the discussions, three case studies had been commissioned by FAO to cover the situation, trends and needs in this respect in Western, Eastern and Southern dry-zone Africa (respectively covering countries from the CILSS, IGADD and SADC sub-regions) and were presented by their authors at the meeting. These case studies^1/, elaborated by African experts, review on-going work in the light of possible adaptation of already identified criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management to the environmental conditions, socio-economic needs and institutional possibilities of countries in the region. Based on consultation with colleagues in the countries covered of their respective sub-region, the authors of the case studies also proposed a strategy and timetable for the promotion of action at regional, eco-regional and national levels aiming at identifying and testing common criteria and sets of regionally applicable indicators, with due consideration to the
assessment of the relevance of these to environmental, social and economic conditions in the countries in the region and to the contribution of their application to the overall management of dry-zone forests and woodlands. Mr. Vantomme of FAO presented Part II of the FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note, which included a synthesis of the above case studies (see Annex 3). Finally Mr. Bellefontaine, FAO resource person, presented the preliminary findings of a joint FAO-SAREC global study on the status of tropical dry-zone forest management.
1/ - "Survey of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Tropical Dry Africa, Sub-Saharan West Africa Zone - CILSS Region" by Mounkaila Goumandakoye.
- "Criteria and Indicators of Sustainable Forest Management, Southern Africa Zone (SADC)" by Samuel Chipompha.
- "A Review of Criteria and Indicators of Sustainable Forest Management, Sub-Saharan East African Zone IGADD Countries", by Jeff Odera.
Available from the Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO (English and French).
19. All papers generated interesting discussions on forest management in dry-zone Africa and on the process of developing appropriate criteria and indicators for the region. The participants agreed that this meeting was the first step of a process in the formulation and application of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at the national level in countries of sub-Saharan dry-zone Africa.
20. The participants also agreed that the following principles and guidelines should be taken into account in this process:
- For the concerned countries, the formulation and application of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at the national level was a useful tool to assess, monitor and improve the management of their forest resources.
- At the international level it was particularly important that this part of Africa developed its own criteria and indicators reflecting its specific needs and capacities.
- The prioritization and assigning of hierarchy among the agreed criteria and among indicators in each criterion should be considered at a later stage as, at present, equal importance had been given to all criteria and to all indicators.
- The indicators agreed on by the meeting and presented below in section VII were to be considered of a generic character, without precise definition at this stage of the corresponding quantitative and/or descriptive parameters. The parameters would however have to be defined in the successive stages of the formulation and application process at the regional, sub-regional and national levels. Naturally this process would be a dynamic one which would adjust progressively to conditions prevailing in each country and subregion.
- The finally agreed parameters would have to be defined without ambiguity. The cost of the assessment and monitoring of the parameters should be acceptable to the national institutions involved; and in relation to the expected benefits from the management of the national forest estate.
- The estimates subsequently provided by the countries for the agreed parameters would have to be complemented by information on the methodology and the means used in obtaining them.
21. The meeting recommended that FAO and UNEP bring to the attention, as soon as possible, the recommendations and conclusions of the meeting to their regional intergovernmental bodies for their review and possible endorsement, and particularly at the 10th Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission and at the Sixth Session of the African Ministerial Conference on Environment.
22. The meeting also recommended that FAO and UNEP inform the CILSS and IGADD Secretariats and the Forestry Sector Technical Coordination Unit of SADC of its conclusions and recommendations in order for them to take appropriate action to pursue the process at sub-regional level for the formulation of criteria and indicators for Sustainable Forest Management.
23. The meeting recommended that each country be involved in the internalization of the process and that this process be promoted simultaneously at regional, sub-regional and national levels.
24. The meeting underlined the importance of an effective coordination in this field among the three sub-regional organizations.
25. The meeting recommended that the process be actively pursued at regional, sub-regional and national levels in order to be taken into account in the programme of work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests of the Commission on Sustainable Development.
26. The meeting recommended that the criteria agreed on at regional, sub-regional and national levels be the same and that for each criterion, indicators be added at the sub-regional and national levels to those adopted at the regional level to reflect the specific conditions of the sub-regions and countries concerned.
27. The meeting further recommended that the process identifies first a minimum set of simple indicators which can be later on complemented and refined gradually on the basis of the experience obtained through testing and application.
28. The meeting finally recommended that every effort be made by all concerned to promote the exchange of information and experience with the relevant on-going processes in this field, through, in particular, the participation of their experts in meetings organized within the framework of this process; and that the various stakeholders, including NGOs and the private sector, be involved at the various levels and in the various phases of this process, in a participatory and transparent manner.
<section>9</section>
VII. Proposed Criteria and Indicators at regional scale
(i.e. for the group of countries of Sub-Saharan dry-zone Africa)
Criterion 1: Maintenance and improvement of FOREST RESOURCES, including their contribution to global carbon cycles.
1. Total areas of forests, plantations and other wooded lands (and their changes over time)^1/
2. Biomass (and its changes over time).
^1/ At forest management unit level an indicator on the area of grazing lands would be useful
Criterion 2: Conservation and enhancement of BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY in forest ecosystems.
Ecosystem Indicators:
1. Areas by types of vegetation (natural and man-made)
2. Extent of protected areas
3. Fragmentation of forests
4. Area cleared annually of forest ecosystems containing endemic species.
Species Indicators:
5. Number of forest dependent species (and its changes over time)
6. Number of forest dependent species at risk
7. Resources exploitation systems^2/used.
^2/ Indicators such as licensing cycle, allowable cut and pattern of coupes can provide useful information on the impact on key species.
Genetic Indicators (fauna, flora):
8. Average number of provenances (and its change over time)
9. Number of forest dependent species with reduced range
10. Population levels of key species across their range
11. Management of genetic resources.
Criterion 3: Maintenance of forest ecosystem HEALTH. VITALITY AND INTEGRITY.
1. Areas and percentages of forest (natural and man-made) modified, with the indication of the severity of damage, by such processes and agents as:
- fires (incl. frequency)
- storms (incl. windthrow, flooded areas)
- insects and diseases
- damage by wild animals
- damage by domesticated animals
- competition from introduced plants
- drought
- damage by wind erosion
2. Percentages of forest ecosystems with or without regeneration
3. Changes in nutrient balance and soil acidity
4. Bush encroachment
5. Trends in crop yields
6. Percentage of the population employed in crop and livestock farming.
Criterion 4: Maintenance and enhancement of PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS of forests and other wooded lands.
1. Percentage of forests and other wooded lands managed according to a management plan
2. Growing stock
3. Annual balance between growth and removals of wood products (and its change over time)
4. Average annual consumption of wood for energy per capita
5. Managed and sustainable extraction of non-wood forest products (and its changes over time^1/) of:
^1/ As in Indicator (3) above, measured as annual balance between production and removals of products.
- fodder (grass layer and fodder from trees/shrubs)
- consumptive wildlife utilization
- honey
- gum
- miscellaneous fruits, roots and edible leaves
- medicinal substances
- fibres for handy crafts and other uses.
Criterion 5: Maintenance and improvement of PROTECTION FUNCTIONS in forest management.
1. Areas and percentages of forests and other wooded lands managed mainly for the protection and/or rehabilitation of agricultural or range lands, and/or rehabilitation of degraded lands and relevant important infrastructure works
2. Areas and percentages of forests and other wooded areas managed mainly for the production of water, protection of watersheds, riverine zones and for flood control.
3. Areas of forests and other wooded lands managed for scenic and amenity purposes.
Criterion 6: Maintenance and enhancement of SOCIO-ECONOMIC BENEFITS.
Indicators of economic benefits:
1. value of wood products
2. value of non-wood forest products
3. ecotourism (including hunting and recreation)
4. share of forest sector in GNP
5. value from primary and secondary industries
6. value from biomass energy
7. forest sector trade balance
8. investment in forests and forest industries.
Indicators of the distribution of benefits:
9. employment generation, notably in rural areas
10. degree to which social, cultural and spiritual needs are met
11. benefits accruing to local communities (with particular emphasis on women and youth)
12. contributions to food security.
Criterion 7: Adequacy of LEGAL. INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICIES FRAMEWORKS for sustainable forest management.
1. Existence of a national forest policy including the integration of forest management in rural land-use planning and development
2. Existence of a comprehensive legislative and regulatory framework providing for equitable access to resources, alternative forms of conflict resolution and consideration of land occupancy and cultural rights of local populations
3. Institutional, human and financial capacity to implement the national forestry policy, and relevant national and international laws, instruments and regulations
4. Research and development capacity
5. Existence of incentives for investments in the forestry sector
6. Valorization of local expertise, knowledge and technologies
7. Existence of measures to facilitate the transfer and adaptation of appropriate technologies
8. Existence of an administrative, policy and legal framework for the effective participation of local communities, NGOs and the private sector in forest policy formulation, implementation and monitoring.
<section>a</section>
ANNEX 1. Agenda
1. Opening of the Meeting
2. Adoption of the Agenda
3. Election of Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Rapporteurs (2)
4. Overview of Existing International Schemes of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management (FAO/UNEP)
5. Presentation and discussion of the Background Papers on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management for Dry-Zone Africa by sub-region:
5.1 - Countries in the West African Sahelian region (CILSS)
5.2 - Countries in Eastern Africa (IGADD)
5.3 - Countries in Southern Africa (SADC)
6. Overview, relevance and applicability of existing Criteria and Indicators to Dry-Zone African countries (FAO/UNEP)
7. Discussion on the development and utilization of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management for Dry-Zone African countries
8. Conclusions and Recommendations
9. Adoption of the Report
10. Closing of the Meeting
<section>b</section>
ANNEX 2. List of Participants
1. NATIONAL EXPERTS
Mr. Mounkaila Goumandakoye
Directeur
Direction de l'Environnement
Ministère de l'Hydraulique et de l'Environnement B.P. 12091 Niamey, Niger
Fax: 227 732784/227 734962
Tel: 227 723362
Mr. Jeff Odera
Chief Research Scientist
Kenya Forestry Research Institute
P.O. Box 20412
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 14 32844/254 2 727584
Tel: 254 1432541
Mr. Salomon Chipompha
Deputy Director of Forestry
SADC
Forestry Department
P.O. Box 30048
Lilongwe 3, Malawi
Fax: 265 784 268
Tel: 265 781 000
Mr. Cyrille Kabore
Ingénieur Forestier
Ministère de l'Environnement et de l'Eau
B.P. 7044
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
Fax: 226 310084
Tel: 226 307207/226 334098
Mr. David Everard
Project Leader
Natural Resources and Development
Programme Division of Forest Science and Technology, CSIR
P.O. Box 395
Pretoria 0001, South Africa
Fax: 27 12 841 2689
Tel: 27 12 841 3444
Mr. Gaafar El Faki Ali Elamin
Director
National Energy Research Institute
P.O. Box 4025
Khartoum, Sudan
Fax: 249 11 44075
Tel: 249 11 44075
Mr. Christopher Shikaputo
Chief Forester
Directorate of Forestry
P.O. Box 333
Grootfontein, Namibia
Fax: 264 6731 3389
Tel: 264 6731 2128
Mr. Diarré Soulyemane
National Expert
Projet Forêt et Securité Alimentaire
B.P 208 Sikasso, Mali
Fax: 223 620681
Tel: 223 620409
Mr. Amadou Maiga
Chef de Division des Ressources Forestières
Direction Nationale des Ressources Forestières
Bamako, Mali
Fax: 223 224199
Tel: 223 225850
Mr. Papa N. Sall
Directeur, Recherche Forestière
Institut Senegalais de Recherche Agricole
Direction des Recherches sur les Productions Forestières (CILSS-IUFRO)
B.P. 2312
Dakar, Senegal
Fax: 221 329617
Tel: 221 321638
Prof. R.E.L. Ole-Meiludie
Coordinator SADC
Centre for Practical Forestry Training
P.O. Box 12173
Arusha, Tanzania
Fax: 255 51 44211
Tel: 255 51 32979
Ms. Sarah K. Mbithi
Forest Department
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
P.O. Box 30241
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 767944
Tel: 254 2 767028
Prof. J. Mwangi Mokili
Forest Department
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
P.O. Box 56533
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 767944
Tel: 254 2 767028
Mr. P.K.A. Konuche
KEFRI
P.O. Box 20412
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 154 32844
Tel: 254 154 32841
2. OBSERVERS FROM ORGANIZATIONS
Mr. Mohammed Lawal Garba
Secretary General
African Timber Organization
B.P. 1077
Libreville, Gabon
Fax: 241 734030
Tel: 241 732928
Dr. Ravindra Prabhu
CIFOR
Jalan Gunung Batu 5
Bogor 16001, Indonesia
Fax: 62 251 326433
Tel: 62 251 343652
E-Mail: r.prabhu@cgnet.com
Mr. Heikki Granholm
Forestry Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Department of Forest Policy
P.O. Box 232
Helsinki, Finland
Fax: 358 0 1602400
Tel: 358 0 1602431
Mr. Bernard K'Omudho
IGADD
P.O. Box 30126
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 216951
Tel: 254 2 216951
Mr. Ndegwa Ndiang'ui
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office (UNSO)
P.O. Box 30552
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 520874
Tel: 254 2 622010
Mr. Guido Broekhoven
Coordinator
Forest Conservation Programme
IUCN Eastern Africa Regional Office
P.O. Box 68200
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 2542 890615
Tel: 254 2 890605-12
E-Mail: AGB@EARO.IUCN.CM
Prof. Julian Bauer
ECOTERRA International
P.O. Box 100
Espenau-2, Germany
Fax: 49 711 445500
Tel: 49 551 8205010
Mr. Patrick Mallet
ELCI
P.O. Box 72461
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 562175
Tel: 254 2 562015
E-Mail: pmallet@elci.sasa.unep.no
3. SECRETARIAT
FAO
Mr. D.A. Harcharik
Assistant Director-General
Forestry Department
FAO, Rome
Mr. Jean-Paul Lanly
Director, Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department, FAO Rome
Mr. Paul Vantomme
Forest Management Officer
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department, FAO Rome
Fax: 39 6 57975137
Tel: 39 6 52254064
Telex: 610181
Email: Paul.Vantomme@FAO.org
Mr. Ronald Bellefontaine
FAO Resource Person
CIRAD-Forêt
45^bis av. Belle Gabrielle
94130 Nogent sur Marne
France
Fax: 33 1 4394 4381
Tel: 33 1 4394 4354
UNEP
Mr. Jaime Hurtubia
Biodiversity Programme Manager
Biodiversity Unit
UNEP
P.O. Box 30552
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: 254 2 624260
Tel: 254 2 623248
E-Mail: Jaime.Hurtubia@unep.no
Mr. Bat-Mass Taal
UNEP
Fax: 254 2 624260
Tel: 254 2 623238
E-Mail: Bai-Mass.Taal@unep.no
Mr. Aiko Bode
UNEP
Fax: 254 2 624260
Tel: 254 2 623894
E-Mail: Aiko.Bode@unep.no
Ms. Rahab Gikunju
UNEP
Fax: 254 2 624260
Tel: 254 2 624321
E-Mail: Rahab.Gikunju@unep.no
Ms. Miriam Schomaker
Programme Officer
Environment Assessment Division
UNEP
Fax: 254 2 623944
Tel: 254 2 623499
E-Mail: miriam.schomaker@unep.no
<section>c</section>
ANNEX 3. FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in dry-zone Africa^1/
^1/ Organized in collaboration with IUFRO
UNEP Headquarters
Nairobi, Kenya 21-24 November 1995
PART I
GENERAL REVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES ON THE FORMULATION OF CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT AT NATIONAL LEVEL
BACKGROUND
1. The development of criteria and indicators is by far the most significant outcome in the field of forest management from the United Nations Conference on the Environment and Development (UNCED, Rio de Janeiro - 1992). The important contribution of forestry and specifically of forest management for sustainable development was formalized at this Conference through the "Non-Legally Binding Authoritative Statement of Principles for a Global Consensus on the Management, Conservation and Sustainable Development of All Types of Forests". Known as the "Forest Principles", they apply to all types of forests, and reconcile the productive functions of forests with the protective, environmental and social roles which forests fulfil. The framework for action in follow-up to UNCED is Agenda 21. In Chapter 11 of Agenda 21, Combating Deforestation (Section 11.22[b]), governments agreed to pursue, in cooperation with special interest groups and international organizations, "the
formulation of scientifically sound criteria and guidelines for the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests".
2. The call for action for the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management was reiterated at several post-UNCED initiatives. The Bandung Declaration arising from the Global Forest Conference organized by the Government of Indonesia (February 1993), the Forestry Forum for Developing Countries (FFDC) organized under the auspices of FAO (New Delhi, September 1993), the New Delhi Resolution, passed by the international workshop "Towards Sustainable Forestry: preparing for the Commission on Sustainable Development 1995" (July 1994), and the workshop "Science, Forests and Sustainability - a policy dialogue", organized by the Government of Indonesia and the Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) in December 1994, helped strengthen the calls for international cooperation and global partnership in sustaining and developing the world's forest resources. The "Inter-Governmental Working Group on Global Forests", sponsored jointly by the
Governments of Malaysia and Canada, drew upon the know-how of experts worldwide, and provided a forum for discussing important forest issues with a view to promoting conflict resolution prior to the third session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) in April 1995, during which follow-up to UNCED in forestry was reviewed and discussed. The development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management, including the elaboration of a globally acceptable definition of sustainable forest management, are among the major tasks and priorities for the Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests (IGPF), which was recently established by the CSD and which met for its first session, 11-15 September 1995, in New York.
THE ROLE OF CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT
3. Sustainable forest management is commonly viewed as one of the most important contributions that the forestry sector can make to sustainable development. There is, therefore, need for a clear international consensus and understanding of the definition of sustainable forest management and how it can be widely implemented.
4. Criteria and indicators are tools which can be used both in the process of conceptualization and in the process of moving towards sustainable forest management. The role of criteria is to define the essential elements or principles of forest management against which the sustainability of forests may be assessed. Each criterion relates to a key element of sustainability in forestry and may be characterised by one or more related qualitative, quantitative or descriptive indicators. Through the measurement and monitoring of these indicators, the overall effects of forest management interventions, or of non-intervention by man, can be assessed and evaluated, and action can be adjusted to better meet stated aims and objectives. Criteria and indicators may be identified at the forest-, national- and regional levels.
5. At the national level, systematic and periodic assessment of indicators provides the basis for monitoring changes and trends and, ultimately, for monitoring progress in sustaining the various functions of the forest recognized in Agenda 21 of UNCED and in the "Forest Principles". Within an internationally agreed definition for sustainable forest management, assessments carried out at the forest management unit level can potentially contribute to clarifying issues related to environment and trade, including forest product certification.
6. Based on a review of on-going initiatives it may be possible to globally agree on a core set of national-level criteria and a small number of corresponding, common indicators by which the degree of sustainability of management may be monitored within an international framework by countries concerned. It may also be possible to develop additional indicators that could be suitably adjusted to environmental and developmental policies and conditions of each country^1/. Thus, the exact, appropriate sets of indicators for a given criterion may vary between countries and regions/eco-regions.
^1/ As laid down in the second principle of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development.
7. Although a given forest area may not satisfy all national and international criteria for sustainability, the corresponding overall, aggregate national criteria may still be satisfied. Examples include the conservation of variation at ecosystem, species and within-species levels and carbon sequestration, where limited forest areas cannot, per se, satisfy national and global needs but can only contribute towards them within the framework of an overall, national land use plan.
OVERVIEW OF INTERNATIONAL ON-GOING INITIATIVES
8. Prior to UNCED, guidelines for the sustainable management of natural tropical forests had been drawn up in 1990 under the auspices of the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), followed by criteria for their measurement published in early 1992. In 1993, these were supplemented by: guidelines for the establishment and sustainable management of planted tropical forests; and guidelines on the conservation of biological diversity in tropical production forests. In continuation of these guidelines, ITTO is presently developing: guidelines for the protection of tropical forests from fire, guidelines for sustainable forest industries, and guidelines for the sustainable management of tropical tidal forests.
9. In the time following UNCED, criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management have been formulated through several international and national, governmental and nongovernmental initiatives. Inter-Governmental activities in this respect have been conducted mainly within the framework of three major international initiatives. As an outcome of two Ministerial Conferences on the Protection of European Forests held in 1990 and 1993, the "Helsinki Process" focuses on European (temperate, boreal and Mediterranean) forests. All European countries have tentatively agreed upon six criteria, twenty-seven most suitable quantitative indicators and a number of descriptive indicators. A consolidated report on national-level performance in these criteria and indicators was presented at the third meeting of the CSD (April 1995). The second initiative is the "Montreal Process", which is a follow-up of the CSCE^2/ Seminar of Experts on Sustainable Development of Temperate and Boreal
Forests (Montreal 1993). The initiative deals with the definition of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management in temperate and boreal forests outside of Europe. The 10 participating countries^3/ agreed in February 1995 on a set of non-legally binding criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management for national implementation. Seven criteria and sixty-seven indicators have been identified in the "Montreal Process". The third initiative is the "Tarapoto Proposal on Criteria and Indicators of Sustainability for the Amazon Forest", which was adopted in February 1995 in Tarapoto (Peru), under the auspices of the Amazon Cooperation Treaty^1/. This initiative covers twelve criteria and seventy-seven indicators for sustainable forest management at the local, national and global levels. In addition to the above, main initiatives, there have been some moves towards starting similar processes, i.a. in Central America, under the auspices of the Central American
Alliance for Sustainable Development. FAO has assisted and actively participated in all post-UNCED governmental, international initiatives.
^1/Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Surinam, Venezuela.
^2/CSCE= Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
^3/Australia, Canada, Chile, China, Japan, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Russia & United States.
10. The international initiatives mentioned above have been complemented by a number of national activities carried out by both governmental agencies and national and international non-governmental organizations. The activities of the latter ones include those of the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and the Forest Stewardship Council, aimed at the identification of criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level. International testing of criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level is under way under the project, "Testing Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Management of Forests", coordinated by CIFOR. The project aims at identifying criteria and indicators which are objective, cost-effective and relevant for assessing the sustainable management of forests, and includes field trials to evaluate existing criteria and indicators, inter alia. in Côte d'Ivoire.
FAO/UNEP SUPPORT TO THE ELABORATION OF CRITERIA AND INDICATORS AND THEIR ROLE IN FACILITATING A DIALOGUE AMONG ON-GOING INITIATIVES
11. At the request of the international community and its own Statutory Bodies, FAO, in collaboration with ITTO, called a three-day Expert Meeting on the Harmonization of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in February 1995. The meeting included experts from countries and organizations involved in the international initiatives mentioned above (except the "Central American initiative"), and experts knowledgeable of those geographical and ecological regions which, at the time, had not been involved in international post-UNCED forestry activities in this field. The meeting was specifically aimed at reviewing the thematic and geographical coverage of on-going initiatives on the formulation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at national level, at seeking ways and means of involving countries and regions not covered by them, and at promoting compatibility, and possible harmonization of on-going initiatives.
13. The Rome Statement on Forestry, issued by the Ministers responsible for forestry, who met in Rome in March 1995 emphasised the need to "continue to develop and apply criteria and indicators for the sustainable management of all types of forests, and to demonstrate and evolve the concept of sustainable forest management through their application, taking into account specific regional and sub-regional conditions as well as the need to promote comparability in international initiatives in this regard".
14. FAO, as the lead agency and in close collaboration with other international and national agencies concerned such as UNEP, ITTO, and IUCN, has offered to assist the UNCSD and the Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests in its task to engage regions and countries not yet involved in the identification and formulation of criteria and indicators, and to help promote a dialogue and comprehension among the existing international initiatives.
15. Taking account of the above, FAO and the United Nations Environment Programme, UNEP have jointly organized the present meeting to discuss criteria and indicators for dry-zone African countries. The findings and recommendations of the present meeting will be submitted at the 10th Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission, to be held in South Africa from 27 November - 1 December 1995. For the Mediterranean climate, North African and Near East countries, FAO plans to organize a similar expert meeting in collaboration with other, concerned international organizations in connection with the 12th session of the Near East Forestry Commission (October 1996). FAO has recently been requested by the Central American countries to provide assistance to a similar process under the auspices of the Central American Alliance for Sustainable Development.
CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT IN DRY-ZONE AFRICA
16. Work carried out to date in the identification of national level criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management of relevance to the countries in Africa includes mainly that related to the ITTO guidelines, criteria and examples of indicators on sustainable forest management, focused on the humid tropics^1/. In addition, some African countries could, in principle, benefit directly from work carried out within the framework of the "Helsinki" and the "Montreal" processes, and from the sub-regional initiative described above.
^1/ ITTO Member countries in Africa include: Cameroon, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Ghana, Liberia, Togo, United Republic of Tanzania, Zaire.
17. As mentioned above, the need has been repeatedly stressed in international fora to involve countries and ecological regions which have not to date been part of on-going international initiatives. Special mention has in this regard been made of countries in the arid and semi-arid zones. While these countries often have limited forest resources, forests and other wooded lands play an important role in meeting basic subsistence needs of local populations; forests and woodlands in these areas also help maintain a multitude of social, cultural and environmental functions.
18. In the light of the contribution that the application of criteria and indicators could provide to the management of all types of forests and woodlands in dry-zone African countries, the discussions of this Meeting will be guided by the FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note and by the three Background Documents, which were prepared by an expert from each of the following sub-regions: countries of the sub-Saharan East African zone (Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought Control and Development -IGADD)^1/, countries of the West African Sahel region (Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel - CILSS^2/), and for countries in Southern Africa (Southern African Development Community - SADC)^3/.
^1/ IGADD: Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan and Uganda.
^2/ CILSS: Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Guinea Bissau, Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal and Chad.
^3/ SADC: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
19. The discussions will review overall strategies, philosophy and aims of on-going international initiatives in the formulation of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management and their applicability to ecological, economic, social and environmental needs and aspirations in dry-zone African countries. The meeting may wish to review the possibilities of the promotion of national programmes in this field under an Africa-wide, regional umbrella, aimed at the identification and subsequent testing of common criteria and sets of regionally applicable indicators. It may also wish to discuss a possible strategy and timetable for action to promote the testing and adaptation of common criteria and a set of regionally applicable indicators of sustainable forest management in dry-zone Africa.
PART II
SUBSTANTIVE ISSUES RELATED TO THE NEED. RELEVANCE AND APPLICABILITY OF CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT IN DRY-ZONE AFRICAN COUNTRIES
1. The main purpose of Part II of the FAO/UNEP Secretariat Note is to facilitate the debate for the Expert Meeting and is in no way intended to favour any sub-region or any given criteria and/or indicators. The focus of this Note is on the management of forests and other wooded vegetation in dry-zone African countries^1/, which are presently not involved in any initiative on developing guidelines, criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management (such as the ITTO guidelines applicable for moist tropical forests for example). The sub-saharan African dry-zone belts are largely (but not exclusively) covered by the countries which form part of the IGADD, CILSS and SADC sub-regional organizations (see Appendix 2).
^1/The North African countries are not included in this review, as a separate expert consultation on the subject for the North African and Near East countries is planned for October 1996.
STATUS AND OBJECTIVES OF FOREST MANAGEMENT IN DRY-ZONE AFRICA
Physical context and extent of dry-zones in Africa
2. Dry zones usually have only one (short) rainy season, a 8 to 9-month dry (to very dry) season, and where evapotranspiration exceeds rainfall throughout most of the year.
3. Drylands are defined in terms of the "Aridity Index", as used by UNEP in the "World Atlas of Desertification" (UNEP, 1992, Nairobi. 72 pp.), which is the ratio of P/PET, where P is the mean annual rainfall and PET the mean annual potential evapotranspiration. Rainfall is measured and PET is calculated according to the Thornthwaite method (Thornthwaite 1948). "Dry zones" are those areas where the Aridity Index is < 0.65. Thomas and Middleton^2/ (1994) give four different aridity zones within this limit: dry sub-humid, semi-arid, arid and hyper-arid. The hyper-arid zones do not fall within the scope of this study, since such areas are deserts where wooded lands are rare (oasis, temporary ponds) and their management is very special. An overview of the extent of drylands in Africa and their relative share of the world's aridity-zones is presented in Table 1.
^2/ Thomas, D.S.G. and Middleton, N.J. (1994). Desertification: exploding the myth. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester. 194 pp.
4. In Africa, drylands that is, dry zones excluding the hyper-arid zones or deserts (which, in Africa only account already for 978.2 million hectares), cover 1.286 million hectares, or 43% of the total land area of the continent (2.964 million ha). African drylands represents 25% of the world's total (UNEP 1995).
Table 1: Extent of drylands in Africa and the world (in million hectares)^1/.
^1/Source: taken from: "Development of Desertification Indicators for Field Level Implementation", UNSO/UNDP and NRI, April 1995. (Page 4, merging of Table 1 and 2).
Aridity Zones
Aridity Index
World coverage
Africa (ha) (%)
1. Dry sub-humid
2. Semi-arid
3. Arid
Total
Vegetation types of dry-zone areas
5. The natural vegetation types of drylands include: dry deciduous forests, very dry forests, mangroves (for coastal zones), forest-savanna mosaics, gallery forests, woodlands, tree savannas, wooded steppes and thickets (FAO/UNEP Forest Resources of Tropical Africa, 1981).
6. The forest resources and other wooded land vegetation types which occur in the countries of the dry-zone African belts and which are of relevance for this study extend from: dense mangrove forests along the coastal fringes of East and West Africa (Senegal, Kenya, etc), coastal dense semi-evergreen forests (Tanzania, Mozambique), dry-deciduous forests (miombo woodlands as in Kenya, Malawi, etc); open woodlands and tree-savannas (Combretaceae bushes in Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan); through the evergreen montane forests, prominent in Central Kenya, western and eastern Uganda, and Ethiopia; to tropical rain forests in western Kenya. To the north and south of the African continent, decreasing rainfall and an extended dry season increasingly give rise to deciduous and open woodlands of lower stature. Further north, this gradually blends into grasslands, scrubland and finally the desert.
Fundamental socio-economic features of African dry-zones
7. Agricultural and pastoralism production is the basis of the economy and the main source of economic development in the region. Most of the rural population depend upon commercial or subsistence agriculture activities for their survival. Much of the agricultural production stems from forest lands and major agricultural activities such as pastoralism or itinerant cultivation occur largely on forest and other wooded lands. Forests and other wooded lands in the African dry-zone countries are thus essential for the food security of its population, through the provision of various food crops for self-consumption or for providing cash income.
8. Non-Timber-Forest-Products (NTFP) are particularly crucial for the supply of basic needs such as: fruits, nuts, edible leaves, drugs, honey, rubber, game, fodder, tanning agents and dyes, and for the gathering of traditional medicines. NTFP are often the unique source of proteins and vitamins in the largely cereal based diet of the rural people. Forests and other forested lands contribute also to energy production since fuel and energy demands are largely met by wood (approximately 85 per cent of domestic energy).
9. Forests and other wooded lands further provide essential services for the population and the environment in general, such as protecting permanent agricultural lands, waterways and other fragile environments, but also in meeting a substantial part of the religious, cultural, spiritual and recreational needs of the rural and urban population in the region.
10. Dry-zone Africa has a high population growth rate (3 to 4 per cent), which is among the highest in the world. Because of sluggish economic growth, which provides only a few options for non-agricultural based employment, and a persistently low level of agricultural yields and technological development, the increased demand for food, energy, cash-crops and grazing lands can only be met by further horizontal expansion of agriculture into forests and/or other wooded lands. Consequently, the countries are experiencing escalating rates of deforestation and degradation of their forest ecosystems. The savannas and the dry lowland forests are among the most severely affected.
11. Although forests and forest lands play a central role in development, forest policies often lack harmonization with other land use policies. Experiences spanning three decades of independence show that traditional forest service structures, with strict custodial policies and regulatory laws have often alienated and marginalized communities from forest management, and have embroiled governments in bitter battles that they can never win. Plantation based forestry has, in general been well developed although the management programmes have been lately weakened. The area of private forestry is very small but on-farm forestry is building up especially in the more humid areas.
Status and Objectives of forest management in dry-zone African countries
12. Countries in the dry-zone region have done a great deal to work out appropriate forest management policies. National Forest Action Plans, laws, forestry methodologies and techniques, and several programmes/projects are and have been implemented to improve management and conservation techniques, plantation establishment or to lay down sound natural forest management rules.
13. Forests which are being properly managed only account for a small percentage of total forest lands. Financial, technical, legal, socio-economic, political and other constraints are responsible for this state of affairs. However, it should be noted that for most of the countries in the region concerned there is an ever increasing awareness and political will to improve the management of their natural resources and in some countries to place some of the responsibility for managing the forest resource at the grassroots community level. Participatory forest management options may substantially increase the areas being managed according to multiple objectives which best reflect the traditional usages of the forest resources (fuelwood, fodder, miscellaneous commodities, grazing, agro-forestry).
14. Forest policies and forest management objectives in most of the countries of the region fit in well with the UNCED "Forest Principles". Prime forest management objectives common to most countries include i.a.:
- to contribute to food security by increasing the multiple roles of forests;
- to promote more sustainable natural resource utilisation and the conservation of key ecosystems;
- to introduce more equitable land occupancy systems;
- to promote grassroots communal organisations for participatory resource management
- to foster the integrated (agriculture, livestock, forests, rural development) management of natural resources in order to guarantee food security, energy security, and economic, social and cultural development.
RELEVANCE OF ON-GOING INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVES FOR THE DRY-ZONE AFRICAN COUNTRIES
15. The various criteria and indicators formulated in the framework of international initiatives (such as: ITTO, Helsinki, Montreal, WWF) have been examined in the three Background Notes in terms of their applicability to a regional context and to the needs and aspirations of the people living in these regions. All initiatives were found highly relevant and a number of complementary or supplementary criteria and indicators have been proposed by these Notes to facilitate the elaboration/monitoring of forest development and environmental protection programmes.
16. A synthesis of the findings and recommendations from these three Background Notes is herewith presented as a listing of the 7 criteria retained with their recommended corresponding indicators in order to facilitate the discussions during the Expert Consultation.
Applicability of existing Criteria and indicators for dry-zone African countries
17. Before dealing with the review of the criteria and indicators, it is necessary to set the basic notions of "forest" and "forest management" in the context of dry-zone African countries.
The notion of "forests"
18. There are various definitions of "forest", but the notion which best meets the conditions of the dry-zones in Africa is the FAO definition on "Forests" and "other wooded lands" taken together. For the purpose of this debate, "Forests" cover all ecosystems with a minimum of 10 per cent crown cover of trees and/or bamboos, AND "Other wooded lands" which are covered by trees, bushes or scattered shrubs, whether natural or planted by man, and which may be cultivated (as agro-forestry lands) or not, and which are generally associated with wild flora and fauna.
The concept of sustainable forest management
19. The existing definitions (including those from FAO, ITTO, Helsinki and Montreal Process) are very similar and refer to all eco-regions of the world. They take account of the multiple roles of forests in ecological, economic and social terms; consider present and future needs; and refer to the need to maintain or enhance the potential of forests to provide products and services. However, it should be noted that the above definitions were based on the concept of sustainable management of what are known as permanent forest estates, occupying a specific area and used mainly for the production of specific forests products or services.
20. As already mentioned above, much of the needs of the population in countries of the dry-zone regions in Africa (food, fuelwood, construction timber, other miscellaneous products and services) are met from agricultural activities on forest lands (irrespective their legal land-use status). In some cases, food production and pastoral activities on forest lands and the gathering of products considered as secondary (fodder, fruit, rubber, gum) may be economically and socially more important than timber. This means that the contribution of forests to food security needs to be fully included into the concept of sustainable forest management.
21. Integrating the above considerations leads us to the following concept of sustainable forest management that takes account of the situation in dry-zone African countries: sustainable forest management is to optimise the value of forests and other wooded areas while maintaining their productivity, health and vitality, and biological diversity in order to meet the present and future needs of the people in economic, environmental, social and cultural terms (Goumandakoye, 1995).
Review of Criteria
22. The review of the existing criteria for sustainable forest management, developed by the ongoing processes and initiatives described in Part I, comprise 7 criteria which were retained and selected as relevant for sustainable forest management in dry-zone african countries and for which indicators can be derived. A synoptic overview on the relevance and adequacy of these Criteria is presented in Table 2.
23. The table shows clearly a general agreement on the existing 7 major groups of criteria regarding their relevancy and applicability to the context of dry-zone African countries. Only on the criterion relating to the contribution to global carbon cycles is there some different interpretation on its relevance for dry-zone countries. It is either not considered as a priority and thus not retained as a relevant criterion (CILSS), or it is retained as an indicator (IGADD), or retained as a criterion "Carbon sequestration" (SADC). Institutional and legal frameworks are identified by all as relevant, although not explicitly mentioned in the Background Note on the SADC countries. The underlying messages found in all background notes, highlighting the importance of an integrated approach when looking at forest management and especially the suggested additional criterion of combatting desertification, are very relevant.
Table 2: Tabular overview of the relevance of criteria for dry-zone African countries by sub-region.
Criterion
Relevance and adequacy by sub-region
CILSS
IGADD
SADC
Forest resources
yes
yes
yes
Biological diversity
yes
yes
yes
Health and vitality
yes + "integrity"
yes
yes
Contribution to global carbon cycles
NO
NO indicator
yes
Production functions
yes
yes
yes
Protection functions
yes
yes
yes
Socio-economic functions
yes
yes
yes
Legal and institutional frameworks
yes
yes
NO
Additional criteria proposed
Combating Desertification
NO
YES^1/
^1/ 12 additional Criteria were proposed in the Background Note, which can however be grouped into one of the above 7 major groups of criteria. The proposed additional criteria on "Land use and Management" and "Permanence of forest resource (or tenure)" have some bearing on the "institutional and or legal frameworks", although "Legal and Institutional frameworks" is not explicitly recommended as a relevant criterion.
Review of Indicators
24. The following analysis takes account of all the indicators drawn up by the various processes and initiatives and includes newly proposed ones taken from the three Background Notes. These indicators are the ones deemed to be appropriate (to the sustainable development objectives for the dry-zone forests), sound (measuring or effectively characterising what they are supposed to measure or evaluate), clear (easy to understand), reliable (verifiable and objective), applicable (practical to measure, without serious technical or scientific constraints, not requiring high administrative or financial costs, or involving heavy work-loads in terms of national capacities or priorities). These indicators can be quantitative, qualitative or descriptive.
25. One of the characteristics of the dry zone African countries which is that they are not only economically poor and ill-endowed with natural forest resources, but they also have weak forest services. This will strongly affect their ability to gather the amount and the type of information required for the indicators. However, it is important to underline here that the absolute values of given indicators are less important as numbers but as indicators of trends.
PROPOSED STRATEGY AND TIMETABLE FOR TESTING AND ADAPTING CRITERIA AND INDICATORS FOR SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT IN DRY-ZONE AFRICA
26. The strategies presented in the three Background Notes provide ample opportunities for discussions at national and regional level on criteria and indicators for sustainable forestry. Also, intergovernmental consultations are proposed, together with the participation of the international community and non-governmental organisations involved with forestry.
27. However, the dissemination of criteria and indicators, followed by their effective and continual use can only be guaranteed through a process which must comprise the following:
- testing and adaptation to the context of the dry-zone African countries;
- incorporation into national forestry action programmes;
- controlled and routine implementation.
28. A number of concrete and concerted actions are necessary, which are presented in full in the three Background Notes. However some important common issues may be highlighted here.
29. The need to place the commitment to sustainable forest management at the highest political level in the country, as the adoption of these criteria is a policy issue which will affect the social and economic well being of most people in the region. It will also facilitate the presentation of regional consensus on sustainable forest management at international meetings.
30. The role of governments in the forestry sector might be reviewed, as policy changes may be needed to liberalise state interests such as through the encouragement of NGOs and the private sector to take up some of the forest management and monitoring roles.
31. Support to national governments will be necessary to assist the development of (sub) regional initiatives on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management.
32. Harmonization between dry-zone countries and with other processes is required. The setup of networks for different aspects of the development of criteria and indicators, and specifically the identification of areas for joint initiatives might be useful.
CONCLUSIONS
33. The process of formulating forest management criteria and indicators for the dry-zone African countries has only just begun. It is hoped that through this expert meeting it will continue as an ongoing process, adapted to the ecological, economic and social dynamics, as well as to the pace of scientific, technological and technical progress of the countries concerned.
34. It is important to back this process with a programme to support the countries concerned, which are presently confronted with numerous difficulties that are limiting their investment capacity and their ability to act. But it is the conviction and the commitment of the countries, their decision-makers, their technicians and their people, rather than their means, which will determine what is to become of the African dry-zone forests in the future.
35. Because of their multiple uses and the support they provide for agriculture and livestock, the future of the dry-zone African forests also determines the future development of the dry-zone African countries. Destruction of the forest resources will lead to the destruction of the production bases with disastrous consequences on food and energy security, and on the economy and well-being of the people in general. For many countries, but particularly for dry-zone African countries, forests are a vital strategic natural resource. Sound forest management is therefore essential.
36. Furthermore, the process should not be limited merely to drafting criteria and indicators. Once they have been analyzed they must determine and guide the action needed to guarantee effective sustainable forest management. These criteria and indicators drawn up on relevant and objective bases will thus become decision-making tools.
<section>d</section>
Appendices
1. Tables with Forest Cover of African Countries
2. List of countries situated in the African dry-zone region.
1. Tables with Forest Cover of African Countries
Source: FAO Forestry Paper no. 124 (1995)
Appendix 1 Area of forest and other wooded land 1990
Country
Land area
Forest & Other Wooded land
Forest
Other Wooded Land
1000 ha
1000 ha
Total
1000 ha
% of land area
Natural
1000 ha
Plantation
1000 ha
1000 ha
AFRICA
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Chad
Gambia
Guinea-Bissau
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Senegal
West Sahelian Africa
Djibouti
Ethiopia, former PDR
Kenya
Somalia
Sudan
Uganda
East Sahelian Africa
Benin
Côte d'Ivoire
Ghana
Guinea
Liberia
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
Togo
West Africa
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Zaire
Central Africa
Angola
Botswana
Burundi
Malawi
Mozambique
Namibia
Rwanda
United Republic of Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Tropical South Africa
Comoros
Madagascar
Mauritius
Reunion
Saint Helena
Seychelles
Insular Africa
Tropical Africa
Algeria
Egypt
Libya Arab Jamahiriya
Morocco
Tunisia
North Africa
Lesotho
South Africa
Swaziland
Non Tropical South Africa
Non Tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
ASIA/PACIFIC
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
South Asia
Cambodia
Laos
Myanmar
Thailand
Vietnam
Continental S.E. Asia
Brunei Darussalam
n.a.
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Insular S.E. Asia
Papua New Guinea
American Samoa
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
New Caledonia
Niue
Pacific Islands
Summary 1990
Country
Forest & other Wooded land
Forest
Other wooded
Total
Annual change
Total
Per cap.
Biomass
Land
1000 ha
1000 ha
1000 ha
of land
ha
million tons
1000 ha
AFRICA
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Chad
Gambia
Guinea-Bissau
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Senegal
West Sahelian Africa
Djibouti
Ethiopia, former PDR
Kenya
Somalia
Sudan
Uganda
East Sahelian Africa
Benin
Côte d'Ivoire
Ghana
Guinea
Liberia
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
Togo
West Africa
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Zaire
Central Africa
Angola
Botswana
Burundi
Malawi
Mozambique
Namibia
Rwanda
United Republic of Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Tropical South Africa
Comoros
Madagascar
Mauritius
Reunion
Saint Helena
Seychelles
Insular Africa
Tropical Africa
Algeria
Egypt
Libya Arab Jamahiriya
Morocco
Tunisia
North Africa
Lesotho
South Africa
Swaziland
Non Tropical South Africa
Non tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
ASIA/PACIFIC
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
South Asia
Cambodia
Laos
Myanmar
Thailand
Vietnam
Continental S.E. Asia
Brunei Darussalam
n.a.
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Insular S.E. Asia
Papua New Guinea
American Samoa
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
New Caledonia
Niue
2. List of countries situated in the African dry-zone region.
Appendix 2 AFRICAN COUNTRIES BY ECO-REGION
Countries of dry-zone regions
CILSS:
- Burkina Faso
- Cape Verde
- Gambia
- Guinea Bissau
-Mali
- Mauritania
- Niger
- Senegal
-Chad
IGADD:
- Djibouti
- Ethiopia
- Kenya
- Somalia
- Sudan
- Uganda
SADC:
- Angola
- Botswana
- Lesotho
- Malawi
- Mozambique
- Namibia
- South Africa
- Swaziland
- Tanzania
- Zambia
- Zimbabwe
- Mauritius
Other African countries
- with dry forests (%)^1
- Benin (15)
- Ghana (4)
- Nigeria (9)
- Togo (3)
- Cameroon (3)
- C. African Rep. (3)
- Madagascar (18)
- Comoros (2)
- Seychelles (?)
- Eritrea^2
- without dry forests^3:
- Côte d'Ivoire
- Guinea
- Liberia
- Sierra Leone
- Congo
- Equatorial Guinea
- Gabon
- Zaire
- Burundi
- Rwanda
^1 Countries with dry-deciduous and very dry forests according to Forest Resources Assessment 1990 (FAO Forestry Paper 112, Table 7a) and the area of both forest types in percentage of total forest area of the country.
^2 Forest area not known, included in figure for Ethiopia.
^3 Same source as under footnote 1. For information: Member countries of the African Timber Organization are: Angola, Cameroon, C. African Rep., Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Ghana, Equatorial Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria.
W/W0741E/1/3.96/325
