<title>Summary information on the Role of International Fishery and other bodies with </title>
<section>1</section>
I. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS CONCERNING THE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF HIGH SEAS FISHERIES
I.1 1982 UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF THE SEA (UNCLOS): PROVISIONS ON CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE LIVING RESOURCES OF THE HIGH SEAS
(a) Freedom of the High Seas
1. Article 87 of UNCLOS while referring generally to the freedoms of the high seas including the freedom of fishing, qualifies this by stating that "these freedoms shall be exercised by all States with due regard for the interests of other States in their exercise of the freedom of the high seas."
(b) Conservation and Management
2. Articles 116 to 120 of UNCLOS deal with the conservation and management of the living resources of the high seas. Under the provisions of these articles all States have the right to engage in fishing on the high seas subject to their treaty obligations (Article 116), their duty to adopt measures for the conservation of the living resources of the high seas (Article 117), and their obligation to cooperate with other States in conservation and management of living resources in the areas of the high seas (Article 118). In all these cases it is generally the responsibility of States whose nationals are engaged in fishing on the high seas to negotiate with other States fishing in the same area or fishing the same stocks to enter into negotiations with a view to taking the necessary measures for the conservation of the living resources concerned. They should, as appropriate, cooperate to establish sub-regional or regional fisheries organizations to achieve these objectives.
(c) Straddling Stocks and Highly Migratory Species.
3. Article 63(2) refers to stocks that straddle the outer limit of the EEZs and the high seas while Article 64 deals with the highly migratory species. In these cases it is the responsibility of States whose nationals are engaged in the fishing of these resources in the high seas and the coastal States involved to negotiate directly or through sub-regional or regional fisheries organizations to agree upon the measures necessary for the conservation of these resources.
I.2 FAO WORLD CONFERENCE ON FISHERIES MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT
4. The FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development was held in Rome from 27 June to 6 July 1984. The Strategy endorsed by the 1984 World Fisheries Conference placed primary emphasis upon the need for better use and management of the world's fishery resources. It drew attention to the fact that the successful exercise of national authority to extract greater benefit from fish resources depends in large measure upon the ability of coastal States to manage their resources more effectively. It underlined that rational management is the essential basis for sound, sustainable development of fisheries.
5. The fundamental issue that must be tackled if expectations and needs in this respect are to be fulfilled is that of controlling open access to fisheries. The extension of national jurisdiction was a necessary but insufficient step towards this objective, and open access continues to exist within exclusive zones of most coastal States as well as on the high seas. The consequences of continued open access are extremely damaging. They include the further depletion of marine stocks, the dissipation of economic rents and increased conflicts among users. When no price or value is placed on the resource, capital and labour continue to enter the fishery as long as revenues exceed costs, leading to wasteful misallocations of inputs. There is thus an increasingly urgent need to address the problems associated with free and open access and to review and install alternative management concepts and mechanisms, in particular property allocation systems including exclusive use rights.
6. Such a move towards more efficient and effective management, through the creation of property rights in the resources, will require fundamental institutional changes involving licensing programmes, the allocation of individual quotas of total allowable catch or territorial use rights. It will also necessitate a shift away from the traditional concept of fishery resources as free goods towards their treatment as economic resources with specific values or prices. International collaboration in fisheries research and management has to take full account of the sovereignty of the participating States. Furthermore, the framework of international cooperation must have flexibility to take into account the particular circumstances of individual countries.
Text of the Strategy Endorsed by the 1984 FAO Conference
7. The following principles and guidelines should be taken into account when examining the changing needs for international collaboration in fisheries development and management and reviewing the present and prospective roles of existing mechanisms for such collaboration, including FAO regional fishery bodies, should include inter alia the following principles:
(i) Objectives of international cooperation should include contributions from all the parties involved on the basis of their experience and capacity, leading to enhancement of national capabilities and transfer of technology.
(ii) Cooperative research efforts and technical cooperation programmes should have clearly identified objectives, responsibilities and deadlines, be given carefully evaluated priorities and be fully integrated with overall national fisheries management and development plans. The research should be practical, make fullest possible use of existing facilities and encourage the development of appropriate technology.
(iii) Scientific and technical advice provided by international bodies should be objective and made available to all concerned. Such advice has proved especially valuable to countries negotiating fishing agreements or formulating joint management measures.
(iv) Planning of effective management and development requires adequate data and information upon the socio-economic aspects of fisheries. Collaboration at the regional level in the analysis of such data collected by national institutions should be encouraged, particularly through regional or sub-regional technical assistance projects.
(v) Central collection and analysis of data from all fleets fishing a common resource, with the participation of all interested States, are essential and should be encouraged to allow for proper management of that resource. These data could be provided through data centres associated with regional fishery bodies. Data should be collected and analysed under the same conditions for all countries, taking every step to avoid an excessive burden on fishermen to provide such information.
(vi) Adequate financial and other resources, administrative servicing and technical backstopping should be provided to support regional fishery bodies and their associated technical assistance projects. There is thus an urgent need to mobilize greater funds for regional collaboration. As soon as possible, developing countries themselves should increase their participation and commitment to the technical support of such bodies, as well as take full responsibility for their management.
(vii) Where appropriate, closer collaboration should be established between FAO regional fishery bodies and projects on the one hand and regional economic groupings and organizations concerned with fisheries on the other, and
(viii) More effective steps should be taken to facilitate the coordination of activities in fishery, oceanography and related environmental research, as well as in integrated marine affairs policy-making and management.
I.3 CANCÚN DECLARATION ON RESPONSIBLE FISHING
8. The concept of responsible fishing was first raised at the FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI) in April 1991. In May 1992, the Government of Mexico in close consultation with FAO, organized the International Conference on Responsible Fishing that led to the adoption of the Declaration of Cancún. The Conference requested FAO to draft, in consultation with relevant international organizations, an International Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishing, taking into account the provisions set out in the Declaration. The Declaration also called on the United Nations to declare the next ten years the "Decade of Responsible Fishing" to ensure concerted efforts towards sustainable fisheries practices.
9. The principles embodied in the Declaration reflect the recent problems concerning the conservation and management of the fisheries resources both within the EEZs and on
the high seas as well as those related to the environment. The following principles are relevant to the conservation and management of high seas resources:
(i) States should cooperate on bilateral, regional and multilateral levels to establish, reinforce and implement effective means and mechanisms to ensure responsible fishing on the high seas, in accordance with relevant provisions of UNCLOS;
(ii) The freedom of States to fish on the high seas must be balanced with the obligation to cooperate with other States to ensure conservation and rational management of the living resources, in accordance with relevant provisions of UNCLOS;
(iii) States should take effective action, consistent with international law, to deter reflagging of vessels as a means of avoiding compliance with applicable conservation and management rules for fishing activities on the high seas;
(iv) States should enhance international cooperation to prevent illicit fishing that constitutes an obstacle to achieving responsible fishing objectives.
I.4 UN CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT (UNCED)
10. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 3 to 14 June 1992. FAO cooperated with the UNCED Secretariat in the preparation of the draft Agenda 21 for the sustainable development of the oceans, particularly in the high seas. Section C entitled "Sustainable Use and Conservation of Marine Living Resources of the High Seas" points out that management of high seas fisheries, including the adoption, monitoring and enforcement of effective conservation measures, is inadequate in many areas and some resources are overutilized. It further notes that "There are problems of unregulated fishing, overcapitalization, excessive fleet size, vessel reflagging to escape controls, insufficiently selective gear, unreliable databases and lack of sufficient cooperation between States. Actions by States whose nationals and vessels fish on the high seas, as well as cooperation at the bilateral, sub-regional, regional and global
levels, is essential particularly for highly migratory species and straddling stocks".
11. Under paragraph 17.52(e) it was recommended that "States should convene, as soon as possible, an intergovernmental conference under the United Nations auspices, taking into account relevant activities at the sub-regional, regional and global levels, with a view to promoting effective implementation of the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks." The Conference should identify and assess existing problems related to the conservation and management of such fish stocks, and consider means of improving cooperation on fisheries among States, and formulate appropriate recommendations. UNCED also called on States to take effective action to deter reflagging of vessels by their nationals as a means of avoiding compliance with applicable conservation and management rules for fishing activities on the high seas.
I.5 FAO TECHNICAL CONSULTATION ON HIGH SEAS FISHING
12. The FAO Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing was held in Rome from 7 to 15 September 1992. The Consultation was held in close cooperation with the UN Division of Ocean Affairs and Law of the Sea and was attended by 66 FAO Members, three non-member States and 15 international and regional organizations. The prime objective of the Consultation was to obtain scientific and technical information that might be used for the proper management of high seas fisheries without prejudice to the deliberations of the UN Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks scheduled for July 1993. The Consultation addressed the issues of statistics, research, management (responsible fishing practices and new concepts and techniques), institutions, participation of developing countries in high seas fishing, and legal framework. The conclusions arrived at by the Consultation included:
- management of high seas fisheries was necessary;
- the provisions of the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea constituted the principal legal framework for the development of a regime for high seas fishing, supplemented by provisions agreed at UNCED and those contained in the Declaration of Cancún;
- FAO should prepare an International Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishing in consultation with other organizations;
- reflagging of fishing vessels to "flags of convenience" was considered a matter of critical concern and one which should be addressed urgently;
- high seas fisheries management should be, wherever possible, undertaken on a regional basis through regional and sub-regional organizations;
- effective monitoring, control and surveillance was identified as an essential requirement for high seas fisheries management; and
- consideration should be given to reviving the COFI Sub-Committee on the Development of cooperation with International Organizations to assist regional fisheries organizations in this task.
I.6 AGREEMENT TO PROMOTE COMPLIANCE WITH INTERNATIONAL CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT MEASURES BY FISHING VESSELS ON THE HIGH SEAS
13. The need for an agreement to promote compliance with international conservation and management measures by fishing vessels on the high seas was first underlined at the Cancún Conference on Responsible Fishing in May 1992. The call for an agreement was reiterated by UNCED in June 1992 and supported by the FAO Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing in September 1992. At its One hundred and second Session held in November 1992, the FAO Council agreed that the Organization should draw up an international agreement with a view to its formal approval at the Twenty-seventh Session of the FAO Conference in November 1993. The Draft Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas was approved unanimously by the FAO Conference at its Twenty-seventh Session in November 1993.
14. The Preamble to the Agreement outlines three important aspects of high seas fishing. First, it refers to the duties of every State to exercise effectively its jurisdiction and control over vessels' trans-shipment of fish. Secondly, it points out that the practice of flagging or reflagging fishing vessels as a means of avoiding compliance with international conservation and management measures for living marine resources is among the factors that seriously undermines the effectiveness of such measures. Thirdly, it sets out the main objectives of the Agreement including Flag States' responsibility in respect of fishing vessels entitled to fly their flags and operating on the high seas.
15. The general and specific provisions on Flag States' responsibilities laid down in Article III of the Agreement include (a) an obligation on the part of Flag States to take measures to ensure that vessels flying their flags do not undermine the effectiveness of international conservation and management measures, (b) States are required to authorize vessels wishing to fish on the high seas only if there are sufficient links between them and the vessels in order to allow them to exercise adequate control over the vessels and fulfil their obligations under the Agreement, (c) vessels are not allowed to act under double authorization, (d) authorization may not be issued to a vessel which had been registered in another State and had its authorization revoked or suspended for breach of international conservation and management measures, (e) all vessels authorized to fish must bear standard markings and Flag States commit themselves to take enforcement action against vessels
flying their flags that act in contravention of the provisions of the Agreement, and (f) sanctions are to be of sufficient gravity to secure compliance with the requirements of the Agreement and include suspension or withdrawal of the authorization.
16. Flag States are required to maintain detailed records on all their vessels authorized to fish on the high seas (Art. IV) and make all such information available to FAO (Art. VI) which will then circulate the information to all Contracting Parties. Any infringements by vessels flying their flags which undermine the effectiveness of the conservation and management measures are to be promptly communicated by Flag States to FAO, which will then pass the information to all contracting parties (Art. VI). Vessels under 24 metres are exempted from the application of the Agreement unless such an exemption would undermine the object and purposes of the Agreement (Art. III.1(b).
17. Finally, coastal States in areas where exclusive economic zones or equivalent zones of national jurisdiction over fisheries have not yet been declared, may set their own limits collectively for their own flag vessels operating exclusively in those regions (Art.II.3). The agreement will form an integral part of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (Preamble). The Agreement has, so far, been ratified by Canada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Georgia, Myanmar, Sweden, Madagascar, Norway and USA.
I.7 ROME CONSENSUS ON WORLD FISHERIES
18. On 14 and 15 March 1995 a Ministerial Meeting on Fisheries was held in Rome at the invitation of the Director-General of FAO to review the state of world fisheries and the FAO follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). The meeting adopted the Rome Consensus on World Fisheries. In the discussion, the Ministerial Meeting noted the FAO analysis which indicated that the problems of overfishing in general, and overcapacity of industrial fishing fleets in particular, threaten the sustainability of the world's fisheries resources for present and future generations. It recognized the need for continuing international cooperation and coordination toward reestablishing sustainability of world fisheries. It stated that improved fisheries conservation and management, along with better protection of fisheries from harmful sea- and land-based activities, are crucial to maintaining world fish resources and aquatic ecosystems. The particular
importance of the fisheries sector for small island developing States was noted.
19. Recognizing the socio-economic, environmental, and nutritional importance of fisheries, and the growing demand for fish products, the Ministerial Meeting concluded that additional actions are urgently required to:
- eliminate overfishing,
- rebuild and enhance fish stocks,
- minimize wasteful fisheries practices,
- develop sustainable aquaculture,
- rehabilitate fish habitats, and
- develop fisheries for new and alternate species based on principles of scientific sustainability and responsible management.
20. To respond effectively to the current fisheries situation and the difficulties that can be foreseen in satisfying growing demand for fish and in conserving aquatic ecosystems, the Rome Ministerial Meeting urged that governments and international organizations take prompt action to:
- reduce fishing to sustainable levels in areas and on stocks currently heavily exploited or overfished;
- review the capacity of fishing fleets in relation to sustainable yields of fishery resources and where necessary reduce these fleets;
- strengthen and support regional, sub-regional, and national fisheries organizations and arrangements for implementing conservation and management measures;
- keep under review the effectiveness of conservation and management measures for ensuring the long-term sustainability of fisheries and aquatic ecosystems;
- continue and, when possible, increase technical, financial, and other assistance to developing countries, in particular to least developed countries, to support their efforts in fisheries conservation and management, and in aquaculture development;
- encourage States to further develop ecologically sound aquaculture as an important contributor to overall food security;
- strengthen fisheries research and increase cooperation among research institutions;
- increase consultation on fisheries with the private sector and non-governmental organizations;
- effectively implement the relevant rules of international law on fisheries and related matters which are reflected in the provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea;
- consider ratifying the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas.
I.8 AGREEMENT FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THE UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE LAW OF THE SEA OF 10 DECEMBER 1982 RELATING TO THE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF STRADDLING FISH STOCKS AND HIGHLY MIGRATORY FISH STOCKS
21. The Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks was adopted by the United Nations Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in New York on 4 August 1995. The Final Act of the Conference and the Agreement opened for signature on 4 December 1995. The Agreement will enter into force 30 days after the date of deposit of the thirtieth instrument of ratification or accession. The objective of the Agreement is "to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks through effective implementation of the relevant provisions of the (LOS) Convention". It is, by far, the most detailed and comprehensive international legal instrument on the subject of conservation and management of straddling and highly migratory
fish stocks.
22. Part III of the Agreement is entitled "Mechanisms for International Cooperation Concerning Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks". In general, coastal States and States fishing on the high seas shall cooperate in relation to straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks either directly or through appropriate subregional or regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements. The purpose of such cooperation is to agree on conservation and management measures with respect to particular fish stock(s) where there is evidence that such stock(s) may be under threat of over-exploitation or where a new fishery is being developed for such stock(s). Where a regional or sub-regional fisheries body exists and has the competence to establish conservation and management measures for straddling and highly migratory fish stocks, States fishing for the stock(s)on the high seas and coastal States with an interest in the stock(s) are to give effect to
their duty to cooperate by participating in the work of that body. States with an interest in the stock(s) which are not parties to an existing fishery organization or arrangements are encouraged to participate in the work of the organization. Only those States which are members of such an organization or participants in such an arrangement, or which agree to apply the conservation and management measures established by such organization or arrangement, are to have access to the fishery resources to which those measures apply.
23. Article 9 of the Agreement "subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements" states that:
1. In establishing subregional or regional fisheries management organizations or in entering into subregional or regional fisheries management arrangements for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, States shall agree, inter alia, on:
(a) the stocks to which conservation and management measures apply, taking into account the biological characteristics of the stocks directly concerned and the nature of all the fisheries involved;
(b) the area of application, taking into account the characteristics of the subregion or region, including socio-economic, geographical and environmental factors;
(c) the relationship between the work of the new organization or arrangement and the role, objectives and operations of any relevant existing fisheries management organizations or arrangements; and
(d) the mechanisms by which the organization or arrangement will obtain scientific advice and review the status of the stocks, including, where appropriate, the establishment of a scientific advisory body.
24. States cooperating in the formation of a subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement shall inform other States which they are aware have a real interest in the work of the proposed organization or arrangement of such cooperation.
25. The Provisions embodied in Article 10 of the Agreement "Functions of subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements" are of particular relevance to the future role of the regional fishery bodies:
In fulfilling their obligation to cooperate through subregional or regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, States shall:
(a) agree on and comply with conservation and management measures to ensure the long-term sustainability of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks;
(b) agree, as appropriate, on participatory rights such as allocations of allowable catch or levels of fishing effort;
(c) adopt and apply any generally recommended international minimum standards for the responsible conduct of fishing operations;
(d) obtain and evaluate scientific advice, review the status of the stocks and assess the impact of fishing on non-target and associated or dependent species;
(e) agree on standards for collection, reporting, verification and exchange of data on fisheries for the stocks;
(f) compile and disseminate accurate and complete statistical data to ensure that the best scientific evidence is available, while maintaining confidentiality where appropriate;
(g) promote and conduct scientific assessments of the stocks and relevant research and disseminate the results thereof;
(h) establish appropriate cooperative mechanisms for effective monitoring, control, surveillance and enforcement;
(i) agree on means by which the fishing interests of new members of, or participants in, the organization or arrangement will be accommodated;
(j) agree on decision-making procedures which facilitate the adoption of conservation and management measures in a timely and effective manner;
(k) promote the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with Part VIII;
(l) ensure the full cooperation of their relevant national agencies and industries in implementing the recommendations and decisions of the subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement; and
(m) give due publicity to the conservation and management measures established by the organization or arrangement.
26. Under Article 13, States are required to cooperate to strengthen existing subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in order to improve their effectiveness in establishing and implementing conservation and management measures for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. The Agreement also provides detailed provisions on Compliance and Enforcement (Part IV) and Peaceful Settlement of Disputes (Part VIII). In general, States parties to a subregional or regional fishery management organization or arrangement are obliged to enforce the conservation and management measures adopted by that body and the disputes arising from the adoption of such measures are to be settled by compulsory means should it become necessary. These provisions go beyond the present commitment by States in the work of existing fishery management organizations.
I.9 FAO CODE OF CONDUCT FOR RESPONSIBLE FISHERIES
27. The Declaration of Cancún called on FAO to draft an International Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishing in consultation with relevant international organizations taking into account the provisions of the Declaration. This call was endorsed by the Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing and in November 1992 the FAO Council formally approved the commencement of the preparation of the Code, taking into account the Declaration of Cancún, the provisions of Agenda 21 of UNCED and the conclusions and recommendations of the Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing. Proposals regarding the content of the Code and a time-frame for its adoption and implementation were submitted to and discussed by FAO Committee on Fisheries (COFI) in March 1993. The Committee recommended that the Code should have an encompassing umbrella of general principles which would p_ovide the framework for the detailed guidelines on the issues to be covered.
28. Paragraph 1 of the Declaration of Cancún calls on States to adopt effective fisheries planning and management standards within the context of sustainable development. The concept of sustainable development was first defined in 1988 by the FAO Ad hoc Working Group on Sustainable Development as "the management and conservation of the natural resource base, and the orientation of technological and institutional change in such a manner as to ensure the attainment and continued satisfaction of human needs for present and future generations. Such sustainable development (in the agriculture, forestry and fisheries sector) conserves land, water, plant and animal genetic resources, is environmentally non-degrading, technically appropriate, economically viable and socially acceptable". Thus the preamble of the declaration of Cancún uses the above definition in defining responsible fishing by stating that "this concept encompasses the sustainable utilization of fisheries resources
in harmony with the environment, the use of capture and aquaculture practices which are not harmful to ecosystems, resources or their quality; the incorporation of added value to such products through transformation processes meeting the required sanitary standards; the conduct of commercial practices so as to provide consumers access to good quality products". In this context the essential element of sustainable utilization or development is the cornerstone of the Code.
29. The FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries was adopted by the FAO Conference at its Twenty-eighth Session, Rome, 20 October to 2 November 1995. The Code sets out principles and international standards of behaviour for responsible practices with a view to ensuring the effective conservation, management and development of living aquatic resources, with due respect for the ecosystem and biodiversity. The application of the Code is voluntary and it contains provisions that have already given binding effect by means of other obligatory legal instruments. The Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas forms an integral part of the Code. The Code consists of twelve Articles. The first five deal with nature and scope, objectives, relationship with other international instruments, implementation, monitoring and updating, and special requirements of developing countries. Article 6 deals with
general principles while the remaining Articles cover specific subjects. These are: Fisheries management, fishing operations, aquaculture developments, integration of fisheries into coastal area management, post-harvest practice and trade, and fisheries research. The Code places a great emphasis on the regional and sub-regional fisheries organizations for its implementation.
w1310e01.jpg (88283 byte)
FAO Statistical Areas
<section>2</section>
II. ATLANTIC OCEAN AND ADJACENT SEAS
II.1 A BRIEF REVIEW OF MAJOR FISHING AREAS IN THE ATLANTIC OCEAN AND ADJACENT SEAS
II.1.1 Northwest Atlantic (Area 21)
Total landings of finfish and invertebrates in 1993 were 2.4 million metric tons (t), a reduction of 19.5% compared to 1990 and below the average level of landings seen during the 1970s and 1980s. The main fisheries within Area 21 are: Atlantic cod, pollock, hake, Atlantic red fishes, Atlantic herring, Atlantic menhadin, Atlantic mackerel, plaice, halibut, haddock, crabs, lobsters, northern prawn, pink shrimps, American sea scallop, ocean quahog, clams and squids. The downward trend in landings from 1990 to 1992 can be attributed to the decline in catches of demersal fish, with nearly 50% of the drop being due to the reduced catch of Northern Atlantic cod. However, landings for all major species groups declined. The shift by demersal fisheries toward landing formerly low value species following the gadoid collapse continues, although the absolute quantities being landed have decreased markedly between 1990 and 1992, particularly for silver hake, Atlantic redfish, and
pollack. Total landings of capelin declined significantly (from 183 792 t in 1990 to 30 978 t in 1992).
The problems encountered in managing stocks which extend beyond the 200 miles zone of coastal States continues. A key feature is the continuing fishing activities of non-Contracting Parties in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO) Regulatory Area. Of particular note is the problem caused by flag of convenience vessels. Despite declines in the size of stocks of several species in traditional areas, fishing effort has expanded at an alarming rate outside the 200-mile limit, in the Davis Strait and on the deep continental slope. Another management problem in Area 21 is getting timely data for stock assessments which has now been explicitly recognized in the management of Atlantic Canada's fisheries. Due to unavoidable delays in collecting and processing data, the most "recent" data that can be used in annual stock assessments is often two years old. It has been observed that incidences of misreporting by species and areas correspond with periods when quotas
should have been limiting landings from specific stocks.
II.1.2 Northeast Atlantic (Area 27)
Total reported catches in 1993 were 10.7 million t, down slightly from 11.1 million t in 1992. The main fisheries in Area 27 are for cod, haddock, whiting, sole, mackerel, capelin, herring, hake, blue whiting, and plaice. Most of the demersal stocks continued to exhibit long-term downward trends due to excessive fishing pressure, undesirable fishing patterns (i.e., too much fishing on young fish and discarding) and poor recruitment, probably related to reduced spawning stock biomass and unfavourable environmental changes.
The level of exploitation of the North Sea cod, haddock, and whiting stocks is very high. Most of the catch consists of fish which are one or two years old, and fewer than one third of the fish alive at the start of the year survive to the end of the year. The fisheries are therefore very dependent upon newly-recruited young fish. The industrial fishery in the North Sea is targeted on small species like sandeel, Norway pout, and sprat for fish meal and oil production. Landings were around 1.8 million t in the mid-1970s and have fluctuated between 1.0 and 1.5 million t since then. Sandeel is the most important species and makes up more than 60% of the total in all years.
The Total Allowable Catch system has been used as the standard tool in managing the stocks in Area 27. As a general rule, agreed TACs throughout Area 27 have exceeded the TACs recommended by ICES and actual catches have exceeded the agreed TACs. Enforcement of management measures has not been adequate in all areas and problems arise from the fact that many of the regulated stocks are harvested in mixed fisheries. The reliability of reported landings statistics has deteriorated for some stocks as a result of management/enforcement problems which, in turn, has reduced the reliability of the scientific advice on those stocks. Discarding of undersized fish or due to low prices for specific sizes appears to be an increasing problem. Besides this obvious waste of resources this phenomenon makes the assessment of the stocks more difficult as data on the amount discarded are difficult to obtain.
ICES has in some cases in recent years departed from the practice of giving advice based on a TAC. For cod in the North Sea misreporting undermined the TAC system and ICES recommended an effort reduction with restrictions on the number of days each fishing vessel is allowed to fish in addition to TACs.
II.1.3 Western Central Atlantic (Area 31)
After increasing over 15 years to a high of 2.6 million t in 1984, landings in the area have decreased steadily to 1.7 million t in 1992 and then rose to 1.9 million t in 1993. Most of the decline was due to three US fisheries: Gulf menhaden, American oyster and calico scallop, which constituted 60% of landings from Area 31 in 1984, but only 35% of landings in 1992. Total landings from the remaining finfish fisheries of the region (i.e. excluding menhaden) were relatively stable at an average of about 620,000 t from 1982-1989 but increased to an average of about 715,000 t for 1990 through 1992. Over this period landings of sharks and rays, other pelagics, snappers, king and Spanish mackerel, and unidentified fishes have increased while other finfishes have remained stable or decreased slightly.
The main fisheries within Area 31 are for small pelagics (menhadens, flyingfish, mackerels), large pelagics (tunas, billfishes and sharks), reef fish (snappers and groupers), coastal demersal fish (drums, weakfish, croaker), crustaceans (shrimps, lobsters and crabs) and molluscs (oysters, scallops and conch). The landings of bony fishes not identified were 299,677 t in 1993. There are some under-utilized resources like cephalopods (squid and octopus), small pelagics, deep water shrimps and deep water snappers which may lead to increases in landings, but it is unlikely, excepting cephalopods, that these increases will be significant in the near future.
II.1.4 Eastern Central Atlantic (Area 34)
The total of reported landings for Area 34 for 1993 were 2.9 million t a significant decrease from the 1990 peak of 4.1 million t. Apart from the higher than average landings reported between 1988 and 1991, annual totals varied between 2.5 million t and 3.3 million t throughout the 1970s and 1980s. The main fisheries in Area 34 are European pilchard, sardinellas, bonga, horse mackerels, mackerels, hakes, sea breams, shrimps, cephalopods (octopus, cuttlefish, squids) and tunas. The landings of bony fishes not identified were 233,266 t in 1993.
Catches were recorded by 21 coastal countries and more than 18 non-coastal countries, giving a markedly international character to many of the region's fisheries and the share of landings by non-African long-range fleets remains high. It has decreased from 67% of the catch during the period 1970-74 to 43% in 1975-79, and was 58% in 1980-84. This share remained at 58% in 1989 and 1990, partly reflecting policy decision by coastal states, but also the current difficulty of some African countries in fully exploiting the resources themselves, especially given the large fluctuations of pelagic offshore resources which are of principal interest to foreign fleets.
II.1.5 Mediterranean and Black Sea (Area 37)
The total landings in the Mediterranean and Black Sea were 1.7 million t in 1993. A substantial decrease from around 2 million t between 1982 to 1988 was mainly due to the collapse of Black Sea stocks of small pelagics, whose landings dropped from 833,000 t in 1988 to 428,000 t in 1990, and continued to decline in 1991 to 257,000 t. The main fisheries in Area 37 are: anchovy, pilchard, sprat, horse mackerel, hake, whitings, mullets, sardinella, tunas cephalopods, crustaceans and molluscs. The landings of bony fishes not identified were 92,025 t in 1993.
The Compliance Agreement (see above paras. 13-17), requires that vessels above a certain size be registered and fly a national flag while operating on the high seas, and this question is currently being addressed by the General Fisheries Council of the Mediterranean (GFCM). In the case of the Mediterranean, the provisions of the Compliance Agreement apply to fisheries beyond territorial seas, and its application is complicated by the small dimensions of many fishing vessels. At least a quarter of the total fishing pressure is exerted by vessels of less than 7-9 t GRT; and more than 70% of the registered catch is taken by vessels at or below 15 t GRT. These figures are probably a significant under-estimate of the importance of small fishing vessels, whose catch and existence are seriously under-estimated in FAO databases.
II.1.6 Southwest Atlantic (Area 41)
Total landings in Southwest Atlantic remains fairly stable. Since mid 1980s the total annual landings have been around 2,000,000 t. The total landings in Area 41 were 2.2 million t in 1993. The main fisheries in Area 41 are Argentine hake, southern blue whiting, grenadiers, sardinella, mackerel, squid, tunas and shrimps. The landings of bony fishes not identified were 212,417 t in 1993.
The fluctuations in the total catches of certain species or groups of species can be considered to be within the normal limits prevalent since 1987. Total landings of Argentinian hake ( Merluccius hubbsi ) increased from 421,000 t in 1990 to 521,000 t in 1991, and then decreased to 455,000 t in 1992. This increase with respect to previous years, has been primarily due to an increase in catches by Argentinean and Uruguayan fleets, mostly as a result of an increase, more particularly in the availability, of the stock in the traditional fishing grounds. These are mostly located in the Common Argentinian-Uruguayan Fishing Zone, but some active fishing also goes on further south.
Landings of sardinella ( Sardinella brasiliensis ) increased slightly to a total of 65,000 t in 1991-92, but are still far below the figure of more than 100,000 t per year reached in the 1970s and early 1980s. Although this might be a sign of recovery with respect to 1990, when total catches dropped to only 32,000 t, the stocks continue to be in poor condition.
Catches of squids increased consistently with respect to 1990, but are of the same order of magnitude at 700,000 t per year, as in the mid 1980s. Some improvements have been made with respect to the management of these squid stocks, particularly in the Falklands (Malvinas) area, where joint efforts are made to regulate the active offshore international fisheries that have developed in this area over the years.
II.1.7 Southeast Atlantic (Area 47)
Following the effective cessation of distant water fishing in 1990 in the EEZs of the then newly independent Namibia, and with increasing awareness of fisheries development in Angola, total reported landings between 1990 and 1993 in this highly productive area remained relatively constant (1,409,468 t, 1,429.055 t) at approximately 50% below the average 2.7 million t per year taken in the 1970s and 1980s. The main fisheries in Area 47 are: Cape horse mackerel, cunene horse mackerel, hakes, sardinellas, pilchard, round herring, Southern African anchovy, snoek, kingklip, sole, rock lobster, dentext, and squid.
While the relatively few species that accounted for both the major share of biomass and catches in the area continue to dominate, there have been some changes of note between 1990 and 1992, notably, the increase in landings of Southern African anchovy (up 186,000 t, or 92%) and the decline in catches of Cape hake (down 88,000 t, or 88%). Total landings of the two species of hakes from all of Area 47 dropped by 60,000 t (22%). All the hake stocks have been over-exploited, although the most southerly stocks seem to show some sign of recovery. Landings in 1991 and 1992 were 183,000 t and 208,000 t, respectively.
The Cape horse mackerel stock is currently considered in a healthy state and the policy is to maintain fishing at a high level. The anchovy stock is less valuable than pilchard and used mainly for fish meal production. Exploited almost entirely by coastal South African fleets, the anchovy stock yielded almost 373,000 t in 1989 and was considered to be fully exploited. Landings totalling 386,000 t were reported for 1992. Landings from the heavily exploited cunene horse mackerel, chub mackerel and Southern African pilchard stocks continued to decline. The high biomass of round herring( Etrumeus whiteheadi ) reported towards the end of 1989 failed to translate into significantly increased landings.
II.2 REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES IN THE ATLANTIC OCEAN AND ADJACENT SEAS
II.2.1 International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES)
Established by the Convention for the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, signed in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 12 September 1964. The Council had been established in 1902 and the new Convention aimed to facilitate the implementation of its Programme. The Convention entered into force on 22 July 1968.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Council as described in Article 2 of the Convention is the Atlantic Ocean and its adjacent seas with emphasis on the North Atlantic. There is no precise delimitation of this area by lines of longitude and latitude. In practice ICES is primarily, but not exclusively, concerned with FAO Statistical Area 27 (Map 2).
Species Covered
The Council covers all living marine resources in its area of competence.
Membership
Membership of the Council is subject to the approval of three quarters of the Member States. The present members of the Council are: Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, UK, and USA.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Council are (a) to promote and encourage research and investigations for the study of the sea particularly those related to the living resources thereof; (b) to draw up programmes required for this purpose and to organize such research and investigation as may appear necessary; and (c) to publish or otherwise disseminate the results of its research and investigations. ICES itself is not a management body. It has an Advisory Committee on Fishery Management (ACFM) which provides scientific information and advice, including recommendations for management measures (e.g. total allowable catches, minimum mesh sizes, etc.), to several international bodies dealing with fisheries in the North Atlantic Ocean (EC, IBSFC, NASCO, NEAFC) and to its Member States. Such information and advice concern fishery resources both within areas under national jurisdiction and on high seas.
w1310e02.jpg (34047 byte)
FAO Statistical Area 27 in which ICES concentrates its activities.
The dotted line is the northern area of NEAFC.
II.2.2 Northeast Atlantic Fisheries Commission (NEAFC)
Established by the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in Northeast Atlantic Fisheries, opened for signature in London on 18 November 1980 and entered into force on 17 March 1982.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Commission is defined as the waters within those parts of the Atlantic and Arctic Oceans and their dependent seas which lie north of 36^oN latitude and between 42^oW longitude and 51^oE longitude; within that part of the Atlantic Ocean north of 59^oN latitude and between 44^oW and 42^oW longitude. The Baltic Sea and the belts and the Mediterranean Sea and its dependent seas are excluded from the Commission's area of competence. This area of competence coincides with most of FAO Statistical Area 27 (Map 3).
Species Covered
The Commission covers fishery resources of the Northeast Atlantic with the exception of marine mammals, sedentary species and, insofar as they are dealt with by other international agreements, highly migratory species and anadromous stocks.
Membership
Membership of the Commission is open to the founding members (Article 20). Accession to the Convention by other States is subject to the approval of three quarters of the Contracting Parties. The present Members of the Commission are: Denmark (in respect of Faroe Island and Greenland, the European Community, Iceland, Norway, Poland and Russian Federation.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Commission are to provide a forum for Consultation and exchange of information on the state of fisheries resources in the Northeast Atlantic and on related management policies to ensure the conservation and optimum utilization of such resources, and to recommend conservation measures in waters outside national jurisdiction. The Commission is empowered to recommend measures applicable to the high seas concerning (i) the conduct of fisheries (ii) the control of fisheries and (iii) the collection of statistical information. In recent years, NEAFC has agreed on measures such as setting total allowable catches for certain species and establishing minimum fish sizes and mesh sizes. The recommendations formulated by NEAFC are subject to the objection procedure.
w1310e03.jpg (33576 byte)
Area of competence of NEAFC. The dotted lines delimit the
FAO Statistical Area 27. The stripped areas are parts of
Statistical Area 27 not covered by NEAFC.
II.2.3 Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO)
Established by the Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries, concluded at Ottawa, Canada, on 24 October 1978 and entered into force on 1 January 1979.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of NAFO "the Convention Area" is defined as "the waters of the Northwest Atlantic Ocean north of 35^oN latitude and west of a line extending due north from 35^oN latitude and 42^oW longitude to 59^oN latitude, thence due west to 44^oW longitude, and thence due north to the coast of Greenland, and the waters of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, Davis Strait and Baffin Bay south of 78^o10'N latitude" (Map 4). This area coincides exactly with FAO Statistical Area 21. The Convention provides for the establishment of "Regulatory Area" which is that part of the Convention Area lying beyond the areas under the fisheries jurisdiction of Coastal States.
Species Covered
NAFO covers all fishery resources with the following exceptions: salmon, tunas and marlins, cetacean stocks managed by the International Whaling Commission or any successor organization, and sedentary species of the continental shelf.
Membership
The Convention is open for accession by other States. The membership of the Fisheries Commission is reviewed annually by the Organization's General Council and should consist of (a) Contracting Parties which participate in the Fisheries of the Regulatory Area, and (b) Contracting Parties which provide satisfactory evidence to the General Council of its expected participation in the fisheries of the Regulatory Area during the year of that annual meeting or during the following calendar year. The present Contracting Parties are: Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba, Denmark (in respect of the Faroe Islands & Greenland), Estonia, European Community, Iceland, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Russia, and the USA.
Objectives and Activities
The main objective of the Convention as set out in its Preamble is to promote the conservation and optimum utilization of the fishery resources of the Northwest Atlantic area within a framework appropriate to the regime of extended coastal States jurisdiction over fisheries, and accordingly to encourage international cooperation and consultation with respect to these resources. The Fisheries Commission is responsible for the management and conservation of the fishery resources of the Regulatory Area. The Fisheries Commission, within the Regulatory Area, may adopt proposals for international measures of control and enforcement within the Regulatory Area for the purpose of ensuring the application of the Convention and execution of the main functions of NAFO. The Commission resolves on the allocations of the catches in the Regulatory Area to the Contracting Parties and maintains a scheme of joint international inspection for providing surveillance and inspection of
international fisheries in the Regulatory Area. The proposals of the Fisheries Commission are subject to the objection procedure. The Convention provides that the Contracting Parties may invite the attention of any State not a Party to this Convention to any matter relating to the fishing activities in the Regulatory Area of the nationals or vessels of that State which appear to affect adversely the attainment of the objectives of this Convention.
w1310e04.jpg (42005 byte)
The area of competence of NAFO
II.2.4 North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization (NASCO)
Established by the Convention for the Conservation of Salmon in the North Atlantic Ocean, signed in Reykjavik, Iceland, on 2 March 1982 and entered into force on 1 October 1983.
Area of Competence
The Convention applies to the salmon stocks which migrate beyond areas of fisheries jurisdiction of coastal States of the Atlantic Ocean north of 36^oN latitude throughout their migratory range. The area of competence of NASCO coincides with FAO Statistical Area 27 and part of Area 21 (Map 5). This area is subdivided into three regions serviced by three different commissions: (1) The North American Commission covers all maritime waters within areas of fisheries jurisdiction of coastal States off the east coast of North America; (2) the West Greenland Commission covers all maritime waters within the area of fisheries jurisdiction off the coast of West Greenland west of a line drawn along 44^oW longitude south to 59^oN latitude, thence due east to 42^oW longitude and thence due south; and (3) the North East Atlantic Commission covers all maritime waters east of the line mentioned above.
Species Covered
Salmon.
Membership
The Convention is open for accession by any State that exercises fisheries jurisdiction in the North Atlantic Ocean or is a State of origin for salmon stocks provided, it is approved by the Council. The present members of NASCO are: Canada, Denmark (in respect of the Faroe Islands and Greenland), the European Community, Iceland, Norway, the Russian Federation, and the USA.
Objectives and Activities
The objective of NASCO is to contribute to the conservation, restoration, enhancement and rational management of salmon stocks in the North Atlantic. In recent years, some regulatory measures have been adopted by the three Commissions. The dramatic increase in the production of farmed Atlantic salmon (from less than 30,000 tons in 1984 to more than 320,000 tons in 1994) is a major concern for the Council since farmed fish are known to escape in large numbers and spawning of these fish has been demonstrated over wide geographical areas. Spawning between wild and farmed salmon has also been observed and there is real concern about the possible genetic effects on the wild stocks. There is also concern about disease and parasite transfers and other environmental impacts. Steps have been taken since 1991 to minimize the threats to wild salmon stocks from salmon aquaculture. In 1994 the Council adopted a Resolution, containing measures to minimize genetic and other biological
interactions and the risk of transmission of diseases and parasites to the wild stocks. This subject is monitored by the Council annually.
w1310e05.jpg (42260 byte)
The area of competence of NASCO. The dotted lines delimit
FAO Statistical Areas 21 (on the left) and 27 (on the right)
II.2.5 International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission (IBSFC)
Established by the Convention on Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources in the Baltic Sea and Belt, signed at Gdansk on 13 September 1973 and entered into force on 28 July 1974.
Area of Competence
The area covered by the Convention "the Convention Area" is all the waters of the Baltic Sea and the Belts, excluding internal waters bounded in the west by a line from Hasenore Head to Gniben Point, and from Korshagae to Spodsbierg and from Gilbierg Head to the Kullen (Map 6).
Species Covered
The Convention applies to all fish species and other living marine resources in the Convention Area.
Membership
The Convention is open for accession to any State interested in preservation and rational exploitation of living resources in the Baltic Sea and the Belts, provided that such a State is invited by the Contracting States. The present membership consists of Estonia, the European Community, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, the Russian Federation and Sweden (until July 1996 from which date the EC will assume responsibility).
Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Convention is to preserve and increase the living resources of the Baltic Sea and the Belts and to obtain the optimum yield, in particular, to expand and coordinate studies towards these ends and to put into effect organizational and technical projects on conservation and growth of the living resources on a just and equitable basis as well as take other steps towards rational and effective exploitation of the living resources. The Commission has the duty to keep under review the living resources and the fisheries in the Convention Area and to prepare and submit recommendations concerning inter alia the regulation of fishing gear, closed seasons, closed areas, and the total allowable catch and its allocation among Contracting Parties. The decisions of the Commission are subject to objection procedure. The total allowable catches for herring, sprat, cod and salmon as well as their allocations among member States are annually set by the Commission.
w1310e06.jpg (38102 byte)
The area of competence of IBSFC and Baltic subdivisions for reporting purposes
II.2.6 General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM)
Established by an Agreement drawn up in Rome on 24 September 1949 under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution and approved by the FAO Conference at its Fifth Session in 1949. The Agreement entered into force on 20 February 1952. It was amended in 1963 and 1976.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Council is the Mediterranean and the Black Sea and connecting waters. This area coincides with FAO Statistical Area 37 (Map 7).
Species Covered
The Agreement applies to all living marine resources in the area covered by the GFCM. At its Tenth Session in 1976 the Council noted that since the establishment of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) in 1966, this body had also had a mandate for the monitoring and management of tuna resources of the Mediterranean as an adjacent sea to the Atlantic. The Council acknowledged the work done by ICCAT in connection with Mediterranean tuna resources and expressed willingness for increased collaboration with ICCAT. Since 1990 the two bodies have held regular Expert Consultations on Stocks of Large Pelagic Fishes in the Mediterranean.
Membership
Membership of GFCM is open to Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO. Other States that are Members of the United Nations, any of its Specialized Agencies or the International Atomic Energy Agency may be admitted as members by a two-thirds majority of the Council's membership. The present members of GFCM are: Albania, Algeria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, Libya, Malta, Monaco, Morocco, Romania, Spain, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey and former Yugoslavia.
Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Council are to promote the development, conservation, rational management and best utilization of living marine resources in its area of competence. The Council is empowered to formulate and recommend appropriate management measures including the regulation of fishing methods and fishing gears, the prescription of the minimum size for individuals of specified species, the establishment of open and closed seasons, and the regulation of the amount of total catch and fishing effort and their allocation among members. The management measures adopted by the Council are subject to objection procedure. Currently, the countries bordering the Black Sea are negotiating a convention for the Black Sea fisheries.
w1310e07.jpg (25033 byte)
Area of competence of GFCM
II.2.7 Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic (CECAF)
Established by Resolution 1/48 of the FAO Council at its Forty-eighth Session held in Rome in June 1967 under Article VI (2) of the FAO Constitution. Its Statutes were promulgated by the Director-General on 19 September 1967 and were amended by the FAO Council in November 1992.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Committee is defined as all the waters of the Atlantic bounded by a line drawn as follows: from a point on the high water mark on the African coast at Cape Spartel (lat. 35^o47'N, long.5^o55'W) following the high water mark along the African coast to a point at Ponta da Moita Seca (lat.6^o07'S, long.12^o16'E) along a rhumb line in a northwesterly direction to a point on 6^o south latitude and 12^o west longitude, thence due north to the Equator, thence due west to 30^o west longitude, thence due north to 5^o north latitude, thence due west to 40^o west longitude, thence due north to 36^o north latitude, thence due east to 6^o west longitude, thence along a rhumb line in a southeasterly direction to the original point at Cape Spartel. This area mostly coincides with FAO Statistical Area 34 (Map 8).
Species Covered
The Committee covers all living marine resources within its area of competence.
Membership
The members of the Committee are selected by their Director-General of FAO from Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO in Africa whose territory borders the Atlantic Ocean from Cape Spartel to the mouth of the Congo River as well as such other Member Nations and Associate Members fishing in the area, carrying out research, or having fisheries interest thereof whose contribution to the work of the Committee the Director-General deems to be essential or desirable. The present members of CECAF are: Benin, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, European Community, Equatorial Guinea, France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Italy, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Liberia, Mauritania, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Romania, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Spain, Togo, USA and Zaire.
Objectives and Activities
The objectives of the Committee are to promote within its area of competence the optimum utilization of the living aquatic resources by the proper management and development of the fisheries and fishing operations, the development of marine brackish water aquaculture and the improvement of related processing and marketing activities in conformity with the objectives of its members. The Committee does not have regulatory powers but can adopt recommendations on management issues.
w1310e08.jpg (37784 byte)
Area of competence of CECAF
II.2.8 Sub-Regional Commission on Fisheries (SRCF)
The Convention for the Establishment of a Sub-Regional Commission on Fisheries was signed by Cape-Verde, the Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Mauritania, and Senegal in Dakar, Senegal, on 29 March 1985. Guinea became a member of the Commission in 1987. The Convention has not yet entered into force.
Area of Competence
The Convention does not define the precise area covered by the Commission but references are made to "Sub-Region" and the EEZs of the Contracting Parties.
Species Covered
The Convention covers all fishery resources within its area of competence.
Membership
The Membership of the Commission is as follows: Cape-Verde, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Mauritania and Senegal. The Convention is open for accession to other States in the sub-region.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objective of the Commission is to harmonize the long-term policies of Member States in the preservation, conservation and exploitation of the fisheries resources for the benefit of their respective populations. The Commission consists of the Conference of Ministers, the Coordinating Committee, and the Permanent Secretariat. The Conakry Convention concerning determination of conditions for foreign access to exploitation of the living resources in off-shore areas of SRCF Member States was signed by the Commission's Member States in 1989.
II.2.9 Regional Convention on Fisheries Cooperation Among African States Bordering
the Atlantic Ocean
The Convention was signed at Dakar, Senegal, on 5 July 1991. The institutional framework of the Convention comprises the Conference of Ministers, the Bureau and the Secretariat. The Convention entered into force on 12 July 1995.
Area of Competence
The area covered by the Convention is not defined in precise terms. Under Article I the convention applies to the African States bordering the Atlantic Ocean and then it defines "regions" as the area comprising those States. This area coincides with parts of the FAO Statistical Areas 34 and 47.
Species Covered
The Convention applies to all fishery resources.
Membership
The Convention is open for ratification, approval or acceptance only by the following States: Angola, Benin, Cameroon, Cape-Verde, Congo, Côte-d'Ivoire, Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Equatorial Guinea, Liberia, Morocco, Mauritania, Namibia, Nigeria, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo and Zaire.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Convention are to enable the Parties inter alia to (i) promote an active and organized cooperation in the area of fisheries management and development in the region, and (ii) take up the challenge of food self-sufficiency through the rational utilization of fishery resources, within the context of an integrated approach that would embrace all the components of the fishing sector. Under Article 3, Parties should combine their efforts to ensure the conservation and rational management of their fishery resources and take concerted action for the assessment of fish stocks occurring within the waters under the sovereignty or jurisdiction of more than one Party. In addition, contracting Parties should endeavour to adopt harmonized policies concerning the conservation, management and exploitation of fishery resources, in particular with regard to the determination of catch quotas and, as appropriate, the adoption of joint regulation of fishing seasons.
II.2.10 Regional Fisheries Committee for the Gulf of Guinea (Comité Régional des Pêches du Golfe de Guinée (CORÉP)
Established by the Convention Concerning the Regional Development of Fisheries in the Gulf of Guinea, signed at Libreville, Gabon, on 21 June 1984. The Convention has not yet entered into force.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Committee is defined as the Central and Southern Gulf of Guinea.
Species Covered
The species covered by the Committee are all living resources within its area of competence.
Membership
The Convention is open for signature and accession to States bordering the Gulf of Guinea. The present members of the Committee are as follows: Congo, Gabon, Sao Tome and Principe, and Zaire.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Convention inter alia are (i) to determine a concerted attitude towards the activities of foreign fishing vessels and give priority to the needs of fishing vessels originating from member countries; (ii) to harmonize the national regulations with a view to having a unified regulation fixing the conditions of fishing and the control of fishing operations in the area covered by the Convention, and (iii) to collect the maximum scientific, technical and economic data on fishing operations.
II.2.11 Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission (WECAFC)
Established by Resolution 4/61 of the FAO Council at its Sixty-first Session held in Rome in November 1973 under Article VI (1) of the FAO Constitution. The Statutes of the Commission were amended by the FAO Council at its Seventy-fourth Session in December 1978.
Area of Competence
The Commission's area of competence is defined as all marine waters of the Western Central Atlantic bounded by a line drawn as follows: from a point on the coast of South America at 10^oS latitude in a northerly direction along this coast past the Atlantic entry to the Panama canal; thence continue along the coasts of central and north America to a point on this coast at 35^oN latitude; thence due east along this parallel to 42^oW longitude; thence due north along this meridian to 36^oN latitude; thence due east along this parallel to 40^oW longitude; thence due south along this meridian to 5^oN latitude; thence due east along this parallel to 30^oW longitude; thence due south along this meridian to the Equator; thence due east along the Equator to 20^oW longitude; thence due south along this meridian to 10^oS latitude; thence due west along this parallel to the original point at 10^oS latitude on the coast of South America. This area coincides with FAO Statistical Area 31
and part of Area 41 (Map 9).
Species Covered
The Commission has competence to deal with all living marine resources.
Membership
The membership of the WECAFC is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO which notify the Director-General of their desire to be considered as members. The present members of the Commission are: Antigua and Burbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, France, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Panama, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Spain, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, USA, Venezuela.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Commission are to facilitate the coordination of research, to encourage education and training, to assist Member Governments in establishing rational policies and to promote the rational management of resources that are of interest for two or more countries. The Commission does not have any regulatory powers and can only perform advisory functions on management.
w1310e09.jpg (37471 byte)
Area of competence of WECAFC. The dotted line delimits FAO Statistical
Area 31 (in the north) from FAO Statistical Area 41 (in the south)
II.2.12 Regional Fisheries Advisory Commission for the Southwest Atlantic (CARPAS)
Established by Resolution 25/61 adopted by the Council of FAO at its Eleventh Session in November 1961 under Article VI (1) of the FAO Constitution. Its Statutes were promulgated by the Director-General of FAO on 17 May 1962.
Area of Competence
The geographic area covered by the Commission includes the waters of the South West Atlantic. There is no precise definition of this area by lines of longitude and latitude. In 1968 the Commission established a statistical area which, at that time, coincided exactly with FAO Statistical Area 41 (Map 10). It also requested the Secretariat to provide statistical information on two adjacent areas which are shown as striped on the same map. FAO Statistical Area 41 has since then undergone two changes: (i) the southern boundary of Area 41 has been moved upward, and (ii) the south west boundary has been modified since 1982 as a result of the boundary agreement between Chile and Argentina.
Species Covered
CARPAS covered all marine living resources.
Membership
The members of CARPAS are Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay. Membership is restricted to FAO Member Nations which belong to the American Continent and have coasts bordering on the Western Atlantic Ocean south of the Equator.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of CARPAS are to develop organized approach among members for the management and regional exploitation of marine and inland fishery resources, and to encourage training and cooperative investigation. CARPAS does not have regulatory powers. This body has not been active since 1974.
w1310e10.jpg (57372 byte)
Map10
CARPAS Statistical Area. The two adjacent areas are shown as stripped.
II.2.13 Joint Technical Commission for the Argentina/Uruguay Maritime Front (CTMFM)
Established by the Agreement "Tratado del Río de la Plata y sus Frente Maritimo", signed by Argentina and Uruguay in 1973.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Joint Technical Commission is referred to in the Agreement as the Common Fishing Zone of the Contracting Parties in the South Atlantic (Map 11).
Species Covered
All marine living resources of the Common Fishing Zone are covered by the Commission.
Membership
The membership of the Commission consists of Argentina and Uruguay.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Commission are to adopt and coordinate plans and measures relevant to conservation, preservation and the rational exploitation of living resources and to protect the maritime environment in the Common Fishing Zone. The Commission has regulatory powers setting quotas for each Party in the Common Fishery Zone.
w1310e11.jpg (84452 byte)
Area of competence of CTMFM
*This map is a reproduction of the map printed in the official publication of CTMFM, `Frente Maritimo' in June 1994.
II.2.14 International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT)
Established by the International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, signed in Rio de Janeiro, on 14 May 1966 and entered into force on 21 March 1969. The Convention was amended in 1984 and 1992.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Commission is defined as "all waters of the Atlantic Ocean, including the adjacent seas". There is no precise delimitation of this area by lines of longitude and latitude. This rather broad definition was established in order to encompass all waters of the Atlantic Ocean in which tunas were likely to be found. This area corresponds in most part to FAO Statistical Areas 41, 47, 48 (part of it), 31, 34, 37, 21 and 27 (Map 12).
Species Covered
The species covered by the Commission are the tuna and tuna like fishes (the Scombrioformes with the exception of the families Trichiuridae and Gempylidae and the genus Scomber) and such other species of fishes exploited in tuna fishing in the Convention Area as are not under investigation by another international organization.
Membership
The membership of ICCAT is open to any State which is a Member of the United Nations or of any Specialized Agency of the United Nations. The Paris Protocol of 1984 amending Article XIV on membership (not yet in force) also allows intergovernmental economic integration organization constituted by States that have transferred to its competence over the matters governed by the convention to become a member. The present members of ICCAT are: Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Canada, Côte d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea (Rep. of), Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Libya, Morocco, Portugal, Russia, Sao Tomé and Principe, Spain, South Africa, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay and Venezuela.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objective of the Convention is to maintain the populations of tuna and tuna-like species found in the Atlantic at levels which permit the maximum sustainable catch for food and other purposes. The Commission's functions inter alia include: (i) to study the populations of tuna and tuna-like fishes, (ii) to collect and analyse statistical information relating to the current conditions and trends of the tuna fishery resources of the Convention Area, and (iii) recommend studies and investigations to the Contracting Parties. The
Commission has regulatory powers and so far has recommended a number of measures on catch quotas, minimum weight of fish and limitation of incidental catches. It has a scheme for Port Inspection as well as an Infraction Committee. The regulatory measures adopted by ICCAT are subject to objection procedure.
w1310e12.jpg (71455 byte)
FAO Statistical Areas 21, 27, 31, 34, 37, 41, 47 and 48 covered by ICCAT
II.2.15 International Commission for the Southeast Atlantic Fisheries (ICSEAF)
Established by the Convention on the Conservation of the Living Resources of the South Atlantic, drawn up in Rome on 23 October 1969, and entered into force on 24 October 1971. On 19 July 1990, a Conference of Plenipotentiaries adopted a Protocol for the Termination of the Convention. In accordance with the Protocol, the Convention shall terminate when all Contracting Parties have deposited an instrument of acceptance of the Protocol with the Director-General of FAO. The Convention has not yet been terminated.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Commission is defined as all waters bounded by a line drawn as follows: beginning at a point 6^o04'36" south latitude and 12^o19-48" east longitude, thence in a northwesterly direction along a rhumb line to a point at the intersection of the meridian 12^o east with the parallel 6^o south, thence due west along this parallel to the meridian 20^o west, thence due south along this meridian to the parallel 50^o south, thence due east along this parallel to the meridian 40^o east, thence due north along this meridian to the coast of the African continent, thence in a westerly direction along this coast to the original point of departure. This area coincides with FAO Statistical Area 47 and part of areas 51 and 58 (Map 13).
Species Covered
The species covered by the Commission are all fish and living resources subject to arrangement with other bodies.
Membership
As noted above the Convention is in the process of being terminated. No session of the Commission has been held since 1990. On 19 July 1990 when the Protocol to terminate the Convention was adopted the membership consisted of Angola, Bulgaria, Cuba, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Iraq, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Poland, Portugal, Romania, South Africa, Spain, and former USSR. So far only Angola and Cuba have formally deposited instruments of acceptance of the Protocol.
w1310e13.jpg (72719 byte)
The ICSEAF area of competence. The dotted lines delimit FAO Statistical Areas 51
(on the east) and 58 (on south east)
II.2.16 North Atlantic Marine Mammal Commission (NAMMCO)
Established by the Agreement on Cooperation in Research, Conservation and Management of Marine Mammals in the North Atlantic, signed at Nuuk, Greenland on 9 April 1992. It entered into force on 7 July 1992.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Commission is the North Atlantic. There is no precise delimitation of this area by lines of longitude and latitude. In practice, this area coincides with FAO Statistical Area 27 (Map 14).
Species Covered
The species covered by NAMMCO are all marine mammals within its area of competence.
Membership
As of January 1994 the members of the Commission were as follows: Faroe Islands, Greenland, Iceland and Norway. Other States may also adhere to the Agreement subject to the consent of the existing signatories.
Main Objectives and Activities
The objective of the Commission is to contribute through regional consultation and cooperation to the conservation, rational management and study of marine mammals in the North Atlantic. The Commission consists of (a) a Council; (b) management Committees; (c) a scientific Committee; and (d) a Secretariat. Management Committees, with respect to stocks of marine mammals within their respective mandates (i) propose to their members measures for conservation and management, and (ii) make recommendations to the Council concerning scientific research. All decisions of the Council and Management Committees are taken by the unanimous vote of those members present and casting an affirmative vote.
w1310e14.jpg (72251 byte)
FAO Statistical Area 27 where NAMMCO concentrates its activities
<section>3</section>
PART III. INDIAN OCEAN AND INDO-PACIFIC AREA
III.1 A BRIEF REVIEW OF MAJOR FISHING AREAS IN THE INDIAN OCEAN AND INDO-PACIFIC AREA
III.1.1 Western Indian Ocean (Area 51)
The total recorded landings for the area in 1993 were up 14.5% compared to 1990; reaching 3.8 million t. Of this increase, 25% can be attributed to the rise in reported landings of skipjack and yellowfin tuna by predominantly distant-water fishing nations. The main fisheries in Area 51 are: Bombay duck, catfish, croakers, emperos, jacks, pompanos, carangids, sardine, anchovies, clupeoids, tuna and tuna-like species, mackerel (chub and Indian), sharks, shrimps, and cephalopods. The landings of bony fishes not identified were 661,551 tons in 1993.
III.1.2 Eastern Indian Ocean (Area 57)
The reported landings for Area 57 in 1993 totalled 3.4 million t, an increase of 22.5% compared to the 1990 figure. The main fisheries in Area 57 are: shads, catfish, ponyfishes, croakers, mullets, carangids, sardines, anchovies, tuna and tuna-like species, mackerel, sharks, prawns, shrimps, lobsters, cockles, and cephalopods. The landings of bony fishes not identified were 1,461,219 tons in 1993. A 32% rise in invertebrate landings accounted for 27% of the total increase between 1990 and 1992, while reported landings of fish increased by about 14%. The 56% rise in penaeid shrimp landings (due to both a good fishing season for banana prawn and increased aquaculture production, primarily by India and Bangladesh) accounted for half of the total improvement in invertebrate landings.
III.2 REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES IN THE INDIAN OCEAN AND INDO-PACIFIC AREA
III.2.1 Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC)
Established by Resolution 2/48 adopted by the FAO Council at its Forty-eighth Session in June 1967 under Article VI(1) of the FAO Constitution.
Area of Competence
IOFC's area of competence is the Indian Ocean and adjacent seas excluding the Antarctic area. This area coincides with FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57 (Map 15).
Species Covered
The Commission covers all living marine resources. With the establishment of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, the future activities of IOFC will be substantially reduced. Species other than tuna in the Indian Ocean are geographically localized and may be managed by smaller fishery bodies at sub-regional levels.
Membership
Membership of IOFC is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO. The present members of IOFC are: Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Greece, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Rep. of), Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Korea (Rep. of) Kuwait, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, Myanmar, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia (Kingdom of), Seychelles, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Tanzania, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, UK, USA and Viet Nam.
Main Objectives and Activities
The objectives of IOFC are to promote, assist and coordinate national programmes over the entire field of fishery development and conservation; to promote research and development activities in the area through international sources, in particular through international aid programmes; and to examine management problems, with special emphasis on the management of offshore resources. IOFC does not have regulatory powers. With the establishment of IOTC, the future role of IOFC will have to be considered by its members. The three remaining subsidiary bodies of the Commission, i.e., Committee for the Development and Management of the Fisheries Resources of the Gulfs, Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Southwest Indian Ocean, and Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal, are well placed to manage other fishery resources of the Indian Ocean at sub-regional levels. They would need a proper mandate to do so while
some minor adjustments to their geographical coverage would ensure that major fishing areas of the Indian Ocean are covered by them.
w1310e15.jpg (84306 byte)
FAO Statistical Areas 51 (left) and 57 (right)
III.2.2 Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC)
Established by an Agreement drawn up at Rome under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution and was approved by the FAO Conference at its Twenty-seventh Session and adopted by the Council at its Hundred and Fifth Session in November 1993. The Agreement entered into force upon the receipt of the tenth instrument of acceptance by the Director-General of the FAO, from Republic of Korea on 27 March 1996.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Commission is defined as the Indian Ocean and adjacent seas, north of the Antarctic convergence, in so far as it is necessary to cover such seas for the purpose of conserving and managing stocks that migrate into or out of the Indian Ocean. This area coincides exactly with the FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57 (Map 16).
Species Covered
The species covered by the Convention are as follows: yellowfin tuna, skipjack tuna, bigeye tuna, albacore, Southern bluefin tuna, longtail tuna, kawakawa, frigate tuna, bullet tuna, narrow-barred Spanish mackerel, Indo-Pacific king mackerel, Indo-Pacific blue marlin, black marlin, striped marlin, Indo-Pacific sailfish, and swordfish.
Membership
The Convention is open for acceptance by Members and Associate Members of FAO that are (i) coastal States or Associate Members situated wholly or partly within the area; (ii) States responsible for the international relations of territories situated wholly or partly within the area covered by the Agreement; (iii) States or Associate Members whose vessels engage in fishing in the area of stocks covered by the Agreement; and (iv) regional economic integration organizations of which any State has transferred competence over matters covered by the Agreement. The Commission may, by a two-third majority of its members, admit other States which are Members of the United Nations or of any of its Specialized Agencies or the International Atomic Energy Agency provided that they are coastal States situated wholly or partly within the area or States whose vessels engage in fishing in the area for stocks covered by the Agreement.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Agreement are to promote cooperation among members with a view to ensuring through appropriate management, the conservation and optimum utilization of stocks as well as to encourage sustainable development of fisheries based on them. The Commission may be a two-third majority of the Members present and voting adopt conservation and management measures binding on its Members. Such regulatory measures are subject to objection procedure.
w1310e16.jpg (76261 byte)
FAO Statistical Areas 51 (left) and 57 (right)
Area of competence of IOTC
III.2.3 Western Indian Ocean Tuna Organization (WIOTO)
Established by the Western Indian Ocean Tuna Organization Convention, signed at Mahé, Seychelles, on 19 June 1991 and entered into force in 1994.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Organization as described in Annex II of the Convention starts along 11^oN latitude from the Eastern coast of India and through the following coordinates: 11^oN latitude to 85^oE longitude and 3^oN latitude to 85^oE longitude and 3^oN latitude to 80^oE longitude and 45^oS latitude to 80^oE longitude and 45^oS latitude to 30^oE longitude and then proceed along meridian 30^oE to the coast of Africa. This area coincides with the FAO Statistical Area 51.
Species Covered
The species covered by the Convention are as follows: yellowfin tuna, skipjack tuna, bigeye tuna, albacore tuna, southern bluefin tuna, longtail tuna, frigate tuna, bullet tuna, kawakawa, narrow-barred Spanish mackerel, Indo-Pacific king mackerel, Indo-Pacific blue marlin, black marlin, striped marlin, Indo-Pacific sailfish, and swordfish.
Membership
The membership of the Organization is open to the funding States (Comoros, India, Kenya, Madagascar, Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, and Tanzania). Any independent coastal State bordering the Western Indian Ocean whose territory is situated principally in the Western Indian Ocean region may also be admitted by unanimous approval of the parties to the Convention. The present members of WIOTO are Seychelles, Mauritius, Comoros and India.
Main Objectives and Activities
The Organization's objectives are (a) harmonization of policies with respect to fisheries; (b) relations with distant water fishing nations; (c) fisheries surveillance and enforcement; (d) fisheries development; and (e) access to exclusive economic zones of members. There are no provisions in the Convention for establishing regulatory measures in the area covered by the Organization. The First Ministerial Meeting of WIOTO was held in August 1994.
III.2.4 Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission (APFIC)
Established (as Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council) by an Agreement adopted at Baguio, Philippines, on 26 February 1948 under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution. The Agreement entered into force on 9 November 1948 and has been amended in 1952, 1955, 1958, 1961, 1977 and 1993. The 1976 amendment changed the title from Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council to Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission (IPFC). The 1993 amendments included the change of the title to Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Commission is referred to as Asia-Pacific area. There is no precise definition of this area by lines of longitude and latitude. The APFIC Committee on Marine Fisheries (COMAF) is responsible for the management of Asia-Pacific area with priority on marine fishery resources in the South China Sea and adjacent waters (Map 17).
Species Covered
The Commission covers all living marine resources as well as living inland aquatic resources. APFIC Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Committee established in 1993 is responsible for the management and development of aquaculture and inland fisheries of Asia-Pacific area.
Membership
Membership of the Commission is open to Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO. Non-member States of FAO which are Members of the United Nations, or any of its Specialized Agencies or the International Atomic Energy Agency may be admitted as members by a two-thirds majority of the Commission's membership. The present members of APFIC are: Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China (People's Republic of), France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea (Republic of), Malaysia, Myanmar (Union of), Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States of America, and Viet Nam.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of APFIC are to promote the full and proper utilization of living aquatic resources by the development and management of fishing and culture operations and by the development of related processing and marketing activities in conformity with the objectives of its members. The Commission has a broad mandate (Article IV) to formulate and recommend measures in respect of conservation and management of the resources in the Asia-Pacific area. It does not have regulatory powers.
w1310e17.jpg (65144 byte)
FAO Statistical Area 71 where APFIC concentrates its marine activities
<section>4</section>
IV. PACIFIC OCEAN
IV.1 A BRIEF REVIEW OF MAJOR FISHING AREAS IN THE PACIFIC OCEAN
IV.1.1. Northwest Pacific (Area 61)
After the peak total catches of over 26 million t observed in the late 1980s, total landings in Area 61 declined from 25.7 million t in 1990 to 24.8 million t in 1993. The main fisheries in Area 61 are: salmon, flatfishes, cods, Alaska pollock, croakers, seabreams, Pacific sandlance, Atka mackerel, filefishes, Pacific saury, Japanese jack mackerel, scads, amberjacks, pomfrets, herrings, Japanese pilchard, anchovies, tuna and tuna-like species, hairtails, chub mackerel, sharks and rays, crabs, prawns, shrimps, oysters, mussels, scallops, cockles, Japanese carpet shell, clams and cephalopods. Landings of bony fishes not included above was 5,362,532 t in 1993. During that period, landings of Japanese sardine and Alaska pollock dropped by 2.24 million t and 678,000 t respectively. These declines were, to some extent, counterbalanced by increased landings of certain invertebrate species, principally Japanese flying squid, Japanese scallop, and Japanese clam. Landings of Japanese
anchovy, largehead hairtail, chub mackerel, and Pacific cod also increased, though to a lesser extent.
In 1991, reported increases in marine landings (up some 150% from 1982) meant that China exceeded Japan in catch volume for the first time, and in 1992 the apparent gap continued to widen. The increases in landings for Japanese scallop, Japanese anchovy, largehead hairtail and chub mackerel for Area 61 were due to increased catch by China. The increase in total landings of Pacific cod was due to increased landings by the Russian Federation and Japan while Japan and the Republic of Korea increased landings of Japanese flying squid. The over-exploited state of the Alaskan pollack fishery, especially in the Okhotsk Sea and Nemuro Strait areas, has become more apparent, and the trend towards an increasing proportion of landings consisting of low value, undifferentiated fish has continued.
IV.1.2 Northeast Pacific (Area 67)
Total reported landings for Area 67 in 1993, at 3.38 million t, remain within a few percentage points of the average 3.24 million t reported in the late 1980s. The main fisheries in Area 67 are: salmon, flatfishes, cod, Alaska pollock, hake, lingcod, mackerel, Pacific herring, crabs, shrimps and oysters. Landings by the USA continue to dominate the statistics, constituting nearly 90% of the total landings by all countries for the area. The relatively low 1991 total of 2.97 million t, the lowest on record since 1985, was primarily due to reduced catches of North Pacific hake and Alaskan pollack, although lower than normal catches of flatfish due to early closures enforced by halibut by-catch restrictions also contributed.
IV.1.3 Western Central Pacific (Area 71)
The Western Central Pacific is dominated by a large area of continental shelf, which to the west stretches from Viet Nam and Thailand down to Malaysia and western Indonesia before ending at the Java Sea. To the east, the shelf reaches between eastern Indonesia,
Papua New Guinea and Australia. The area is rich in demersal resources, including penaeid shrimp, and small pelagic resources. In the offshore areas, including those adjacent to oceanic islands of the Pacific, there are rich tuna resources.
Total fisheries landings in this area in 1993 was 8.3 million t, representing a slight increase on the 1992 figure. The main fisheries in Area 71 are: catfishes, snappers, breams, ponyfishes, croakers, barracudas, mullets, scads, carangids, sardinellas, anchovies, tuna and tuna-like species, mackerels, sharks and rays, crabs, prawns, shrimps, cockles, clams and squids. Landings of bony fishes not included above were: 1,678,340 t in 1993. The main landings are still contributed by Thailand, the Philippines and Indonesia with the bulk of the landings in Indonesia and the Philippines coming from the small-scale fisheries sector, whereas in Thailand the fisheries sector is on a larger, more commercial scale. Shrimp catches continued to increase due to increases in coastal aquaculture production throughout Southeast Asia, and landings of banana prawn in the Australian northern prawn fishery.
IV.1.4 Eastern Central Pacific (Area 77)
The total catches in this area continued to decrease. This has mainly been due to the impact of a medium intensity "El Niño" that affected the area in 1991 and 1992. Total catches decreased from 1.7 million t per year in the late 1980s, to 1.5 million t in 1991 and 1.3 million t in 1992 and 1.2 million t in 1993 (1.247.063). The main fisheries in Area 77 are: pilchard, mackerel, herring, anchoveta, tuna and tuna-like species, sharks and rays, shrimps and squids. Landings of bony fishes not included above were 232,109 t in 1993.
The most noticeable change has been in the landings of the North Pacific anchovy ( Engraulis mordax ) whose catches dropped sharply from 111,000 t in 1989 to only
6,000 t in 1990, 21,000 t in 1991, and 10,000 t in 1992 and 4,700 t in 1993. This is a sharp loss compared to catches well above 100,000 t per year obtained in the early 1970s and 1980s, and is due to a sharp decrease in stock size, which has mainly affected Mexican fish stocks and fisheries.
Some decrease has also been noticed in the total catches of the Californian sardine ( Sardinops sagax caeruleus ), chub mackerel ( Scomber japonicus ), Central Pacific anchoveta ( Cetengraulis mysticetus ), Eastern Pacific bonito ( Sarda chiliensis ) and several species of large pelagic fish, including the yellowfin tuna ( Thunnus albacares ).
Catches of other species have remained more or less unchanged in recent years. Squids (mostly Dosidiscus gigas ) seem to be abundant in the area and still remains underexploited.
IV.1.5 Southwest Pacific (Area 81)
The reported landings for 1993 totalled 777,157 t; down by 16% on the 1992 figure. Landings of southern blue whiting which had showed a clear trend; increasing from 34,050 t in 1990 to 92,167 t in 1992, fell to 32,443 t in 1993. The Foveaux Strait oyster fishery (for Ostrea spp. ), once the largest dredge fishery for oysters in the world, continues to be in an extremely depressed state because of severe mortalities caused by disease. Vessels are permitted a catch of two sacks, where at one time catches of 115,000 sacks/vessel/season were permitted. Thus, in reality, the fishery has been closed.
IV.1.6 Southeast Pacific (Area 87)
Total reported catches in Area 87 were 14,979,981 t in 1993. Total landings in this area seem to be levelling off at around 14 million t per year since 1990, after an increasing trend that started in 1983-84 and brought the total catches from around 10 million t per year to the current 14 million t per year. Major changes seem to be occurring in this area, with respect to the pelagic fish stocks such as anchoveta, sardine, mackerel and horse mackerel.
The Peruvian anchoveta ( Engraulis ringens ) has replaced sardine ( Sardinops sagax ) as the main fish stock in the area. Catches of anchovy continue in an increasing trend, which seems to be associated with a recovery of this stock after the 1972 collapse and the low stock levels observed since then. Catches of Chilean horse mackerel ( Trachurus symmetricus murphy ) continued to increase, reaching almost 4 million t in 1991, to decrease to 3.3 million t in 1993. To some extent, the reduced landings in this species are due to the reduced catches of the long-range fleets (mostly from the Russian Federation) that were exploiting this stock in the high seas. Total catches of the sardine ( Sardinops sagax ) continued in their decreasing trend which started in 1985. From a maximum catch of 6.5 million t in 1985, total catches have dropped almost continuously to 3.1 million t in 1992 and again to 1.6 million t in 1993. The decrease in the total landings of this species is related
to reduction in the stock-size and total area of distribution of the species.
Changes in the abundance and total landings of anchovy, sardine and other small pelagic fishes in the area seem to be associated with similar "regime changes" in other areas of the world. Inside the Gulf of California in the Eastern-Central Pacific, the stocks of California sardine ( Sardinops caeruleus ) are decreasing consistently, while the stocks of anchovies in the same area seem to be increasing, as is the case for the Japanese sardine ( Sardinops melanostictus ) in the Northwest Pacific.
Catches of hake in area 87 decreased slightly in the last couple of years. Another major change occurring in this area has been the increase in abundance of catches of the squid ( Dosidiscus gigas ). Catches of this species increased from around 10,000 t per year during the 1980s to more than 200,000 t in 1993. Catches of other species are relatively stable or showing light year-to-year fluctuations.
IV.1.7 South Pacific Islands (Areas 71 and 77)
Stretching across the eastern half of FAO Statistical Area 71 and the southern parts of FAO Statistical Area 77, there is a distinctive fisheries region encompassing Micronesia, Polynesia and Melanesia. The following review concentrates predominantly on this region, but certain parts may also be relevant to fisheries off adjacent Asian countries, northern and eastern Australia and Hawaii, USA. The small island countries support 5.25 million residents (67% in Papua New Guinea), who rely heavily on living marine resources as a source of food and foreign currencies from licence fees as well as exports. The average consumption of fish is about 50 kg per person per year, but reaches 250 kg in some atolls. This can be compared with 8 kg per person each year in a continental country such as Australia. Tuna (especially skipjack, yellowfin and, to a lesser extent, bigeye and albacore) are the primary living resources of the region. Landings from the capture fisheries in the coastal
waters of the islands are relatively modest amounting to about 104,000 t per year.
IV.2 REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES IN THE PACIFIC OCEAN
IV.2.1 North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES)
Established by the Convention for a North Pacific Marine Science by Canada, China, Japan, the United States and the Soviet Union Organization, signed in Ottawa, Canada on 12 December 1990 and entered into force on 24 March 1992.
Area of Competence
The area covered by the Convention is the temperate and Sub-Arctic region of the North Pacific Ocean and adjacent seas, especially northward from 30^oN latitude. The activities of the Organization may, for scientific reasons, extend farther southward in the North Pacific Ocean. This area coincides with FAO Statistical Area 67 as well as part of FAO Statistical Areas 61 and 77 (Map 18).
Species Covered
The species covered by the Organization are all living marine resources within its area of competence.
Membership
The membership of the Organization is open to the five signatory States. After entry into force, the Convention is open for accession by non-signatory States subject to a unanimous approval by the Contracting Parties. The present members of PICES are: Canada, Japan, China (People's Republic of), Korea (Republic of), Russian Federation and the United States.
Objectives and Activities
The objectives of the Organization are (a) to promote and coordinate marine scientific research in order to advance scientific knowledge of the area concerned and of its living resources, including but not necessarily limited to research with respect to the ocean environment and its interactions with land and atmosphere, its role in and response to global weather and climate change, its flora, fauna and ecosystems, its uses and resources, and impacts upon it from human activities; and (b) to promote the collection and exchange of information and data related to marine scientific research in the area concerned.
The Organization consists of (a) a Governing Council, (b) Finance and Administration Committee, (c) Science Board, and (d) a Secretariat. The activities of the Organization is purely scientific and will cover both areas under national jurisdiction and the high seas under its competence. The Organization is not empowered to recommend regulatory measures.
w1310e18.jpg (65408 byte)
Area to be especially covered by PICES
IV.2.2 North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC)
Established by the Convention for the Conservation of Anadromous Stocks in the North Pacific Ocean, signed at Moscow, Russia, on 11 February 1992 and entered into force on 16 February 1993. It replaced the International Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific which had been in force since 1952.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Commission, referred to as the "Convention Area" is defined as the waters of the North Pacific Ocean and its adjacent seas, north of 33^oN latitude beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured. It is understood that activities under the Convention, for scientific purposes, may extend further southward in the North Pacific Ocean and its adjacent seas. "The Convention Area" coincides mainly with the FAO Statistical Areas 61 and 67 and part of 77.
Species Covered
The species covered by the Commission are as follows: chum salmon, coho salmon, pink salmon, sockeye salmon, chinook salmon, cherry salmon, and steelhead trout.
Membership
The members of the Commission are: the Untied States, Canada, Japan, and the Russian Federation. The Convention is not open to other States but at the invitation of the original Parties by unanimous agreement, other States may accede to it.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Convention are to prohibit directed high seas fishing for North Pacific salmon and to strictly limit the incidental taking of Pacific salmon. The Commission inter alia has the authority (i) to recommend to the parties measures for the conservation of anadromous stocks and ecologically related species in the Convention Area; (ii) to promote the exchange of information of any activities contrary to the provisions of the Convention; (iii) to consider and make proposals to the Parties for the enactment of schedules of equivalent penalties for activities contrary to the provisions of the Convention; and (i) to review and evaluate enforcement actions taken by the Parties. The Parties may take action individually or collectively to prevent unauthorized fishing activities by others and prevent trafficking in illegally harvested Pacific salmon. Decisions of the Commission on all important matters are taken by consensus among all Parties that are States of
origin of anadromous stocks which migrate into the Convention Area.
IV.2.3. Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (I-ATTC)
Created by the Convention for the Establishment of an Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission signed by the Governments of the United States and Costa Rica, in Washington on 31 May 1949 and entered into force on 3 March 1950.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the Commission is defined was the "Eastern Pacific Ocean". There is no precise definition of this area by lines of longitudes and latitudes. In 1962, a Commission's Yellowfin Regulatory Area (CYRA) was created. This "Regulatory area" was defined as follows: All waters of the Eastern Pacific Ocean bounded by the mainland of the Americas and the following lines: beginning at a point on the mainland where the parallel of 40 degrees north latitude intersects the coast; thence due west to the meridian of 125 degrees west longitude; thence due south to the parallel of 20 degrees north latitude; thence due east to the meridian of 120 degrees west longitude; thence due south to the parallel of 5 degrees north latitude; thence due east to the meridian of 110 degrees west longitude; thence due south to the parallel of 30 degrees south latitude; thence due east to a point on the mainland where the parallel of 30 degrees south latitude intersects the coast.
This area which includes substantive areas of high seas, coincides with part of FAO Statistical Areas 77 and 87 (Map 19).
Species Covered
The species covered by I-ATTC are as follows: yellowfin and skipjack tuna, fish used as bait for tuna and other fish taken by tuna vessels. The I-ATTC staff has also studied other species of tuna (bigeye, black skipjack, bluefin tuna, albacore) and billfishes.
Membership
Membership of the Committee is open to any States whose nationals participate in fisheries in the I-ATTC Convention Area, provided that the Contracting Parties given their unanimous consent. The present members of I-ATTC are: Costa Rica, France, Japan, Nicaragua, Panama, the United States of America, Vanuatu and Venezuela.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Convention are to maintain the populations of yellowfin and skipjack tuna and other kind of fish taken by tuna fishing vessels in the eastern Pacific and to cooperate in the gathering and interpretation of factual information to facilitate maintaining the populations of these fishes at a level which permits maximum sustainable catches year after year. The functions of the Commission include inter alia (a) to gather and interpret information on tuna, (b) to conduct scientific investigation concerning the abundance, biology, biometry, and ecology of yellowfin and skipjack tuna in the Convention Area, and to recommend proposals for joint action for conservation. The Commission has regulatory powers and catch quotas for yellowfin tuna have been set by the Commission since 1962. Since 1976, the Commission has implemented a programme on tuna dolphin relationship and since 1992 it has developed an International Dolphin Conservation
Programme aiming at progressively reducing dolphin mortality in tuna fishing. In 1995 the 30th Intergovernmental Meeting of members and observer nations of I-ATTC, held in Panama, made two declarations. The first, the Declaration of Panama, called for strengthening the Agreement for the Conservation of Dolphins. The second, the Declaration on Strengthening the Objectives and Operation of the Convention establishing I-ATTC, called for amending the Convention to conform with the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, including giving effect to the provisions of the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.
w1310e19.jpg (81456 byte)
The I-ATTC Yellowfin Regulatory Area
IV.2.4. Council of the Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Agreement (CEPTFA)
The Eastern Pacific Ocean Tuna Fishing Agreement and its Protocol was signed in San José, Costa Rica, by the United States of America, Costa Rica and Panama on 15 March 1983. The Agreement will enter into force after it has been ratified or adhered to by five coastal States bordering the area covered by the Agreement. The Agreement has not yet entered into force.
Area of Competence
The Agreement Area is defined as the area bounded by a line from the point on the mainland where the parallel of 40^oN latitude intersects the coast westward along the parallel of 40^oN latitude to 40^oN latitude by 125^oW longitude, thence southerly along the meridian of 125^oW longitude to 20^oN latitude by 125^oW longitude, then easterly along the parallel of 20^oN latitude to 20^oN latitude by 120^oW longitude, thence southerly along the meridian of 120^oW longitude to 5^oN latitude by 120^oW longitude, thence easterly along the parallel of 5^oN latitude to 5^oN latitude by 110^oW longitude, thence southerly along the meridian of 110^oW longitude to 10^oS latitude by 110^oW longitude, thence easterly along the parallel of 10^oS latitude to 10^oS latitude by 90^oW longitude, thence southerly along the meridian of 90^oW longitude to 30^oS latitude by 90^oW longitude, thence easterly along the parallel of 30^oS latitude to the point on the mainland where the parallel
intersects the coast, excluding the areas within 12 nautical miles of the baseline from which the breadth of territorial sea is measured and those areas within 200 nautical miles of the baselines of coastal States not signatories to this Agreement, measured from the same baseline. This area coincides with part of FAO Statistical Areas 77 and 87.
Species Covered
The species covered by the Agreement are as follows: yellowfin tuna, bigeye tuna, albacore tuna, northern bluefin tuna, southern bluefin tuna, skipjack tuna, black skipjack, kawakawa, bullet tuna, frigate tuna, eastern Pacific bonito, and Indo-Pacific bonito.
Membership
Membership of the Council will be open to States bordering the Agreement Area or to members of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (I-ATTC) at the time when the Agreement enters into force, other States may also adhere to the Agreement subject to the unanimous approval by the Council.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objective of the Agreement is to ensure the conservation and rational utilization of tuna resources in the eastern Pacific Ocean. The Agreement, when in force, would establish an Eastern Pacific Tuna Council whose main activity will be to issue licences permitting access to fishing in the Agreement Area to vessels of States parties to the Agreement against payment of a fee based on net registered tons of the vessel requesting the licence.
IV.2.5. International Pacific Halibut Commission (IPHC)
Established by the Convention for the Preservation of the Halibut Fishery, signed at Washington on March 2, 1923. The Convention was amended in 1930 and 1937. A new Convention between the United States of America and Canada for the Preservation of the Halibut Fishery of the Northern Pacific Ocean and Berring Sea was signed in Ottawa, Canada on 2 March 1953 and entered into force on 28 October 1953. When the two countries extended their fishery jurisdictions a Protocol Amending the Convention was signed in Washington on 29 March 1979 and entered into force on 15 October 1980.
Area of Competence
The Convention covers the "Convention Area" defined as the waters off the west coasts of the United States and Canada, including the southern as well as the western coasts of Alaska, within the respective maritime areas in which either partly exercises exclusive fisheries jurisdiction. Maritime area includes without distinction areas within and seaward of the territorial sea or internal waters of the Parties. This area coincides with FAO Statistical Area 67.
Species Covered
The species covered by the Convention is halibut ( Hippoglossus ) found in the Convention Area.
Membership
The Convention is not open to other States. Membership is limited to Canada and the United States.
Objectives and Activities
The objective of the Convention are the preservation of the halibut fishery of the Northern Pacific Ocean and Bering Sea. The main functions of the Commission are to coordinate scientific studies relating to the halibut fishery and to formulate regulations designed to develop the stocks of halibut to those levels which permit optimum utilization. The Commission has regulatory powers and sets the total allowable catch of halibut in the Convention Area.
IV.2.6. Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Organization (OAPO)
An Agreement Creating the Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Organization was signed by Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua and Peru in Lima on 21 July 1989. The Agreement has not yet entered into force.
Area of Competence
The area covered is defined as the Eastern Pacific Ocean through which the species covered by the Agreement roam. This area includes, not only the 200 miles zones adjacent to island and continental territories of the States parties, but also high seas areas adjacent to these zones, up to the meridian 145^oW longitude (Map 20). This area coincides with part of FAO Statistical Areas 77, 81, 87 and 71.
Species Covered
The species covered by the Agreement are: yellowfin tuna, skipjack, northern bluefin tuna, southern bluefin tuna, albacore, and bigeye tuna.
Membership
The membership of the Organization will be open to Eastern Pacific Coastal Nations and other States whose vessels have fished the species covered by the Agreement within its area of competence. The admission of non-coastal States will be subject to the approval of the Governing Body of the Organization.
Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Organization are (i) to achieve the conservation, protection and optimum utilization of the highly migratory species, (ii) to provide training, transfer of technology and to assist with development of fishing capacity and infrastructure of disadvantaged Latin American Eastern Pacific Coastal States who are Parties to the Agreement. The structure of the Organization will consist of the Governing Board, the Scientific Committee and the Secretariat. The Organization will have regulatory powers and its decisions are made by consensus or by a two-third majority.
w1310e20.jpg (104130 byte)
Area covered by the OAPO Convention
IV.2.7 South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA)
Established by South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency Convention, signed in Honiara, Solomon Islands on 10 July 1979. The Convention entered into force on 9 August 1979.
Area of Competence
The FFA's area of competence is the South Pacific region. There is no precise definition of this area by lines of longitude and latitude. It coincides mainly with FAO Statistical Areas 71 and 81 (Map 21).
Species Covered
The species covered by the FFA are all living marine resources and in particular the highly migratory species.
Membership
Membership of FFA is open to members of the South Pacific Forum and to other States or territories in the region on the recommendation of the Forum Fisheries Committee. The present members of FFA are: Australia, Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshal Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Western Samoa.
Objectives and Activities
The objectives of the Convention are (i) conservation and optimum utilization of the species covered by the Convention, (ii) promotion of regional cooperation and coordination in respect of fisheries policies, (iii) securing of maximum benefits from the living resources of the region for their peoples and for the region as a whole and in particular the developing countries, and (iv) facilitating the collection, analysis, evaluation and dissemination of relevant statistical scientific and economic information about the resources covered by the Convention. The functions of the Agency include inter alia: (i) harmonization of policies with respect to fisheries management; (ii) co-operation in respect of relations with distant water fishing countries; (iii) co-operation in surveillance and enforcement; (iv) co-operation in respect of onshore fish processing; (v) co-operation in marketing; (vi) co-operation in respect of access to the 200 mile zones of other Parties.
In 1987, following the signing of the Treaty on Fisheries between FFA and the United States (the Treaty was amended in 1992), the FFA Director was designated as the "Administrator" for the purpose of the Treaty. This Treaty covers tuna fishing vessels flying the flag of the USA operating both in certain areas under the fishery jurisdiction of the FFA Member States and in certain adjacent areas of high seas (see Map 21).
Moreover, the Convention for the Prohibition of Fishing with Long Driftnets in the South Pacific, concluded at Wellington on 24 November 1989, sets forth specific functions for the FFA within a Convention area which includes substantial areas of high seas (see Map 22). These functions, to be performed by FFA with respect to the whole Convention area,
are (i) the collection, preparation and dissemination of information on driftnet fishing activities, (ii) the facilitation of scientific analysis on the effect of driftnet fishing activities and (iii) the preparation and transmission to the Parties of an annual report on any driftnet fishing activities and the measures taken to implement the Convention. In July 1992 the FFA members signed the Niue Treaty which entered into force in May 1993 under which they cooperate in the coordination of their surveillance and enforcement activities.
w1310e21.jpg (81491 byte)
Areas under fisheries jurisdiction of FFA Island Member Countries
w1310e22.jpg (88684 byte)
Area covered by the Wellington Convention
IV.2.8 Permanent South Pacific Commission/Commission permanente du Pacific Sud (CPPS)
Established by the Agreement on the Organization of the Permanent Commission of the Conference on the Use and Conservation of the Maritime Resources of the South Pacific, signed by Chile, Ecuador and Peru at the First Conference on the Use and Conservation of the Marine Resources of the South Pacific, held in Santiago, Chile, in August 1952.
Area of Competence
The Agreement does not define the precise area to be served by the Commission by lines of longitude and latitude. It merely provides that the Permanent Commission is established in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the Declaration on the Maritime Zone. This Declaration states that the three Governments proclaim as a principle of their international maritime policy that each of them possesses sole sovereignty and jurisdiction over the area of the sea, the sea floor and sub-soil thereof adjacent to the coast of its own country and extending not less than 200 nautical miles from the said coast. This area is part of FAO Statistical Area 87 (Map 23). In 1984, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of CPPS member countries referred to the "legitimate interests of the Coastal States in the conservation and optimum utilization of the marine resources beyond their 200 mile zones, when these resources are part of the same populations of species existing in their 200 mile zones,
or populations of species associated with them". They instructed the CPPS Secretariat to take action with a view to considering the possibility of establishing adequate mechanisms for the conservation and optimum utilization of these resources.
Species Covered
The species covered by the Agreement are all living marine resources.
Membership
Neither the Agreement establishing the Commission nor any of the Declarations, resolutions or recommendations of the Commission mention conditions regarding eligibility for membership. The present members of the Commission are: Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.
Objectives and Activities
The objectives of the Agreement are those set out in the Declaration on Maritime Zone. The objectives of the Declaration were, inter alia, the necessity to provide for the peoples of the three governments food supplies and to furnish them with the means of developing their economy. To do so it is essential to ensure the conservation and protection of their natural resources in the areas of the sea adjacent to their coasts and to regulate the use thereof. The functions of the Commission, are inter alia, (i) to determine protected species; open and closed seasons and areas of sea; fishing and hunting times, methods and equipment; prohibited gear and methods; and to lay down general regulations for hunting and fishing, (ii) to study and propose to the Parties such measures as it considers suitable for the protection, defence, conservation and use of marine resources, (iii) to encourage scientific
and technical study of and research into biological phenomena in the South Pacific, and (iv) to prepare general statistics of the industrial use of marine resources by the Parties, and to suggest protective measures based on the study thereof.
The Commission collaborates closely with FAO and OLDEPESCA. CPPS, in collaboration with FAO has published a number of Bulletins on Fisheries Statistics of the Southeast Pacific. A monthly Bulletin on Climatic Alert, providing information on El Niño Phenomenon is also published by the Commission.
w1310e23.jpg (122868 byte)
FAO Statistical Area 87
IV.2.9 South Pacific Commission (SPC)
Established by an Agreement signed by Australia, France, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States at Canberra on 6 February 1947, entered into force on 29 July 1948, amended in 1952, 1954, 1964 and supplemented by Protocols of understanding in 1974 and 1976. The Commission activities are not restricted to fisheries and also cover agriculture and plant protection, rural development, education, health information and cultural exchanges.
Area of Competence
The territorial scope of the Commission was defined by the Canberra Agreement as all those territories in the Pacific Ocean which are administered by the participating Governments and which lie wholly or in part south of the Equator and east from and including the Australian Territory of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea, and Guam and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. There is no precise definition of this area by lines of longitude and latitude in the Agreement. During many years the Commission published a map showing its area of competence (Map 24). This area coincides with part of FAO Statistical Areas 71 and 77.
Species Covered
The Commission operates a number of coastal fisheries projects covering all living marine resources and an oceanic programme, which deals exclusively with tunas and billfishes and consists of two projects (statistics, research).
Membership
The membership of the South Pacific Commission is as follows: American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, France, French Polynesia, Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Pitcairn Islands, Solomon Islands, Samoa, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, U.K., U.S.A., Vanuatu, Wallis and Futuna.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objective of the Agreement is to encourage and strengthen international cooperation in promoting the economic and social welfare and advancement of the peoples of the South Pacific region. SPC does not recommend any management measures to its Member Countries but does provide scientific advice on the status of exploited stocks. With regard to high seas fishing, its works includes (i) the collection and analysis of catch statistics and related data, and (ii) scientific research on tuna and billfish.
w1310e24.jpg (58105 byte)
The SPC Area
IV.2.10 Pacific Salmon Commission (PSC)
Established by Treaty Between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of Canada concerning Pacific salmon, signed in Ottawa, Canada on 28 January 1985 and entered into force on 18 March 1985.
Area of Competence
The Treaty applies to "Pacific salmon stocks". There is no precise definition of the area covered by the Treaty although the area covered by the Fraser River Panel for Fraser River sockeye and pink salmon is defined in Annex 23 of the Treaty as follows:
1. The territorial waters and the high seas westward from the western coast of Canada and the United States of America and from a direct line drawn from Bonilla Point, Vancouver Island, to the lighthouse on Tatoosh Island, Washington--which line marks the entrance to Juan de Fuca Strait, --and embraced between 48 and 49 degrees north latitude, excepting therefrom, however, all the waters of Barkley Sound, eastward of a straight line drawn from Amphitrite Point to Cape Beale and all the waters of Nitinat Lake and the entrance thereto.
2. The waters included within the following boundaries:
Beginning at Bonilla Point, Vancouver Island, thence along the aforesaid direct line drawn from Bonilla Point to Tatoosh Lighthouse, Washington, described in paragraph numbered 1 of this Article thence to the nearest point of Cape Flattery, thence following the southerly shore of Juan de Fuca Strait to Point Wilson, on Quimper Peninsula, thence in a straight line to Point Partridge on Whidbey Island thence following the western shore of the said Whidbey Island, to the entrance to Deception Pass, thence across said entrance to the southern side of Reservation Bay, on Fidalgo Island, thence following the western and northern shore line of the said Fidalgo Island to Swinomish Slough, crossing the said Swinomish Slough, in line with the track of the Great Northern Railway, thence northerly following the shore line of the mainland to Atkinson Point at the northerly entrance to Burrard Inlet, British Columbia, thence in a straight line to the southern end of Bowen Island, thence
westerly following the southern shore of Bowen Island to Cape Roger Curtis, thence in a straight line to Gower Point, thence westerly following the shore line to Welcome Point on Sechelt Peninsula, thence in a straight line to Point Young on Lasqueti Island, thence in a straight line to Dorcas Point on Vancouver Island, thence following the eastern and southern shores of the said Vancouver Island, to the starting point at Bonilla Point, as shown on the British Admiralty Chart Number 579, and on the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Chart Number 6300, as corrected to March 14, 1930, copies of which are annexed to the 1930 Convention and made a part thereof.
3. The Fraser River and the streams and lakes tributary thereto.
Species Covered
The Treaty covers all Pacific salmon stocks.
Membership
Membership of PSC is not open to other States. The membership consists of Canada and the United States of America.
Main Objectives and Activities
The main objectives of the Treaty are the conservation and rational management of Pacific salmon stocks and the promotion of optimum production of such stocks and the cooperation in the management, research and enhancement of Pacific salmon stocks. The Commission has established three panels: Southern Panel, Fraser River Panel, and Northern Panel. These Panels provide information and make recommendations to the Commission which the latter reviews and then recommends fishery regimes to the Parties.
<section>5</section>
V. OTHERS
V.1 A BRIEF REVIEW OF MAJOR FISHING IN OTHER AREAS
V.1.1 Southern Oceans (Areas 48, 58 and 88)
An important development in the Southern Oceans has been the reduction in krill harvests. While the catch has been about 300,000 t in recent years, in the 1992/93 season it fell to about 87,000 t because of a reduction in Russian and Ukrainian fishing effort for this species. Surveys indicated an abundance of 30.8 million t of krill in Area 48. A resource issue of particular concern was that "significant" numbers of juvenile icefish, Champsocephalus gunnari , and other species were being taken as by-catch in the krill fishery.
No catches of icefish were reported for 1992/3. The Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), set low quotas for icefish following stock assessments, but the decline in catches has been predominantly due to a couple of large declines in biomass detected by UK trawl surveys. The cause(s) of these major declines is unknown but is believed to be related to the recent poor years for krill. The only reported catches of finfish species in the CCAMLR Convention area during the 1992/3 season were of Patagonian toothfish, Dissostichus eleginoides , of which 5,771 t were taken in subareas 48.3 and 58.5.1 combined. Concern is arising within the Commission regarding the control of this straddling stock in areas that lie immediately outside the CCAMLR Convention Area.
V.2 OTHER BODIES CONCERNED WITH THE CONSERVATION, MANAGEMENT OR OTHER ACTIVITIES RELATED TO THE LIVING RESOURCES
V.2.1 International Whaling Commission (IWC)
Established by the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, signed in Washington D.C. on 2 December 1946 and entered into force on 10 November 1948. The Convention was amended in 1956 and the Schedule to the Convention is amended annually.
Area of Competence
The Convention applies to factory ships, land stations, and whale catchers under the jurisdiction of the Contracting Governments, and to all waters in which whaling is prosecuted by such factory ships, land stations, and whale catchers.
Species Covered
The 1946 Convention refers to the proper conservation of "whale stocks" and does not define the species covered by the term "whale". Contracting Governments are not of one view on such a definition. When formulating the Convention, the 1946 International Whaling Conference adopted a recommendation that a chart of Nomenclature of whales, annexed to the Final Act of the Conference, be accepted as a guide by the governments represented at the Conference. This list included in toto the baleen, sperm and bottlenose whales. Several Contracting Governments are of the view that the Commission is not empowered to recommend management measures for those species of small cetaceans which are not included in the list.
In 1972, a Sub-Committee of the Scientific Committee was set up to improve data collection on all world catches of small cetaceans and to review species and stock identification. At its Twenty-Seventh Session in 1976, the Commission noted the Scientific Committee's view that there was a need for an international body to manage stocks of all cetaceans not covered by the IWC Schedule. In 1990, IWC requested the Scientific Committee to commence a process of drawing together all available relevant information on the present status of the stocks of small cetaceans which are subjected to significant directed and incidental takes, on the impact of those takes on the stocks, and providing an assessment of the present threats to the stocks concerned.
Membership
The membership of the Commission is open to all States who wish to ratify or adhere to the Convention. The present members of the Commission are: Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Chile, People's Republic of China, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominica, Finland, France, Germany, Grenada, India, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, Republic of Korea, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Peru, Russian Federation, Saint Kilts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, USA and Venezuela.
Objectives and Activities
The purpose of the Convention is to provide for the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly development of the whaling industry. The main duty of the Commission is to keep under review and revise as necessary the measures laid down in the Schedule to the Convention which govern the conduct of whaling throughout the world. These measures, among other things, provide for the complete protection of certain species; designate specified areas as whale sanctuaries; set limits on the numbers and size of whales which may be taken; prescribe open and closed seasons and areas of whaling; and prohibit the capture of suckling calves and female whales accompanied by calves. In 1975 a new management policy for whales was adopted by the IWC. This was designed to bring all stocks to the levels providing the greatest long-term harvests, by setting catch limits for individual stocks below their sustainable yields. Because of uncertainties in the scientific
analyses and therefore the precise status of the various whale stocks, the IWC decided at its meeting in 1982 that there should be a pause in commercial whaling on all stocks from 1985/1986. A revised management procedure has been developed subsequently, which the Commission accepted and endorsed in 1994. This balances the somewhat conflicting requirements to ensure that the risk to individual stocks is not seriously increased, while maintaining the highest continuing yield. The regulatory measures adopted by the Commission are subject to an objection procedure.
V.2.2 Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)
Established by the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources drawn up at Canberra on 20 May 1980 and entered into force on 7 April 1982.
Area of Competence
The area of competence of the CCAMLR is the area south of the line joining the following points along parallels of latitude and meridians of longitude:
50^oS, 0^o, 50^oS, 30^oE, 45^oS, 30^oE, 45^oS, 80^oE, 55^oS, 150^oE, 60^oS, 150^oE, 60^oS, 50^oS, 50^oW, 50^oS, 0^o.
This area coincides exactly with FAO statistical areas 48, 58 and 88 (Map 25).
Species Covered
The Convention applies to the Antarctic marine living resources defined by the Convention as: "the populations of finfish, molluscs, crustaceans, and all other species of living organisms, including birds, found south of the Antarctic Convergence".
Membership
The Convention is open for accession by any State interested in research or harvesting activities in relation to the marine living resources to which the Convention applies. In addition, the Convention is also open for accession by regional economic integration organizations constituted by sovereign States which include among their members one or more States Members of the Commission and to which the States members of the organization have transferred, in whole or in part, competence with regard to the matters covered by this Convention. The accession of such regional economic integration organizations is the subject of consultations among Members of the Commission. The membership of the Commission consists of (a) Contracting Parties which participated in the meeting at which the Convention was adopted, (b) each State Party acceded to the Convention becomes a member of the Commission during the period when the acceding Party is engaged in research or harvesting activities in
relation to the marine living resources to which the Convention applies, and (c) each regional economic integration organization which has acceded to the Convention is entitled to become a member of the Commission during such time as its States members are so entitled. The members of the Commission are: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, European Union, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Korea (Republic of), New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, UK and USA. States which have acceded to the Convention but are not Members of the Commission are: Bulgaria, Canada, Finland, Greece, Netherlands, Peru and Uruguay.
Objectives and Activities
The main objective of the Convention is the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources. The main functions of the Commission are (i) to ensure that all harvesting and research activities are conducted in accordance with the objectives of the Convention, (ii) to formulate, adopt and revise conservation measures, (iii) to compile, analyze and disseminate information on the status of resources, and (iv) to facilitate research activities. The Commission has regulatory powers and its regulatory measures are subject to an objection procedure. The Commission has a scientific Committee which itself is advised by specialist working groups. The Commission also has a Standing Committee on Observation and Inspection whose primary functions are to report on inspections of fishing vessels and to ensure compliance with conservation measures in force.
w1310e25.jpg (136730 byte)
Area of competence of CCAMLR. The dotted lines indicated the limits of
FAO Statistical Areas 58, 48 and 88
V.2.3 Latin American Organization for Fishery Development (OLDEPESCA)
Established by the Constitutional Agreement of the Latin American Organization for Fishery Development, signed in Mexico City on 29 October 1982 and entered into force on 2 November 1984. The Agreement was amended twice in 1984.
Area of Competence
The Constitutional Agreement which established OLDEPESCA does not define the area of competence of the Organization by lines of longitude and latitude. It should be noted, however, that the preamble to the Convention refers to the need to encourage the correct use and protection of fishery resources within the maritime jurisdiction zones of each State.
Species Covered
The Agreement covers all living marine resources.
Membership
The Membership of the Organization is open only to those States belonging to the Latin American Economic System. The present members of the Organization are: Bolivia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru and Venezuela.
Objectives and Activities
The main objective of the Agreement is to provide adequately for the food needs of Latin America and Caribbean, using the potential of fishery resources for the benefit of the people in the region. The Organization consists of the Conference of Ministers, the Governing Council and the Executive Director. The Conference of Ministers is the supreme authority specifying the direction and policy of OLDEPESCA through its Declarations and Resolutions. These policies are generally prepared by the Governing Council in relation to the objectives of the Organization. OLDEPESCA is actively involved in areas of research in fisheries resources, exploitation of fisheries resources, aquaculture, fisheries technology, fisheries trade, training, and environmental protection. In 1990 the Conference of Ministers of OLDEPESCA adopted a Resolution approving an International Programme for the reduction of capture and incidental mortality of marine species in commercial fishing operations.
V.2.4 Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna (CCSBT)
Established by the Convention for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna signed by Australia, Japan and New Zealand in Canberra on 10 May 1993 and entered into force on 20 May 1994.
Area of Competence
The Convention does not mention any specific geographical area or areas to be covered by its provisions. Southern bluefin tuna ( Thunnus maccoyii ) constitute a stock fished in the Indian Ocean, the Southern Atlantic and the South Pacific. The species spawns south off Java, Indonesia, from where juveniles migrate east through the southern part of the Australian Fishing Zone towards New Zealand. Some other juveniles from the same spawning ground migrate west through the Indian Ocean towards South Africa. It is therefore assumed that the Commission is responsible for the whole area mentioned above.
Species Covered
Species covered by the Convention is Southern Bluefin Tuna. The Commission is also responsible for collecting information on "ecologically related species" defined in the Convention as living marine species which are associated with southern bluefin tuna, including but not restricted to both predators and prey of southern bluefin tuna.
Membership
The Convention is open for accession to (a) any State whose vessels engage in fishing for southern bluefin tuna and (b) any coastal State through whose exclusive economic or fishery zone southern bluefin tuna migrates. The present members of CCSBT are Australia, Japan and New Zealand.
Objectives and Activities
The objective of the Convention is to ensure, through appropriate management, the conservation and optimum utilization of southern bluefin tuna. The functions of the Commission include: (i) collecting, analysing and interpreting scientific and other relevant information on SBT, and (ii) to adopt conservation and management measures including the total allowable catch and its allocation among the Members. Other additional measures may also be adopted by the CCSBT. The decisions of the Commission are taken by unanimous vote.
It must be noted that the exploitation of SBT began with an Australian surface fishery and a Japanese longline fishery in the early 1950s, while New Zealand started handline fishing in the early 1980s. The catch of SBT increased rapidly to a peak of 82 thousand metric tonnes (MT) in 1961. Since then, it has gradually decreased to 45 thousand MT in 1980 and 14 thousand MT in 1990. Since 1982 a scientific meeting and a subsequent management meeting have been held annually by the three countries. Total allowable catch and its allocation had been set by these meetings since 1985. In order to assist the scientific assessment, Australia, Japan and New Zealand cooperate in a Real Time Monitoring Programme which collects information in important areas on catch rates and size composition of SBT.
V.2.5 Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics (CWP)
Established by Resolution 23/59 of the FAO Conference under Article VI-2 of the Organization's Constitution at its Tenth Session in 1959. It was called "Continuing Working Party on Fishery Statistics in the North Atlantic Area". The establishment of this Working Party was the outcome of the recommendations of an Expert Meeting on Fishery Statistics in the North Atlantic Area held in Edinburgh in September 1959. The Statutes of CWP were amended and approved by the FAO Council at its Hundred and Eighth Session in June 1995.
Area of Competence
Although the area of competence of the Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics has been the Atlantic Ocean since 1995 its area of competence has no geographical limitations. It covers the requirements for fishery statistics of all fisheries including aquaculture.
Species Covered
All species are covered by CWP.
Membership
The Working Party is composed of experts nominated by intergovernmental organizations which have competence in fishery statistics. The following are the participating organizations initially:
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT)
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES)
North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization (NASCO)
Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO)
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
Statistical Office of the European Communities (EU/Eurostat)
Participating organizations may admit other intergovernmental organizations having competence in fishery statistics. Participating organizations may withdraw from the Working Party. In 1995, International Whaling Commission (IWC) made a formal request to become a participating organization in CWP.
Objectives and Activities
The objectives of the CWP are to: (a) keep under continuous review the requirements for fishery statistics (including aquaculture) for the purposes of research, policy-making and management, taking into account inter alia their purpose, usefulness, cost, burden in collection and collation, timeliness, quality, confidentiality needs and regional differences; (b) agree standard concepts, definitions, classifications and methodologies for the collection and collation of fishery statistics; and (c) make proposals and recommendations for action in relation to the collection, collation and dissemination of fishery statistics, recognizing the need to coordinate activities so as to avoid duplication.
The CWP supported by the participating organizations has served since 1960 as the premier international and inter-organization forum for agreeing common definitions, classifications and standards for the collection of fishery statistics. It has developed common procedures for statistics collation which have streamlined the collation process and reduced the burden on national fisheries statistical offices. It has provided technical advice on fishery statistical matters to participating organizations and has facilitated the publication of methodological and reference documents. In the process it has shaped the statistical programmes of all participating organizations to some extent, and those of FAO in particular, while leaving organizations with complete autonomy in their area of responsibility.
The new statutes for the CWP were designed to provide a sound basis for the Working Party to meet the challenges resulting from the enhanced role of regional fishery organizations in relation to statistics following the UN Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and to facilitate the participation of other agencies with a remit for fisheries statistics outside the Atlantic
<section>6</section>
ANNEX I
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FISHERY BODIES
Atlantic Ocean and Adjacent Seas
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
CARPAS
Regional Fisheries
Advisory Commission for the Southwest Atlantic
Resolution of FAO Conference (under Article VI-1 of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay Southwest Atlantic and inland waters of member countries To develop organized approach among members for the management and regional exploitation of marine and inland fishery resources; to encourage training and cooperative investigations
CECAF
Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-2 of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Benin, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, EC, Equatorial Guinea, France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Italy, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Liberia, Mauritania, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Romania, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Spain, Togo, USA, Zaire. Eastern Central Atlantic between Cape Spartel and the Congo River To promote programmes of development for the rational utilization of fishery resources; to assist in establishing basis for regulatory measures; to encourage training.
COREP
Comité régional des pêches du Golfe de Guinée
International Convention
Libreville, Gabon Congo, Gabon, Sao Tomé et Principe, Zaire. Central and southern Gulf of Guinea Coordination, harmonization of policies on development and exploitation of shared stocks found within EEZ of Member States.
CSRP
Commission Sous-régionale des pêches
International Convention
Dakar, Senegal Cape Verde, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea- Bissau, Mauritania, Senegal. N.W. Africa (Mauritania to Guinea including Cape Verde) To facilitate harmonization of policies concerning the preservation, conservation and exploitation of fisheries resources, cooperation among the countries with a view to deriving maximum benefit from the resources for their populations.
Cont'd
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FISHERY BODIES
Atlantic Ocean and Adjacent Seas
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
CTMFM
Joint Technical Commission for the Argentina/Uruguay Maritime Front
International Agreement
Montevideo (Uruguay) Argentina, Uruguay South Atlantic To adopt and coordinate plans and measures relevant to conservation, preservation and the rational exploitation of living resources and the protection of the maritime environment in the common fishing zone.
GFCM
General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean
International Agreement under aegis of FAO (Article XIV of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Albania, Algeria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, Libya, Malta, Monaco, Morocco, Romania, Spain, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey. Mediterranean, Black Sea and connecting waters To promote the development, conservation and management of living marine resources; to formulate and recommend conservation measures; to encourage training cooperative projects
IBSFC
International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission
International Convention
Warsaw (Poland) Estonia, EC, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania Poland, Russian Federation, Sweden Baltic Sea and the Belts To keep the fisheries under review; to coordinate scientific research; to recommend regulatory measures including catch quotas and enforcement schemes
ICCAT
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
International Convention
Madrid (Spain) Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Canada, Côte d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea (Rep. of), France, Gabon, Ghana, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Libya, Morocco, Portugal, Russian Federation, Sao Tome and Principe, South Africa, Spain, UK, USA, Uruguay, Venezuela Atlantic Ocean including the adjacent seas To study the population of tuna and tuna-like fishes; to make recommendations designed to maintain these populations at levels permitting maximum sustainable catch.
Cont'd
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FISHERY BODIES
Atlantic Ocean and Adjacent Seas
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
ICES
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea
International Convention
Copenhagen (Denmark) Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Latvia, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation, Spain, Sweden, UK, USA Atlantic Ocean and adjacent seas with particular reference to the North Atlantic To promote and encourage research and investigation on the seas, particularly those related to the living resources thereof; to draw up programmes required for this purpose; to publish or otherwise disseminate the result of research and investigation.
ICSEAF
International Commission for the Southeast Atlantic Fisheries
International Convention
Madrid (Spain) Angola, Bulgaria, Cuba, France, Germany, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain Southeast Atlantic south of the Congo River and north of parallel 50ºS To carry out studies and research; to make recommendations for joint action through closed areas and seasons, size limitations, gear control, total catch limit and other measures.
NAFO
Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization
International Convention
Dartmouth, Nova Scotia (Canada) Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba, Denmark, (for Faroe Islands and Greenland), EC, Estonia, Iceland, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, USA. Northwest Atlantic Ocean To contribute to the optimum utilization and rational management and conservation of the fishery resources.
Cont'd
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FISHERY BODIES
Atlantic Ocean and Adjacent Seas
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
NAMMCO
North Atlantic Marine Mammal Commission
International Convention
Tromso, Norway Faroe Islands, Greenland, Iceland, Norway North Atlantic To provide a forum for the study, analysis and exchange of information among the Parties on matters concerning marine mammals in the North Atlantic; to establish appropriate Management Committees and coordinate their activities; to establish guidelines and objectives for the work of the Management Committees; to establish working arrangements with the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea and other appropriate organizations; and to coordinate requests for scientific advice.
NASCO
North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization
International Convention
Edinburgh (UK) Canada, Denmark (for Faroe Islands and Greenland), EC, Iceland, Norway, Russian Federation, USA Atlantic Ocean north of 36ºN latitude To promote the acquisition analysis and dissemination of scientific information pertaining to salmon stocks in the North Atlantic Ocean; to promote the conservation, restoration, enhancement and rational management of salmon stocks in the North Atlantic Ocean through international cooperation.
NEAFC
North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission
International Convention
London (UK) Bulgaria, Denmark (for Faroe Islands and Greenland), EC, Iceland, Norway, Poland, Russian Federation. Northeast Atlantic Ocean To provide a forum for consultation and exchange of information on the state of fisheries resources in the Northeast Atlantic, and on related management policies to ensure the conservation and optimum utilization of such resources; and to recommend conservation measures in waters outside national jurisdiction.
WECAFC
Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-1 of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, France, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Panama, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Spain, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, USA, Venezuela. Western Central Atlantic Ocean To facilitate the coordination of research; to encourage education and training; to assist Member Governments in establishing rational policies, to promote the rational management of resources that are of interest for two or more countries.
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FISHERY BODIES
Pacific Ocean
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
I-ATTC
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
International Convention
La Jolla, California (USA) Costa Rica, France, Japan, Nicaragua, Panama, USA, Vanuatu, Venezuela Eastern Pacific Ocean To gather and interpret information on tuna; to conduct scientific investigation; to recommend proposals for joint action for conservation.
IPHC
International Pacific Halibut Commission
International Convention
Seattle, Washington (USA) Canada, USA North Pacific Ocean and Bering Sea To coordinate scientific studies relating to the halibut fishery; to formulate regulations designed to develop the stocks of halibut to those levels which will permit optimum yield.
NPAFC
North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission
International Convention
Vancouver, Canada Canada, Japan, Russian Federation, USA North Pacific Ocean and its adjacent seas north of 33ºN To recommend to the Parties measures for the Conservation of Anadromous Stocks and ecologically related species in the Convention area; to promote the exchange of information on any activities contrary to the provisions of the Convention; to consider and make proposals to the Parties for the enactment of schedules of equivalent penalties for activities contrary to the provisions of the Convention; and to review and evaluate enforcement actions taken by the Parties.
PICES
North Pacific Marine Science Organization
1992 Sydney, B.C., Canada Canada, Japon, China (People's Rep. of), Korea (Rep. of), Russian Federation, USA North Pacific and adjacent Seas To promote and coordinate marine scientific research in order to advance scientific knowlodge of the area concerned and of its living resources and to promote the collection and echange of information and data related to marine scientific research in its area of competence.
PSC
Pacific Salmon Commission
International Convention
Vancouver, British Columbia (Canada) Canada, USA Northwest Pacific To prevent overfishing and provide for optimum production and to provide for each country to receive benefits equivalent to the production of salmon originating in its waters.
Cont'd
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FISHERY BODIES
Pacific Ocean
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
SPFFA
South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency
International
Honiara (Solomon Islands) Australia, Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Western Samoa. South Pacific (Central and West) To harmonize fishery management policies; to facilitate cooperation in surveillance and enforcement, processing, marketing and relations with third countries; to arrange for reciprocal access by member countries to their respective 200-mile zones.
SPPC (CPPS)
South Pacific Permanent Commission
International Convention
Santiago, Chile Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru. South Pacific (East) To carry out studies and adopt resolutions with a view to the conservation and improved use of resources; to standardize the regulations governing fishing.
SPC
South Pacific Commission
1948 Noumea, New Caledonia American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, France, French Polynesia, Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Nive, Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Pitcarin Islands, Salomon Islands, Samoa, Tokclau, Tonga, Tuvalu, UK, USA, Vanuatu, Wallis and Futuna South Pacific South of the Equator. To encourage and strengthen international cooperation in promoting the economic and social welfare and advancement of the peoples of the South Pacific region, to collect and analyse catch statistics and related data, and to conduct scientific research on tuna and billfish.
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FISHERY BODIES
Indian Ocean and Indo-Pacific Area
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
APFIC
Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission
International Agreement under aegis of FAO (Article XIV of FAO Consitution)
Bangkok (Thailand) Australia, Bangladesh, China (People's Republic of), Democratic Kampuchea, France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea (Rep. of), Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, UK, USA, Viet Nam. Indo-Pacific area (including inland waters) To keep fishery resources under review; to formulate and recommend conservation and management measures; to keep under review the economic and social aspects of fishing; to encourage training and research.
IOFC
Indian Ocean Fishery Commission
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-1 of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Greece, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Rep. of), Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Korea (Rep. of) Kuwait, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, Myanmar, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia (Kingdom of), Seychelles, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Tanzania, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, UK, USA, Viet Nam. Indian Ocean and adjacent seas (excluding the Antarctic area) To promote programmes for fishery development and conservation; to promote research and development activities; to examine management problems with particular reference to offshore resources.
IOTC
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
International Agreement under aegis of FAO (Article XIV of FAO Constitution)
To be determined Sri Lanka, Eritrea, Mauritus, India, UK, Pakistan, Seychelles, EC, Madagascar, Republic of Korea. Indian Ocean and adjacent seas north of the Antarctic Convergence To promote cooperation in the conservation of tuna and tuna like species and also promote their optimum utilization, and the sustainable development of the fisheries.
WIOTO
Western Indian Ocean Tuna Organization
International Convention
Mahé, Seychelles Seychelles, Mauritius, Comoros, India Western Indian Ocean To harmonize policies wiht respect to fisheries; to determine relations with distant water fishing nations; to establish mechanism for fisheires surveillance and enforcement; to cooperate for fisheries development; and to coordinate access to EEZs of the members.
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FISHERY BODIES
Others
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
CCAMLR
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
International Convention
Hobart (Australia) Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Chile, EU, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Korea (Rep.of), New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Ukraine, UK, USA. Antarctic Ocean To ensure that all harvesting and research activities are conducted in accordance with the objectives of the Convention; to formulate, adopt and revise conservation measures; to compile, analyze and disseminate information on the status of resources and to facilitate research activities.
OLDEPESCA
Latin American Organization for the Development of Fisheries
International Convention
Lima (Peru) Bolivia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Venezuela. Oceans bordering Latin America To provide adequately for the food needs of Latin America and Caribbean, using the potential of fishery resources for the benefit of the people in the region.
IWC
International Whaling Commission
International Convention
Cambridge (UK) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominica, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, Korea (Rep. of), Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Peru, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Seychelles, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, USA, Venezuela All waters in which whaling is carried out and land stations To encourage or organize studies relating to whales; to collect and analyze information; to adopt regulations with respect to the conservation and utilization of whale resources.
CCSBT
Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna
International Convention
Canberra, Australia Australia, Japon, New Zealand Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans where SBT are found To collect, analyse, and interpret scientific and other relevant information on SBT, to adopt conservation and managment measures including the total allowable catch and its alloction among the Members.
CWP
Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics
Resolution of FAO Conference (under Article VI-2 of FAO Constitution)
Rome, Italy Consists of International Organizations: CCAMLR, FAO, ICCAT, ICES, NASCO, NAFO, OECD, EC (EUROSTAT) All oceans To keep under continuous review the requirements for fishery statistics for the purposes of research, policy-making and managment, aqua standard concepts, definitions, classifications and methodologies for the collection and collation of fishery statistics.
<section>7</section>
ANNEX II
Address, Telephone and Fax Numbers of the Organizations
ICES
Palaegade 2-4,
DK-1261 Copenhagen K,
Denmark
Tel: (33) 154225
Fax: (33) 934215
NEAFC
425 Noble House
17 Smith Square
London SW1P 3JR,
United Kingdom
Tel: (0171) 238 5923
Fax: (0171) 238 5721
NAFO
P.O. Box 638,
Dartmouth,
Nova Scotia,
B2Y 3Y9,
Canada
Tel: (902) 469 9105
Fax: (902) 469 5729
NASCO
11 Rutland Square,
Edinburgh EH1 2AS,
Scotland
United Kingdom
Tel: (0131) 228 2551
Fax: (0131) 228 4384
IBSFC
Hoza 20,
00-528 Warszawa,
Poland
Tel: (2) 628 8647
Fax: (2) 625 3372
GFCM
FAO
Room NF411
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome,
Italy
Tel: (6) 5225 6435
Fax: (6) 5225 6500
CECAF
P.O. Box 1628
Accra,
Ghana
Tel: 666 851-4
Fax: 00233-21 668 427; 233999
CSRP
Km.11, Route de Rufisque
B.P. 20505
Dakar,
Senegal
Tel: 345580
CORÉP
B.P. 161
Libreville,
Gabon
Tel: 73 7149
Fax:
Telex: 5265 GO
WECAFC
FAO
Room NF-408
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome,
Italy
Tel: (6) 5225 5802
Fax: (6) 5225 6500
CARPAS
Not operational
Adva. Santa Maria 6700/or
Casilla 10095,
Santiago,
Chile
Tel: 22 88056
Fax: (562) 484 312
CTMFM
JUNCAL 1355,
P.6 ESC. 604,
11000 Montevideo,
Uruguay
Tel: 962047
Fax: (5982) 961578
ICCAT
Principe de Vergara, 17-7^o,
28001 Madrid,
Spain
Tel: 431 0329
Fax: (34) 1 576 1968
ICSEAF
Not applicable
NAMMCO
University of Tromso,
9037 Tromso,
Norway
Tel: (77) 645 908
Fax: (77) 645 905
IOFC
FAO
Room NF-412
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome,
Italy
Tel: (6) 5225 3637
Fax: (6) 5225 6500
IOTC
Until a Headquarters is chosen:
FAO
Room NF-412
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome,
Italy
Tel: (6) 5225 3637
Fax: (6) 5225 6500
WIOTO
Not yet operational, temporary address:
Seychelles Fishing Authority
P.O. Box 449,
Fishing Port,
Mahé,
Seychelles
Tel: 224 597
Fax: 224 508
APFIC
Maliwan Mansion
Phra Atit Road,
Bangkok,
Thailand
Tel: 281 7844
Fax: 280 0445
PICES
Institute of Ocean Sciences,
P.O. Box 6000,
Sidney, B.C.,
Canada V8L 4B2
Tel: (604) 363 6366
Fax: (604) 363 6827
NPAFC
6640 Northwest Marine Drive
Vancouver, B.C., V6T 1X2,
Canada
Tel: (604) 228 1128
Fax: (604) 228 1135
I-ATTC
Scripps Institution of Oceanography
8604 La Jolla Shores Drive
La Jolla,
CA 92037,
U.S.A.
Tel: (619) 546 7100
Fax: (619) 546 7133
CEPTFA
Not applicable
IPHC
P.O. Box 95009
Seattle,
Washington 98145-2009,
U.S.A.
Tel:
Fax:
OAPO
Not applicable
SPFFA
P.O. Box 629,
Honiara,
Solomon Islands
Tel: (6777) 21124
Fax: (677) 23995
CPPS
Casilla 16638,
Agencia 6400-9,
Santiago 9,
Chile
Tel: 726652
Fax: 6951100
PSC
1155 Robson Street,
Sixth Floor,
Vancouver,
British Columbia V6E 189,
Canada
Tel:
Fax:
SPC
P.O. Box D5,
98848 Nouméa Cedex,
New Caledonia
Tel: (687) 262000
Fax: (687) 263818
IWC
The Red House
Station Road Histon,
Cambridge CB$ 4NP,
U.K.
Tel: (01223) 233 971
Fax: (01223) 232 876
CCAMLR
25 Old Wharf
Hobart,
Tasmania,
Australia 7000
Tel: (002) 310 366
Fax: (002) 232714
OLDEPESCA
Calle las Palomas No. 422,
Urbanización Limatambo,
Lima 34, Apartado 10168,
Lima,
Peru
Tel: 413858
Fax: 51-1442 9925
*CCSBT
GPO Box 856
Canberra ACT 2601
Australia
Tel: (06) 2716396
Fax: (06) 272 4215
CWP
FAO
Room NF-217
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome,
Italy
Tel: (6) 5225 4828
Fax: (6) 5225 3605
*The Secretariat has not been established yet. This is a temporary address.
<section>8</section>
ANNEX III
List of Abbreviations
APEC Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
APFIC Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CARPAS Regional Fisheries Advisory Commission for the Southwest Atlantic
CCAMLR Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Resources
CCSBT Commission for the Conservation of Southern Bluefin Tuna
CECAF Fishery Commission for the Eastern Central Atlantic
CEPTFA Council of the Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Agreement
CORÉP Regional Fisheries Committee for the Gulf of Guinea (Comité régional des pêches du Golfe de Guinée)
CPPS South Pacific Permanent Commission
CSRP Sub-Regional Commission on Fisheries (Commission sous-régionale des pêches)
CTMFM Joint Technical Commission for the Argentina/Uruguay Maritime Front
CWP Coordinating Working Party on Fishery Statistics
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FFA South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency
GFCM General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean
I-ATTC Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
IBSFC International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission
ICCAT International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
ICES International Council for the Exploration of the Sea
ICSEAF International Commission for the Southeast Atlantic Fisheries
INFOFISH Marketing Information and Advisory Services for Fish Products in the Asia/Pacific Region
IOFC Indian Ocean Fishery Commission
IOTC Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
IPHC International Pacific Halibut Commission
IWC International Whaling Commission
NAFO Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization
NAMMCO North Atlantic Marine Mammal Commission
NASCO North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization
NEAFC North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission
NPAFC North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission
OAPO Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Organization
OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
OECS Organization of Eastern Caribbean States
OLDEPESCA Latin American Organization for the Development of Fisheries
PICES North Pacific Marine Science Organization
PSC Pacific Salmon Commission
SEAFDEC Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center
SPC South Pacific Commission
UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNCLOS United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
WECAFC Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission
WIOTO Western Indian Ocean Tuna Organization
