<title>Unasylva - No. 187 - Forest conservation and utilization</title>
<section>1</section>
Guidelines for authors
Editorial focus and readership
Unasylva, an international journal of forestry and forest industries, is produced quarterly in English, French and Spanish. Unasylva contains articles on all aspects of forestry: policy and planning; conservation and management of forest-based plants and animals; rural socio-economic development; species improvement; industrial development; international trade; and environmental impact, including the role of forests and trees in maintaining a sustainable base for agricultural production at micro and macro levels as well as the effects of environmental change on forestry.
Unasylva publishes articles specifically prepared for the journal, as opposed to technical papers. However, papers may be submitted for consideration, with the understanding that they will be edited to bring them into line with the overall style of the journal.
Original articles are preferred but the journal occasionally accepts articles judged to be of particular value that have been previously published with very limited distribution and with a limited readership overlap with Unasylva.
The readers of Unasylva represent five broad categories and articles should be of interest to as broad a cross-section of this readership as possible:
· government officials, in particular those of national forest services, and the administrative structures responsible for overall agricultural and rural development. This category also includes delegates attached to the United Nations and its specialized agencies as well as staff of governmental organizations dealing with forestry;
· non-governmental organizations dealing with forestry at local, national and international levels;
· forestry schools and institutes, their libraries and staff members;
· industrial forestry operations, both government and private;
· individual professional foresters, especially those concerned with international forestry.
Unasylva accepts unsolicited manuscripts; however, authors are encouraged to submit proposals for articles rather than finished manuscripts. This usually results in articles that are more in accordance with the editorial plans of the journal while increasing efficiency in terms of writing and editing time.
Manuscript preparation and style
Manuscripts may be submitted in English. French or Spanish. Articles should be typewritten double-spaced on A4 paper (21 x 30 cm). Articles should be between 2000 and 4000 words long; however, shorter or longer articles may be considered on occasion. If possible, the text should be submitted on a floppy computer disk. Name the word processing program used.
The first page of the article should be a title page, giving the full name, position and contact address (including telephone and fax if available) of the author(s). A brief abstract or summary of the article should also be provided. Subsequent pages should be numbered sequentially.
Articles should be written in plain, concise language and in a style that will make them accessible and interesting to forestry professionals in general, and not only to those with a vested interest in the topic being considered. Jargon should be avoided and technical terms that may be unfamiliar to readers should be defined the first time they appear. Footnotes should be avoided as far as possible.
Editing
In editing manuscripts, Unasylva will attempt to maintain the style and point of view of the author(s). Wherever possible, the author(s) will be consulted with respect to major changes. However, Unasylva reserves the right to edit all copy as deemed appropriate.
Measurement and numerals
All measurements should be given in the metric system. When monetary data are included in the article, a conversion to US dollars should be provided, using the current rate at the time the article is submitted.
Abbreviations and scientific names
Abbreviations and acronyms should be defined the first time they are used; for example, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). Scientific names and words in languages other than that of the text should be in italics (or underlined if italics are not available).
Bibliographies
Articles should be accompanied by appropriate references. The style of Unasylva's bibliographies is as follows:
i) Last name of author, initials, last name of second author, initials, etc. Date. Book title. Place of publication, publisher.
ii) Last name of author, initials. Date. Article title (in roman). Journal title (in italics), volume, issue number, page numbers.
Note: The term et al. is used for references in the text where there are four or more authors to be listed. It is never to be used in the bibliography where, instead, all authors must be named.
Illustrative material
Unasylva encourages authors to provide supporting illustrative material with manuscripts. Figures, graphs and drawings should each be on a separate page and the point of reference in the text should be identified. Figures are to be preferred to tables.
Unasylva reproduces photographs in black and white; however, originals may be submitted as black-and-white prints or negatives, or colour prints, negatives or slides (transparencies). Original material will be resumed on request.
<section>2</section>
Editorial - Forest conservation and utilization
A world without forests is unthinkable. Forests provide a wide range of benefits at the local, national and global levels. Some of these benefits depend on the forest being left untouched or subject to minimal interference. Others can only be realized by harvesting the forest for wood and other products. It is simplistic and counterproductive to portray the complex issue of forestry as a struggle between the "good" forces of conservation and the "evil" of utilization. Absolute protectionism that denies access to resources and leaves these resources unattended is as constraining to sustainable development as is "mining" utilization which does not allow the resource to regenerate.
This means that the question of conservation and utilization of forest resources must be debated. The balance between the two is at the very essence of the work of all who are concerned with management of natural resources for sustainable development. However. the essential discussion must not focus on the extremes; rather. it must be concentrated on how needs for conservation and utilization can be combined harmoniously to derive the maximum benefits for present and future generations.
It is noteworthy that the public debate has evolved significantly on this question. The major forces of forest utilization have all recognized the need to incorporate conservation considerations in their efforts. And, almost without exception, even the most "green" of the environmental advocacy groups now recognize the need to incorporate and encourage some degree of utilization in conservation programmes aimed at preserving the forest. The question is now "whether we need to conserve the forests and, to do that, what degree of utilization do we need to embrace", or "whether we need to utilize the forests and. to do this in a sustainable manner, what degree of conservation must we ensure" arguably two sides of the same coin.
The articles in this issue of Unasylva consider a number of aspects of the question. The lead article, by C. Elliott, Senior Forestry Advisor for the World Wide Fund for Nature, explores how paradigms of forest conservation have evolved over time, mainly drawing on examples from European and American history. The following article, by G. Wohlfahrt of the Swedish Forest Industries Association, explores recent trends in the evolution of the Swedish forest industry, with an accent on the harmonization of conservation and production goals. These two articles are a good example of the trend towards convergent views.
One of the key issues in the conservation/utilization debate is how to minimize negative environmental impacts of industrial forest utilization, particularly in the fragile conditions that predominate in tropical moist forests. J.J. Gerwing, J.S. Johns and E. Vidal explore the potential for reduction of waste in logging and processing in industrial forestry operations in eastern Amazonia, and consider the possible implications for forest conservation. A related short article describes the new FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice.
The actual and potential contribution of non-timber forest products to sustainable socio-economic development is being increasingly recognized. This, in turn, is leading to rapid growth in utilization and commercialization of these products. However, associated risks of overutilization, damage to the resource base and changes in the distribution of benefits are raising important questions. D.D. Tewari and J.Y. Campbell consider the implications of increased development of non-timber forest products in India.
Another type of forest utilization that is attracting increasing attention is ecotourism. J.G. Colvin considers an ecotourism programme in Ecuador that is independently operated and controlled by an indigenous community, the Quichua Indians.
Underlying the various ecological and economic justifications for forest conservation and utilization as part of overall sustainable development is a fundamental philosophical or moral question: what do we owe future generations? Or, as expressed by the United States comedian Groucho Marx, "What do I care about posterity? What has posterity ever done for me?" Completing the articles related to the main theme of this issue. T. Hurka provides a thought-provoking philosophical analysis of the implications of the concept of sustainable development, especially as proposed in the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development.
At a time when the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Forests will be approaching the conclusion of its work and readying its presentation to the Commission on Sustainable Development, this issue provides different elements in and perspectives on the fundamental aspects of forest conservation and utilization. with human welfare as the ultimate goal.
This issue of Unasylva launches a new section in the journal: FAO forestry. Complementing our 50-year commitment to presenting an impartial, analytical picture of the issues facing world forestry development, this section will provide "snapshots" of specific FAO forestry-related activities, both at headquarters and in the field. It joins the World of forestry and Books sections which already form part of the journal. As always, Unasylva solicits the feedback of its readership on this new section as well as on the journal overall.
<section>3</section>
Paradigms of forest conservation
C. Elliott
Christopher Elliott is the Senior Forest Advisor for the World Wide Fund for Nature International in Gland, Switzerland. He is currently working on a Ph.D. dissertation in forest policy at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich.
This article explores how paradigms of forest conservation have evolved over time, mainly drawing on examples from European and American history It also reviews and compares today's dominant paradigms.
In the mid-1990s, unregulated exploitation of forests is still occurring in some regions around the world, despite the fact that almost all countries have forest policies with the stated objectives of conserving their forests. However, even if almost all policy-makers agree that unregulated exploitation should be stopped, conservation (sometimes referred to as "conservation and management") means different things to different people. The interpretation of the term and the implementation of forest conservation policies have led to numerous controversies.
Forests have always had a complex role in national and local economies because they provide a wide range of goods and services, and some uses inevitably conflict with others. Some historians have actually seen the origin of the concept of "conservation" in these conflicts over forest uses. As Glacken (1965) notes:
"The practice of transhumance often meant clearance of forest lands to increase mountain pastures at the expense of trees.... Another explanation for the growth of the conservation idea is thus to be sought in conflicts of interest with regard to [forest] use... in the [Western] writings from the seventeenth to the nineteenth century... [where] nature was conceived as a usufruct and man as the highest being in the creation had responsibilities as well as privileges in using it."
This vision of the human role as a steward of nature is closely related to modern dictionary definitions of conservation, for example "The planning and management of resources so as to secure their wide use and continuity of supply while maintaining and possibly enhancing their quality, value and diversity" (Allanby, 1993). It should be noted that this definition is not the same as "preservation" (which normally refers to the protection of a particular site from human activities such as logging and mining), although the terms are often used interchangeably in the mass media. In this article, preservation is viewed as one of several forms of conservation.
There have always been two distinct approaches to conservation. One, which could be characterized as "elitist", has its origins in the imperial hunting parks of Assyria and China. The other, which could be characterized as "populist", originated in the multiple arrangements the local communities have developed over time for the management of forests as common property resources. In the following sections, some of the different forms that forest conservation has taken through the ages are explored.
The history of forest conservation
Forest utilization at the national level generally goes through three stages: unregulated or at least uncontrolled exploitation, protective custody and conservation or stewardship. The custodial stage involves placing the forest under professional management, reducing or halting deforestation and initiating the forest's recovery after overexploitation. The conservation (or stewardship) stage is reached once the benefits of the custodial stage have been realized and the forest resources can be managed sustainably. Like all models, this one oversimplifies the situation, but it does provide a useful reference point.
Ancient paradigms of forest conservation (before AD 1200)
Humanity's complex and often conflicting relationships to forests have been recorded since writing was first invented. The earliest literary work known, the Epic of Gilgamesh, describes the adventures of a Sumerian king of the city of Uruk, who lived in about 2700 BC. He is referred to as the "builder of the walls of Uruk" and he made a "forest journey" outside the walls to the Cedar Mountain to slay the forest's guardian, Huwawa. The epic has been interpreted at a practical level as an account of a search for timber, which was a precious commodity for the Sumerians because, even at that time, the spread of agriculture in Mesopotamia had resulted in forest depletion or, alternatively, as an account of the destruction of the cedar forests of Lebanon. At a psychological level it has been seen as a description of an attempt of humankind to control nature.
The first clear records of forest conservation measures that have been found are those of Assyria in 700 BC where game reserves were set aside by decree for royal hunts (Dixon and Sherman, 1991). Forests in China were valued for more than just hunting: in about 300 BC the Chinese philosopher Mencius wrote of his concern about the deforestation of Bull Mountain owing to timber harvesting and overgrazing and its impact on stream flows (Waley, 1939).
The Greek philosopher Plato, writing in the fourth century BC, noted that with the removal of the trees in Attica "there has been a constant movement of soil away from the high ground and what remains is like the skeleton of a body wasted by disease" (quoted in Thirgood, 1981).
Medieval cosmology and forest conservation (about 1200 to 1500)
In medieval Europe forests were cleared on an increasing scale for agriculture and to provide fuel for the iron industry. At the same time, however, in Europe and elsewhere there were well-established traditions of forest management and parks for forest protection:
"Wooded commons... belonged to a landowner, usually the lord of the manor; but the right to use them belonged to commoners who were the occupiers of particular properties. Usually the grazing belonged to the commoners and the soil (including mineral rights) to the lord. The trees might belong to either: often timber belonged to the lord, and wood... to commoners (not necessarily the same persons as those that had the grazing). By the Middle Ages such rights already dated from time immemorial. They were administered, and could be revised, by the manorial courts, which were composed mainly of the commoners themselves and were seldom unduly favourable to the lord's interests" (Rackham, 1986).
The "scientific revolution" (about 1500 to 1700)
In 1543, Copernicus published On the revolutions of the Celestial Spheres which challenged one of the fundamental tenets of medieval cosmology - that the sun and planets revolved around the earth. This started a process which has come to be known as the "scientific revolution" which was to last for about two centuries. During this period, nature was viewed as a machine which operated according to universal laws.
The scientific revolution thus set the stage for a quite different attitude to forests from those that had prevailed in either ancient or medieval times. Forests, like any other part of nature, could be studied and analysed in terms of certain natural laws, and humans would be able to manage them accordingly for their benefit. By implication, this management would conserve forests for the future. because humankind understood, or would understand, how the "forest machine" worked. A leading advocate of this approach was John Evelyn, a member of the Royal Society; his Sylva, or a discourse of forest-trees, and the propagation of timber, published in 1664, is perhaps the best-known forestry treatise of the period.
The application of the ideas of the scientific revolution to forest conservation led to tree planting in England for economic purposes (to sell timber to the Navy) in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries. Similarly, in 1661 in France, Louis XIV and his Minister of Finance Colbert instituted revisions of forest administration and laws with the intent of reversing the reduction of forest cover caused by overexploitation. The new scientific approach to forestry was accompanied by an increasing demand for forest products from society. It was resumed by Le Roy, the warden of the park of Versailles, in Diderot's Encyclopédie of 1766:
"In all ages one has sensed the importance of preserving forests; they have always been regarded as the property of the state and administered in its name: religion itself had consecrated forests, doubtless to protect, through veneration, that which had to be conserved for the public interest.... Our oaks no longer proffer oracles... we must replace this cult by care, and whatever advantage one may previously have found in the respect that one had for forests, one can expect even more success from vigilance and economy.... If one exploits woods for present needs, one must also conserve them and plan in advance for future generations.... It is therefore necessary that those who are charged with overseeing the maintenance of forests by the state be very experienced... they must know the workings of nature" (Le Roy, cited in Harrison, 1992).
The Industrial Revolution and the modern environmental movement (1800 to the present)
The scientific revolution provided the intellectual basis for the Industrial Revolution. The environmental effects of industrialization led to what has been called the beginning of modern concern about the impact of economic activities on the environment. The demands for timber and fuelwood caused by the Industrial Revolution in Europe led to increased imports from North America and, later, the beginning of imports from tropical regions. The impacts of European demands of timber on the forests of New Brunswick and other provinces in eastern Canada have been well documented and give an ominous hint of trends which were to develop in other regions of the world:
"The wealth that has come into it [New Brunswick], has passed as through a thoroughfare... the persons principally engaged in shipping the timber have been strangers who have taken no interest in the welfare of the country... the forests are stripped and there is nothing left in prospect but the gloomy apprehension, when the timber is gone, of sinking into insignificance and poverty" (Lower, cited in Mather, 1990).
It should be noted, however, that Grove (1992) has traced the roots of modern forest conservation measures to earlier work by French scientists under the influence of Rousseau, reacting to deforestation in Mauritius in the 1760s. The botanist Commerson, who was trained by Linnaeus, took an innovative approach to forest conservation in two ways. First, he perceived a relationship between deforestation on the island and local climate change, and he was able to persuade the local authorities to pass an ordinance in 1769 which called for the reforestation of degraded forest areas and the protection of montane forests to reduce erosion. Second, he supported the establishment of a professional forest service on Mauritius in 1777. These ideas spread to British colonies such as Tobago, where 20 percent of the island was set aside as forest reserves for climate stabilization.
In the United States, the depletion of forests in the nineteenth century led to calls from both artists and scientists for protection against almost uncontrolled timber exploitation in the western part of the country. In the 1830s, the painter George Catlin called for the creation of a "magnificent park" to protect "nature's works which are destined to fall before the deadly axe" (cited in Shabecoff, 1993).
Later, Muir (1898) wrote: "Thousands of tired, nerve-shaken, overcivilized people are beginning to find that going to the mountains is going home; that wilderness is a necessity and that mountain parks and reservations are useful not only as fountains of timber and irrigating rivers, but as fountains of life."
Partly because of pressure from Muir, who founded the Sierra Club in 1892, the Forest Reserve Act was passed by the United States Congress in 1891 authorizing the establishment of the National Forest System.
John Muir (1838-1914)
Gifford Pinchot (1865-1946) were two of the pioneers In promoting modern resource conservation
Muir's hope of protecting the National Forests was, however, challenged by his contemporary Pinchot who founded the United States Forest Service. Pinchot agreed with Muir that public resources should be protected from overexploitation by private interests, but was promoting a form of conservation based on "rational use".
"The central thing for which conservation stands is to make this country the best possible place to live in, both for us and our descendants. It stands against the waste of natural resources... and most of all it stands for an equal opportunity of every American citizen to get his fair share of benefit from these resources, both now and hereafter... it demands the complete and orderly development of all of our resources for the benefit of all the people" (Pinchot, 1901).
The differences in perspective between the followers of Muir and Pinchot continue to cause controversy about forest management in the United States today. The scientific school of ecology argues that humankind's attempts to manage natural systems should be based on an understanding and even an imitation of natural processes. This cautious approach of saying that whatever we do to nature may rebound on us is quite different from Francis Bacon's (1561-1626) views of humans' domination of nature. In the first case, knowledge should be used to achieve harmony over nature; in the second, to achieve power over it. It is also different from the romantic view of Muir and his followers that we should know nature subjectively and respect it for its own sake. These views of nature coexist today, at least in Europe and North America, and have led to the different concepts of forest conservation discussed below.
Modern forest conservation paradigms
Various typologies of conservation paradigms have been developed. The typology used here draws on that of Eckersley (1992) because of its relevance to forest conservation. Eckersley has identified a number of paradigms (which may be subdivided) ranging on a spectrum of decreasing anthropocentrism, from traditional "resource conservation" to "egocentrism". These paradigms draw on the elitist and populist streams of conservation in varying degrees.
Resource conservation
Gifford Pinchot is usually referred to as the first proponent of modern resource conservation (Eckersley, 1992). Pinchot saw conservation as prudent use of nature's bounty, in opposition to the unrestrained forest exploitation. He had been trained as a forester in Europe and believed in the complementarily of conservation and development. Pinchot saw conservation as being based on three principles: the development of natural resources under scientific management, the reduction in waste and equity in access to resources.
Today the term forest conservation can mean anything from intensive timber production to total preservation (a)
Resource conservation is an anthropocentric approach and relies heavily on scientists and professionals to manage resources sustainably. The concept of "multiple use", as used by the United States Forest Service, has its origins in resource conservation (Kennedy and Quigley, 1994).
Because of Pinchot's emphasis on conservation being linked to development, resource conservation has influenced the concept of "sustainable development" (IUCN, 1991). Resource conservation is still the dominant paradigm in the private sector in forestry and is still influential in governments and international agencies, although the influence of human welfare ecology is increasing and recent international statements and resolutions on forests are influenced by both concepts (e.g. the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development Forest Principles of 1992 and the Helsinki Resolutions of 1993).
Human welfare ecology
Human welfare ecology places humanity at the centre of conservation. It has taken different forms in developed and developing countries, but there are some elements in common. Proponents have been concerned with "environmental quality" and the social issues which may be neglected by resource conservation such as democratic rights, equitable access to natural resources, recreation and spiritual and psychological needs (Eckersley, 1992). Unlike resource conservation, however, human welfare ecology based on "ecosystem management" has been critical of both economic growth and the abilities of science and technology to solve environmental problems.
Ecosystem management differs from resource conservation in terms of who is supposed to make decisions about forest management: for resource conservationists this is largely the function of the professional forest service; in ecosystem management an explicit effort is made to bring the public into the process.
Today the term forest conservation can mean anything from intensive timber production to total preservation (b)
Preservationism
If resource conservation is the basis for multiple use and may be traced back to Pinchot, preservationism has its modern origins in John Muir who wanted to preserve forests from development. Preservationism is different from both resource conservation and human welfare ecology in that it is less anthropocentric and gives weight to the perceived rights of other species to exist.
Preservationism has had a major impact on the establishment of national parks and other protected areas around the world. It is estimated that there are now almost 8500 major protected areas around the world covering 5.2 percent of the earth's land area (WCMC, 1992). Many of the larger protected areas are in tropical moist forests (Sayer, 1991) and it has been estimated that, worldwide, 5 percent of forests are in protected areas (FAO, 1995).
At the fourth World Congress on National Parks and Protected Areas in 1992, a resolution was adopted calling for more protected areas so that each country would protect 10 percent of each biome within its own territory (IUCN, 1993). It is noteworthy that internationally accepted criteria for designating protected areas now recognize a wide range of human uses (IUCN, 1994) in addition to the strict protection advocated by preservationists.
Preservationism has always attracted criticism from the proponents of economic development, despite arguments that protected areas are reservoirs for biological diversity and may also generate income through non-consumptive uses such as ecotourism. More recently, they have also been challenged by some environmentalists and social scientists on the basis that they may deprive local communities of their livelihood (Colchester, 1994; Pimbert and Pretty, 1995).
Ecocentrism
Ecocentrism is a concept based on a holistic world view in which the reductionist approach, characteristic of modern science, and anthropocentrism are rejected:
"According to this picture of reality, the world is an intrinsically dynamic, interconnected web of relations in which there are no absolutely discrete entities, and no absolute dividing lines between the living and the non-living" (Eckersley, 1992).
Ecocentrism seeks to go beyond preservationism in that the concern is to protect species, populations, habitats and ecosystems wherever they are situated and irrespective of their value to humans. Ecocentrism stresses the interrelationships between organisms and their environment and is based on the awareness and acceptance of natural limits to economic growth.
Ecocentrism has provided the intellectual basis for "deep ecology" and for the forest protection activities of groups, such as Earth First!, which have engaged in the "ecological sabotage" of logging equipment to protect "old growth" forests in the States of Oregon and Washington in the United States. The emphasis is, first and foremost, on reduced consumption of wood products, protection of forests (particularly old growth forests) and management based on:
"A new relationship with the forest - a relationship based on respect and humanity... first, love the forest... second, protect all pans of the forest while using the forest wisely, third, trade or barter the excess bounty of the forest" (Hammond, 1992).
Ecocentric thinking that places a low value on, or even opposes, economic development has proved controversial in many instances.
Conclusion
Today the term "forest conservation" is subject to a wide variety of interpretations. It can mean anything from intensive timber production to total preservation. It sometimes appears as if the only thing users of the term agree on is that it means that forest should not be permanently convened to another use, such as agriculture. Under these circumstances, perhaps some new terminology is called for. The paradigms outlined in the previous section might provide a basis for this.
The different forms of conservation are usually incompatible on a single forest site. Many of the forestry conflicts around the world today (in which all of the participants declare themselves to be in support of forest conservation) are about specific sites. If these conflicts are to have an outcome that gives some measure of satisfaction to all parties, the solution will usually involve two components. First, the creation of a forum in which the panics can have a real dialogue on the problems and options facing them, going far beyond general statements in favour of conservation.
Second, a willingness to go beyond the boundaries of the particular controversy, to think at the level of the landscape rather than the site. At the landscape level it may be possible to find ways to satisfy preservationists by protecting old growth forests, and the timber industry by managing other forest areas more intensively. In this respect the "ecosystems management" approach currently in vogue in the United States may have much to offer.
In New Zealand, the timber industry and environmentalists have signed a Forest Accord under which significant areas of old growth forests are protected while plantations are established on abandoned pastures. In Nepal and India, forest departments and local villagers have explored options for the joint management of forest resources. In Sweden, non-governmental organizations are working with the forest industry on certification standards. In Colombia, more than one-half of the country's rain forest has been allocated to indigenous people living in the forest. None of these developments is perfect; however, all have involved dialogue and a search for new solutions to old forest management problems.
Amid increasing global concern about the future of forests and depressing figures on deforestation, these examples may point to ideas for a more positive way forward.
Bibliography
Allanby, M. 1993. The Macmillan dictionary of the environment. London, Macmillan.
Colchester, M. 1994. Salvaging nature: indigenous peoples, protected areas and biodiversity conservation. Discussion Paper No. 55. Geneva, Switzerland, UNRISD.
Dixon, J.A. & Sherman, P.B. 1991. Economics of protected areas: a new look at costs and benefits, p. 9. London, Earthscan.
Eckersley, R. 1992. Environmentalism and political theory. Toward an ecocentric approach, p. 33-45,49. London, University College London Press.
FAO. 1985. Forests, trees and people. FAO Forestry Topics Report No. 2, Rome.
FAO. 1995. "Combating deforestation" and the Non-legally Binding Authoritative Statement of Principles for a Global Consensus on the Management, Conservation and Sustainable Development of All Types of Forests. Report of the Secretary-General. United Nations Economic and Social Council, Commission on Sustainable Development. Third session, 11-28 April 1995. New York.
Glacken, C.J. 1965. The origins of the conservation philosophy. In I. Burton & R.W. Kates, eds. Readings in resource management and conservation. Chicago, USA. University of Chicago Press.
Glacken, C.J. 1967. Traces on the Rhodian shore. Berkeley and Los Angeles, USA, University of California Press.
Gómez-Pompa, A. & Kaus, A. 1992. Taming the wilderness myth. Bioscience, (42)4: 271 -279.
Grove, R.H. 1992. Origins of Western environmentalism. Sci. Am., (July): 22-27.
Hammond, H. 1992. Seeing the forest among the trees: the case for holistic forest use, p. 197. Vancouver, Canada, Polestar.
Harrison, R.P. 1992. Forests: the shadow of civilization, p. 115. Chicago, USA, University of Chicago Press.
IUCN. 1991. Caring for the earth: a strategy for sustainable living. Gland, Switzerland, IUCN/UNEP/WWF.
IUCN. 1993. Parks for life: report of the fourth World Congress on National Parks and Protected Areas, p. 48. Gland, Switzerland, IUCN.
IUCN. 1994. Guidelines for protected area management categories. Gland, Switzerland, IUCN Commission on National Parks and Protected Areas.
Kennedy, J.J. & Quigley, T.M. 1994. Evolution of Forest Service organizational culture and adaptation issues in embracing ecosystem management, p. 16-26. In M.E. Jensen & P.S. Bougeron, eds. Volume II. Ecosystem management: principles and applications. United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station, General Technical Report PNW-GTR-318, Portland, Oregon, USA.
Mather, A.S. 1990. Global forest resources. London, Bellhaven Press.
Muir, J. 1898. The wild parks and forest reservations in the West. Atlantic Mthly. LXXXI: 483.
Pimbert, M.P. & Pretty, J.N. 1995. Parks, people and professionals. Discussion Paper No. 57, Geneva, Switzerland, UNRISD.
Pinchot, G. 1901. The fight for conservation, p. 79-81. New York, Harcourt Brace.
Rackham, O. 1986. The history of the countryside, p. 121. London. J.M. Dent.
Sayer, J. 1991. Conservation and protection of tropical rain forests: the perspective of the World Conservation Union. Unasylva. 166: 40-45
Shabecoff, P. 1993. A fierce green fire: the American Environmental Movement. p. 47. New York. Hill and Wang.
Thirgood, J.V. 1981. Man's impact on the forests of Europe. J. World For. Resource Manage.. 4(2): 127-167.
Thomas, K. 1983. Man and the natural world: changing attitudes in England 1500-1800. London. Allen Lane.
Waley, A. 1939. Three ways of thought in ancient China, p. 116. London. George Allen and Unwin.
WCMC. 1992. Global biodiversity status of the earth's living resources, p. 448. London, Chapman and Hall.
<section>4</section>
The Swedish forest industry in the ecocycle
G. Wohlfahrt
Göran Wohlfahrt is former vice-president of the Swedish Forest Industries Association. Stockholm.
Recent trends in the evolution of the Swedish forest industry towards more environment-friendly, conservation-oriented practices and policies and a harmonization of conservation and production goals.
Swedish law dictates that the biodiversity and genetic variation in a forest shall be secured
For the heads of companies in the major pulp and paper producing countries, the theme of this issue of Unasylva - the relationship between forest conservation and forest utilization - is not one of contrasting interests but rather one of reciprocal dependence and support. It is by reaping a harvest from forest land that the necessary resources are derived in order to maintain ecological values. The history of the forests in Europe is a sad story of successive waves of conversion into pasture and arable land; conservation was disregarded even though, very early on, there were warnings of the effects of continued depletion and attempts were made to regulate fellings and forest clearance. However, given the social structure of the nineteenth century, with a rapidly growing population to feed which was heavily dependent on forests for building materials, for charcoal, tar and fuelwood, it was not possible to halt the trend of forest conversion until fossil fuel replaced wood as
the primary source of energy.
In Sweden, the barren tracts of land in the south of the country (the result of failed attempts at reforestation) and the exploitation of the large virgin forests in the north for export, following the abolition in the 1850s of the British duties imposed on sawnwood, prepared the public for the need for silviculture and reforestation, as was later codified in the 1903 act. Felling old stands for sawn timber created wealth, investment capital and industrialized the river mouths, thereby giving value to the forested inland. The emerging pulp industry, which was established to give added value to sawmill residues and small-sized wood, helped to pave the way for new forest management concepts.
As a result, forests once more cover 60 percent of Sweden's land area. The forest products industry is an important national source of employment and income and is the backbone of Sweden's foreign trade. Forest products represent one-fifth of the country's gross export value and are by far the greatest net currency earner. The modern, large-scale Swedish sawmilling and pulp and paper manufacturing industry is a world leader in technology. At the same time, the growing stock of the forests has almost doubled since the 1920s, and the annual growth rate is close to 83 million m³. Moreover, since only 65 to 70 percent of the annual increment is felled, forests constitute Sweden's largest hidden reserve, representing even greater potential income and employment.
With only 1 percent of the world's forests, Sweden is third in world trade in pulp and paper and second in exports of sawnwood. In fact, some 80 to 90 percent of the Swedish forest industry production is exported, the main markets being the Western European countries with 85 percent. Forecasts show a steadily rising need for forest products worldwide, with Western Europe, a wood-deficit region, accounting for one-fifth of world consumption. With half the forested area of Western Europe, the Nordic countries are expected to deliver more wood. Swedish companies, with their large forest holdings, have considerable experience in forest conservation which allows them to maintain steady growth in production.
Mill closures and restructuring, with heavy investments in joint research and new technology, have cleaned up the environment in areas surrounding the mills, raised productivity and kept them competitive on the international scene. Today, the main forces promoting environmentally sound practices in the forests and in the mills are new knowledge from research and the exacting requirements of customers and consumers. The producers of sawnwood and paper must be able to show that neither the raw material supply nor the manufacturing processes are impairing the environment; hence the demands for forest certification, ecolabelling and environmental auditing. The utilization of the forests is no longer only a matter of optimal growth, cheap logging and reforestation, but also one of ensuring the future for the plants, animals and people living there.
In the wake of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, the environmental debate has branched out and begun to deal with the overriding system issues. The forest industry system is more than forest conservation and considerate utilization. It is an element in an ecocycle (see Figure) with renewable raw materials and with products that can be recycled both as products and as energy. As such, it is probably the only large-scale industrial system capable of realizing the sustainable development goals formulated by UNCED. This is how the Swedish industry views it and how it would like the world to act.
Sustainability in the ecocycle
Fundamental to the whole ecocycle concept is that forest utilization must be truly sustainable. This means not only a sustained harvest of the wood but also a balanced use of the forest ecosystem which impairs neither soil productivity nor biological diversity, This dual approach, developed over the last ten to 15 years by the Swedish forestry community, has been codified in the new forest policy act of May 1993. The act comprises one goal for the forest environment and one for production, the two goals having the same priority which means they should be given equal weight in the management of forest resources. Thus, timber production must always be combined with appropriate measures and resources for nature conservation.
To this effect, the law prescribes: "Forests and forest land shall be utilized efficiently aiming at a sustainable and valuable yield. The composition of forest production must be such that it has a potential to satisfy different human needs in the future." This is not a problem; it is a long -established principle.
The environmental goal reads: "The productivity of forest land shall be preserved. Biodiversity and genetic variation in the forest shall be secured. Forests must be managed so that plant and animal species which exist naturally in the forest ecosystems can survive under natural conditions and in viable populations. Endangered species and vegetation types shall be protected. The forest's cultural heritage, aesthetic and social values must be defended."
Preserving soil productivity was a much debated subject some 15 years ago. After the great strides in the 1960s and 1970s in the mechanization of logging and transport and the large tracts opened for clear-cutting with little consideration for local variations, there came a change in attitude in favour of biology, variation and adapted methods. Much of the reaction aimed at maintaining long-term fertility by avoiding exploitation and unintentional loss of the soil nutrient stores. The new wave was called "site-adapted forestry practices", implying that standard methods are adapted to the varying biological prerequisites of specific tracts of forest land. It proved positive both for production and the environment. It also required an increased level of knowledge and skill, particularly among individual foresters and forest workers, and was therefore backed by extensive education programmes and a new generation of advanced and lighter machines for more flexible, considerate
and small-scale logging.
FIGURE - The forest industry system In Sweden Is part of an ecocycle
More worrying today is soil acidification by air pollutants - mainly in the southwestern part of the country which cause problems for soil fertility in the long term; about 90 percent of the acidifying substances are wind-blown from neighbouring and distant countries, beyond the control of Swedish measures, adding a negative element to our definition of sustainable forestry.
There can never be one global definition for sustainable conservation or forest resources because the basic vegetation conditions and solutions will always vary between regions and countries following different ecosystem types and land use history. In Sweden, for example, the experiences of successful restoration work over most of the forested area after centuries of intensive utilization and the indiscriminate exploitation of boreal virgin stands during the nineteenth century have emphasized the need to safeguard the biological diversity of the ecosystems; no more than 5 percent of untouched virgin or old growth forests remain.
Clear-cutting over extended areas has been replaced by site-adapted forestry In which selected trees and a more varied landscape are maintained
The strategy for conserving biological diversity is therefore built more on ecological restoration in combination with forestry than on the protection of large areas as nature reserves. This approach is totally different from regions where old growth virgin forest still dominates.
Flexible forestry is the best conservation policy
The enactment in 1903 of the world's first modern silvicultural law with the obligation of reforestation after cutting triggered the restoration of the Swedish forests - the first "green movement". The result has already been mentioned: growing timber stocks have almost reached 3 billion m³ and the annual growth rate is higher than ever before and still rising. Practically the whole forest landscape has been managed under law-enforced rules using the best knowledge available in order to increase both yield and stock.
Against this background, it is hardly surprising that scientists, during the early 1980s, pointed out that part of the Swedish flora and fauna should be considered endangered or threatened, the reason being the historically long human use which has changed the composition and structure of the forest stands and landscapes. The area of old and large trees has declined significantly during this century as well as the number of standing dead trees. Species that depend on dying trees and decaying wood are suffering.
The development of commercial forestry has meant an effective reduction of the influence of fires. In the past, notably in boreal regions, the forest structure and the whole landscape has been formed by recurrent fire; some areas have been burnt several times per century, forests on humid land, hollows and broad-leaved forests only rarely. Animals and plant species have adapted to live and survive in a system which includes forest fire. The suppression of fires has had an effect on biological diversity by reducing the young successional stages dominated by hardwood trees and the mix-in of hardwood in older stands.
Key habitats, locations where endangered. vulnerable or care-demanding species exist, have been registered by field surveys conducted by the landowners and the forestry staff with the objective of preserving, inter alia, the surviving fire-influenced coniferous wood and maintaining the natural features that still exist in the cultural landscape. Management programmes describe multiple elements, including what measures may be used in sensitive forests; how natural regeneration can be used on rich, damp soils, by leaving seed-trees instead of expensive planting after clear-felling-, how generous border zones should be left around lakes, swamps and watercourses; how to preserve the remaining cultivation and wood pasture land; and how to apply less absolute measures in the clearing of felled areas, for example leaving fallen trunks and standing dead trees for the benefit of insects, lichens and birds, and leaving spruce swamps and unstable slopes.
Forest fire must be managed rather than eliminated
Ecological landscape planning
Ecological landscape planning is the way to mimic the functions of natural forests. Building a landscape - anything between 5000 and 25000 ha - starts with an inventory of the elements that still exist from the time of the natural forests. When possible, these are linked together in a network of corridors of forest lands which will never be clear-cut. Normally these corridors comprise forests in wet areas, along streams, lake shores, etc., which did not burn under natural conditions.
Over the rest of the area, production forestry is practised with the best available methods. The forest composition in age classes and the mix of forest management methods, and so on, are controlled at the landscape level by means of a geographical information system. Also included in forest management are some methods that are especially adapted for environmental purposes, such as controlled burning and selective cutting. Even if these methods are applied on small areas only, they are important for the maintenance of biological diversity.
Consensus building
To become generally accepted, the idea of sustainability must have the backing of the authorities and the consent of the public, landowners and politicians. Swedish experience shows that a combination of national legislation, imposing minimum silvicultural standards on all forest owner categories, and an effective extension service has proved most conducive to an understanding of silviculture as a goal in itself and how forest holdings can become a reliable source of income.
A key question for positive and responsible participation is the well-defined and guaranteed ownership of forest land. In Sweden, 88 percent of all forest land is privately owned by farmers, estates, small woodlot owners' cooperatives (50 percent) and by industry (38 percent,). Their willingness to invest and manage their forest land assets carefully is motivated by their expectations of future revenues. People's participation is more important than any legislation or administrative regulation.
The County Forestry Boards were instituted in 1905 with the task of promoting private forestry through law enforcement, but mainly through word and deed, advice and education. The foresters of the regional boards acquire good local contacts and are generally recognized by the forest owners as a resource and support system rather than as controllers or "police". But control of forestry practices on individual holdings has also proved indispensable. This is made possible through standwise inventories carried out by the county board or by the forest owners themselves through their associations. In addition, all final failings must be reported to the county boards, enabling them also to maintain a check on reforestation and nature conservation measures.
At the national level, since the 1920s the National Forest Inventory has been conducting repeated (now annual) nationwide surveys in order to follow the development of the forest area. standing volumes and growth by region. species, age class, dimension, owner category, etc. Calculations of potentially sustainable cutting levels are regularly carried out and compared with the forecast demand for wood as well as actual consumption.
Apart from extension services and dissemination of the results of biological and technical development and research and development, the county forestry boards also organize training courses to improve the skills of all personnel and of forest owners and entrepreneurs.
Industry is the driving force
The driving force behind the transition of Swedish forests from degradation to productive forest land has been the demand for roundwood and processed products. The wealth created by the industry has financed investments in silviculture thus opening the way for an expansion of the industry, etc. Since medieval times, and particularly during the past century, the Swedish forest products industry has been highly export-dependent.
The conditions on the world market have set the framework for its activities and expansion possibilities. On the whole, the state has refrained from intervening in the market for roundwood and derived products (contrary to what has been the case in agriculture). Buyers and sellers have been forced to work under externally determined economic conditions. These have at times been harsh. necessitating radical rationalization measures notably in logging, transport and marketing; however, the margins have been wide enough to allow resources to be ploughed back into reforestation as stipulated by law.
The first principle is that the price paid for wood by the industry must be high enough to cover the cost of silviculture and other requirements that are necessary for forest management. State subsidies are limited compared with those of other countries and have always played a minor role. Whereas in some countries forestry and forest industries are seen as antagonists, in Sweden they have lived in an increasingly close relationship, almost in symbiosis with one another. It is generally important that the market is "funding" the development of sustainable forest management, although the implementation of new programmes and developments may need some financial assistance.
In order to implement its own strategies, each country needs to create a minimum critical mass of research competence, of education and training and of public awareness of the need for sustained management of land and resources. Regional and international cooperation could be instrumental in bringing about an assessment of problems and opportunities and the need for financial and technical resources. research policies, etc.
Recycling - An element in the ecocycle
Since the 1960s, public attention in Sweden (and in other countries) has been focused on the effects that increasingly bigger pulp and paper plants have on water quality and fish life downstream. Air pollution, unpleasant odours and noise contributed to a widespread image of an environment-unfriendly industry. In a declaration of intent in 1988, the forest industries in Sweden committed themselves to reducing emissions to ecologically acceptable levels and to overcoming any remaining environmental problems. It was also stated that environmental measures are possible only if the industry is profitable and that international harmonization of environmental standards should be sought.
Today, the situation has changed drastically. In Sweden, as well as in most industrialized countries, the focus in the public debate is now on issues of forestry, on waste management and, not least, on recycling. Emissions are no longer front-page news. The industry's achievements are even officially recognized and pulp and paper is occasionally cited as a pattern for other industry sectors.
In 1994, out of the total consumption of fibres of 270 million tonnes by the paper industry worldwide, some 40 percent are recycled fibres and this percentage is rising. By the year 2000, some two-thirds of the increased demand for fibres will be met by recycled paper. All industrialized countries with insufficient forest resources have stepped up paper collection, and improved de-inking and dissolving techniques have increased the paper companies' interest in using cheaper, sorted recycled fibre from the "urban forest" resources. In a handful of countries more than one-half of consumption is recovered; in Germany, the share of recycled fibre in paper products is almost 60 percent. In 1994, the average collection rate for European Union (EU) countries was 42 percent.
In Sweden, more than six out of ten newspapers and 70 percent of corrugated cardboard are recycled; in total, over 50 percent of all paper products are recovered. If paper products burnt for energy generation (20 percent) are included, total paper recovery is over 70 percent; the remainder ends up in libraries, as building materials, in landfill and in sewage.
In most EU countries the share of landfill is still high, while incineration with heat generation is just gaining acceptance, although it is growing in importance.
Waste paper, newspapers and used packaging are not substitutes for fresh forest raw material. Paper cannot be recycled an indefinite number of times. Every circuit of a recovery cycle weakens the fibre and a part is destroyed. Therefore, waste paper is not a sustainable raw material base; recycled fibres and virgin fibres serve as two elements of the same sustainable cycle. New. virgin wood fibre is constantly needed to "top up" the system, to maintain the performance and the quality of products made mainly from recycled fibres. When strength, stiffness, durability and purity are important, then virgin fibre is the best and often the only choice. The Nordic forests' role is to supply the European paper system with the virgin fibres needed to maintain quality.
It is a misconception that paper products should be made from recycled fibre to "save the forest". Trees are not grown to be saved. Wisely managed and utilized forests are not in conflict with ecological considerations. The point at issue is not whether the fibres have been used several times but whether the original raw material comes from forests that are managed according to environmentally sustainable principles and the production process meets today's emission standards.
Moreover, collecting paper is not an end in itself and must be environmentally justified and economically viable: to truck small volumes of recyclable paper long distances is negative to the environment and raises the cost of the fibre.
Finding the best combination of the recovery of materials and of energy is the key issue when the forest industry adapts to the ecocyclic society of the future.
Closing the cycle
In the end, the relationship between forest conservation and forest utilization is not one of diametrically opposed extremes - of absolute protectionism on the one hand versus mining utilization on the other. The solution lies in utilizing forests in a sustainable manner, thereby ensuring their continued productivity and conservation. Although no country can or should ever believe that it has reached a maximum level in this quest, the efforts and results of the Swedish forest industry indicate that, with long-term effort and political commitment, significant progress in the right direction can be achieved.
<section>5</section>
Reducing waste during logging and log processing: Forest conservation in eastern Amazonia
J.J. Gerwing, J.S. Johns and E. Vidal
Jeffrey J. Gerwing is a doctoral candidate in the Graduate Program in Ecology at Pennsylvania State University, USA, and a researcher with the Instituto do Homem e Meio Ambiente da Amazônia (IMAZON), Belém, Brazil.
Jennifer S. Johns is a doctoral candidate in the Ecology and Evolution Program at Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.
Edson Vidal is a researcher with IMAZON, Belém, Brazil.
This article describes the waste associated with logging and log processing in eastern Amazonia and suggests methods for reducing both waste and forest damage as a result of logging.
Over the past 20 years, eastern Amazonia has become Brazil's primary producing region for hardwood logs (Verissimo et al., 1992). Much of this increase in production has occurred in Pará State (Figure 1). In the eastern part of the state, near the township of Paragominas, the number of veneer and saw mills rose from two mills with a total production of 8600 m³ in 1970, to 238 mills with an output in excess of 1.2 million m³ in 1990 (Verissimo et al., 1992). To date, the majority of this region's production has been absorbed by the demand for lumber within Brazil. However, as timber stocks are depleted in tropical Asia, eastern Amazonia, with its still extensive tracts of unexploited forests, is on the way to becoming a major supplier of tropical timber for international markets.
FIGURE 1 - Pará State encompasses the major part of the eastern Amazon region of Brazil
Forestry is among the important land-use options in eastern Amazonia, but a close look at the growth of the region's wood industry reveals a repeated pattern of the careless exploitation and degradation of forests near mill centres. A typical logging operation removes 30 to 50 m³ of wood volume per hectare of 30 to 60 species. In the process of extraction, 26 percent of all trees existing prior to harvest are killed or damaged and total forest canopy cover is reduced by 50 percent (Uhl and Vieira, 1989). Also, extensive canopy opening combined with the creation of many dead trees and piles of slash leave logged forest vulnerable to encroaching fires (Holdsworth and Uhl, in press). When nearby forests have been thoroughly exploited, loggers travel to increasingly distant forest tracts until high transportation costs drive mill owners to move their mills closer to unexploited forest. If this pattern of forest mining and subsequent abandonment continues, even the relatively
vast tracts of intact forest in eastern Amazonia will be rapidly depleted and the importance of this region as a timber-producing centime will be short-lived. Breaking this destructive pattern requires shifting from forest mining to a system of forest management where working forests provide a reliable source of timber far into the future (Barreto, Uhl and Yared, 1993).
The need for sustainable forest management in eastern Amazonia is obvious, but practical models for forest management in the region are few and far between. In 1992, a group of researchers working as part of a small, non -profit-making research institute, Instituto do Homem a Meio Ambiente do Amazônia (IMAZON), set out to conduct a demonstration forest management project near Paragominas to determine the economic and ecological implications of forest management. The core of this management project was a side-by-side comparison of a 75 ha traditional timber operation with a 100 ha timber extraction effort that was planned to reduce waste timber volume, damage to the residual stand and excessive machine use. The components of the planned forest extraction included: stand inventorying and mapping; preharvest vine cutting, road and skid trail planning and marking; directional tree felling; and the use of a skidder with a winch instead of a bulldozer with no winch (Figures 2 and
3). Management of a timber resource does not, however, end in this forest. As a complement to the forest extraction project, the group also conducted an analysis of the conversion efficiencies and opportunities for waste reduction in the region's wood-processing industries.
FIGURE 2 - In the traditional logging model, a bulldozer with a fixed cable was used to skid logs from the forest to the log landings
FIGURE 3 - As part of the planned logging model, a rubber-tyred skidder equipped with a winch was used to skid logs from the forest to the log landings
The results of the investigations indicated that the methods of exploiting the region's timber resource, both in the forests and in the mills, are unnecessarily wasting large volumes of wood. In the forest, this waste took the form of logs that were felled but never skidded and young trees of commercial value that were needlessly destroyed. In the mills, wood waste took the form of logs that degraded during storage and excessive lumber thickness owing to inaccurately sawn lumber. A first step towards conservation and sustainable use of a resource is minimizing its needless waste. Minimizing timber waste translates into reducing the amount of forested land that needs to be exploited in order to produce a constant volume of timber. The following sections of this article describe some of the sources of waste incurred during timber exploitation and processing as it is currently practised in eastern Amazonia. The group concluded that, in many cases, waste could be greatly reduced
by the adoption of straightforward management practices.
Reducing timber waste during logging
The traditional timber extraction model, as it is currently practised in eastern Amazonia, can be thought of as unplanned forest mining that both wastes usable timber and damages the future productive capacity of the forest. Tree-felling decisions are made by chain sawyers (contract workers) as they walk the forest in search of potential timber trees. The chain sawyers have little formal training in tree felling and no training in forest management or silviculture and they are paid according to the volume of timber they fell per day. Thus, rapid sawing is better rewarded than careful sawing. Log skidding by bulldozer occurs several days after tree felling. Although chain sawyers and bulldozer drivers live in the same camp, there seems to be little communication among them regarding the locations of the felled trees. To find felled trees, bulldozer operators drive their tractors towards openings in the forest canopy. When a log is found, it is skidded back to the log landing,
but not necessarily by retracing the path used to arrive at the log. The result of this unplanned searching and skidding is a criss-crossing network of skid trails, some of which lead to natural forest gaps in which no timber tree was felled.
It is noteworthy that the underlying reason for this type of utilization is that, until recently, in order to validate their claims to the land, owners have been required to "develop" the forest area. This has involved subcontracting to a logging crew to clear 50 percent of the land (the maximum allowed by law) for cattle ranching. Under these circumstances, it is not surprising that loggers (and their subcontractors) have not been concerned about forest degradation.
There are two major sources of timber waste in forest extraction operations that can be eliminated or reduced through planning and training. The first source of unnecessary waste is trees that are felled but never found by the bulldozer drivers. The group covered a total of 15 km of transects in three previously logged areas and found an average of 6.6 m³ per hectare of usable timber that had been felled but never skidded. This represents about one tree per hectare and as much as 20 percent of the 30 m³ of timber volume that is extracted from a typical hectare. The majority of the felled trees that were not found were either buried under the crowns of other felled trees or isolated from other timber trees. This type of waste did not occur in the planned extraction effort. Stand mapping of potential timber trees coupled with skid trail marking resulted in all the trees that were felled being skidded.
In addition to felled trees that are never found, there is unnecessary waste in traditional logging as a result of poor felling and bucking techniques. Several errors can lead to this type of waste: for trees without buttresses, sawing too high on the bole (i.e. more than 20 cm from the ground) and leaving usable wood in the stump; for trees with buttresses, sawing trees above the buttresses instead of removing the buttresses and sawing lower on the tree; improperly sawing at the base of the tree so that the bole splits upwards from the base as it falls; and bucking the tree too far from the top and leaving the usable bole with the crown. The group assessed 854 felled trees in traditional logging sites and found that these four errors, combined, resulted in an average waste of 0.41 m³ per tree felled. This waste represents 7 percent of the harvestable volume of a typical tree and amounts to 2.3 m³ per hectare. To reduce this type of waste in the planned extraction, a chain
sawyer who had been specifically trained in both directional felling and sawing to minimize the types of error described above was employed. A sample of 164 trees felled by the trained chain sawyer showed 0.11 m³ of waste per tree felled in felling and bucking operations. The difference in waste between trained and untrained chain sawyers was 0.30 m³ per tree felled or 1.7 m³ per hectare. Combining this difference with the elimination of waste owing to trees that are felled but never found (6.6 m³ per hectare) produces a total yield increase of 8.3 m³ per hectare which resulted from planning timber extraction and training the chain sawyer. This increase in per hectare yield can be directly translated into fewer hectares of forest subjected to extraction to meet a given timber demand.
Reducing forest damage during logging
Logging in eastern Amazonia is most often conducted with little prior knowledge of the stand and virtually no planning (this is not the case in the Permanent Forest Estate). The result is much unnecessary damage to the small-to medium-sized trees that could make up future harvests. Although these operations are selectively logging the forest (cutting only five to six commercial trees per hectare), an additional 200 trees per hectare with more than 10 cm dbh are incidentally damaged.
Several factors contribute to this damage. Vines are common in the region, connecting each tree canopy to an average of six others. When a tree is felled for harvest or road building, neighbouring trees are damaged when the interconnecting vines pull apart their canopies. In addition, during tree felling, with no training in the art of directional felling, the sawyer attempts to fell the tree along its natural inclination; however, vines that still connect the crown of the cut tree to adjacent crowns often foil such efforts. This greatly reduces the possibility of sparing a specific tree that is not yet large enough to cut for the next harvest. In addition, this lack of controlled felling frequently results in piling one tree on top of another. Such tree "tangles" make it exceedingly difficult to extract the boles during skidding. With no grapple on the bulldozer, the operator must push the boles apart with the blade. In exceptionally difficult tangles, the operator is
reduced to driving in circles around the felled trees in an effort to free or lift the boles. Clearly, such movement causes an inordinate amount of damage to nearby trees and results in large areas of disturbance both to the forest canopy and to the forest floor (Figure 4). Skidding is further complicated because boles are usually bucked only once near the crown of the tree. Therefore the bulldozer operator skids long boles back over the twisting trails that were made in search of the felled trees. Skidding back through the forest, the bole cannot bend and the trunks of trees standing near the edge of the trail along the curves are damaged by the passing log.
The group found that the adoption of a series of planning measures and techniques can lead to a significant reduction in damage during logging. One such measure is vine cutting two years prior to logging. When a tree was felled during traditional logging, vines often tore branches from neighbouring trees behind the stump, uprooted trees along the bole and topped trees in the vicinity of the fallen crown. In the planned area, cut trees fell swiftly to the ground, causing little damage behind the stump or along the bole and only minor damage around the crown. The cost implications of this preharvesting treatment would need to be factored into any economic analysis.
A second measure that is associated with reduced damage during logging is directional felling. With directional felling, trees were felled to reduce damage to trees targeted for future harvests, to avoid piling trees one on top of another, and to facilitate choker hookups in preparation for skidding. Utilization of these techniques allowed trees occurring in groups to be harvested without creating unnecessarily large forest disturbances (Figure 4).
The planning of skid trail layout is a third factor that can reduce damage. In the planned effort, trails were laid out to approximate a herring-bone pattern, with a central primary skid trail and secondary trails that formed obtuse angles with the primary trail. This design both minimized the total area in skid trails and avoided sharp corners that result in damage to neighbouring trees as logs are skidded past.
FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice
Considerable progress has been made in recent years in the introduction of efficient, environmentally sound forest harvesting practices in many parts of the world. Nonetheless, much remains to be done. There is a continuing need to refine harvesting systems and techniques so that they become fully compatible with the objectives of sustainable forest management, allowing them to contribute in an important way to the economic and social aims of sustainable development. The newly published FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice is one response to this need.
This document is intended primarily to serve as a reference for countries considering the adoption or revision of their own codes of forest practice. Its overall purpose is to promote harvesting practices which will improve standards of utilization, reduce negative environmental impacts, help ensure that forests are sustained for future generations and improve the economic and social contributions of forestry as a component of sustainable development.
Forestry does not focus exclusively on the production of commercial timber. The importance of forests for biological diversity, non-timber products, cultural values, wildlife, scenic beauty, recreational opportunities and environmental services is now recognized worldwide. As a result, forestry has become a more complex, more demanding discipline. One consequence of this increased complexity is that it is more difficult to plan and implement forest harvesting operations. These operations must be designed and carried out in ways that accommodate and, if possible, enhance the multiresource character of the forest. Foresters, planners and harvesting operators require up-to-date information and guidance on the practices that society is willing to accept and the outcomes that are required in connection with forest harvesting operations. Whether they are mandatory or voluntary, codes of forest practice which fail to recognize and provide for the full complexity of modern,
multiresource forestry will not be acceptable to society and are thus doomed to failure. This model code takes a comprehensive look at harvesting practices while intentionally not including other forest practices such as silviculture. However, many of the concepts expressed could be applicable in developing codes of practice for other forestry operations.
The model code takes the approach that there are four essential ingredients in relation to forest harvesting operations if forests are to be managed on a sustainable basis. These are:
· comprehensive harvest planning;
· effective implementation and control of harvesting operations;
· thorough postharvest assessment and communication of results to the planning team and to the harvesting personnel;
· development of a competent and properly motivated workforce.
Harvesting operations are further categorized by road engineering, felling, extraction, landing operations and transport operations. Each of the resulting eight items is treated in a separate chapter in the model code.
Each chapter follows a common outline. The section on recommended practices is preceded by discussions of objectives, guiding principles and a definition of the operation under consideration. The potential consequences of improperly implementing each harvest practice are discussed.
The code presents a comprehensive look at forest harvest practices that should provide valuable ideas for anyone dealing with forest practices. This is true from any point of view, public or private, small or large landholder, consumer or producer. Even holders of well-established, comprehensive codes of forest practice will find new ideas and a refreshing viewpoint presented to them.
FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. 1996. Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch, Forestry Department. Rome, FAO.
FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice
Utilization of these planning methods and careful logging techniques resulted in a reduction of the number of trees inadvertently damaged during each phase of logging. For instance, in traditional logging, 28.7 trees of more than 10 cm dbh were damaged per tree felled, compared with 20.5 trees per tree felled in the planned operation. Thus, during felling alone, 46 trees of more than 10 cm dbh per hectare were spared from unnecessary damage. Similarly, for each tree skidded to a log landing, 7.1 trees were damaged in the traditional operation, whereas only 4.4 were damaged in the planned operation. In total, 16.2 fewer trees were damaged per tree logged, resulting in 91 fewer damaged trees per hectare in the planned than in the traditional operation. Of these 91 trees, 57 were severely damaged (i.e. topped or smashed) and of these, 11 trees (totalling 2.7 m³ per hectare) were of species with current commercial value.
Reducing waste during log processing
The efficiency with which logs are converted into finished products can significantly affect the area of forest needed to satisfy demand. The group studied the factors governing log conversion efficiencies in ten sawmills and two veneer peeling mills in the wood-processing centre of Paragominas. In general, processing efficiency was low (Figure 5). Of the total volume of solid wood in a typical saw log, less than 35 percent was converted into sawn timber.
FIGURE 4 - Canopy opening and ground area damage associated with the harvest of groups of frees in planned (9 trees) and unplanned (12 trees) logging operations near Paragominas in Pará State, Brazil
The low product yields of logs processed in the region are the result of wood waste at various steps during log processing. Inadequate log storage in mill yards resulted in volume and quality losses (e.g. insect damage and log splitting). Over typical storage times of several weeks to a month, an average of 15 percent of log volume was found to be affected by insect damage. In logs of the most commonly sawn species in the region, Manilkara huberi, log splitting affected 13 percent of the total sawable log volume.
The use of inadequate or outdated equipment in regional mills also reduces the conversion efficiency of logs to timber. Of 47 sawmills surveyed, the mean age of sawing equipment in the region was ten years. The relative lack of investment in new sawing equipment has led to poor sawing accuracy. In the 11 mills studied, the mean variation in sawn board thickness was 4.3 min. Thus, on average, 4.3 mm of thickness is added to each board produced to ensure that its minimum thickness is within the purchasers' specifications. Although several millimetres per board may seem a trivial amount, it can amount to the waste of several potential boards per log, or about 5 percent of total log volume (Williston, 1981).
Substantial gains in the conversion efficiency of logs to timber could come with the implementation of some relatively simple techniques and technologies. Primary among these is improved log storage. Techniques such as painting log ends with wax to seal in moisture and minimize splitting and using log yard sprinklers to wash off insects could reduce log degradation during storage and increase conversion efficiency by 5 to 8 percent. Moreover, upgrading sawing equipment Could improve sawing accuracy and increase conversion efficiencies by 3 to 5 percent. Finally, the development of new product lines to make use of small pieces of wood (e.g. broom handles, parquet flooring and door pieces) Could improve efficiency by another 5 percent. In all, implementation of these improvements could raise total conversion efficiencies from 39 percent to approximately 60 percent for veneer mills and from 35 percent to 50 percent for sawmills.
Reducing forest resources waste as part of forest conservation
The first step in conserving a resource is gaining recognition of its value. Not long ago, it was common for landowners in eastern Amazonia to afford a greater value to a hectare of degraded. pasture than to a hectare of intact forest, Trees were simply an obstacle standing in the way of ranching, which was viewed as the appropriate land use for the region (and was supported by government incentives). Following the valuation of the forest resource, the next logical step in its conservation is using the resource in a manner that minimizes unnecessary waste. The benefits of such careful use of forest resources are at least twofold: with less waste of forest products, less forest area needs to be harvested to meet a given demand for timber; and carefully harvested forests have greater conservation value than those that are carelessly harvested.
FIGURE 5 - Piles of discarded wood scraps are common in the yards of sawmills in eastern Amazonia
FIGURE 6 - The amount of avoidable waste of commercial timber associated with typical logging and log-processing activities In the Paragominas region of Pará State, Brazil
By eliminating timber losses to trees that are felled and never found and losses caused by poor cutting and bucking practices, the amount of timber harvested from each hectare logged can be increased by an average of 8.3 m³ (Figure 6). However, this presupposes the processing and utilization of species that are not currently marketed. The adoption of simple strategies could improve timber-processing conversion efficiencies by 15 percent. If 38 m³ could be harvested from a typical hectare, this improvement in conversion efficiency would result in an increase in lumber production of 5.7 m³ for each hectare logged (Figure 6). Further reductions in timber waste could come in the form of future crop trees that are spared serious damage (i.e. topping or crushing). Spared trees would amount to 2.7 m³ per hectare of commercial timber that would be available for future cuts. In all, waste amounting to 16.7 m³ per hectare of commercial timber could be prevented through planned logging
and improved log processing.
In addition to sparing potential crop trees from unnecessary damage, a carefully managed logging operation is also less damaging to other aspects of forest structure. For example, in the planned logging operation, the ground area affected by tree felling and machine movement was reduced by a total of 773 m² per hectare over traditional logging. Major reductions were also achieved in the amount of damage done to the forest canopy. In the planned extraction, the mean size of the canopy gaps formed was 189 m² less than in the traditional extraction. This was partially the result of fewer trees being felled into each gap. In the planned operation no more than four trees were arranged in a single gap whereas in the traditional operation as many as nine trees were felled together. Maintaining forest canopy cover and reducing the number of large canopy gaps is an important step towards maintaining the fire resistance of intact forests (Holdsworth and Uhl, in press). The accidental
burning of traditionally logged forests is increasing in the region. Thus, careful, planned logging may be a way to break the cycle of regional forest degradation that includes both direct logging damage and subsequent fire.
Bibliography
Barrels, P., Uhl, C. & Yared, G. 1993. O potencial de produção sustentavel de madereira em Paragominas, Pará na Amazônia Oriental: considerações ecológicas a econômicas. 7° Congresso Florestal Brasileiro. Anais da Sociedade Brasileira de Engenheiros Florestais, (Setembro): 387-392.
Holdsworth, A.R. & Uhl, C. Fire in eastern Amazonian logged rain forest and the potential for fire reduction. Ecol. Appl. (in press)
Uhl, C. & Vieira, I.C.G. 1989. Ecological impacts of selective logging in the Brazilian Amazon: a case study from the Paragominas region of the state of Pará. Biotropica, 21: 98-106.
Verissimo, A., Barreto, P., Mattos, M., Tarifa, R. & Uhl, C. 1992. Logging impacts and prospects for sustainable forest management in an old Amazonian frontier: the case of Paragominas. For. Ecol. Manage., 55: 169-199.
Williston, E.M. 1981. Small log sawmills. San Francisco, USA, Miller Freeman Publications.
<section>6</section>
Increased development of non-timber forest products in India: Some issues and concerns
D.D. Tewari and J.Y. Campbell
Devi D. Tewari is Associate Professor, Centre for Management in Agriculture, Indian Institute of Management. Ahmedabad, India.
Jeffrey Y. Campbell is Program Officer, Ford Foundation, New Delhi, India.
Note: This article has appeared as Tewari, D.D. and Campbell, J.Y. 1995. Developing and sustaining non-timber forest products: some policy issues and concerns with special reference to India. J. Sust. For., 3(1): 53-79.
Some considerations of the needs and risks associated with increased development and use of non-timber, forest products.
FIGURE 1 - Non-timber forest products (including fuelwood) make a significant contribution to the forestry sector in most countries
The contribution of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) to the forestry sector in most countries is significant, and studies are showing that they have been undervalued in the past. A recent valuation undertaken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests in India estimates that 220 million tonnes of fuelwood, 250 million tonnes of grass and green fodder and 12 million m³ of timber are removed from India's forests annually. These products are estimated to be worth US$ 10 billion (Mukherjee, 1994).
In India, NTFPs provide about 40 percent of total official forest revenues and 55 percent of forest-based employment. Nearly 500 million people living in and around forests in India rely on NTFPs as a critical component for their sustenance (World Resources Institute, 1990). In Madhya Pradesh, the NTFPs which are primarily collected by tribal (i.e. members of local indigenous groups) women are worth more than Rs 21 billion (US$ 700 million) annually (Worldwatch Institute, 1991). Based on a study of ten forest protection committees under the Joint Forest Management programme, it was found that the income from NTFPs ranges from Rs 234 to Rs 5569 (US $8-$186) per hectare per year with a mean of Rs 2299 (US $79) (Malhotra et al., 1991).
Furthermore, revenues from NTFPs have been growing faster than revenues from timber in the past. For example, compound growth rates in revenue from NTFPs in India during the 1968/69 to 1976/77 period were 40 percent higher than those for timber. Export earnings from NTFPs on average account for about 60 to 70 percent of total export earnings from forest products, and this proportion has been rising. Moreover, there is considerable scope for increasing exports further by exploiting untapped resources as the current production of most NTFPs is estimated to be about 60 percent of the potential production. In the case of non-edible fibres and flowers, production is only 7 and 12 percent, respectively, of the potential production (Gupta, Banerji and Guleria, 1982).
It is now felt increasingly that management and development of NTFP resources is essential for various reasons. First, forest management focused on the production of NTFPs may be ecologically and economically sustainable provided that extraction rates do not exceed the maximum sustainable yield. Tribal communities have been involved in NTFP utilization for centuries without destroying the resource base. Managing forests for production of NTFPs also implies maintaining biological diversity of both plant and animal species.
Second, non-timber forest products are a vital source of livelihood for a large proportion of the poor living in or close to the forest in most tropical countries. In West Midnapore district in West Bengal, many village communities derive as much as 17 percent of their annual household incomes from NTFPs (Malhotra et al., 1991). Other estimates suggest that up to 35 percent of the income of tribal households in India comes from the collection of unprocessed NTFPs. Also, since NTFPs involve a large variety of seasonal products, returns are frequent and relatively continuous. Moreover, local processing of NTFPs can increase off-farm rural employment opportunities. Small-scale forest-based enterprises, many of them based on NTFPs, provide up to 50 percent of income for 20 to 30 percent of the rural labour force in India (Campbell, 1988).
Third, in addition to subsistence and income-generating potential, NTFPs also provide food security to large low-income populations, their cattle and other domestic animals, particularly during droughts or famines (FAO, 1989).
A major challenge related to the further development of NTFPs is the limited availability of documentation related to sustainable harvesting levels. In the past, studies on timber have dominated the scientific forestry literature. There are ethnobatanical studies which list a wide variety of forest products, descriptions of economically useful plants and scattered regional profiles of NTFP trade. The difficulty stems from a singular lack of hard scientific data on the economics of NTFP management, trade and marketing in different forest types; on biological production functions for most NTFP species; traditional harvesting and utilization patterns; and the impacts of commercialization and changing use patterns on the state of NTFPs and related activities.
Fortunately, in the past few years there has been a spurt of interest, and several NTFP-related studies have been undertaken. For example, some studies have looked at valuation issues (Peters, Gentry and Mendelssohn, 1989; de Beer and McDermott, 1989; Schwartzman, 1989; Padoch and de Jong, 1989; Campbell, 1988; Malhotra et al., 1991). Wickens (1991) has reviewed the issues related to the development of NTFPs. Richards (1992) has raised serious concerns about the viability of commercializing NTFPs as "eco-protection enterprises". May (1991) has studied the role of institutions in the NTFP markets in Brazilian Amazon. Case-studies by FAO (FAO, 1991a; 1991b) have analysed problems of value addition and organizational management in Southeast and East Asia. The International Tropical Timber Organization has developed guidelines for the sustainable use of all natural resources; these guidelines specifically stress the need for estimation of the present and potential values of
NTFPs (Arnetz, 1993). In India, pioneering work has been done by Gupta, Banerji and Guleria (1982). This article discusses some of the challenges related to increasing NTFP exploitation and highlights needs for sustainable management.
Challenges associated with increased exploitation
As development of NTFPs increases, there is a danger of unsustainable exploitation. Unsustainable extraction practices may occur for many reasons. Increasing demand can lead people to disregard traditional harvesting techniques. For example, prices of chironji seeds (Buchanania lanzan, B. latifolia) or Cuddapah almond, used as a substitute for almond in various delicacies, have increased more than 150 times or so within a span of five years in India. Many tribal people prematurely harvest chironji fruits and overexploit them to the extent that natural regeneration is now being hampered, especially in Madhya Pradesh.
In West Bengal, faulty techniques of collecting mahua flowers (the collectors break the apical twigs which affects flowering in the following year) were found to do considerable damage to the natural stock (Rama Krishna Mission Lokashiksha Parishad, 1992). In Central India, mahua forests are burnt repeatedly to simplify collection of the yellow flowers from the forest floor, damaging regeneration. As a result, young mahua trees are becoming scarce and some experts suggest that the species will be extinct by AD 2200.
Similarly, the indiscriminate collection of raw materials from forests for the incense stick (agarbatti) industry in Karnataka State in southern India has created large environmental losses in some areas. Two examples out of many in the state are the extensive loss of gulmavu (Machilus macarantha) trees in Coorg and Malanad districts resulting from debarking of the trees, and of species such as Ailanthus malabarica (halmaddi) and Borewellia serrota owing to unsustainable exploitation (Parameswarappa, 1992). Similarly, the indiscriminate felling and collection of NTFPs from uppage (Garcinia cambogia) trees in Karnataka has resulted in widespread losses.
Policy and institutional challenges
Institutional and organizational processes need to be better understood in order to help communities manage NTFPs as part of a larger livelihood strategy, while maintaining an equitable distribution of responsibilities and benefits. It is possible for inappropriate, although well-meaning, policies to have an effect contrary to that desired.
A very good example of a policy and institutional response that proved inappropriate is governmental intervention in the NTFP industry in India. In an attempt to tap the potential more fully in terms of production and employment generation of the forestry sector in India, the Government of India set up the Forest Development Corporations (FDCs) in 1976, on the recommendation of the National Commission on Agriculture. One of the major objectives of the FDCs was to help tribal NTFP collectors by eliminating the large profit margins pocketed by local entrepreneurs and passing these benefits to tribal people in terms of better wages and working conditions.
An FDC was set up in each state; in addition, several government-supported cooperatives were also established. But the functioning of these cooperatives has often been detrimental to the interest of tribal people, and such organizations have not been cost-effective. As a result, tribal people sometimes receive as little as 10 to 40 percent of the sale price in the nearest NTFP market (Chambers, Saxena and Tushaar, 1990).
Tenure and ownership issues
Another challenge relates to tenure and ownership. Unless access and usufruct rights are given to users, there is little incentive to manage NTFPs sustainably. In an attempt to develop these resources, some Indian states nationalized many NTFPs. For example, Madhya Pradesh nationalized bamboo, khair, sal seeds, harra, gums and tendu leaves, among others. The tribal people were required to sell their produce exclusively to the Forest Department to the agent contractors appointed by them.
Production levels of some NTFPs declined sharply following nationalization (Chambers, Saxena and Tushaar, 1990). For example, production of tendu leaves in Madhya Pradesh declined from 5.1 million bags in 1981/82 to 3.9 million bags in 1985/86 - a decrease of 23.5 percent. In Orissa, the production of tendu leaves stagnated over a longer period. Similarly, after nationalization, the collection of sal seeds fell from 200000 tonnes in 1979 to only 60000 tonnes in 1987 -a decline of 70 percent. The average annual production of lac also declined from 32000 tonnes during 1961-70 to 16000 tonnes during 1981-86 - a decline of about 50 percent.
FIGURE 2 Unsustainable collection of Ailanthus malabarica for the match Industry has resulted in widespread losses, particularly In Karnataka State, India
FIGURE 3 - Improper collection of the fruits of uppage (Garcinia cambogia) trees used in making ghee, a buffer substitute, can result In severe damage to the resource base
Nationalization can significantly reduce the remuneration to collectors of NTFPs. For example, the government of Madhya Pradesh, a central Indian state, paid only Rs 0.55 per kilogram of sal seeds collected as opposed to Rs 1.31 per kilogram, which a study (Chambers, Saxena and Tushaar, 1990) estimated could have been passed on to collectors after meeting all the expenses and margins of the Forest Department.
It can also result in delays in payment to gatherers, as government agencies often find it difficult to make prompt payments. This can stimulate the development of black market activities, with associated higher margins required to cover the costs of illegal activities. All these factors reduce tribal people's collection and incomes (Chambers, Saxena and Tushaar, 1990).
A number of experiments are under way to empower local communities in the protection and management of forest resources. India's Joint Forest Management programme in which local communities become partners with the State Forest Department, sharing responsibilities and benefits from forests, is an exciting step in this direction.
The size of enterprise development
Another challenge associated with the increased exploitation of NTFPs is a shift from small-scale to large-scale activities. If not carefully planned and managed, this shift can produce undesirable results, particularly in terms of benefits to local people.
Case-studies from India, Indonesia and Latin American and African countries on NTFP-based activities reveal that NTFP-based small-scale enterprises have some common characteristics. Obviously, these are small in size, are based in the household and are frequently seasonal in labour and employment generation. They are labour-intensive, are based on simple technologies, have low capital requirements and provide direct benefits to the local economy. Most important, they are accessible to low-income and socially disadvantaged groups and are most often managed by women (FAO, 1987; 1991a).
Large-scale enterprises typically incur higher collection and processing costs compared with small-scale enterprises because NTFP resources are scattered and hard to reach, making mass extraction and transfer costs high. Furthermore, for large-scale enterprises the minimum output required to break even may demand unsustainable exploitation and rapid moves in and out of the market. A very good example of the latter is the depletion of natural stands of edible palm species in southern Brazil during the 1960s by the palm-heart canning industry which has now moved to the states of Pará and Amapa. Further unsustainable harvesting practices of palm hearts are stressing the resource base in these states too (Richards, 1993).
However, small-scale enterprises also face some common constraints, including limited access to institutional finance and a lack of tax incentives, highly risky market environments and income-sharing problems. Moreover, as NTFP markets expand and efforts are made to increase local processing capacity in order to capture the value-added benefits, traditional patterns of management, income distribution and the division of labour can become disrupted (FAO, 1991a; 1991b). In Karnataka, studies by the Indian Social Studies Trust showed how increased commercialization of one product and improved technologies applied to another negatively affected the predominant user group in each case women. As men saw greater value attached and felt attracted by new, more mechanized technology, women were marginalized (FAO, 1991b). A similar story can be heard from Raigarh village of West Bengal, India (Rama Krishna Mission Lokashiksha Parishad, 1992). About six or seven years ago, NTFP
collection was a low-key activity, mainly done by women in Raigarh village. But, after the introduction of a Joint Forest Management programme under the Forest Department, as NTFP collection became a major activity for some families, men have taken over women's employment.
Requirements for sustainable management
Given the considerable potential of NTFPs to contribute to local livelihoods, there is a real need for: field-level research; synthesis and collection of information on NTFPs from as many published sources as possible, and their dissemination in the form of practical guidelines for NTFP identification, regeneration, extraction management, collection, processing, storage and marketing; and training on technical issues, including silviculture, extraction management, processing and marketing issues.
The sustainable extraction levels of NTFPs are not easy to calculate, and yet they are a prerequisite for NTFP-based development. In order to ensure this, much more information is needed on current rates of extraction and on productivity rates for different products. Indiscriminate extraction practices have already resulted in the depletion of natural regeneration and local extermination of species in some cases.
Without good yield data and matching data on extraction rates (the flow) per unit of area, it is almost impossible to decide whether a given practice is sustainable in the long term or not. What is needed are systematic methodologies for rapidly assessing the distribution and yields of NTFPs and current and potential extraction levels.
More precise research is needed on the ecological requirements and functions of NTFP species, their regeneration rates and yields in different forest types and ecological zones and on innovative silvicultural techniques for managing multiple products.
Research is needed to clarify tenurial arrangements and understand the often conflicting layers of traditional rights, use pattern settlements, concessions and privileges and gender relationships.
Institutional processes and organizational arrangements need to be better understood in order to help communities manage NTFPs as part of a broader livelihood strategy, while maintaining an equitable distribution of responsibilities and benefits.
Research is needed on the values of selected commodities in village, district, national and international markets, on the marketing chain and the profits of collector/producers, processors and entrepreneurs.
The impact of product substitution and the possibility of creating new markets need to be examined, together with the impacts of changes in collection, processing and marketing patterns. Price supply and demand trends will need to be assessed to determine the medium- and long-term economic viability and market absorptive capacity of each NTFP.
FIGURE 4 In many cases, small scale Industries based on NTFPs - for example, furniture making from rattan - can be more sustainable and provide more local benefits than large scale exploitation
The role of marketing cooperatives, forest corporations and voluntary agencies should be examined to maximize benefits to collectors and producers. Special emphasis should be placed on developing appropriate small-scale processing technology and enterprises which maximize value added at the local level but do not strain the resource base.
All this should be carried out simultaneously. Information from field-level research and existing sources should be used as inputs for training and extension, technical and credit support.
Conclusion
As local people's resource and livelihood needs come to the forefront, particularly their dependency on forests and their myriad products, forest management strategies are increasingly devoting attention to the current use and future potential of non-timber forest products. NTFPs represent significant opportunities in terms of products, employment and income generation but, as with other renewable resources, attempts to utilize this potential further carry with them the risk of resource depletion. Moreover, the current character of NTFP exploitation, i.e. primarily small-scale and of direct benefit to rural people, risks being changed or even lost. Development of NTFPs merits immediate and long-term attention but should be undertaken with clarity and caution.
Bibliography
Arnetz, F. 1993. Non-timber products: their sustainable development of tropical forests. Trop. For. Manage. Update, 3(2).
Campbell, J.Y. 1988. Putting people's products first: multiple-use management for non-wood forest products in India. (unpublished draft)
Chambers, R., Saxena, N.C. & Tushaar, S. 1990. To the hands of the poor: water and trees. New Delhi, Oxford & IBH Publishing. 273 pp.
de Beer, J.H. & McDermott, M.J. 1989. Economic value of non-timber forest products in Southeast Asia. The Netherlands, Council of the International Union of the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources-World Conservation Union (IUCN).
FAO. 1987. Review of forest-based small-scale processing enterprises. In Small-scale forest-based processing enterprises, p. 5-30. FAO Forestry Paper No. 79. Rome.
FAO. 1989. Household food security and forestry: an analysis of socio-economic issues. FAO Community Forestry Note No. 1. Rome.
FAO. 1991a. Case-studies in forest -based small-scale enterprises in Asia: rattan matchmaking and handicrafts, edited by Jay. Campbell. FAO Community Forestry Case Study No. 4. Bangkok.
FAO. 1991b. Women's role in dynamic forest based small-scale enterprises: case-studies on uppage and lacquerware from India. FAO Community Forestry Case Study No. 3. Rome.
Gupta, R., Banerji, P. & Guleria, A. 1982. Tribal unrest and forestry management in Bihar. CMA Monograph No. 98. Ahmedabad, India, Indian Institute of Management. 88 pp.
Malhotra, K.C., Deb, D., Dutta, M., Vasula, T.S., Yadav, G. & Adhikari, M. 1991. Role of non-timber forest products in village economy: A household survey in Jamboni Range, Midnapore, West Bengal. India, Indian Institute of Bio-social Research and Development.
May, P.M. 1991. Building institutions and markets for non-wood forest products from the Brazilian Amazon. Unasylva, 42(165): 9-16.
Mukherjee, A.K. 1994. India's forests: a status report: concepts, definitions, trends, controversies. Paper presented at the International Workshop on India's Forests Management and Ecological Revival. New Delhi, 10-12 February.
Padoch, C. & de Jong, W. 1989. Production and profit in agroforestry: an example from the Peruvian Amazon. In J.G. Browder, ed, Fragile lands of Latin America: strategies for sustainable development, p. 102-113. Boulder, Colorado, USA, Westview Press.
Parameswarappa, S. 1992. Agarbathi industry in Karnataka: some thoughts on raw materials. My Forest, 28(2): 143-146.
Peters, Call., Gentry, AM & Mendelssohn, R.O. 1989. Valuation of an Amazonian rainforest. Nature, 339: 655-656.
Rama Krishna Mission Lokashiksha Perished. 1992. Role of NTFP in forest fringe dwellers' economy and current status of forest flora: a case-study at Raigarh Forest Protection Committee under Bankura South Division, Ford Foundation Project Report. Delhi.
Richards, D.C. 1992. Ecoprotection enterprise, hope hyperbole or hoax. Draft paper prepared for the Bio Diversity Support Programme.
Richards, M. 1993. The potential of non-timber forest products in sustainable natural forest management in Amazonia. Commonw. For. Rev., 72(1): 21-27.
Schwartzman, S. 1989. Extractive reserves in the Amazon. In J.G. Browder, ed. Fragile lands of Latin America: strategies for sustainable development, p. 150-163. Boulder, Colorado, USA, Westview Press.
Wickens, G.E. 1991. Management issues for development of non-timber forest products. Unasylva, 42(165): 3-8.
World Resources Institute. 1990. The World Bank in the forest sector: a global policy paper. Wasteland News, 8(2): 6-12.
Worldwatch Institute. 1991. Quoted in Wasteland News, (July-August): 22.
<section>7</section>
Indigenous ecotourism: The Capirona programme in Napo Province, Ecuador
J.G. Colvin
Jean G. Colvin is Director, University Research Expeditions Program (UREP), University of California, Berkeley, USA.
An analysis of an ecotourism programme which is independently initiated, operated and fully controlled by an indigenous community.
View of the Capirona tourist facilities
Ecotourism is one of the fastest growing segments of the travel industry today. It is potentially an economic alternative or complement to other land-use options, including logging, oil production or cattle ranching. and can represent an important source of foreign exchange.
Many ecotourist destinations in the developing world are located in wilderness areas inhabited by indigenous populations. The rain forests of Brazil, Ecuador and Peru, for example, are home to peoples who depend on the forest for food, building materials and medicine. For years, indigenous people have been competing for resources with large-scale users. The timber and oil industries as well as pharmaceutical companies looking for new drug sources have been encouraged by governments which are struggling to generate foreign exchange. Ecotourism is one of the newest opportunities for income generation from natural resources.
Ecotourism can mean many things to the local people who inhabit these areas -job opportunities, enormous increases in income and a revival of traditional crafts. But it also can have negative social impacts by causing competition for land and resources as well as a disruption of centuries-old values and traditions as wealthy outsiders visit and thereby influence traditional villages and land-use patterns.
Although there are still many unanswered questions about what constitutes proper management, ecotourism does seem to offer a sustainable economic alternative - the possibility of generating income without destroying the environment. However, for ecotourism to work effectively, local people must be partners in the process and derive genuine economic benefit.
Unfortunately, the burgeoning ecotourism industry shows little evidence of local benefit and almost no local control. In the vast majority of cases, ecotourism programmes are run by large national or international companies operating from the capital cities. In many cases, very little of the money generated even enters the country. Local people are often reduced to taking the menial jobs of housekeepers at tourist lodges, cooks and guides. Although some individuals may benefit, the communities as a whole generally do not.
An example of a programme that does not fit this mould is Capirona, an ecotourism effort completely operated by an indigenous community in Ecuador's Amazon basin. Capirona is a community of 24 Quichua Indian families who inhabit the rain forest in Ecuador's Napo Province.
Traditionally, like most indigenous communities in the area, the inhabitants of Capirona have survived by growing subsistence crops and a few hectares of maize and coffee for sale in the market towns up-river.
In the face of steady increases in the price of seeds and transport, several years ago the community was forced to seek other income-producing activities. Unlike recent immigrants into the area, the people of Capirona did not want to turn to logging. They value the forest highly as a source of everything, from food to medicine, and were concerned that logging, although providing short-term gains, might not be managed in a sustainable manner. In an effort to keep this valuable resource intact, in 1991 the community decided collectively to start a small-scale ecotourism programme.
The idea for the project originated with marquises Tapuy, a young man from the village whose elder brother had been the first president of the Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of Ecuador (CONAIE). The younger Tapuy, concerned that too many young people equated economic success with urban jobs, was committed to starting a successful grassroots development project that would benefit and involve all members of the community. Although, initially, many of the villagers were reluctant to invite outsiders to Capirona, one of the factors that convinced them to change their minds was that travel agents from the town were already bringing tourists into their forest with no direct benefit to the community.
Tapuy, his sister Bertha and Cesar Andy, the former village president, persuaded the community that a small-scale, well-planned project could be minimally intrusive, could generate much-needed income and give them control over who visited their forest. Through a series of community meetings, the villagers worked out the details of the programme and plans for the visitor facilities. With a small loan for the purchase of materials from the indigenous federation of Napo Province, FOIN, and money they had earned from selling maize, they purchased the materials to build a visitors' centre.
Although many families in Capirona aspire to live in tin-roofed, cinder-block structures like their local community centre, they recognized the tourists' desire for "authenticity" and built a small tourist lodge and dining area in the traditional grass and bamboo style with a lovely view of the river. Everyone in the village participated in the construction of the tourist facilities which are a short walk from the main village centre.
Visitors with Capirona guide, Tarquino Tapuy, one of the programme originators
From the beginning, it was clear that Capirona would appeal to a special kind of tourist. The community is located on the banks of the River Puni, deep in primary lowland tropical forest in eastern Ecuador. The only access is by foot or dugout canoe when the river is high enough. Visitors are met in the regional capital of Tena and transported to the trail head by truck or bus. From there, they must be able to make the two-hour walk through the forest to the village.
With the help of a German non-governmental organization, Capirona printed flyers about the programme and distributed them in the provincial capital, Tena. The first visitors to Capirona came in groups of two or three -mainly student travellers. In the first year Capirona had fewer than 50 visitors, with a group of four being the largest. Now they are opting for larger groups, arranged in cooperation with study groups from United States universities.
A four- to six-day programme is offered to visitors. Activities include walks in the forest led by guides who recount myths and legends of the forest and explain traditional uses of the vast array of tropical plants and flowers that grow in such profusion; demonstrations of traditional resource use such as basket-making and how to use a blowgun, and participation in the minga, a day when visitors and residents alike share in a communal work project. The minga could be a day clearing the land for planting yucca, constructing a community centre or building a village latrine.
While locally grown maize, yucca and tropical fruits are served to visitors, a large part of the food and supplies must be transported from Tena, several hours up-river by canoe. The community is considering what other food crops could be grown locally to avoid the heavy expense of having to purchase and transport supplies.
The project continues to be a communal effort. Women from different families rotate the responsibility of preparing meals for visitors. Men from the village operate the canoes and act as guides through the forest. Some individuals are responsible for keeping accounts while others monitor supplies. Even the village shaman participates by sharing his special knowledge of the forest, local legends and demonstrating some of the traditional ceremonies. Everyone joins in the farewell party for visitors. Since the programme's emphasis is on cultural exchange, visitors are asked to share something of their culture at the farewell party where traditional Quichua music and dance are offered.
Community members also manage the accounts, determine how much to charge, decide what groups to receive and when and, most important, decide together how to utilize the financial gains. Profits from the project have paid for medical emergencies, provided loans to community members, purchased an outboard motor for the communal canoe and capitalized a small store that sells basic staples to visitors and community members.
A Capirona guide explains the traditional use of plants to a visitor
Code for the indigenous-sensitive ecotourist
Ecotourism programmes take place in lands inhabited by indigenous people. An too often, tour groups visit local villages without the permission of, or direct benefit to, the communities involved. Even if a few individuals receive payment for allowing visitors to enter their homes and to take photographs, there is no benefit to the community at large, a situation which may give rise to intracommunity tension.
The following "Code" is based on visitors' guidelines established at Capirona during the 1992 workshop.
Before you visit indigenous areas, whether with a tour or independently, consider the following:
· Who operates the programme? Is it run by local people? If so, is it operated communally or do only a few individuals or families profit?
· If it is not operated by indigenous people, do local communities receive an equitable share of the profits or any other direct benefits, such as training? Or do only a few individuals/families benefit?
· Learn as much as you can about the local culture and customs. Visit local indigenous federation offices for information and materials with an indigenous perspective.
· Do not take photographs without asking permission.
· If you want to give a gift, make it a useful gift to the community rather than to an individual. Most indigenous communities function communally. Gifts for the local school are much appreciated and shared by all.
· Refrain from tipping individuals. If you are with a group, everyone can contribute to a gift for the community.
· Be aware of the boundaries of individual homes and gardens. Never enter or photograph without permission.
· Bring your own water purification tablets. Do not rely on boiling water exclusively as it depletes scarce fuelwood or contributes to forest destruction.
· Take out what you take in (especially non-biodegradable items such as plastic water bottles). Use biodegradable soaps.
· Be sensitive to those around you. Use headphones with tape/cassette players.
· Do not make promises you cannot or will not keep - for example, sending back photographs to local people.
· Do not collect plants or plant products without permission.
· Wear appropriate and discreet clothing. For example, many cultures are offended by women in shorts even though they may go topless.
· Respect local residents' privacy and customs. Treat people with the same respect you would expect from visitors to your own home.
Refining the process
In the summer of 1992, the community invited a small team from the University of California Research Expeditions Program (UREP) to organize a workshop that would work with the Capirona community to develop long-term management strategies for the project. The community was particularly concerned about practical issues, so a considerable amount of time was devoted to designing a promotional plan and new brochure; a cost-benefit analysis to determine a pricing structure and the ideal group size; a very basic accounting system; written guidelines for guides and visitors; and suggestions for dealing with emergencies and taking reservations. Workshop members also created a self-guiding trail identifying important local plants, their traditional use and the name in Quichua, Spanish, English and Latin. A second workshop in 1993 initiated a forest and floral survey and also produced trilingual (Quichua, Spanish, English) informational displays for visitors on Quichua history,
culture, traditional resource use and the political organization of Ecuador's indigenous groups. Similar displays were created for a regional office in Tena.
Other income-generating activities related to the ecotourism programme were discussed, such as selling locally made crafts, postcards and a biodegradable soap made from a local plant. There was general agreement that the community could not rely on ecotourism alone, but ought to consider other economic alternatives. Some of the possibilities discussed included raising chickens for visitors' meals and selling the surplus in town, establishing Capirona as a guide training centre for the region; and cultivating cacao, natural pesticides or other forest products for sale in Tena.
The workshop in August 1993 further developed some of these ideas, evaluated progress to date, produced a bilingual educational display and began a comprehensive forest survey. The workshop discussions raised many issues about the environmental impact of having visitors. For example, the river is currently used by villagers and visitors both as a water source and for washing and bathing. This situation poses potential problems of river water contamination.
A second challenge was the increasing need to cut wood to sustain the fires that are built several times daily to purify drinking water for visitors. Although the community is now using gas canisters for fuel to boil water, there are questions about the long-term sustainability of this option'. Food was another issue. Locally grown fruits and vegetables comprise the major part of the meals offered to visitors, although supplementary food is purchased and transported from Tena. Given the costs and problems of transport, increasing numbers of visitors may result in clearing more land to produce enough crops to sustain the ecotourism programme. Waste disposal was another consideration in terms of having many visitors over an extended period. The limits needed to safeguard the conservation of the natural resources on which the community depends are still to be determined.
There are also issues of privacy as well as safety. The hard-core ecotourist wants to visit the forest, experience its solitude and wander its paths freely. Yet the forest has many risks for the inexperienced visitor and a guide is necessary for both information and safety. Many ecotourists also want to visit traditional homes and experience a different culture. Yet the Quichua Indians are a private people who are not used to outsiders, much less Westerners. A balance must be established which sets limits on visitors while not making them feel confined or too controlled. The participation of two Native American students (Hopi and Navajo) in the workshops provided an added level of cultural exchange. They shared valuable information on how the Hopi and Navajo have attempted to balance these conflicting interests within their own communities.
Visitors and villagers join in a minga to collect maize
Candles for the tourists, electricity for the Quichua
The visitors' hut at Capirona has candle lighting, while generators are used for village functions. This dichotomy typifies one of the most serious issues arising from the project: the issue of cultural authenticity. Should the villagers continue to live in traditional huts or wear traditional dress in order to maintain the appearance of "authenticity" to please visitors? Just how far should the community go to accommodate the visitors' desires without compromising their own integrity? Is their traditional culture enhanced by the tourists' interest?
Some claim that tourism revives and maintains traditions that would otherwise be lost, be they traditional dances, ceremonies or crafts. Conversely, maintaining the aura of traditions such as candies for the tourists when the local people want and use lights from generators is unauthentic, because indigenous people are now, and have always been, changing. They do wear Western clothes, many attend school, and all are involved in the struggle to maintain authority over their traditional lands in the face of encroachments ranging from colonists to oil companies. In fact, the future of Capirona's model programme has recently been threatened by the visit of seismic teams from the national oil company exploring for oil in the region. The community adamantly protested this incursion into their lands and, at least for now, the exploratory efforts have ceased.
The enthusiasm of the representatives from nearby villages for starting their own ecotourism projects also made it clear that a regional plan is necessary. For indigenous ecotourist programmes to compete successfully with established four operators, there needs to be a regional plan and policies governing relations with outside travel agents. The market for this specialized segment of the ecotourism industry is limited. So developing programmes with different emphases is crucial to avoid saturating the market. For example, some villages may specialize in taking in bird watchers, others might focus on cultural activities while still others might serve as regional research, education or training centres for local and foreign scientists and students. An indigenous ecotourism network is currently being developed, in conjunction with the regional indigenous federation, to coordinate these activities.
Conclusion
There is growing interest in ecotourism among Ecuador's indigenous peoples. Recently, 23 communities organized a formal ecotourism network under the sponsorship of the provincial indigenous federation, FOIN. So far, only two communities apart from Capirona are accepting visitors, but others are actively preparing to do so. In August 1994, 19 communities of the Shuar ethnic group in Pastaza Province agreed to begin their own ecotourism programmes. The national Amazon Indian federation, CONFENIAE, now has a permanent ecotourism staff position.
Although the country's ecotourism programmes are still predominantly run by large national and international companies without indigenous representation, the situation is beginning to change. The government tourism agency, CETUR, has formed a commission charged with developing tourism in Amazonia in cooperation with indigenous federations.
Much of the current interest in ecotourism among indigenous groups stems from a fear of oil development in the region. Serious contamination of rivers and soils in other parts of Ecuador has galvanized most indigenous federations against oil exploitation. However. the government is still actively exploring for oil in Amazonia. Capirona and many other indigenous communities are located within the prospective sites and have already had conflicts with oil exploration teams.
Ecotourism as a conservation strategy is not a panacea. The travel industry is a fragile business. The place that is "in" this year is out of fashion the next. But, even more important for ecotourist sites, whose very remoteness, pristine nature and wildness make them attractive, is the threat of too much success. Ecotourism will not work for every forest. There must be a diversification of sustainable activities. And where local people are involved they must participate fully and gain equitable benefits.
<section>8</section>
Sustainable development: What do we owe to future generations?
T Hurka
Thomas Hurka is with the Department of Philosophy, University of Calgary. Alberta, Canada.
Note: This article is adapted, with permission, from a presentation made at a conference, Environmental ethics, sustainability, competition and forestry, held on 23 and 24 October 1992 at the University of British Columbia. The conference was sponsored by the university's Centre for Applied Ethics and the Goethe Institute, Vancouver. The conference presentations were published as Environmental ethics: sustainability, competition and forestry. A Working Paper, MacDonald, C.J., ad. 1992. Vancouver: Canada, Centre for Applied Ethics, University of British Columbia.
The implications of the concept of sustainable development.
The concept of "sustainable development", especially as proposed in the Brundtland Commission report Our common future (World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987), is an attempt to balance two moral demands. The first demand is for "development", including economic development or economic growth. It arises mainly from the needs or desires of present generations, especially of those groups whose present poverty gives them a low quality of life and calls urgently for steps to improve that quality of life. The second demand is for "sustainability", for ensuring that we do not sacrifice the future for the sake of gains in the present.
As the Brundtland Commission recognizes, these two demands can conflict. In fact, economic growth or development is often a prime source of threats to the natural environment. But the commission believes that the demands can be balanced, that policies can be found which satisfy both to a reasonable degree, or which, in the often-quoted words, "meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs". Critics of the commission are less sanguine on this point. Environmentalist critics claim that to include any reference to "development" in a moral ideal is to compromise fatally one's commitment to environmental protection; "sustainable development", they say, "is not a balancing act, but a contradiction in terms". Pro-growth critics, on the other hand, contend that the restraints on economic activity proposed in the name of "sustainability" will have unacceptably high costs in foregone growth and prosperity.
Much of the discussion of the Brundtland Commission has focused on this issue of the coherence of its central ideal. But the discussion has tended to take for granted the commission's formulation of the ideal and of its component moral demands. These formulations, however, are vague: there are different interpretations of what is meant by a concern for the "needs of the present" or the "needs" of future generations. This article explores this philosophical issue further and, especially, asks what exactly may be owed to future generations under the heading of "sustainability".
First, however, it should be noted that, although they can conflict, the two moral demands behind the concept of sustainable development have a parallel basis. The Brundtland Commission starts from the assumption that the needs of others place moral demands on us. The commission assumes what can be called an "ethic of outcomes". It assumes that we have a duty to produce good outcomes for people or to prevent bad outcomes, no matter what the cause of the bad outcome would be. And it also holds that this duty is not extinguished by distance in space or time. The place where a person in need lives does not influence our duty to relieve their need. Analogously, that a person will live in another generation or another century does not remove our duty to care about their need. Suffering 100 years hence will be as real then as present suffering is now, and calls in the same way for steps to prevent it. Like the duty to people in underdeveloped areas, the duty concerning future
generations arises when an ethic of outcomes is combined with a principle of impartiality: impartiality with respect to spatial location, in the one case, and to temporal location in the other.
This, then, is the abstract basis of the Brundtland Commission's concern for sustainability. And the commitment to temporal impartiality is reflected in the commission's balancing of the "needs of the present" with the "needs" of future generations, or in the implicit assumption that the two sets of needs have equal moral weight. There are, however, different interpretations of an equal concern for generations, or different forms that a temporally impartial concern for needs or interests can take. These interpretations are considered here, both as elaborations of the Brundtland Commission and as moral views worth evaluating in their own right.
The first view says that we should weigh gains in well-being with respect to times and, in particular, should not prefer a smaller increase in present wellbeing to larger increases in the future. We should try instead to maximize the sum of increases in wellbeing across times, or the total surplus of good over evil in all human lives, counting future lives equally against those in the present.
This view applies the structure of utilitarianism to the duty concerning future generations and can therefore be called utilitarianism about future generations. It holds, with the founder of the utilitarian school, Jeremy Bentham, that "each is to count for one and no one for more than one", in the sense that a unit gain in quality of life for one person counts no more nor less than a unit gain for another. Our moral goal should always be to produce the greatest total of such gains, no matter by whom they are enjoyed.
Utilitarianism has been extensively discussed by philosophers, and many objections have been raised against it. Two objections are especially relevant here. First, utilitarianism is an extremely, even excessively, demanding moral view. If we have a duty always to bring about the best outcome, then any time we can increase the well-being of others or ourselves -that is, just about any time - we have a moral duty to do so. There is no moral time off, no moral relaxation, no such thing as a moral holiday. We are always duty-bound to be sacrificing something for the sake of benefits elsewhere. Second, utilitarianism can favour unequal distributions of wellbeing and, in particular, can impose severe deprivations on the few for the sake of gains for the many. Given its interpretation of impartiality, utilitarianism will count the deprivations of the few as a moral cost but, if they produce benefits for enough other people, this cost will be outweighed and even a severe inequality
can be approved on balance.
These two objections come together when utilitarianism is applied to future generations. If the quality of life improves through time because of economic growth and technological innovation, then the worst-off generations in history are the earliest generations. But they have a very demanding duty to make sacrifices for future generations, for example by investing rather than consuming resources. The earliest generations, despite their comparatively low quality of life, have a stringent duty to sacrifice their quality of life for the sake of people who, no matter what, will be far better off than they.
Some philosophers, feeling the force of these objections, have proposed replacing utilitarianism about future generations with a different -egalitarian -view. This view cares not just about the sum of benefits across generations but also about their equitable distribution, or about intergenerational equality. We do not sacrifice the worst-off generation for better-off generations, but aim in some way at equality of condition among them.
This egalitarian view can take several forms, but an interesting version has been proposed by Barry (1983). Barry considers that each generation has a duty to pass on to its successors a total range of resources and opportunities that is at least as good as its own. Those generations that enjoy favourable conditions of life must pass on similar circumstances of life to their successors: generations that are less fortunate have no such stringent obligation.
Several points in Barry's view are worth mentioning. First, it characterizes our duty concerning future generations not in terms of their well-being or quality of life but in terms of their range of opportunities. If we leave successor generations the opportunity for a high quality of life but they misuse it - if they squander the resources we have left them -that is their fault, not ours, and does not mean that we have failed in our duty. Second, the view's reference to a "total range" of opportunities allows variations in how the duty is fulfilled at different times in history. Referring to a range of opportunities allows trade-offs between different sources of opportunities: resources, technology, capital investment, environmental quality.
Understood in this way, the egalitarian view has several interesting features. It does not require large sacrifices by the earliest generations; on the contrary, it never requires a generation to make sacrifices for the sake of generations that will be better off than it is. This view seems close to some of the intentions of the Brundtland Commission. Utilitarianism about future generations fits at best the abstract idea of impartiality with respect to times, but the egalitarian view fits the specific language of "sustainable development". Thus, the term "sustainable" suggests a process that continues at a constant level through time. This is precisely what happens if each generation passes on an equal range of opportunities to its successors: a level of opportunities is achieved and then sustained through time. And the view's focus on opportunities fits the commission's interpretation of "development": what is sustained is not quality of life as such, but the economic and
other activity that permits quality of life. What sustainable development ensures, in the commission's words, is the "ability of future generations to meet their own needs"; again, what is passed on is only opportunities.
Is the egalitarian view, therefore, the best view of our duty concerning future generations? There seem to be two serious objections against it.
The first objection is the other side of one of the view's merits. The egalitarian view does not place excessive demands on early generations to make sacrifices for the sake of later generations, but that is because it places no such demands at all - early generations need do nothing for later generations. Surely this is going too far; surely early generations have some duty to enable their successors to live better than themselves. An ideal of "sustainability", or of a constant level of wellbeing through time, may be attractive when we imagine it starting from a high level of well-being, but it is not attractive starting from a low level of well-being. There is nothing inspiring about a consistently maintained level of misery. There may not be as stringent a duty to improve conditions for future generations as utilitarianism claims, but surely there is some such duty.
The second objection is more abstract and concerns the way all egalitarian views focus on comparative judgements. Imagine that I am well off and you are badly off. Egalitarianism says the reason I should help you is that you are worse off than I. But surely this is not the right reason. The right reason is simply that you are badly off, apart from any comparison with me; it is your condition considered in itself that generates my duty. The egalitarian interest in comparative judgements does not make a practical difference in this case, since it still leads to the right conclusion: that I should help you. But, in other cases, it does make a difference. Imagine that I am extremely well off and you, although very well off, are still somewhat less well off than I am. Egalitarianism says I have the same reason to help you as in the first case; that you are less well off than I am. But it is not clear that there is any necessity about helping in this case. If your condition
considered in itself is very good, why do I have any duty at all to improve it?
Reflecting on these objections leads to a third view about our duty concerning future generations. This third view states that our duty is not to make the condition of future generations as good as possible, as utilitarianism claims, or even as good as our own, as egalitarianism claims. Our duty is only to make the condition of future generations reasonably good. If we follow utilitarianism and formulate the duty in terms of quality of life, we will say that we have a duty to give future generations a reasonable quality of life. But Barry (1983) had persuasive arguments showing that the proper subject-matter of justice is opportunities. If we accept these arguments, we will formulate the third view as saying that each generation has a duty to pass on to its successor a range of opportunities that allows for a reasonable quality of life - in short, a reasonable range of opportunities. If a generation can pass on a better range of opportunities, one that allows for a more than
reasonable quality of life, that may be a nice or even admirable thing to do. But it is not a duty.
This third view rests on an idea for which economists have coined the term "satisficing", meaning "making satisfactory". It says that, in general, rational agents do not strive obsessively for the best possible outcome but are content when they find one that is reasonably good. This third view, the "satisficing" view, has several attractive features.
First, the view's claims about early generations are midway between those of the egalitarian and utilitarian views. Early generations do have a duty concerning later generations; they should help enable their descendants to live lives that are reasonably good. But if their own lives are not reasonably good, they may weigh a concern for their own interests against their duty to their descendants. Second, the view moderates its demands on later generations, Imagine that our present range of opportunities allows us a quality of life that is far more than reasonably good. We do not violate a satisficing duty if we pass on a smaller range of opportunities to our successors, so long as this range is reasonably large, i.e. above a threshold.
Finally, the satisficing view fits an important part of the Brundtland Commission's language: its reference to "needs", as in "the needs of the present" and enabling "future generations to meet their own needs". We normally contrast people's needs with their wants, or with luxuries, or with things that benefit them but in a less significant or morally compelling way. Needs are not all that matter for a good life, but they come first and have a certain priority. It is natural to define this priority in satisficing terms: people's needs are what must be satisfied if they are to have a reasonably good life, while wants and luxuries allow them an even better life. And needs have priority because our duty to others is only to make their conditions of life reasonably good. To talk of "needs", then, as the Brundtland Commission does, is to talk in what looks like a satisficing way.
If this is right, however, there is a certain conflict between the commission's discussion of "sustainability" and its references to "needs". "Sustainability" suggests a constantly maintained level of well-being through time, and a duty that is violated if there is ever a decline in the conditions of life. But to speak of "needs" allows such a decline: if a wealthy generation's duty to its successors concerns only their needs, it does nothing wrong if it leaves them a little less than its own tremendous range of opportunities. In fact, speaking of "needs" allows a continuous decline in the conditions of life, so long as they remain above some threshold level. This is not to suggest that this conflict is of great practical or political significance. The problem in the world today is not that people are tempted to sacrifice more than they need to for future generations; it is that they seem oblivious to duties concerning the future.
Nonetheless, there is a philosophical question about what the best account of our duty concerning future generations is, and on that question "sustainability" and "needs" conflict. The author considers that the reference to "needs" is primary here: it is future people's condition considered in itself that matters, not its comparison with our own. It is not our privilege that entails responsibility, but our descendants' possible poverty. Accordingly, the satisficing view could be the best account of both our duty concerning future generations and, despite the need to rename it, sustainable development. It needs just two refinements to be complete.
In their initial formulations, the egalitarian and satisficing views treat generations as wholes; the present generation as a whole has a duty to pass certain conditions of life on to successor generations as wholes. But generations consist of individuals, and it is these individuals whose conditions of life matter morally. Thus, the demands of satisficing are not satisfied if just some or even a reasonable number of the individuals in a future generation live well; they must all be able to live well. We cannot, acting today, guarantee a proper division of a future generation's conditions of life, but our goal is that all its members can enjoy reasonable wellbeing.
The second point concerns an issue any complete view of our duties concerning the future must address: population growth and population size. This issue is especially pressing for the utilitarian view. Since this view is concerned with producing the best outcomes possible, it must decide whether producing a larger population is, other things being equal, better than producing a smaller one and, if it is, how the value of increased numbers weighs against the disvalue of its probable result: a lower quality of life. The egalitarian and satisficing views do not need to address these questions themselves. They seem neutral on the question of whether a larger population is, other things being equal, better or even whether there is a duty to preserve the human race from extinction. They claim only that, if there will be future people, we owe them certain conditions of life. The views therefore need to be supplemented by claims about the duty (if any) to produce numbers of human
lives. Whatever these supplementary claims say, issues about population size affect the core of the satisficing duty. Since this duty is, as mentioned above, to ensure that each member of a future generation enjoys reasonable conditions of life, its demands will be more pressing the more such members there will be. If the numbers in a future generation will be larger, we must pass on a larger total set of resources, capital and unspoiled wilderness if each individual is to have a reasonable supply. And if we cannot pass on this larger set, and producing the larger population is not a duty, then producing a smaller population is a duty. If we are to avoid violating our duty concerning future generations - to ensure that each can live reasonably well - we must restrain population growth.
The focus has so far been on the "sustainable" half of "sustainable development", and the interpretation of our impartial duty concerning future generations. But the Brundtland Commission also accepts an impartial duty concerning people in developing countries, and the same interpretive options arise for it. Thus, a utilitarian view about developing countries states that we should aim at the greatest sum total of benefits for people in all countries, counting a unit gain in one country no more or less than in another; an egalitarian view states that developed countries should help developing countries reach a level of opportunities equal to their own; and a satisficing view states that developed countries should help developing countries reach a level of opportunities that is reasonably good. Arguments similar to those favouring satisficing in the intergenerational case could also favour it in the international case, suggesting that the best overall view applies a
satisficing principle both across times and across spatial locations: we are all to aim at reasonably good conditions of life both for our own descendants and for people elsewhere. The debate about the coherence of "sustainable development" is then one about whether these two aims are compatible. Critics of the commission claim that they are not: we cannot ensure reasonable opportunities both for our descendants and for people elsewhere now. The commission believes we can. But the debate is an empirical one, about the possibility of satisfying two parallel satisficing demands, each arising from a satisficing interpretation of an impartial ethic of outcomes.
Turning briefly to the relationship between sustainable development and competitiveness, if there is a moral vision implicit in the term "competitiveness", is this vision compatible with the ideal of sustainable development?
At the level of theory, the answer must be no. The term "competitiveness" is not normally used by those who have an impartial concern for people in all countries. On the contrary, it usually appeals to those who are competitive, who want their own country to do better than others or who at least care more about their country's doing well than about others' doing well. Taking Canada as an example, the promoters of Canadian competitiveness would not think it a good thing if economic developments led to a transfer of wealth from well-off Canadians to poorer people in developing countries; on the contrary, they would deplore this loss of competitiveness. But the ideal of sustainable development as formulated by the Brundtland Commission would applaud this development as helping to meet the needs of those whose needs are most pressing.
A moral vision of competitiveness can embrace part of the ideal of sustainable development, that is, its impartial concern for the future. Thus, we can care about competitiveness in a long-term rather than in just a short-term way, so that we care about competitiveness for Canadians not just now but into the distant future. In managing the British Columbian forests, for example, we can ensure that we do not ravage the forests today for the sake of quick profits, but instead practise sustainable forestry, leaving a resource that our descendants can use and gain employment from in the same way that we do today.
This limited concern for sustainability - sustainability just here, for Canadians only - is indeed compatible with a kind of competitiveness, namely long-term competitiveness. In fact, the two concerns seem identical: caring about preserving a range of opportunities for future Canadians seems indistinguishable from caring about Canada's long-term competitiveness. But what coincides with long-term competitiveness here is not sustainable development in the sense intended by the Brundtland Commission, which requires impartial concern for all people everywhere. In the commission's words, sustainable development "requires meeting the basic needs of all and extending to all the opportunity for a better life". And it involves economic growth, because "such growth [is] absolutely essential to relieve the great poverty that is deepening in much of the developing world". In comparison with these remarks, the vision of long-term Canadian competitiveness, or any vision of merely local
sustainability, seems incomplete and even internally in tension. Sustainable development in the full sense involves two parallel demands of impartiality, across times and across spatial locations. But how can one accept one of these demands but not the other? How can one endorse a concern for future Canadians, accepting that temporal distance does not extinguish moral duties, but reject a concern for non-Canadians, who are merely spatially distant? Whereas the ideal of sustainable development has an inner coherence, that of local long-term competitiveness seems at odds with itself.
There is a further theoretical difference between competitiveness and sustainable development. Assuming that we interpret sustainable development as involving a satisficing view, reflected in the Brundtland Commission's talk of "needs", we have a duty to ensure that others enjoy reasonable conditions of life, but any interests they have beyond this level - for example, interests in having mere wants satisfied or in acquiring luxuries - make no claims on us. And what is true of them is equally true of us - any interests we have in mere wants or luxuries have no moral weight. Imagine that we are extremely well off, and that the reduction in our well-being required to satisfy others' pressing needs will still leave us more than reasonably well off. On the satisficing view, the fact that we will suffer this reduction has no moral weight against the demand to satisfy others' needs. It is not that it counts for something but is outweighed by gains to the needy, as in the
utilitarian view; in the satisficing view it counts for nothing at all.
A satisficing version of sustainable development is therefore an ethic of limits - not just ecological but ethical limits. It holds that no one has any claim to more than a reasonable supply of resources, at least so long as the more pressing demands of others are not satisfied. This ethic of limits seems to be essential to the Brundtland Commission's belief that the two component demands in its ideal are compatible. We can satisfy the needs both of people in developing countries and of future generations once we realize that people in developed countries - or at least the wealthiest among them - have no legitimate claim to that share of their resources that is not needed for a reasonable life.
But there is no suggestion of this ethic of limits in the moral vision of "competitiveness". On the contrary, this vision seems to imply a continual striving for material acquisition, a "competition" for wealth and luxury that never ends. This is in stark contrast to an ethic of "needs" that sees no legitimate claim to what is unnecessary for satisfying needs.
As has already been argued, there are two theoretical differences between the moral visions of sustainable development and competitiveness, differences in the fundamental principles that inspire them; however, someone may object that the central issue before this conference is not theoretical, it is practical. Sometimes radically different principles can require the very same action; they can give different reasons for doing exactly the same thing. May not this not be the case for sustainable development and competitiveness today? May these two different ideals require the same behaviour in our circumstances now?
It is true that a certain concern for sustainability - for local sustainability is compatible with competitiveness. Managing the British Columbian forests, for example, in a sustainable way will promote, not sacrifice, the long-term competitiveness of British Columbia and Canada. But it should also be recognized that local sustainability is not the only concern in the full ideal of sustainable development: that ideal includes an equal concern for people, now and in the future, in developing countries. So the practical question is whether ensuring reasonable conditions of life for these people as well as for our descendants is the best way of promoting our standard of living - not just to a reasonable level, but as high as it can go - in Canada.
There are many reasons for answering no to this large question which is, in effect, the ancient philosophical question about the relationship between morality and self-interest: is promoting the good of others the best way of promoting one's own good? It would certainly be nice - it would be wonderful - if this were so, but it is not, either in the case of individuals or in that of nations. In the author's view, satisfying the needs of people in developing countries, both now and in the future, will require sacrifices by those in developed countries. These sacrifices may not leave them unable to satisfy their needs - it would be wrong if they did - but they will properly require some sacrifice of luxuries, wants and mere competitiveness.
Bibliography
Barry, B. 1983. Intergenerational justice in energy policy. In D. Maclean & P.G. Brown, eds. Energy and the future. Totowa, NJ, USA, Rowman and Littlefield.
Danielson, P. 1993. Personal responsibility. In H. Coward & T. Hurka, eds. Ethics and climate change: the greenhouse effect. Waterloo, Ont., Canada, Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Sidgwick, H. 1907. The methods of ethics, 7th ed. London, Macmillan.
World Commission on Environment and Development. 1987. Our common future. Oxford, United Kingdom/New York, USA, Oxford University Press.
<section>9</section>
Forests and employment
K. Theophile
Karin Theophile is a policy analyst with the International Forestry Program, United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service. Washington, DC, USA.
This article considers the relationship between forests and employment. It is not meant to be an exhaustive analysis of jobs in forest-based activities or to weigh the environmental pros and cons of forest development against its employment impacts. Rather, it is a snapshot of the direct and indirect employment provided by forest-based activities.
Forest-based industries are job-intensive compared with other industrial sectors
Employment is critical to economic development. Rich and poor nations alike have national policies and programmes to attain full employment and to avoid the dangers of high unemployment. It is clearly in any country's interest to maximize domestic employment. The benefit to a given country of increased employment in other nations should also be apparent. When trading partners are close to full employment, their economies develop and trade with wealthy nations can trigger growth in poorer ones. For example, one-quarter of the United States economy is dependent on foreign trade and most recent economic growth is driven by exports (The Economist, 1995). Thus, the United States economy and employment rate is affected by economic development and employment in other nations. This is what it me-arks to be part of the global economy.
Forests and forest-based industry are increasingly recognized as key elements of development as they figure prominently in people's lives in terms of social and economic benefits. Increasingly, policies are explicitly constructed to maximize the economic and employment benefits of forests and forest-based industry.
Forest-based industries are relatively job-intensive compared with other industrial sectors, and more so if jobs attributable to recreation, non-timber forest products (NTFPs) and small-scale informal sector employment are included. Forest-based industries generate revenue in rural locations, especially valuable as the number of agricultural jobs wane as a result of increased mechanization and land-use intensification (Laarman and Sedjo, 1992). Additionally, some forestry activities are complementary to on-farm activities, as they occur during agricultural slow periods, and some agricultural skills are easily transferable to forestry and wood processing.
While not as well documented as the timber industry, activities in small-scale forest-based enterprises, particularly those engaged in non-timber forestry activities, make significant economic contributions, provide rural employment opportunities and diversify local economies. Some NTFPs comprise industrial-scale businesses, such as rubber tapping in Brazil, but most are small-scale in terms of investment, revenue generated, business size and employment provision. In developing countries, the small businesses in the informal sector collectively provide a large proportion of employment opportunities.
In the industrialized countries, including the United States, more and more entrepreneurs are harvesting mushrooms, medicinal plants and charging hunters, ecotourists and scientists fees for access to their private land.
Traditional timber-based jobs
Employment in a sector is shaped by consumer demand - what kinds of products consumers want and can afford, and other socio-economic factors such as distribution of wealth, average age of population and the role of exports in the national economy. The demand trends for sawnwood in developing countries differ substantially from those of the industrialized world. During the period from 1965 to 1985 when annual growth rates in sawnwood consumption (used for framing and house construction) were decreasing in developed countries, they were increasing in developing nations. This is due to fewer competitive substitute materials for sawnwood, rapid population growth rates and attendant unmet needs for construction in developing nations (Laarman and Sedjo, 1992). By contrast, developing nations' demand for wood-based panels and pulp and paper products grew at a much slower rate than that of the developed countries. Furthermore, the absolute consumption is also lower: Africa, the
developing countries of Asia and the poorest regions of Latin America and the Caribbean basin consume an average of 3-10 kg of paper and paperboard per caput annually, compared with the United States annual consumption of 300 kg per caput. This means that the percentage of people working in high-end products such as pulp and paper production will be greater in wealthier countries. Conversely, employment in low-technology wood and wood products processing will be more common in developing nations.
The most common end use of wood determines the types of forest-based jobs available in a country. In developing countries, an average of 90 percent of all roundwood production is consumed domestically and a great proportion of that, almost 80 percent, is used for fuelwood (FAO, 1987). This has important employment implications because much of the employment ensuing from the fuelwood collection and marketing occurs in dispersed, rural markets which operate in the informal sector. Thus, the many people employed in these activities will not be reflected in official statistics.
Small-scale forest-based enterprises make significant contributions to rural employment
Despite these facts, encouraging developing countries to develop their forest industries is highly controversial. Critics argue that promoting timber industry on the basis of employment and economic benefits to the poor nation is false, as the collective employment directly attributable to formal sector forest industry is normally less than 1 percent of the total labour force in most developing countries (Repetto and Gillis, 1988). Another issue is the fact that many of the employment opportunities created by the development of forest industry in developing countries are often filled by imported or urban skilled labour, thereby reducing benefits to local populations. This is particularly true in the case of large-scale, high-technology industry. On the other hand, although the direct impact of large-scale industries may be limited in the surrounding rural area, the impact may be significant in terms of employment generation in related industrial sectors.
Employment opportunities in His pulp and paper sectors are concentrated In industrialized countries
Non-timber forest products and nature-based recreation
Data describing the economic and employment contributions of forests and forest industries typically focus on timber harvesting and processing, stemming from the widespread conviction that these activities provide the best economic rents among the alternative uses of forested land. This is being challenged now, and data quantifying alternative uses, notably NTFPs and non-extractive uses of forests such as nature tourism, are emerging, although still scant. Many are labour-intensive, creating full-time and seasonal jobs. Moreover, rapidly rising export revenues from NTFPs suggest that employment in this area has significant growth potential. For example, in the coastal areas of the American and Canadian Pacific Northwest, businesses involved in the harvesting and processing of greens for the floral industry were valued at nearly $130 million, in 1989, employing 10000 people in seasonal and permanent positions (Brooks, 1993).
With respect to the industrialized countries, NTFPs play a bigger role in many developing countries because of the greater population concentration in rural areas relying directly on forests. Typically, developing nations have fewer rural non-farm employment opportunities. Many developing countries, in recognition of the significant employment role of NTFPs, are actively developing the processing and manufacturing capacity of related industries. Overall, the role of NTFPs in developing nations' employment is significant and likely to grow [Ed. note: see the article on non-timber forest products by Tewari and Campbell].
In addition to NTFPs, nature-based tourism provides revenues and jobs in many countries. In the United States, recreation is one of the most important benefits supplied by forested land generating billions of dollars in revenue as well as jobs. In many developing countries, nature provides an important source of revenue (Laarman and Gregersen, 1994). While there is little quantitative data about the employment impacts of forest-based tourism, revenue figures suggest that this labour-intensive industry could create many jobs in developing countries [Ed. note: see also the article by Colvin]. However, the sustainability of both NTFPs and ecotourism is in question.
The informal sector
A discussion of forest-based employment would be incomplete without consideration of jobs in the informal sector. Relative to other types of enterprises, forest-based informal sector enterprises are a large provider of jobs. An extensive FAO survey showed that forest-based activities are one of the most common types of small enterprise, often comprising the highest percentage of small-scale enterprises in the rural sector of developing countries. In comparison with traditional, large-scale timber industries, the informal sector provides an equivalent or greater number of jobs in many developing countries (FAO, 1987). A 1984 study of the wood-processing sector in Lima, Peru concluded that the informal sector provided up to four times the number of jobs as did the formal furniture industry or twice that of the overall national wood industries sector for the whole country. During the economic downturn of 1965 to 1969, and again from 1980 to 1984, when the formal sector
employment waned, numbers employed in the informal sector grew (FAO, 1987). In Jamaica, of all small-scale enterprises, forest-based businesses comprise 34.8 percent (FAO, 1987). The number of people employed in handicrafts is also significant; in India alone it is estimated that more than two million people are engaged in full-time craft production (Pye, 1988). In Nepal, the figure is 13 percent of the total workforce. Thus, the aggregate employment of small-scale forestry enterprises is often substantial (Laarman and Pedro, 1992).
Forest-based activities in the United States
Direct employment in the United States related to forest-based activities was more than 1.9 million as of 1990. This represents about 1.4 percent of United States employment in all sectors, providing $14 billion in wages and salaries (American Forest & Paper Association, 1995).
In most regions of the country, timber and other solid wood product industries rank in the top three industries in terms of net jobs generated (USDA Forest Service, 1990). This varies considerably regionally, depending on the amount of forested land and the degree of other types of industrial development.
In tandem with the growth in demand for more pulp and paper products in the United States (as compared with a slowing in demand for sawnwood and wood-based panels), the jobs associated with these industries comprise almost 30 percent of the total wood-based jobs. This is due to the scale of the operations and the overall number of firms in the sector, not to relative labour-intensity. In contrast to other timber industries, pulp and paper is capital-intensive, providing a large proportion of highly skilled jobs but, overall, providing fewer jobs (Contreras-Hermosilla and Gregersen, 1991).
MULTIPLIER EFFECT
Standard data for timber-related jobs do not include jobs in the labour-intensive milling and processing industries. Instead, these jobs are aggregated with other manufacturing data, including non-timber manufacturing such as steel, making it difficult to disaggregate timber-related jobs. Nevertheless, it is clear that the timber-related industries exert a powerful multiplier effect. For every job directly related to the private timber industry, jobs are created in other related industries such as transportation and marketing. One estimate suggests that, for every ten persons employed directly in modern, large-scale forestry enterprises, another eight jobs are created in related sectors (Contreras-Hermosilla and Gregersen, 1991). This would mean that beyond the 1.9 million direct, forest-based jobs in the United States private sector, there are usually an additional 1.5 million not accounted for. This adds up to almost 35 million people, or about 2.5 percent of the United
States workforce excluding government employment. If federal employment figures are included, the numbers are even more impressive. A Forest Service analysis of combined private and government employment estimated that the National Forest System (NFS) generated 3.1 million jobs, 2.7 million of them in recreation and 98 200 in timber. In dollar terms the multiplier effect can be seen as well. The same analysis assessed $123 billion in 1993 to the NFS, almost 2 percent of the gross domestic product (USDA Forest Service, 1995).
Another factor resulting in an underestimation of forest-related jobs is that some income and employment related to small-scale activities, particularly those that operate on a cash or barter basis, are not included in standard data. In many developing countries, these activities are a significant portion of the total. Small-scale and informal forestry sector employment is discussed in greater detail below.
In terms of national economic health, the job intensity of forest-based industries is more meaningful if compared with other industry types. Overall, the relative job intensity of forest-based industries is greater than many other industry types, suggesting that investments in forest-based industry are effective in generating employment.
In addition to providing employment, forest-based informal sector enterprises transfer technology and skills to rural populations and form an essential part of a broader industrial continuum which includes large-scale sawmills and furniture plants. Furthermore, average salaries for forest-based labour are often higher than for other unskilled work, averaging approximately 50 percent more than those for agricultural labour (FAO, 1987).
Conclusion
A universal objective of public policy is to increase employment in view of its importance to a nation's productivity, rate of economic growth and social stability. Full employment enhances government revenue because it spreads the tax burden across the greatest possible number of people. Conversely, unemployment is often the starting point for the self-perpetuating cycle of poverty which entails an increased need for government to provide basic services to the poor (Mansfield, 1989).
A large number of jobs are provided by forests in the United States and also in many developing countries, particularly if the multiplier effect, NTFPs, recreation and the informal sector forest-based activities are taken into account. Many of the related activities are labour-intensive, maintaining rural employment Opportunities and diversifying local economies.
Forest sector employment opportunities related to recreation management are increasing in importance
Overall, forest-based activities, whether undertaken on a small or an industrial scale, are an integral part of the economic health and employment of forested nations. This argues for increasing attention and investments in forest-based industry to ensure the long-term viability of the world's forests. Collectively, the economic and employment benefits of industry founded on the principles of sustainable forest management make a compelling case for increasing investments in them.
However, the forestry sector is still lacking recognition of its employment-generating role in line with and proportionate to its actual importance. This is due to a lack of systematic attention to the employment dimension in forest sector statistics. Such statistics usually cover production and trade of timber and industrial products. Information on employment is very scarce and seldom reliable, comprehensive or up to date. This lack of attention to a major social impact of the sector's activities has a severe impact on its credibility among higher politicians and decision-makers engaged in resource allocation and investment. The image portrayed by the sector concerning the contribution of conservation and utilization activities is weak. This link between the two is clear only to informed persons within the sector itself. There is an urgent need for more systematic collection and analysis of the employment impact of forestry activities both to inform policy-makers and the
public about the actual importance of the sector and to maximize employment-generation as economically viable in the development of forestry activities within the sector itself.
Bibliography
American Forest & Paper Association. 1995. US forest facts and figures. Seattle, USA.
Bourke, I.J. 1991. Domestic timber markets: important outlets for the developing countries. Unasylva, 42(167): 16-24.
Brooks, D. 1993. US forests in a global context. USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-228. Washington, DC, USDA.
Contreras-Hermosilla, A. & Gregersen, H. 1991. Large-scale forest-based industrial development in developing countries. Unasylva, 42(167): 25-35.
Conway, M., Gibbons, C. & O'Regan, F. 1994. Regional strategies for employment and poverty alleviation. Washington, DC, Aspen Institute.
FAO. 1987. Small-scale forest-based processing enterprises. FAO Forestry Paper No. 79. Rome.
FAO. 1991. Forest industry - crucial for overall socio-economic development. Unasylva, 42(167): 2.
Hasan, M. 1991. The Indonesian wood panel industry. Unasylva, 42(167): 11-15.
Laarman, J. & Gregersen, H. 1994. The Environmental and Natural Resources Policy and Training Project. Policy Brief, (5 July). College of Natural Resources, University of Minnesota, USA. (unpublished)
Laarman, J. & Sedjo, R. 1992. Global forests: issues for six billion people. New York, McGraw-Hill.
MacCleery, D. 1992. American forests: a history of resiliency and recovery. USDA Forest Service, FS-540. Washington, DC. USDA.
Mansfield, J. 1989. Economics. New York, Will. Norton Company.
Meyanathan, S.D., ad. 1994. Industrial structures and the development of small and medium enterprise linkages: examples from East Asia. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Pye, E.A., ad. 1988. Artisans in economic development. Ottawa, International Development Research Centre.
Repetto, R. 1995. Jobs, competitiveness and environmental regulation: what are the real issues? Washington, DC, World Resources Institute.
Repetto, R. & Gillis, M. 1988. Public policies and the misuse of forest resources. Washington, DC, World Resources Institute.
Sharma, N.P., ad. 1992. World forests in perspective. Managing the world's forests: looking for a balance between conservation and development. Dubuque, Iowa, USA, Kendall Hunt.
Schlosser, WE. & Blatner, K.A. 1995. The wild edible mushroom industry of Washington, Oregon and Idaho: a 1992 survey. J. For., 93(3): 31-36.
The Economist. 1995. America's foreign policy: from the jaws of victory. Economist, (27 May).
USDA Forest Service. 1990. An analysis of the timber situation in the United States: 1989-2040. General Technical Report RM-199. Washington, DC, USDA.
USDA Forest Service. 1995. Economic benefits from national forest system lands. Washington, DC, USDA. (unpublished draft)
<section>a</section>
FAO forestry
The state of the world's forests
FAO Forestry Department launches Global Fibre Supply Study
Conflict and forestry: An electronic conference on conflict resolution
The FAO information system on forest genetic resources
Participatory watershed management in Hoang Bô district, Viet Nam
The state of the world's forests
State of the World's Forests (SOFO) arose from a recommendation of the High-Level Panel of Experts on Forestry which met at FAO headquarters in October 1994. The panel's report stated, "Recognizing the current dynamic situation in international forestry, FAO has the opportunity to project its leadership role by keeping the international community abreast of developments in the forest sector. The Panel therefore strongly recommends that the Director-General should issue... a report on the state of the world's forests. This should be an authoritative policy-oriented report.... It should highlight issues of special importance...."
Subsequently, with the strong support of the Director-General of FAO, the Forestry Department committed itself to producing State of the World's Forests every two years. The first edition of SOFO was published in March 1995. The next edition will be available in March 1997. SOFO is similar in concept to FAO's longstanding annual publication, The State of Food and Agriculture and to The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture, also launched in 1995 as a biennial publication.
Objective
The objective of SOFO is to provide easy access to regularly updated information on global forestry and major recent developments in the sector. There are other serial publications that regularly provide information on forestry, but SOFO is unique in its specific focus on forestry and its broad overview of current policy issues and international developments in the sector.
Content and structure
State of the World's Forests is a policy-relevant document which describes the status, trends and outlook for the forestry sector globally, with a particular focus on recent developments. SOFO describes in an objective manner: the resource situation, including forest cover and, to the extent possible, forest quality; supply, demand and trade flows for wood and, where possible, non-wood forest products; and policy and institutional developments within the forestry sector or which are influencing or have the potential to have an impact on forestry. Global, regional and national statistical information is presented.
SOFO has three major components:
· A world review which provides information on global developments in the forestry sector focusing on the preceding two-year period, It includes data on world forest resources (cover and condition); forest products production, consumption and trade; the outlook for forestry for the next five to ten years; and provides information on policy related issues. Where relevant, the analysis presents information disaggregated by region.
· An in-depth discussion of a special issue of current global concern. Discussion of the issue is. likely to cover developments over a greater time period than the biennium in question.
· Six regional highlights focusing on current developments or key issues facing the regions. The regions correspond to the country groupings of the six regional forestry commissions convened by FAO: Africa; Asia and the Pacific; Europe; Latin America and the Caribbean; the Near East; and North America.
An executive summary of SOFO is prepared as a separate document for wider distribution.
State a Le of the World's Forests
Readership
The audience for SOFO includes a wide range of people directly involved in or concerned about forestry at the national, regional and global levels. Users of SOFO are likely to include:
· ministers responsible for forestry and related sectors;
· staff of governmental and non-governmental organizations concerned with forestry policy and/or with the design and implementation of forestry programmes;
· managers and members of forestry enterprises and trade associations;
· researchers, educators and students in forestry-related fields; and
· staff responsible for forestry in national and international lending institutions and multilateral and bilateral development agencies.
The document is also of potential interest to the media and the general public.
Periodicity, format, length and languages
SOFO is published biennially (1995,1997,1999...) for release in conjunction with the meetings of the FAO Committee on Forestry, which are generally held in March or April every two years. It is approximately 100 pages in length, consisting of text supported by tables and information presented in graphic form. SOFO is published in five languages: English, French, Spanish, Chinese and Arabic.
Preparation and review
SOFO is prepared by FAO Forestry Department staff, with input from other departments, as a joint, in-house effort. An External Review Committee, which acts in an advisory capacity, is called on to provide comments on the content and structure of SOFO.
Distribution
SOFO is available through the Sales and Marketing Group of FAO, Viale delle Terms di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
E-mail: Publications-Sales@fao.org.
SOFO is also available electronically on the Internet through the FAO Home Page on both the World Wide Web (http://www.fao.org) and the FAO gopher (gopher@fao.org).
The next edition of State of the World's Forests will be released in March 1997.
FAO Forestry Department launches Global Fibre Supply Study
Where is the raw material going to come from to cover our forest products needs? How much productive forest do we need to supply expected future fibre demand?
The FAO Forestry Department has initiated the Global Fibre Supply Study to assist in answering these questions. The objective of the study is formulated in general terms as "a contribution to the worldwide forest policy development through the provision of reliable data, information and analysis of industrial fibre sources, markets and uses".
The meaning of fibre is to be understood as fibrous wood and non-wood raw material for primary industries producing sawn timber, wood-based panels, pulp and paper products. The majority of this fibre exists in standing form in natural and planted forests. Other kinds of fibre are in the form of industrial wood residues, recovered paper, and non-wood fibre for pulp production, such as bamboo and annual crops.
The study, which will be completed in 1997, will include a description of the current sources of industrial fibre, projection and analysis of future developments in fibre supply and demand up to the year 2010, based on a consideration of the major factors affecting them. These factors include:
· technological improvements in harvesting
· biotechnology
· material efficiency
· price of raw materials
· population growth
· legislation, regulation and conventions
· economic growth
· fibre quality
· wood product certification/ ecosystem management
· land in protected areas or other status
· competition between industrial and non-industrial uses
· competition among industrial uses
· market substitution
The above approach is expected to produce a policy-relevant document that will also be valuable for the industrial and academic sectors. The study will be the starting point of a process to sensitize governments on raw material sources and uses and will highlight the necessity to improve their data collection and analysis in this field.
Study implementation
A steering committee has been created with the purpose of advising FAO during the study execution period. This committee is formed by executives from the forest industry sector and meets regularly in order to monitor the progress of the study. In addition, a working group consisting of a number of experts from industry and FAO is currently working on the different phases of the study. Further scientific support is also provided through formal institutional collaboration, established between FAO and the German Federal Research Centre for Forestry and Forest Products (BFH), the Swedish University of Umea and the United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service, Pacific North-West Research Station.
A number of activities will be carried out during the implementation phases of the study, including the selection and analysis of existing data within and outside FAO, as well as monitoring progress of the work. These activities are being carried out by the working group, external consultants and the steering committee.
The financial resources required are jointly covered by the forest industry sector, partner institutions and FAO. The private sector has continuously provided executives and professionals to participate actively in the different meetings. In addition, the partner institutions are providing scientists' time at no cost to assist in the preparation of specific topics. Similarly, the FAO Forestry Department considers the Global Fibre Supply Study to be one of its priority activities and has set aside the required financial and professional resources for its implementation.
This joint endeavour between governments, the private sector, research institutes and FAO is a collaborative effort which recognizes the benefits that can derive from making the best use of all comparative advantages. As a result, a valuable and objective document will be produced in line with the requirements of a demanding international forestry community.
Conflict and forestry: An electronic conference on conflict resolution
Around-the-world discussion of "virtual conflict" has led to "virtual relationships" between people eager to help the various users of the world's forests to resolve their disputes. Organizers of an Electronic Conference on Conflict Resolution, led by the Community Forestry Unit of the FAO Forestry Department, are completing a compilation of the proceedings of the recently concluded electronic mail conference, and evaluating this new way of holding meetings of the global village.
What kinds of conflict demand resolution in community forestry? Disputes are based in power relationships and the use to which a given segment of society would put the forest. Two examples illustrate the problems and potential for success in seeking resolution of disputes in community forestry:
In Cameroon in 1993, conflicts between communities and transnational logging companies erupted in incidences of kidnapping expatriate logging company personnel and blockading logging roads by villagers, some of whom ended up in prison. But in Orissa in the Indian state of West Bengal, villagers formed their own forest protection committees in response to severe degradation of nearby sal (Shorea robusta) forests. Community members set limits on local forest use and, with or without official sanction, established forest patrols. Their efforts were repaid by the gradual regeneration of the forests and imitation of their programme by other villages.
Against this background, FAO's Community Forestry Unit convened an electronic mail "virtual conference" entitled Addressing Natural Resource Conflicts through Community Forestry from 15 January to 28 April 1996.
More than 450 subscribers from 46 countries contributed over two megabytes of discussion, case-studies and literature, The FAO conference facilitators prepared nine discussion papers as starting points for electronic discussions on gender relations, power imbalances, the viability of traditional methods of dispute resolution and laws relating to forest access and joint forest management.
Key themes discussed were incorporation of gender considerations; legal issues; indigenous knowledge systems; and power and equity. Conference participants read about and debated questions such as:
· How might a social scientist and a forester in East Africa, trained in techniques of conflict resolution, facilitate development of a forest management plan involving all interested parties?
· What tools would someone need to analyse gender-based conflicts brought on by a community forestry initiative in India?
· In the Andes, how did a non-governmental organization bring together big logging interests, government officials and peasants dependent on the forest, for a fruitful discussion on changing national forestry laws?
The official language of the E-mail conference was English, but regional focal points and national working groups located in Quito (Ecuador), Cochabamba (Bolivia), Dakar (Senegal) and Nairobi (Kenya) also worked in Spanish, French, Bambara and Swahili. Summaries of the regional and national discussions in these other languages were collected and sent out in English to all participants.
Evaluations of the E-mail conference are still coming in to the Secretariat, but the response so far has been overwhelmingly positive. People spoke of making "new friends" (as well as "enjoying a few tussles") and, indeed, networking is one of the obvious strengths of E-mail as a conference medium.
It is clear as well that there are drawbacks to using E-mail for a conference. As one participant wrote in her evaluation, "it is difficult to lead a conference of this sort into consensus or agreement. You cannot even get people to answer specific questions or comment on particular things! It works, in fact, as an inverse funnel, generating more ideas, not agreeing on them. It seems to me the real benefit is in the serendipity: every individual gets something out of it for him/herself, through inspiration from other individuals, even if there is no final statement as such. I can imagine this is frustrating for the moderators and facilitators, but it is fine for the participants."
Another evident limitation is that, notwithstanding the rapid growth of E-mail, the vast majority of people involved in agriculture and rural development still do not have access. Nonetheless, in comparison with a "live" conference which requires participants' physical presence in one place at one time, electronic conferences can bring together far more people from more diverse places.
The E-mail conference proceedings and a logistical report will be available at the end of 1996 from the Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla. 00100 Rome, Italy.
Participating countries in the conflict resolution E-mail conference
Countries with direct E-mail subscribers. Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Burkina Faso, Canada, China, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Guatemala, Hong Kong, Hungary, Indonesia, India, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Mali, Mexico, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan (Province of China), Thailand, Uganda, the United Kingdom, the United States, Viet Nam. Countries with participants involved in the E-mail conference through working groups. Benin, Cameroon, Colombia, Ethiopia, Nicaragua, the Niger, the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela.
The FAO information system on forest genetic resources
Informed decision-making for the conservation and wise utilization of forest genetic resources requires reliable and up-to-date information on the status of the genetic resources and ongoing activities and programmes. Since 1993, FAO's Forestry Department, in close collaboration with governments and national institutes of countries concerned, has been working on the development of a worldwide information system on forest genetic resources. The objective is to make available reliable and up-to-date information on forest genetic resources for use in planning and decision-making at the subregional, regional and international levels. All information is aggregated at the country level and includes information on:
· institutions dealing with conservation and utilization of forest genetic resources in the country;
· main native and introduced tree species in the country and their main uses;
· endangered tree species at the species and/or population level;
· tree species managed for in situ conservation;
· ex situ conservation activities in vivo and in vitro;
· tree improvement programmes; and
· availability of forest reproductive materials for conservation and research purposes.
The core information in the system was provided by FAO member countries through replies to a questionnaire sent in 1993 to heads of Forest Services in all countries. These data were complemented by data from other sources, e.g. information on forest genetic resources included in the Country Reports submitted to FAO in preparation for the fourth International Technical Conference in Plant Genetic Resources, held in Leipzig, Germany in June 1996.
Once the system is fully operational, and the data in the system have been checked and approved by member countries, the information system will be made available on the FAO Home Page of the World Wide Web, where it can be accessed from personal computers all over the world using Internet connections. It is envisaged that periodic updating of the information in the system will be undertaken based on information provided by collaborating institutes in member countries, but the frequency and the modus operandi are yet to be decided.
For additional information, contact the Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Participatory watershed management in Hoang Bô district, Viet Nam
New land management and land tenure policies of the Government of Viet Nam aim at distributing both agricultural and forest land to the local people. This has created a situation in which individuals, grassroots associations and self-help groups can take a leading role in the development and management of productive land. An FAO project, funded by a Belgian trust fund, is providing support to the Quang Ninh Province forestry administration in introducing participatory planning and integrated watershed management in the commune of Bang Ca, in Hoang Bô district.
Until a few decades ago, shifting cultivation practices were not a threatening factor for the watersheds of Viet Nam. The local inhabitants, few in number and mostly of ethnic minorities, used only those sites that were little affected by erosion, but the situation is rapidly changing. Apart from rapid increases in population, migration from densely populated delta areas into the mountain regions is putting these lands under increasing pressure. Moreover, the land-use patterns of the new populations are often inspired by delta area agricultural techniques, generally not suited to fragile upland areas.
Under the three-year project which began in June 1995, the experience and the knowledge of the farmers who are native to the area are being used as the foundation for the development of integrated land husbandry and rural development in general and the sustainable use of the watershed's natural resources in particular. Based on a Participatory Rural Appraisal approach built up under another FAO project (Country capacity strengthening for TFAP implementation in Argentina, Mozambique and Viet Nam - supported by Italy), local grassroots organizations are working in tandem with the provincial technical services to address the challenges and opportunities related to sustainable land husbandry and environmental conservation.
By the end of the project, it is expected that four basic results will have been achieved. The population of approximately 1700 people of Bang Ca commune will have benefited directly in terms of improvement of crops, livestock and forestry and their integration with ensured environmental stability, thus reducing poverty and increasing sustainable livelihoods. Local grassroots organizations will have been strengthened and participatory methods and tools for integrated watershed management designed, tested and refined. The siltation rates of the Yen Lap reservoir (below the watershed area) will have been reduced, its expected life span will have increased and downstream irrigations schemes and the quality of life of the 160000 people who depend on the reservoir as a source of water will be improved. Finally, models of participatory watershed management will have been developed for further expansion and replication, first in the project area and later on a wider scale. This, in
turn, will help to speed up progress in implementation of the government policy to distribute forest land to local people, now stalled partly owing to the lack of appropriate models for participatory management of upland forest areas.
<section>b</section>
World of forestry
11th World Forestry Congress
Technical programme by main areas and topics
11th World Forestry Congress
The 11th World Forestry Congress, which is being organized by the Turkish Ministry of Forestry in collaboration with FAO, will be held from 13 to 22 October 1997 in Turkey at the new Antalya Greater Municipality Fair Place and Cultural Centre. Antalya, with a population of about 750000, is on the Turquoise Riviera in the Mediterranean region of southern Turkey. Dominated by the Toros (Taurus) mountains rising to 3086 m and covered with forests, the coastal area of Antalya between Kemer, 42 km to the west, and Belek, 40 km to the east, has become Turkey's main holiday resort.
Technical programme
The technical programme for the congress, after consultation with forestry administrations in all countries as well as with international governmental and non-governmental organizations interested in forestry and related matters, has been structured in seven main programme areas which follow the seven basic criteria of sustainable forest management (SFM) which are being considered in the various processes (Montreal, Helsinki, Tarapoto, etc.) within the current international debate on SFM. As many of those consulted thought that a combination of both approaches by subject matter and by ecoregion would be desirable, a number of sessions will be devoted to SFM in six different major types of forest. The technical programme therefore comprises 38 topics which cover those issues that have dominated the international debate since the last congress and which require a response and new directions from technical people, both in the forestry profession and in other disciplines that
can contribute to sustainable development in forestry.
Congress papers. The papers to be considered by the congress are of three types:
· Position papers providing a comprehensive review of the situation for each of the main programme areas and some of the major issues, to be prepared by specialists who are well known worldwide at the invitation of the Organizing Committee.
· Special papers which correspond to each one of the topics of the congress, also to be prepared by renowned specialists at the invitation of the Organizing Committee.
· Voluntary papers, which can be submitted by any person who wishes to contribute to the discussion of any of the 38 topics of the congress. Technical Secretaries designated by the Host Government and Associate Technical Secretaries designated by FAO will review these papers and may select a number of them for brief presentations during the congress.
Technical programme by main areas and topics
A. Forest and tree resources
1. Assessment and monitoring of forest and tree resources includes methods and tools for forest surveys and monitoring, such as GIS and remote sensing; the status of forest resources (global, regional/ecoregional, national), trends in deforestation, qualitative and quantitative aspects.
2. The forestry-agriculture interface includes the role of forests and trees in integrated land use, land-use planning, shifting cultivation, settlements in forest lands and forest clearing, food production from forest lands and the contribution to food security, and agroforestry systems and techniques.
3. Urban and peri-urban forestry includes the recreational function of forests in the natural or planted forest environment and the aesthetic and pollution control (noise, air pollution); the role of trees and forests along highways and in the urban and peri-urban environment, including green belts; and the use of urban waste water in forest plantations.
4. Forests and climate change and the role of forest lands as carbon sinks includes the effects of forests on the microclimate and regional and global impacts of the change in forest cover; the role of forest soils and trees in the storage of CO[2]; the potential of afforestation and forest regeneration in the absorption of CO[2]; and forests and the Framework Convention on Climate Change.
5. Protecting forests against pests and diseases, air pollution and decline includes the prevention and biological and chemical control of air pollution; effects of air pollution on forests; and forest dieback.
6. Forests and fire includes the prevention and control of forest fires, equipment and methods and the controlled use of fire; economic and environmental cost; and timber salvage operations after natural disasters.
B. Forest, biological diversity and the maintenance of the natural heritage
7. Conservation of forest ecosystems includes conservation strategies; national parks and protected area management; endangered flora and wildlife species; the establishment of buffer zones and corridors; and the involvement of the local population in protection.
8. Conservation and utilization of forest genetic resources includes in situ and ex situ conservation; plant breeding techniques; conservation of germplasm and provision of planting material; and genetic engineering developments, utilization and economic value of forest genetic resources.
C. Protective and environmental functions of forests
9. Watershed management, torrent and avalanche control, land rehabilitation and erosion control includes forest hydrology, forest soils and the role of forests in mountain areas, and approaches and techniques in integrated watershed management and upland conservation; design and techniques for torrent control; river channel stabilization; road stabilization; avalanche and landslide control; rehabilitation of degraded areas; and the prevention of hazards in mountain and hilly areas,
10. The role of forestry in combating desertification includes all the spectrum of and land forestry, including sand dune stabilization; the protection of oasis and infrastructure from wind erosion; windbreaks and shelterbelts; and land rehabilitation techniques; water harvesting; the management of rangelands; and matters relating to the Convention to Combat Desertification and Drought.
11. Protection of wetlands and coastal lands and their habitat includes matters related to the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (the Ramsar Convention) and the protection of resources in swamp forests, inland and coastal wetlands; the afforestation and regeneration of forests in coastal areas; the protection of fisheries and bird habitats; protection against natural disasters (hurricanes and tidal surges); and the protection of the landscape in coastal areas and small islands.
D. Productive functions of forests
12. Afforestation and plantation forestry includes nursery practices; the selection of species; afforestation techniques and equipment; the management of plantations; and forest roads.
13. Silviculture and management of production forests includes silvicultural practices and experience in forest management in different types of commercial forests.
14. Forest harvesting and transportation includes design and implementation of environmentally sound forest harvesting practices, including extraction and transportation systems and, particularly, logging roads.
15. Non-wood forest products include products such as gums, oils and resins, fibres, honey, mushrooms, nuts and medicinal plants.
16. Wood fuels and biomass energy. from household to industry includes biomass energy sources and technologies; the substitution and improvement of fuels and stoves; the planning of village woodlots; fuelwood and charcoal production for rural and urban use; and wood-based energy generation for industrial purposes.
17. Grazing in rangelands and forest lands includes the relationship of forests to the pastoral economy and the various modalities, both ecoregional and related to grazing systems (transhumance, silvopastoral systems, extensive grazing in woodlands and rangelands), fodder trees and methods to prevent overgrazing and land degradation.
18. Wildlife, tourism and other products from wildlands includes the breeding of wildlife species in captivity, domestication, wildlife farming and game ranching; the importance to rural and, in many countries, to urban populations of protein from wild animals; the prevention of poaching and illegal traffic of wildlife products; and the importance of wildlife for the provision of game, bushmeat and as a tourist attraction.
E. The economic contribution of forestry to sustainable development
19. Processing and forest industries includes wood preservation; wood transformation; small-scale industries; plywood and chipboard; and pulp and paper.
20. Forests and employment includes labour needs; the contribution to the industrialization and stabilization of the population; safety in the workplace; and ergonomics.
21. Demand for forest products, consumption patterns and marketing includes the analysis of trends in the national and international market and of changes in production and consumption patterns, and the need to respond to the changes through improved marketing.
22. Forest products trade and certification includes ecolabelling; the effects of liberalization; competitiveness in international markets and vis-à-vis other raw materials; subsidies and incentives for exports; and stabilizing prices to stimulate investment.
23. The role of the private sector, economies in transition and Issues of privatization in forestry includes the contribution of private forestry and of cooperatives and other associations; the opportunities and possible risks of privatization; joint ventures and the role of multinational organizations; and the process of privatization in the economies in transition.
24. Valuation of forest goods and services and incorporation in national accounts includes methodologies for economic, social and environmental appraisal and valuation of intangible benefits such as biological diversity and watershed protection.
F. Social dimensions of forestry's contribution to sustainable development
25. Forests, quality of life and livelihoods includes questions related to the historical, archaeological, religious and landscaping importance of trees and forests; the contribution to shelter, amenity forests and recreation impacts; the collection of species of flora and fauna; trekking, mountaineering and camping in wilderness and protected areas; opportunities for ecotourism; ethnobotany; and sustainable livelihoods of forest dwellers.
26. The vision and role of community forestry in sustainable development includes a review of the concepts underlying community/social forestry; presentation of perspectives and experience; the interlinkage between communities and forestry; and the status and future of community forestry.
27. Better addressing conflicts in natural resource use through the promotion of participatory management from community to policy level includes the nexus between indigenous knowledge systems, legal issues, power and equity, gender and marginalized people and natural resource conflicts; alternative dispute management; conflicts resulting from economic, ecological, cultural and demographic changes,
28. The role of the non-governmental organizations and special groups includes the advocacy role of international and national NGOs, their contribution to empowerment and participation of rural communities and in the creation of awareness and education of the public and of specific groups of civil society; the role of special groups youth, women and children and approaches to mobilize them and make their contribution more effective.
29. Forest dwellers, indigenous people and local communities includes settlers and communities whose livelihoods depend on the forest ecosystem and hill tribes and other indigenous people who live in symbiosis with forests.
30. Communication methods and public awareness raising includes strategies and methods to improve the image of forestry administrations; to establish better relations with the public; to raise awareness and organize public information campaigns on specific issues; and to address different target groups of civil society, including environmental education.
G. Policies, Institutions and means for sustainable forestry development
31. New trends in forestry public administration includes new and innovative institutional arrangements to enhance policy formulation and the application of regulatory instruments, interagency coordination and joint implementation; and the involvement of other sectors of public administration, as well as new roles of forest administrations vis-à-vis regionalization, decentralization and delegation of management functions to regional and local authorities.
32. Formulation, analysis and implementation of forestry policies includes regulatory instruments, economic incentives and financial mechanisms to promote investment, the formulation of National Forestry Action Plans and the reallocation of internal resources; and the mobilization of external financial and technical support for the implementation of sustainable development policies in the forestry sector.
33. Forestry sector planning includes analytic, evaluation and monitoring tools and approaches for integrated planning, including multipurpose development of forest resources and forest industries development; the contribution to integrated rural development; and regional development plans.
34. Human resources development, education and training includes formal and informal education at various levels and in-service and other forms of training; new trends in curricula development; and new needs in the development of human resources.
35. Research, transfer of technology and extension includes the institutional strengthening of international and national capabilities for research; the identification of gaps and priorities in research and transfer of technology; and the strengthening of extension services for conservation, community forestry and private forestry.
36. International cooperation and resource mobilization for sustainable forestry development includes a review of external technical and financial assistance after UNCED and the prospects and trends in international cooperation, including new financial modalities and mechanisms, innovative sources of funding and terms and conditions of development assistance.
H. Ecoregional review
37. Taking stock of the various sustainable forest management (SFM) processes includes inputs on the status and the possible follow-up action related to the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management, particularly regarding the various international undertakings -the Montreal Process, the Helsinki Process, the Tarapoto Initiative and the Dry African Forests Initiative.
38. Exchange of experience and state of the art in SFM by ecoregion: boreal forests, temperate forests, Mediterranean forests, dry tropical forests, humid tropical forests, mangroves and other coastal forests. National field experience in the application of sustainable management of forests will be shared, taking into account the various dimensions of forestry's contribution to sustainable development and the seven criteria generally agreed internationally for SFM: i) extent of forest resources; ii) health and vitality; iii) biological diversity; iv) productive functions; v) protective and environmental functions; vi) development and social needs; and vii) legal, policy and institutional framework.
<section>c</section>
Books
World directory of and lands research institutions
Non-timber forest products in the Asian context
FAO forest harvesting case-studies
World directory of and lands research institutions
Directory of and lands research institutions. 1995. K.V. Waser and B.S. Hutchinson. Office of Arid Lands Studies, University of Arizona/Desertification Control- Programme Activity Centre, UNEP/FAO. Rome, FAO.
This fourth edition of the world Directory of arid lands research institutions is particularly timely. It will support cooperation between dryland research institutions, especially in relation to the implementation of the International Convention to Combat Desertification in countries suffering from drought and desertification, particularly in Africa.
The Convention on Desertification stresses the role of scientific and technical cooperation in the implementation of national plans to combat desertification and for drylands development. Nations that are parties to the convention engage themselves to "facilitate and strengthen the functioning of the global network of institutions and facilities for the collection, analysis and exchange of information...". They also commit themselves to "exchange and make fully and promptly available information from all publicly available sources relevant to combating deforestation and mitigating the effects of drought".
Arid lands research institutions
The directory should help secure the implementation of the above commitments by facilitating contacts and, eventually, cooperation among concerned institutions. It contains more than 250 entries and is therefore an up-to-date tool for technical and scientific cooperation. The directory will contribute to the transfer of knowledge and technology between the developed and developing regions and will support technical cooperation among developing countries. Individual researchers, specialized institutions in research as well as in development and educational organizations will find the directory useful in furthering cooperation, increasing knowledge of human resources, institutional capabilities and depositories of information in the area of dryland resources conservation and development as well as related research activities.
Previous editions of the directory were published by the Office of Arid Lands Studies of the University of Arizona. This edition is produced in collaboration with FAO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
Non-timber forest products in the Asian context
Society and non-timber forest products in tropical Asia. 1995. J. Fox, ed. East-West Center Occasional Papers, Environment Series No. 19. Honolulu, Hawaii, East-West Center.
It would be difficult to overstate the importance of non-timber forest products for the Asia and the Pacific region. These products commonly contribute to meeting food and other basic needs, are a source of input into the agricultural system, help households control exposure to risk of various kinds and often constitute an integral part of the habitat and of the social and cultural structure of those living within that environment. Very large numbers of households also generate some of their income from selling non-timber forest products.
A better understanding of the magnitude and nature of the role of NTFPs is therefore central to making decisions about forest management that adequately reflect society's demands on the forest resource. This volume brings together eight papers that report on work that does address these issues.
The papers were prepared for a panel at the 17th Pacific Science Congress which was held in Honolulu, Hawaii in May-June 1991. The panel focused on the collection, utilization and marketing of non-timber forest products in tropical Asia, how patterns change through space and time and the role of local institutions and government policies in managing these products.
The papers are grouped into two sections. The first deals with collecting, processing and marketing: variation and change. The second covers local institutions and government policies: methods of managing (or mismanaging) non-timber forest products. The collection is compiled and introduced by Jefferson Fox, a fellow in the Program on Environment at the East-West Center and program area coordinator of Renewable Resources Management.
Collectively, these papers bring Asian perspectives on NTFPs into clearer focus. They offer details gained from case-studies and anchor local-level realities learned through years of fieldwork with theoretical concerns.
FAO forest harvesting case-studies
The Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch of the FAO Forestry Department produces a series of case-studies to assist developing countries in promoting harvesting systems, techniques and methods designed to enhance productivity, reduce waste of resources and make forest operations more environmentally acceptable. Emphasis in selecting techniques for inclusion in the case-study series has been placed on systems that favour local people's participation, increase employment and income opportunities and thus contribute to self-reliance and development of local communities in rural areas.
Uso de bueyes en operaciones de aprovechamiento forestal en áreas rurales de Costa Rica. 1995. FAO Forest Harvesting Case-Study No. 3, Rome, FAO.
The principal objective of this study is to present a broad view of the use of oxen in forest operations in rural Costa Rica. The study demonstrates very clearly the advantages animal traction can present in rural areas in developing countries, including low investment cost, low environmental impact and the labour-intensive nature of their use.
The information presented in the study permits the intended reader (extension agents, educators and timber extraction decision-makers) to understand current practice and its limitations, and the potential for improvement, not only in Costa Rica but in Central America overall.
Uso de bueyes en operaciones de aprovechamiento forestal en áreas rurales de Costa Rica
Use of the construction crane for wood extraction on mountainous terrain. 1995. FAO Forest Harvesting Case-Study No. 4. Rome, FAO.
This report documents a study on the use of construction cranes for wood extraction in mountainous terrain in Austria, providing information on the advantages and limitations of this type of low-impact harvesting system. The aim of the study is to focus the attention of forest harvesting specialists on the possibility of using building cranes for forest operations in areas with good road development standards and where special silvicultural prescriptions need to be applied, for example safeguarding advanced forest regeneration, or extracting single tree stems in selective cuts in old growth forests. The study provides indicative figures on productivity and costs and offers suggestions for the possible use of building cranes in combination with wood processors.
Elephants in logging operations in Sri Lanka. 1995. FAO Forest Harvesting Case-Study No. 5. Rome, FAO.
This study covers various aspects of the use of the Asian elephant (in this case Elephas maximum) in logging operations in Sri Lanka. Starting with a general analysis of the basic advantages and disadvantages of the use of elephants, the study then considers elephant use in skidding, sorting, etc. as well as the physical and economic requirements for the use of elephants in forest operations, An annex considers the clinical biology and care of the elephant.
Impacto ambiental de las prácticas de cosecha forestal y construcción de caminos en bosques nativos siempreverdes de le X Región do Chile. 1995. FAO Forest Harvesting Case-Study No 6, Rome. FAO.
This study documents the forestry operations that make up harvesting, transport and road construction in evergreen forests in the X region of Chile (which extends for some 230 km between 39° and 42°30' South latitude, between the Pacific Ocean and the Andes mountain chain) and evaluates their environmental impacts.
Based on existing literature and observations in the field, the study makes recommendations for the improvement of harvesting and reduction of waste; as well as reduction of negative environmental impacts on natural resources, soil and water. The study also includes suggestions for the adoption of appropriate technologies that favour the participation of local populations. These suggestions are consistent with the principles espoused in the FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice (see Box on page 20).
<section>d</section>
Where to purchase FAO publications locally - Points de vente des publications de la FAO - Puntos de venta de publicaciones de la FAO
· ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de Publicações, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceição Silva, N° 7
C.P. N° 1314-C, Luanda
· ARGENTINA
Librería Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743, 1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Av. Córdoba 1877, 1120 Buenos Aires
E-mail: olilibro@satlink.com
· AUSTRALIA
Hunter Publications
P.O. Box 404, Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
Tel.:(03) 9417 5361
Fax: (03) 914 7154
E-mail: jpdavies@ozemail.com.au
· AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26, 1010 Vienna
· BANGLADESH
Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F,
Lalmatia, Dhaka 1207
· BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi, 1060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Av. Heroínas 311, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
· BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532, Gaborone
· BRAZIL
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
E-mail: valeria@sede.fgvrj.br
Núcleo Editora da Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icaraí-Niterói 24
220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Fundação da Universidade Federal do Paraná - FUNPAR
Rua Alfredo Bufrem 140, 30° andar
80020-240 Curitiba
· CAMEROON
CADDES
Centre Africain de Diffusion et
Développement Social
B.P. 7317 Douala Bassa
Tel.: (237) 43 37 83
Fax: (237) 42 77 03
· CANADA
Renouf Publishing
5369 chemin Canotek Road, Unit 1
Ottawa, Ontario K1J 9J3
Tel.: (613) 745-2665
Fax: (613) 745 7660
Website: www.renoufbooks.com
E-mail: renouf@fox.nstn.ca
· CHILE
Librería - Oficina Regional FAO
c/o FAO Officina Regional para América
Latina y el Caribe (RLC)
Avda. Dag Hammarskjold, 3241
Vitacura, Santiago
Tel.: 33 72 314
Fax: 696 1121/696 1124
E-mail: german.rojas@field.fao.org
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
· CHINA
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation
16 Gongti East Road, Beijing 100020
Tel.: 6506 30 70
Fax: 6506 3101
E-mail: cnpiec@public.3.bta.net.cn
· COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Vicepresidencia de Fomento
Carrera 9^a N° 72-21, Piso 5
Bogotá D.E.
Tel.: 217 0100
· CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577, Brazzaville
· COSTA RICA
Librería Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central, Apartado 10011
1000 San José
CINDE
Coalición Costarricense de Iniciativas de Desarrollo
Apdo 7170, 1000 San José
E-mail: rtacinde@sol.rassa.co.cr
· CÔTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P. 541, Abidjan 04
Tel.: 22 20 55
Fax: 21 72 62
· CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas Empresa de Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605, La Habana
· CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd Import of Periodicals
Palác Metro, P.O. Box 825
Národní 25, 111 21 Praha 1
· DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel.: 4533128570
Fax: 4533129387
Website: www.munksgaard.dk;
E-mail: subscription.service@mail.munksgaard.dk
· DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241, Santo Domingo
· ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Librería Internacional
Juan León Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029, Quito
E-mail: librimul@librimundi.com.ec
Universidad agraria del Ecuador Centro de Información Agraria
Av. 23 de Julio, Apdo 09-01-1248
Guayaquil
Librería Española
Murgeón 364 y Ulloa, Quito
· EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street, Cairo
Tel.: 393 97 2
Fax.: 360 68 04
E-mail: fouda@soficom.com.eg
· ESPAÑA
Librería Agrícola
Fernando VI 2, 28004 Madrid
Librería de la Generalitat de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118 (Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel.: (93) 302 6462
Fax: (93) 302 1299
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castelló 37, 28001 Madrid
Tel.: 914 36 37 00
Fax: 915 75 39 98
Website: www.tsai.es/MPRENSA
E-mail: mundiprensa@tsai.es
Mundi Prensa - Barcelona
Consejo de Ciento 391,
08009 Barcelona
Tel.: 301 8615
Fax: 317 0141
· FINLAND
Aketeeminen Kirjakauppa Subscription Services
P.O. Box 23, FIN-00371 Helsinki
Tel.: (358) 0121 4416
Fax.: (358) 0121 4450
· FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot, 75005 Paris
Lavoisier Tec & Doc
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Website: www.lavoisier.fr
E-mail: livres@lavoisier.fr
Librairie du Commerce International
10, avenue d'Iéna
75783 Paris Cedex 16
Website: www.cfce.fr
E-mail: pl@net-export.fr
WORLD DATA
10, rue Nicolas Flamand
75004 Paris
Tel.: (01) 4278 0578
Fax: (01) 4278 1472
· GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale Buchhandlung
Friedrichstrasse 34
D-65185 Wiesbaden
Tel.: 37 42 12
S. Toeche-Mittler GmbH Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
Tel.: 6151 336 65
Fax: 6151 314 048
Website: www. booksell.com/triops
E-mail: triops@booksell.com
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn 1
Tel.: 49 (0) 228 94 90 20
Fax: 49 (0) 228 21 74 92
Website: www.uno-verlag.de
E-mail: unoverlag@aol.com
· GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051, Accra
· GREECE
Papasotiriou S.A.
35 Stournara Str., 10682 Athens
Tel.: +301 3302 980
Fax: +301 3648254
· GUYANA
Guyana National Trading Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P.O. Box 308
Georgetown
· HAÏTI
Librairie «A la Caravelle»
26, rue Bonne Foi
B.P. 111, Port-au-Prince
· HONDURAS
Escuela Agrícola Panamericana Librería RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrícola Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazán, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93, Tegucigalpa
· HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126, H-1656 Budapest
Tel.: 256 1672
Fax: 256 8727
· INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press PVT, Ltd
G-I/16, Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Tel.: 32 64 180
Fax: 32 60 538
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi 110 001
Tel.: 91 11 331 5310
Fax: 91 11 371 3275
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
Bookwell
Head Office:
2/72, Nirankari Colony, New Delhi - 110009
Tel.: 725 1283
Fax: 91-11-328 13 15
Sales Office:
24/4800, Ansari Road
Darya Ganj, New Delhi - 110002
Tel.: 326 8786, 325 7264
E-mail: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in
· IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and Regional Specialized Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
· IRELAND
Office of Public Work
4-5 Harcourt Road, Dublin 2
· ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056, Tel Aviv 61130
E-mail: royil@netvision.net.il
· ITALY
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel.: 06 57055688
Fax: 06 57055155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Librería Commissionaria Sansoni S.p.A. - Licosa
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
Tel.: 055 64 54 15
Fax: 055 64 12 57
E-mail: licosa@ftbcc.it
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6, 20146 Milano
· JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers (Kyokuto Shoten Ltd.)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Tel.: 03 3265 7531
Fax: 03 3265 4656
Maruzen Company Ltd.
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
Tel.: 81 3 3278 1894
Fax: 81 3 3278 1895
E-mail: h_sugiyama@maruzen.co.jp
· KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd.
Kijabe Street
P.O. Box 47540, Nairobi
Tel.: 330 342
Fax: 22 57 79
Inter Africa Book Distribution
Kencom House, Moi Avenue
P.O. Box 73580, Nairobi
Tel.: 21 11 84
Fax: 254 2 22 35 70
· LUXEMBOURG
M. J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
E-mail: jean.de.lannoy@infoboard.be
· MADAGASCAR
Centre d'information et de Documentation Scientifique et Technique
Ministère de la recherche appliquée au développement
B.P 6224 Tsimbazaza, Antanarivo
· MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square, 01250 Penang
· MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243, Bamako
· MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
PO. Box 302 (RP), Rabat
Tel./Fax: 212 7 75 01 83
· MEXICO
Librería, Universidad Autónoma de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N° 202-1° Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922
Col. Escandón, 11800 México D.F.
Mundi Prensa Mexico, S.A.
Rió Pánuco, 141 Col. Cuauhtémoc
C.P. 06500, México, DF
Tel.: 533-5658 al 60
Fax: 514-6799
E-mail: 1015452361@compuserve.com
· NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
E-mail: roodboek@euronet.nl
Tel.: 622 8035
Fax: 625 5493
Swets & Zeitlinger b.v.
P.O. Box 830, 2160 Lisse
Heereweg 347 B, 2161 CA Lisse
E-mail: infono@swets.nl
Website: www.swets.nl
· NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
E-mail: gppmjxf@gp.co.nz
Oasis Official
P.O. Box 3627, Wellington
Tel.: (+64) 4 499 1551
Fax: (+64) 4 499 1972
E-mail: oasis@clear.net.nz
Website: www.oasisbooks.co.nzl
· NICARAGUA
Librería HISPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221, Managua
· NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd.
University of Ibadan, Ibadan
· NORWAY
Swets Norge AS
P.O. Box 6512, Etterstad
N-0606 Oslo
Tel.: (+47) 2297 4500
Fax: (+47) 2297 4545
E-mail: nicagen@swets.nl
· PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
· PARAGUAY
Librería Intercontinental Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asunción
· PERU
INDEAR
Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
Universidad Nacional "Pedro Ruiz Gallo"
Facultad de Agronomía, A.P. 795
Lambayeque (Chiclayo)
· PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center, Inc.
Room 720, Cityland 10 Tower 2
H.V. de la Costa, Cor. Valero St
Makati, Metro Manila
Tel.: 817 9676
Fax: 817 1741
· POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
· PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal, Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74
Apartado 2681, 1200 Lisboa Codex
· SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd.
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road, Singapore 1024
Tel.: 732 1515
Fax: 736 0855
· SLOVAK REPUBLIC
Institute of Scientific and Technical Information for Agriculture
Samova 9, 950 10 Nitra
Tel.: +42 87 522 185
Fax: +42 87 525 275
E-mail: uvtip @ nr.sanet.sk
· SOMALIA
Samater
P.O. Box 936, Mogadishu
· SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd.
P.O. Box 23408, Claremont 7735
Tel.: Cape Town (021) 64-4136
Fax: Cape Town (021) 64-3358
E-mail: dpp@iafrica.com
Website: www.twisted.co.za
· SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd.
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
· SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17, 8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genève 1
Website: www.un.org
Van Diermen Editions Techniques ADECO
41 Lacuez, CH-1807 Blonzy
· SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
· SWEDEN
Wennergren Williams AB
P.O. Box 1305, S-171 25 Solna
Tel.: 46 8 705 9750
Fax: 46 8 27 00 71
E-mail: mail@wwi.se
Bokdistributören
P.O. Box 301 61, S-104 25 Stockholm
Tel.: 46 8 728 2500
Fax: 46 8 31 30 44
E-mail: lis.ledin @ hk.akademibokhandeln.se
· THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
· TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164, Lomé
· TUNISIE
Société tunisienne de diffusion
5, avenue de Carthage, Tunis
· TURKEY
DUNYA INFOTEL
100. Yil Mahallesi
34440 Bagcilar, Istanbul
Tel.: 0212 629 08 08
Fax: 0212 629 46 89
E-mail: dunya@dunya-gazete.com.tr
Website: http://www.dunya.com
· UNITED KINGDOM
The Stationery Office
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel.: (0171) 873 9090 (orders)
(0171) 873 0011 (inquiries)
Fax: (0171) 873 8463
and through The Stationery Office Bookshops
E-mail: postmaster@theso.co.uk
Website: www.the-stationery-office.co.uk
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd.
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road
Alton, Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel.: (01420) 86848
Fax: (01420) 89889
Website: www.microinfo.co.uk
E-mail: emedia@microinfo.co.uk
· UNITED STATES
Publications:
BERNAN Associates (ex UNIPUB)
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham, MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 1-800-274-4447
Fax: 301-459-0056
Website: www.bernan.com
E-mail: info@bernan.com
UN Bookshop
The United Nations Bookshop
General Assembly Building Room 32
New York, N.Y. 10017
Tel.: 212 963 7680
Fax: 212 963 4910
Website: www.un.org
E-mail: bookshop@un.org
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1943
Birmingham, AL 35201 -1943
Tel.: (205) 991-6600
Telex: 78-2661
Fax: (205) 991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood, MA 02090
Tel.: 6117-329-3350
Telex: 95-1980
Cable: FW Faxon Wood
· URUGUAY
Librería Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335, Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
· VENEZUELA
Fundación La Era Agrícola
Calle 31 Junin Qta Coromoto 5-49
Apartado 456, Mérida
Fundación para la Investigación Agrícola
San Javier
Estado Yaracuy, A.P. 182, San Felipe
Fax: 054 44210
E-mail: damac@diero.conicit.ve
Fudeco, Librería
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel.: (051) 538 022
Fax: (051) 544 394
Telex: (051) 513 14 FUDEC VC
Librería FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
Librería Universitaria, C.A.
Av. 3, entre 29 y 30
N° 29-25 Edif. EVA, Mérida
Fax: 074 52 09 56
Tamanaco Libros Técnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2, Caracas
Tel.: 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
A.P. 20.315, 1020 Caracas
Tel.: 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
E-mail: tchlibros@ibm.net
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial
Av. Andrés Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia, Ed. Carabobo
Tel.: 222 724
· ZIMBABWE
Grassroots Books
The Book Café
Fife Avenue, Harare;
61 a Fort Street, Bulawayo
Tel.: 79 31 82
Fax: 70 21 29
· Other countries/Autres pays/Otros países
Sales and Marketing Group
Information Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel.: (39) 06 57051
Fax: (39) 06 57053360
Telex: 625852/625853/610181 FAO I
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
