<title>Food Fortification: Technology and Quality Control. (FAO Food And Nutrition Paper - 60)</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION
The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) convened a Technical Consultation on Food Fortification: Technology and Quality Control at the Istituto Nazionale della Nutrizione, Rome, Italy, from 20 to 23 November 1995. The list of Consultation participants is presented in Annex 1.
The Consultation was opened by Mr. J. R. Lupien, Director, Food and Nutrition Division, FAO. He noted that the Consultation subject is a topical issue as both developed and developing countries seek to ensure that food fortification is used effectively to meet the diverse needs existing in these countries. He mentioned that the International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) held in Rome in 1992, recognised micronutrient deficiency as a widespread nutritional problem and stated that food-based activities should be the focus of attention in addressing this problem. One of the most important aspects of the follow-up to this Conference has been the preparation of National Plans of Action for Nutrition which detail activities to be undertaken by governments which include reducing micronutrient deficiencies. FAO has the responsibility of providing technical support to member countries as they attempt to implement those activities.
Mr. Lupien called to the attention of the Consultation the importance of international recommended standards and guidelines covering fortified foods. He pointed out that the Codex Alimentarius Commission has been responsible, since 1962, for implementing the joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, the primary aims of which are to protect the health of the consumer and facilitate international trade. The Codex Alimentarius recommended Standards and Codes of Practice have been recognised by the World Trade Organization as reference standards for use in the international trade of foods.
Finally, Mr. Lupien pointed out that the Consultation could perform a valuable service to FAO by providing well considered opinions and recommendations in the following areas:
1. The most appropriate technologies to be utilised, and existing technological constraints in food fortification programmes;
2. Criteria which must be evaluated in assessing the sustainability of fortification programmes;
3. The establishment of mechanisms which would ensure adequate quality and safety of fortified foods;
4. Identification of any need for further development of international guidelines covering fortified foods; and
5. Identification of areas which should be promoted for further research or investigation.
Mr. Giuseppe Rotilio, President, Istituto Nazionale della Nutrizione welcomed the participants and expressed the interest of his Institution in the topic of food fortification especially in light of the currently expanding knowledge on the physiological roles of micronutrients in the body.
The Consultation elected Dr. Shawky Dagher as Chairman, and Dr. Chen Chun Ming and Dr. Anna Ferro Luzzi as Vice-Chairpersons. Professor Demetre Labadarios was appointed as Consultation Rapporteur. The provisional agenda was presented for consideration by the Consultation and was subsequently adopted. This is attached as Annex 2.
The deliberations of the Consultation were based on six working papers, the titles of which are listed in Annex 3.
<section>2</section>
BACKGROUND
The FAO/WHO International Conference on Nutrition (ICN), held in Rome during December 1992, recognised the widespread occurrence of micronutrient deficiencies. The ICN World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition recommended steps to make all efforts to eliminate iodine and vitamin A deficiencies before the end of this decade and to reduce substantially other important micronutrient deficiencies, including iron.
Food-based approaches were recognised by the ICN as the most effective way to address existing micronutrient deficiencies. These approaches must include strategies to assure dietary diversification, improved food availability, food preservation, nutrition education and food fortification. Existing constraints in many developing countries include agricultural, economic, environmental, socio-cultural, political, health-related and infrastructural issues. In every case the most appropriate combination of the above mentioned nutrition strategies must be employed to overcome local constraints and achieve the desired results. It is widely recognised that the long term solution to micronutrient deficiencies must rest on the provision of adequate quantities of all micronutrients from a well balanced diet.
Certain micronutrients are sometimes not naturally present or available in local foods, such as adequate amounts of iodine. This can be due to lack of iodine in the soil where crops are grown, or in the case of other micronutrients such as iron or vitamin A, due to problems of bioavailability, unbalanced diets or intestinal parasites. In such cases, food fortification with micronutrients may help in overcoming deficiency problems. The major problems involved in fortifying foods include the identification of suitable vehicles, selection of appropriate fortificant compounds, determination of technologies to be used in the fortification process and the implementation of appropriate monitoring mechanisms to determine whether the goals of the programme are being met. Reliable methods for determining micronutrient status are required both in establishing the need for food fortification and in monitoring its nutritional impact.
These issues were presented to this Technical Consultation on Food Fortification for their consideration and for their guidance in arriving at appropriate recommendations with regards to food fortification.
<section>3</section>
FOOD FORTIFICATION TECHNOLOGY
Iodine
Iron
Vitamin A
Vitamin D
Vitamin E
Vitamin C
B-Complex Vitamins
Practical Problems Encountered in Establishing Fortification Programmes
The discussion on food fortification technology was based on two working papers, 'Micronutrient Fortification of Food: Technology and quality Control' (CONFORT 2) and 'History of Technology Development for Vitamin A Fortification of Foods in Developing Countries' (CONFORT 5). These two working papers have been attached (see Annexes 4 and 5) as much of the detailed information contained therein is not repeated in this report. The Consultation stressed the need to take an holistic approach to food fortification, and hence emphasised many supporting activities which would facilitate efficacious fortification.
Considerations beyond the methodologies employed in the addition of micronutrients to foods influence to a large extent the potential of food fortification to meet its nutritional objectives. These include: current technologies for determining micronutrient status of target population groups; bioavailability of certain micronutrients in fortified foods, and; impact of traditional practices on the stability of nutrients in fortified foods. Existing problems in these areas as they relate to specific micronutrients are dealt with below.
The focus of the international community has so far been on the three most prevalent deficiencies (Vitamin A, iodine and iron). However, the Consultation considered that other micronutrients, such as vitamin D, E, C and the B-complex, were also important. The Consultation further recognised the mounting evidence suggesting that zinc deficiency may be prevalent in many population groups, but decided not to include this mineral in its deliberations because zinc fortification is not yet widely practised except in special cases such as emergency refugee programmes. The Consultation did not consider the addition of nutrients to foods for special dietary uses, such as weaning foods and infant formulae.
For the purposes of this Consultation, food fortification was defined as in the Codex Alimentarius, namely, "...the addition of one or more essential nutrients to a food, whether or not it is normally contained in the food, for the purpose of preventing or correcting a demonstrated deficiency of one or more nutrients in the population or specific population groups...". However, the Consultation recognised that micronutrient addition also included other considerations such as new scientific findings on the role of micronutrients in better health and changes in dietary patterns. The Consultation recognized the need to better define "demonstrated deficiency" as mentioned in the Codex definition of fortification. The Consultation accepted the definition of "deficiency" as that demonstrated by dietary, biochemical, functional and/or clinical data.
Iodine
The Consultation agreed that salt is one of the most suitable vehicles for iodine fortification for the general population. It has been successfully and, in general, safely used for over 70 years in programmes around the world to prevent iodine deficiency problems.
Two chemical forms of iodine are currently used for iodization; these are iodates and iodides. The Codex Alimentarius standard for food grade salt permits the use of the sodium and potassium salts of iodides and iodates in the iodisation of salt. The level of fortification that has been used ranges from 30-200 ppm. These two forms of iodine, however, need to be harmonized in terms of equivalence in order to avoid trade barriers.
A major consideration in the choice of the two compounds is the purity of the salt. The iodides are more readily degraded in the presence of impurities, whereas the iodates remains stable in salt of lower quality.
Suitable technologies for iodization of salt exist for both large and small scale production plants. There have been four major technologies used in the addition of iodine to salt. These are dry mixing, drip feed addition, spray mixing and submersion. These technologies have been extensively reviewed elsewhere.
Alternative vehicles which may be considered for iodization are milk, bread, flour, sugar and condiments. In addition, fortification of animal feeds can be useful in increasing the iodine content of animal products. Recent data indicate that dietary intake of iodine can be increased by the use of slow release resins added to water. The overall effectiveness of this practice remains to be established.
With the use of iodized salt in food processing, a variety of foods will act as an iodine source. In some countries where iodized salt is provided for home use, it is not only added to food during preparation but also used in the home processing of traditional foods such as cured fish and pickled products. The iodized salt in the home processing of traditional foods provides much of the iodine consumed by certain population groups.
Clearer understanding of the interaction of iodine with other dietary factors needs to be achieved if one is to optimise iodine fortification programmes. It would be desirable to further investigate the interaction of iodine with various goitrogens which may be present in the diets of target populations, so that a more accurate assessment of optimal iodine fortification levels could be determined.
In cases where there is more than one demonstrated micronutrient deficiency in a target population, the addition of more than one micronutrient to a single vehicle (multiple fortification) could be advantageous. The evaluation of new methods of iodine fortification which facilitate multiple fortification should be encouraged.
Sporadic reports of thyrotoxicosis have been reported especially in iodine fortification programs which were poorly monitored. The prevalence of this side effect can be reduced by close monitoring of iodine levels in foods which can be adjusted based on monitoring of human urinary iodine excretion.
The Consultation was of the opinion that monitoring of any iodine fortification program by quality assurance of the fortification process and periodic evaluation of urinal iodine status are of critical importance in ensuring the success and long term sustainability of any such program.
Iron
Cereals are the most widely used vehicles for iron fortification although many others, such as milk products, sugar, curry powder, soya sauce and cookies have been successfully used.
Elemental iron (particularly micronized), iron sulphate and iron fumarate are examples of preferred iron fortificants. Selection of the iron fortificant is dependent on the food vehicle. The colour of iron compounds is often a critical factor when fortifying lightly coloured foods. The use of more soluble iron compounds (eg. iron sulphate) often leads to the development of off-colours and off-flavours due to reactions with other components of the food material, but they have the advantage of being highly bioavailable. Vitamin C is known to increase the bioavailability of non-heme iron forms. In some countries bovine haemoglobin concentrate, which has an exceptionally high bioavailability, is being used as a heme-iron fortificant in local feeding programmes.
The presence of phytates, polyphenols and calcium are known to adversely affect the bioavailability of non-heme iron fortificants. Increasing evidence indicates that in such cases sodium iron-EDTA may prove to be a better choice of fortificant in the future as iron from the EDTA-complex remains bioavailable even in the presence of iron absorption inhibitors. A three year study in humans has shown no adverse effects. The Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) has given sodium iron-EDTA tentative approval for use as a fortificant. However, at present, there is little available information on food grade specifications for the compound.
Given the wide variability of iron bioavailability, influenced by physical and chemical properties of the fortificant as well as the presence of substances which either inhibit or improve iron absorption, there is a need to develop convenient models for the evaluation of iron bioavailability. Improved information on the bioavailability of iron in fortified foods should be used to assess the necessity of revising levels of iron fortification in some products. This is particularly important as an increasing range of iron fortificants with different physico-chemical properties, is being developed and marketed.
Iron fortification practices should be based on feedback from comprehensive surveillance programmes monitoring their impact on iron status. It should be noted that iron overload is not a concern in growing children and menstruating women, but since the iron requirement of these groups is much higher than for adult male populations, there is a need to evaluate the long-term risks of excessive iron intake in the latter group, as consumption of the fortified foods is generally not restricted to the group at greatest risk of deficiency. A combination of nutrition intervention strategies should be used to meet the high iron requirements of these population groups. It is important to assess the contribution of iron fortification in combination with other strategies for the control of iron deficiency in specific age/sex groups, so as to establish optimal goals for iron fortification of foods.
Surveillance data of iron status should be interpreted with caution because of the known alteration of serum ferritin levels and other indicators of iron status in the presence of recent infection. Serum transferrin receptor determination appears promising in the evaluation of iron status in the presence of infection. Furthermore, it should be stressed that not all anaemia is due to iron deficiency, although the latter is most common.
Several aspects of the interaction between iron and other nutrients, such as vitamin A, iodine, zinc and calcium, need to be investigated in relation to the possibility of multiple fortification. The stability and the cost of fortificant compounds as well as the bioavailability of the nutrients need to be considered.
The Consultation also noted that meal composition and dietary variety are important factors in optimizing iron status.
Vitamin A
Foods which have been successfully fortified with vitamin A include margarine, fats and oils, milk, sugar, cereals, and instant noodles with spice mix. Moisture contents in excess of about 7-8% in a food are known to adversely affect the stability of vitamin A. Beyond the critical moisture content there is a rapid increase in water activity which permits various deteriorative reactions to occur. Repeated heating, as may be experienced with vegetable oils used for frying, is known to significantly degrade vitamin A. The hygroscopic nature of salt has prevented its use as a vehicle for vitamin A fortification in countries of high humidity. In trying overcome this problem, a new vitamin A fortificant, encapsulated to provide an additional moisture barrier, was evaluated with limited success. The cost of using highly protected fortificants can be prohibitive in many cases.
In developed countries vitamin A fortification is limited to milk and dairy products, margarine and fat spreads and breakfast cereals. Current levels of fortification of Vitamin A are generally considered as safe.
Carotenoids can be used as a source of vitamin A. However the conversion and bioavailability of the carotenoids is known to be affected by the vitamin A status of the individual and by dietary composition. A conversion factor of 6:1 (six milligrams of beta carotene equivalent to one milligram of retinol) is currently being applied in calculating intake. The cost factor in using carotenoids as the source of vitamin A activity in fortification is generally considered prohibitive.
Vitamin D
There are a limited number of food vehicles suitable for vitamin D fortification. These include margarine, vegetable oils and dairy products.
Vitamin D metabolism is linked to calcium absorption and parathyroid hormone. Susceptible populations for marginal vitamin D status include children under three years of age, the elderly and any population where cultural practices or climatic conditions prevent exposure to sunlight. Some research is currently being conducted to evaluate the effect of sun screens on vitamin D status. It is important to note, however, that there is a need to develop reliable, accurate, simple and rapid methodology for the assessment of vitamin D status. Without this it is difficult to make required adjustments to fortification practices based on feedback from comprehensive monitoring of the impact of fortification on vitamin D status.
Vitamin E
Vitamin E, as tocopherol acetate, is added to fats and oils including margarine and fat spreads and breakfast cereals.
Vitamin E intake is known to be related to the total dietary intake of fat and it has been shown to enhance absorption and bio-conversion of dietary carotenoids to vitamin A. Emerging evidence indicates that daily intake of vitamin E greater than 30 IU may afford protection against the development of degenerative diseases. Optimal levels of fortification of vitamin E should be reassessed based on such scientific evidence.
Vitamin C
There are technologies available for vitamin C fortification of fruit juices, fruit juice drinks, other related beverages, dairy products and some breakfast cereals. Vitamin C, as used in foods, is known to improve iron bioavailability. High moisture content (greater than 7%) in the presence of oxygen is known to adversely affect the stability of vitamin C in cereals. There is a need to develop more stable vitamin C compounds and evaluate their use in the fortification of a range of vehicles.
There is much ongoing investigation on the role of vitamin C in the prevention of chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease, cancer and cataracts. Based on the outcome of such research it may be desirable to revise fortification practices for this vitamin.
B-Complex Vitamins
There are no problems related to the technology of the addition of B vitamins to cereals and grains. The development of off-flavours due to the thermal instability of thiamine is easily circumvented by adding this vitamin following all heat treatments.
Riboflavin is thought to be associated with anaemia prevention and its role in this association needs to be clarified. The status of B complex vitamins is known to be marginal in populations with low consumption of animal foods (milk, meat, liver) and/or those which use low extraction (highly refined) products of cereals and grains such as flour as well as in populations in transition from rural to urban settlements. Food fortification with B complex vitamins may be appropriate for such populations. The development of improved methodologies for the evaluation of B-vitamin status would be a valuable tool in establishing the need for fortification in target populations and in the monitoring of these programmes.
A confirmed association between dietary folic acid intake and neural tube defects has been reported. Populations with marginal or low folic acid intake may therefore benefit from fortification of staples with folic acid. Furthermore, folic acid together with vitamin B6 and vitamin B12 have been reported to decrease plasma homocysteine levels; the latter is reported to be inversely associated with the development of ischaemic heart disease. Further investigation of these relationships is relevant to the evaluation of the adequacy of current fortification practices.
Practical Problems Encountered in Establishing Fortification Programmes
With the expanding range of fortificant compounds available and the need to use various vehicles according to the designated target groups, there is need to consider the technologies best suited to achieve a fortified product with the desired properties. The Consultation agreed that, ideally, a fortified food should:
- Be commonly consumed by the target population;
- Have a constant consumption pattern with a low risk of excess consumption;
- Have good stability during storage;
- Be relatively low in cost;
- Be centrally processed with minimal stratification of the fortificant;
- Have no interaction between the fortificant and the carrier food;
- Be contained in most meals with availability unrelated to socio-economic status;
- Be linked to energy intake.
Selection of an appropriate vehicle is a critical step in successful fortification. In many cases identification of suitable vehicles is made difficult by the absence of reliable information on dietary habits of the target population.
The desirability of providing detailed methodologies for the fortification of foods to countries with limited resources interested in carrying out such activity, was recognised. It was decided, however, that the primary task of the Consultation should be to use its experience to guide policy-makers towards an understanding of the complexity of the issues involved in food fortification, rather than to provide a 'procedural manual' for the production of selected fortified foods. In recognition of the fact that the need for information on technical procedures in the fortification of foods still exists, the Consultation recommended that a database, documenting fortification practices and new developments, be established and maintained. This would facilitate ready access to such information internationally, thus reducing wastage of resources and improving efficiency in the establishment of food fortification.
- There have been a number of important lessons learned in the technical research and development work carried out for food fortification processes. These include:
- The long time and high cost required for the development of new combinations of fortificants and vehicles must be considered in planning fortification activity.
- Fortificants must meet quality criteria specifications explicitly established for each application, including; chemical stability, appearance, bioavailability and homogeneity.
- Field testing of fortified food must be done at several locations in the country of intended fortification use, due to differing environmental conditions, and consideration should be given to problems potentiated by scaling up production activities from pilot to industrial scale.
- In certain situations promotion of production and consumption of fortified foods proved to be a critical factor influencing the acceptability of the food.
- Active participation must be maintained by all partners involved in fortification programmes. These should include; relevant governmental organizations, food industry, trade organizations, consumer organizations, academic and research facilities, marketing specialists and interested international organizations and agencies.
<section>4</section>
IMPACT OF LEGISLATION
General principles for addition of nutrients to foods
Consideration of additional requirements
Nutrients are increasingly being added to foods for a number of reasons and this tendency raises the issue of the regulation of such practices. Discussion on the impact of legislation was based on the working paper entitled 'Impact of Legislation on Food Fortification Practices' (CONFORT 3).
It should be stressed here that there is a substantial body of legislation at the national level, as well as Codex international recommended standards which are applicable to all food products. The Consultation stressed that these same requirements must in general apply also to foods to which nutrients are added. However, some specific issues related to the practice of addition of nutrients to foods may require additional legal provisions. Such provisions, however, should cover the subject of the addition of nutrients horizontally across a range of foods. Vertical (product specific) legislation should be discouraged unless strictly necessary.
General principles for addition of nutrients to foods
At the present stage of world trade development, the existence of international provisions pertaining to the addition of nutrients to foods are necessary in order to facilitate trade in such products. Within the FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme, the Codex Alimentarius Commission has adopted "General Principles for the Addition of Essential Nutrients to Foods".
According to these General Principles, essential nutrients may be added to food in order to achieve any of the following: restoration of nutrients lost during processing; nutritional equivalence of substitute foods; fortification; and ensuring the appropriate nutrient composition for a special purpose food. The basic principles for the addition of essential nutrients to foods, as stated by the Codex Alimentarius Commission are:
1. The essential nutrient should be present at a level which will not result in either an excessive or an insignificant intake of the added essential nutrient considering amounts from other sources in the diet;
2. The addition of an essential nutrient to a food should not result in an adverse effect on the metabolism of any other nutrient;
3. The essential nutrient should be sufficiently stable in the food under customary conditions of packaging, storage, distribution and use;
4. The essential nutrient should be biologically available from the food;
5. The essential nutrient should not impart undesirable characteristics to the food and should not unduly shorten the food shelf life;
6. Technology and processing facilities should be available to permit the addition of the essential nutrient in a satisfactory manner;
7. Addition of essential nutrients to foods should not be used to mislead or deceive the consumer as to the nutritional merit of the food;
8. The additional cost should be reasonable for the intended consumer;
9. Methods of measuring, controlling and/or enforcing the levels of added essential nutrients in the foods should be available;
10. When provision is made in food standards, regulations or guidelines, for the addition of essential nutrients to foods, specific provisions should be included identifying the essential nutrients which are to be considered or be required and the levels at which they should be present in the food to achieve their intended purposes.
As stated previously, the Codex definition of fortification is, "...the addition of one or more essential nutrients to a food whether or not it is normally contained in the food, for the purpose of preventing or correcting a demonstrated deficiency of one or more nutrients in the population or specific population groups...". Within the above General Principles outlined by the Codex, nutrient addition for purposes of fortification should be the responsibility of national authorities since the kinds and amounts of essential nutrients to be added and foods to be fortified will depend upon the particular nutritional problems to be corrected, the characteristics of the target populations and the food consumption patterns in the area. Any fortification programme should meet the following conditions:
- There should be a demonstrated need for increasing the intake of an essential nutrient in one or more target groups. This may be in the form of actual clinical or sub-clinical evidence of deficiency, estimates indicating low levels of intake of nutrients or possible deficiency likely to develop because of changes taking place in food habits;
- The food selected as a vehicle for the essential nutrients should be consumed by the population at risk;
- The food selected as a vehicle for the essential nutrient(s) should be stable and uniform and the lower and upper levels of intake should be known;
- The amount of the essential nutrient added to the food should be sufficient to correct or prevent the deficiency when the food is consumed in normal amounts by the population at risk;
- The amount of the essential nutrient added should not result in excessive intakes by individuals with a high intake of a fortified food.
Consideration of additional requirements
The Consultation felt that there were a number of issues related to food fortification which should be additionally considered:
Compulsory addition of nutrients
Such rules would be the responsibility of national authorities and respond to specific regional, national or even local situations. Specific provisions may address:
- Specific food vehicles to be chosen on the basis of the recommendations given above;
- Specific nutrients that may be added to these foods;
- Specific levels which would be appropriate for the situation.
Existing legislation currently pertaining to nutrient addition to selected food products in many countries are included in Annex 7.
The establishment of an advisory list of nutrients
The establishment of an advisory list of nutrients and nutrient compounds to be used in food fortification should be encouraged. The Consultation felt that the Advisory lists of mineral salts and vitamin compounds for use in foods for infants and young children detailed in the Codex Alimentarius Volume 4-1994, would be an excellent starting point. Such a list should be regularly updated taking into account new scientific and technological developments and data on safety, bioavailability, stability and other relevant data.
Foods to which nutrients may be added
The Consultation felt that a list of foods to which nutrients may be added should not be drawn. However, the selection of such foods should be guided by the principles set out in the appropriate Codex guidelines referred to above.
Levels of nutrients
The Consultation believed that minimum levels for the addition of nutrients should be set, in international recommended standards, according to the purpose of the addition. The setting of maximum levels, it was felt, should be considered for those nutrients for which there is evidence that excessive intakes would result in undesirable effects.
Labelling
It has already been stated that general labelling rules and specific rules on nutrition labelling should apply. A particular issue of interest is that of nutrition claims and health claims to be made for foods to which nutrients are added.
Experience has shown that the success of food fortification programmes can be enhanced by permitting the manufacturers to make relevant claims. Commercial realities would also advocate that such permission also be granted when nutrients are added voluntarily to foods. However, care should be taken that use of claims does not result in practices that could mislead or deceive the consumer or distort the true value of the fortification.
Given that the subject of health and nutrition claims on food labelling is currently being discussed within the Codex Alimentarius programme, the Consultation did not deem it appropriate to discuss it further. However, the Consultation recommended that Codex accelerate the resolution of this important matter.
Finally, the Consultation suggested that the extent of legislative measures to be developed should not be such as to make fortification practices cumbersome nor restrict communication on the availability of the fortified food. The legislative development process should involve extensive consultation with the scientific community, industry, consumers and other relevant, interested parties.
<section>5</section>
FOOD CONTROL SYSTEMS IN FOOD FORTIFICATION PROCESSES
The effects of inadequate food control
Obstacles to adequate food control
Discussion of the total quality management of food fortification processes was based on the working paper 'Quality Assurance in Food Fortification Processes' (CONFORT 4). For the purpose of this Consultation, a food control system (FCS) covers activities such as issuance of laws and regulations, government inspections and analyses, and quality assurance by industry. The Consultation emphasized the need for an efficient food control system in order for food fortification processes to meet nutritional objectives. Inspection procedures should be risk based and quality assurance procedures at the production level should be based on Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP).
The effects of inadequate food control
The Consultation agreed that inadequacies in the FCS at any or all stages in the production-consumption chain has cumulative contribution to the deterioration of product quality. This results in: economic losses on the part of industry and government; lost reputation on the part of the producer, and; social development setback for the health and nutrition programme when the expected impact, in terms of benefit to target population groups, is not realized.
Obstacles to adequate food control
Major obstacles to implementation of adequate FCS programmes occur when material sourcing, production, packaging, storage, transport conditions and delivery systems are sub-optimal. Poor or variable quality of raw materials, unreliable and poorly fabricated equipment, and inadequate manufacturing and marketing facilities lead to poor product quality. The lack of efficient and skilled manpower to carry out an effective FCS both at the production and the government levels, coupled with limited training opportunities is another major obstacle. Moreover, legislation and regulation may not be well developed nor enforcement mechanisms established to ensure that government standards are met. The lack of adequate political, financial and technical support of an efficient monitoring and surveillance system is often the cause of failure.
The Consultation underscored the need for collaboration among government, industry and the consumer to make FCS work effectively. There should be multi-sectoral participation in the development of necessary laws, regulations and standards and the commitment of government to their enforcement through adequate monitoring, inspection and surveillance. Adequate training of people at all levels of the food control system should be a priority.
An aspect of food control requiring attention which is specific to control of fortified foods, is the selection of methodologies for the determination of vitamin and mineral content of foods. Development or selection of analytical procedures should be based on consideration of accuracy and precision of measurements, available facilities and equipment, simplicity of procedure and rapidity of determination. Methodologies used must be internationally recognised.
<section>6</section>
REQUIREMENTS FOR EFFECTIVE FORTIFICATION IN FOOD AID PROGRAMMES
Discussion of food fortification in the context of food aid programmes was based on the working paper 'Requirements for Effective Fortification in Food Aid Programmes' (CONFORT 6) which has been attached as Annex 6, for clarity. Fortification of food aid for displaced persons and refugees was endorsed at the ICN in the World Plan of Action for Nutrition, which included the following recommendation:
"...donor countries and involved organizations must ... ensure that the nutrient content of food used in emergency food aid meets the nutritional requirements if necessary through fortification, or ultimately supplementation..." (FAO/WHO, 1992).
The Consultation discussed two types of food aid programmes with relevance to food fortification. One is regular programmes which include products for maternal and child health, Food-for-Work programmes and concessional food programme sales to governments.
The second type of food aid programme are those designed for emergency relief of refugees, displaced populations or natural disasters. Because these emergency programmes aim to cover the complete nutritional requirements of the target population, food fortification must be designed to meet these needs and to prevent micronutrient deficiency diseases. More than 40% of today's food aid is oriented towards emergency programmes, and this figure is increasing. This demonstrates that a growing proportion of food aid recipients rely entirely on food aid programmes to meet their nutritional requirements. It is essential, therefore, that appropriate fortification of foods distributed through food aid programmes, be practised.
There are several challenges to achieving effective fortification in the context of food aid programmes which include: varying uses of a given fortified commodity, and; varying fortification and enrichment policies and practices by donor countries. These factors are discussed in Annex 6. Although some guidelines already exist for the enrichment of food commodities, there are no overall international guidelines for the enrichment and fortification of food aid commodities. The Consultation recommended the development of international guidelines to advise food aid donors on acceptable and safe fortification practices, as a means of overcoming some of the problems currently encountered. It was emphasised, however, that guidelines should not impede the ability of food donors to respond to emergency requests.
Increased monitoring is needed of micronutrient levels, bioavailability, stability and shelf-life of fortified food used in food aid programmes. Most countries in need of food aid do not have the capability to implement adequate food control procedures locally and therefore provisions must be made by producers and/or donors of the foods to ensure adequate levels of nutrients at the point of consumption, based on a realistic estimate of food intake. All required nutritional information must be provided through appropriate labelling of all fortified foods distributed through these programmes.
Countries receiving food aid should be made fully aware of existing mechanisms by which they can request fortified foods for their food aid programmes. If fortified foods are used in these programmes, the increased costs incurred mean that decreased quantities of food will be available. The stimulation, where possible, of local fortification of the unfortified food aid commodities may help overcome this problem.
<section>7</section>
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
General recommendations
Specific recommendations and areas for future work
Food fortification is an essential element in nutrition strategies to alleviate micronutrient deficiencies. It is a dynamic area developing in response to the needs of population groups and industry. Efforts should continue to develop improved and new systems of delivering micronutrients to target populations through appropriate fortification procedures. To facilitate this, those involved in the establishment of food fortification programmes locally must have ready access to information concerning fortification techniques and procedures being used all over the world. A multi-disciplinary approach is essential for successful fortification with active collaboration of all sectors involved. These include; government, donor agencies, food industry, local academic institutions, food legislators and consumers. Adequate monitoring of food fortification is essential and should include both, monitoring of critical control points in the production and distribution of fortified foods
and monitoring of micronutrient status of target populations, in establishing the need for intervention and to assess food fortification impact. The importance of this underlines the need for agreement on suitable clinical and analytical methodologies to be used, where satisfactory methodologies do not exist, improved procedures should be developed. Following the deliberations of the Consultation, general recommendations for food fortification were agreed upon, and specific recommendations were made with respect to technical aspects of food fortification as deemed necessary.
General recommendations
The Consultation agreed upon the following general recommendations regarding food fortification:
1. Where foodstuffs cannot provide naturally occurring essential nutrients to population groups, the use of fortification, following the principles outlined in Codex Alimentarius, should be given serious consideration as a means of achieving ICN goals.
2. A multi-sectoral approach must be adopted in the establishment of any food fortification programme, encompassing participation of relevant governmental organizations, food industry, trade organizations, consumers, academic and research facilities, marketing specialists and any involved international organizations and agencies.
3. Efforts should continue to harmonize national legislation concerning fortified foods, with the international standards of the Codex Alimentarius.
4. International guidelines to advise food aid donors on acceptable and safe fortification practices should be developed; guidelines should not be so restrictive as to impede the provision of high quality food aid commodities nor hinder communication on fortification between relevant parties.
5. There should be appropriate fortification of foods used in food aid programmes, with donors being required to provide relevant nutritional information particularly through adequate labelling.
6. Levels of fortification should be evaluated and adjusted according to bioavailability of the nutrient(s) in the diets of target populations.
7. It is important to evaluate the potential of local food industries to become involved in the production of high quality fortified food products, including those destined for use in food aid programmes, in areas where problems of micronutrient deficiency are likely to occur.
8. Food control systems based on HACCP principles, risk-based inspection procedures and internationally accepted analytical methods should be developed in support of fortification programmes.
9. The impact of food fortification on the nutritional status of target populations should be monitored so that appropriate corrective action can take place as required.
Specific recommendations and areas for future work
The Consultation made the following specific recommendations and suggestions for future work:
Food Fortification Technology
Iodine:
1. Determine iodine stability in traditional food processing as very little information on this is currently available.
2. Evaluate efficacy of iodine resins added to water as an iodine source, as findings regarding the effectiveness of this practice are inconclusive.
3. Evaluate iodine interaction with various goitrogens so as to better understand the influence of diet on the effectiveness of iodine fortification.
Iron:
1. Use methodologies which are accurate and reliable in the presence or absence of recent infection, to define iron status in different population groups.
2. Develop convenient models of iron bioavailability (non-human or in-vitro models) as current methodologies for the evaluation of bioavailability are problematic.
3. Determine the necessity to revise levels of iron fortification in some products because of improved iron bioavailability of new fortificants.
4. Explore the use of new iron fortificants such as liposome micro-encapsulated iron compounds and amino acid chelates. Their bioavailability, long-term safety, regulation of absorption and retention need to be studied.
5. Evaluate long-term risks of iron intake for adult male populations as their iron requirement is lower than that for adult females and children, and iron fortification of foods generally does not allow for preferential targeting among these groups.
6. Assess the contribution of iron fortification, in combination with other strategies, for the control of iron deficiency in specific age/sex groups.
7. Assess issues of multiple fortification (iron/vitamin A; iron/iodine; iron/zinc; iron/calcium, etc) in terms of their practicality, nutrient interaction, stability and bioavailability.
Vitamins A, B, C and D:
1. Identify other potential food vehicles for vitamin A and evaluate suitability of currently available technologies for these new vehicles. Develop new vitamin A forms, if necessary.
2. Develop reliable, accurate, simple and rapid methodology for the assessment of vitamin D status as current methods of assessment are difficult.
3. Develop and evaluate the use of more stable vitamin C compounds for the purpose of fortification.
4. Develop improved methodologies for assessment of B-vitamin status as this is currently difficult to determine.
5. The reported association between plasma homocysteine levels and the roles of vitamin B6, folic acid and vitamin B12 in this relationship should be further investigated.
Practical Problems in Food Fortification:
1. Establishment and maintenance of a database documenting existing food fortification practices in developed and developing countries. Widespread and ready access to such information could reduce time wasted in establishing 'new' fortification procedures globally.
2. Surveys are required in many countries to establish dietary patterns and habits which are critical inputs in determining appropriate vehicles for use in food fortification.
Legislation and international standards
1. Establishment, at an international level, of an advisory list of nutrients for use in food fortification.
2 Determination of the need for additional regulations, at the national level, pertaining to fortified foods according to specific regional, national or even local situations.
3. Further consideration of evidence indicating undesirable effects of excessive intakes of essential micronutrients in order to establish maximum levels of fortification where necessary.
4. The Codex work on Nutrition and Health Claims should be expedited as this is directly related to labelling requirements and allowable claims for fortified foods.
Fortification in food aid
1. Countries receiving food aid should be made aware of existing mechanisms for requesting fortified food products according to local requirements.
2. Evaluate the current and potential capacity of local and regional processing industries to fortify food aid commodities.
<section>8</section>
ANNEX 1 - LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
EXPERTS
Dr. Leo Bick
Technical Director, ABIA
Av. Brig. Faria Lima 2003/11°
Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Tel.: 55 11 814 5733
Fax: 55 11 814 5733
Max Blum
Advisor in Human Nutrition
F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.
P.O. Box CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.
Tel.: 41 61 687 2792
Fax: 41 61 688 1736 email: max.blum@roche.com
Dr. Patricia Murphy
Professor
Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition
Iowa State University
Ames, IA 50011, USA.
Tel.: 515 294 3011
Fax: 515 294 8181 email: pmurphy@iastate.edu
Irina du Bois
Vice President
Head of Regulatory Affairs
Nestec Ltd.
Vevey, Switzerland.
Tel.: 41 21 924 2262
Fax: 41 21 924 4547 email: chvev430.bayer@nestecch.nestle.com
Professor D. Labadarios
Head: Department of Human Nutrition
Faculty of Medicine
University of Stellenbosch and the South African Medical Research Council
Tygerberg 7505, South Africa.
Tel.: 27 21 938 9259
Fax: 27 21 933 2991
email: Demetre@maties.sun.ac.za
Dr. Tomas Walter
Haematology Unit, INTA
University of Chile
Casilla .1.5139
Santiago 011, Chile
Tel.: 56 2 678 1480
Fax: 56 2 221 4030
email: twalter@uec.inta.uchile.cl
Dr. Rodolfo Florentino
Director, Food and Nutrition Research Institute
General Santos Avenue
Taguig, Metro Manila, Philippines.
Tel.: 632 823 8934
Fax: 632 837 2937
email: rff@dostmis.dost.gov.ph
Dr. Chen Chun Ming
Chinese Academy of Preventative Medicine
27, Nanwei Road
Beijing, 100050, China.
Tel.: 86 1 3022960
Fax: 86 1 317 0892
Dr. Shawky Dagher
Chairman, Department of Biology
American University of Beirut
Beirut, Lebanon.
Tel.: 961 1 353465/6 ext. 3880
Fax: 1 212 478 1995
email: sdagher@layla.aub.ac.lb
Dr. David Yeung
Director, Corporate Nutrition
H. J. Heinz Co. Ltd.
5650 Yonge St., 16th Floor
North York, ON M2M 4G3, Canada
Tel.: 416 226 7504
Fax: 416 226 5064
Dr. Victor Fulgoni
Kellogg Company
Nutrition Department
235 Porter Street
Battle Creek, MI 49016-3423, USA
Tel.: 616 961 3160
Fax: 616 961 3130
email: victor.fulgoni@kellogg.com
Dr. Samuel Kahn
Senior Health and Nutrition Advisor
Office of Health and Nutrition
USAID
Washington, D.C., 20523, USA.
Tel.: 703 875 4228
Fax: 703 875 4686
email: skahn@usaid.gov
Mr. Basil Mathioudakis
Principal Administrator
European Commission
Directorate General Ill-Industry
Rue de la Roi 200
B-1049 Brussels, Belgium
Tel.: 3222959951
Fax: 3222960951
email: Mathioudakis-b@dg3.cec.be
Dr. Nelly Baiocchi
Director General
Centro Nacional de Alimentacion y Nutricion
Instituto Nacional de Salud
Lima, Peru
Tel.: 5114633833
Fax: 5114 639617
Dr. Fernando Viteri
Professor
Department of Nutritional Sciences
University of California
Berkeley, California, USA
Fax: 510 642 0535
Dr. Anna Ferro-Luzzi
Human Nutrition
Istituto Nazionale della Nutrizione
Rome, Italy
Tel.: 39 6 504 2677
Fax: 39 6 503 1592
Dr. Emilia Carnovale
Food Chemistry
Istituto Nazionale della Nutrizione
Rome, Italy
Tel.: 39 6 519 1133
Fax: 39 6 503 1592
SECRETARIAT
Anthony Whitehead
Senior Officer
Food Quality and Standards Service
Food and Nutrition Division, FAO
Enrico Casadei
Nutrition Officer
Food Quality and Standards Service
Food and Nutrition Division, FAO
Renata Clarke
Consultant
Food Quality and Standards Service
Food and Nutrition Division, FAO
Mary Kenny
Associate Professional Officer
Food Quality and Standards Service
Food and Nutrition Division, FAO
<section>9</section>
ANNEX 2 - PROVISIONAL AGENDA
CONFORT 1
FAO TECHNICAL MEETING ON FOOD FORTIFICATION:
TECHNOLOGY AND QUALITY CONTROL
ROME, ITALY, 20-23 NOVEMBER 1995
Document No.
Opening of the Session
Election of Officers
Adoption of the Agenda
CONFORT 1
Tabling of Pre-circulated Paper - Micronutrient Fortification of Foods: Technology and Quality Control
CONFORT 2
Tabling of Pre-circulated Paper - Impact of Legislation on Food Fortification Practices
CONFORT 3
Tabling of Working Paper - Quality Assurance in Food Fortification Processes
CONFORT 4
Tabling of Pre-circulated Paper - Vitamin A Fortification Programmes in Developing Countries
CONFORT 5
Tabling of Pre-circulated Paper - Requirements for Effective Fortification in Food Aid Programmes
CONFORT 6
Tabling of Pre-circulated Paper - The Role of USAID in Supporting Food Fortification Activities
CONFORT 7
Other Business
Conclusions and Recommendations of the Consultation
Adoption of Report
Close of Session
<section>a</section>
ANNEX 3 - LIST OF WORKING PAPERS
A number of working papers were presented over the course of the Consultation and served as the basis for the discussions. The titles of the working papers and author information is listed in this annex. Some but not all of these papers have been included in this publication. The decision as to which to publish and which not to publish was taken solely on the basis of the degree to which they added to what was included in the report, and does not in any way reflect upon the quality or contribution to the work of the Consultation of those omitted. All enquiries concerning the papers not published herewith should be directed to the Chief, Food Quality and Standards Service, Food and Nutrition Division, FAO, Rome.
TITLE
AUTHOR
Micronutrient Fortification of Foods: Technology and Quality Control (CONFORT 2)
Dr. Renata Clarke, Consultant, ESNS, FAO, Rome
Impact of Legislation on Food Fortification Practices (CONFORT 3)
Dr. Renata Clarke, Consultant, ESNS, FAO, Rome
Quality Assurance in Food Fortification Processes (CONFORT 4)
Dr. Rodolfo Florentino, Director, Food and Nutrition Research Institute, Philippines.
History of Technological Development of Vitamin A Fortification in Developing Countries (CONFORT 5)
Dr. Patricia Murphy, Professor, Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Iowa State University, Iowa, USA
Requirements for Effective Fortification in Food Aid Programmes (CONFORT 6)
Ms. Patricia Dexter, Nutritionist, Food Science Department, University of Arkansas, Arkansas, USA
The Role of USAID in Supporting Food Fortification Activities (CONFORT 7)
Dr. Samuel Kahn, Senior Health and Nutrition Adviser, USAID, Washington DC, USA.
<section>b</section>
ANNEX 4 - MICRONUTRIENT FORTIFICATION OF FOOD: TECHNOLOGY AND QUALITY CONTROL*
1. INTRODUCTION
2. NUTRIENT ADDITIONS TO FOOD - TECHNOLOGY
3. IMPACT OF OTHER TECHNOLOGIES ON FORTIFICATION PROCEDURES
4. VITAMIN AND MINERAL FORTIFICANTS
5. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND CONTROL
6. FUTURE DIRECTIONS OF FORTIFICATION
7. SUMMARY
8. REFERENCES
ANNEX 1 - COMMON CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS IN THE PRODUCTION OF SELECTED FORTIFIED FOODS AND EXAMPLES OF MONITORING PROCEDURES
*This paper was prepared for the Technical Consultation by Dr. Renata Clarke, Consultant in Food Science and Technology.
CONFORT 2
FAO TECHNICAL CONSULTATION ON FOOD FORTIFICATION:
TECHNOLOGY AND QUALITY CONTROL
ROME, ITALY, 20-23 NOVEMBER 1995
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Forms of Nutritional Intervention
1.2 Food Fortification: A Definition
1.3 Food Fortification in Developed Countries
1.4 Food Fortification in Developing Countries
1.1 Forms of Nutritional Intervention
Before going on to look at the technologies involved in food fortification, it is important to emphasise that there are alternative or complementary forms of intervention which are sometimes indicated in the face of nutritional deficiency. Food based interventions include the establishment of horticultural and home garden projects, whereby support is given to strategic target groups to grow certain crops which could alleviate their dietary deficiency. Such activity has received widespread acceptance (Arroyave, 1987; Smitasiri, 1991; Attig et al., 1993). Nutritional education aimed at getting people to improve their eating habits has also demonstrated positive results in selected situations (Devadas, 1987; Soekirman and Jalal, 1991). Supplemental feeding programmes have also been very successful (Devadas and Saroja, 1985). Development or promotion of superior plant varieties in terms of their micronutrient content as well as the identification of processing technologies which
maximise vitamin retention are also important food based strategies (FAO, 1993; Bouis, 1995). Taken individually any of these interventions is inadequate to eliminate micronutrient deficiency. In some cases cultivation of some crops is not widely possible, or the prices of these are out of reach of the most susceptible groups in the population. Also, achieving the necessary results within a reasonable time frame is limited by the fact that in many cases it requires substantial modification of traditional practices. Success in the global context is only possible if a flexible and integrated approach to the problem is adopted.
The distribution of nutrient supplements or clinically administered vitamin doses is sometimes an effective form of intervention in the short term as it can facilitate the more rapid relief of physiological symptoms where additional nutrient demand is high (West, 1987). This strategy depends on the existence of adequate health and social infrastructure.
1.2 Food Fortification: A Definition
Food fortification has been defined as the addition of one or more essential nutrients to a food, whether or not it is normally contained in the food, for the purpose of preventing or correcting a demonstrated deficiency of one or more nutrients in the population or specific population groups (FAO/WHO 1994). Other terminology exists for the addition of nutrients to foods. Restoration means the addition to a food of essential nutrients which are lost during the course of Good Manufacturing Process (GMP), or during normal storage and handling procedures, in amounts which will result in the presence in the food of the levels of the nutrients present in the edible portion of the food before processing, storage or handling (FAO/WHO, 1994). Enrichment has been used interchangeably with fortification (FAO/WHO, 1994), but elsewhere it has been defined as the restoration of vitamins and minerals lost during processing (Hoffpauer and Wright, 1994).
1.3 Food Fortification in Developed Countries
Food fortification continues to be a widely used mechanism in many developed countries. In this context, it is the rapidly changing lifestyles and increasing reliance on more highly processed foods has been used to justify the addition of nutrients to an expanding range of foods in order to ensure nutritional adequacy of the diet (LaChance and Bauernfiend, 1991; Hoffpauer and Wright, 1994). It is important to note that there is no general consensus regarding the extent to which food fortification should be practised and the prevailing attitude towards it varies in the developed world. France, the Netherlands, Norway and Finland have restrictive legislation regarding the addition of micronutrients to foods (du Bois, 1991). Nutrification has, however , continued in these countries for certain processed foods. In France restoration of vitamins to compensate for processing losses to the extent of 80 - 200% of naturally occurring levels, is allowed. It is also permitted to add
nutrients to foods for special dietary uses. In the Netherlands, addition of nutrients to certain foods for special dietary uses is allowed as well. Vitamin A fortification of margarine and iodine addition to salt are also practised. In Norway and Finland, special permission for nutrient addition to specific foods may be granted (du Bois, 1991). In his recommendations concerning the micronutrient enrichment of foods in the Netherlands, Anderson (1994) stated that the increase in processed ready to use foods had not lowered nutrient intakes in that country and that there was no basis for extending the authorisation for food enrichment. In Germany there is currently an effort to promote the fortification of foods with iodine in order to combat iodine deficiency in that country (Wirth and Kuehne, 1991a; Wirth and Kuehne, 1991b; Schaff, 1993).
In North America, fortification of foods is viewed positively. Many studies underline the role of such nutrified foods in assuring nutritional adequacy in the North American diet (Wiemer, 1995). The expanding range of fortified foods can be justified by the fact that RDA's for many nutrients are commonly not met (NRC, 1989). In a study carried out on a group of women in New York, it was shown that the mean intakes of Ca, Fe and vitamin D were all below the recommended daily allowance (Subar and Bowering, 1988). Other factors can complicate food fortification policy, however, as was shown by the USA National Dairy Council's request for monitoring of Ca fortification on the basis that the required element is readily available in dairy products (Anon., 1995). In developed countries, regulation of fortification is currently receiving more attention than the technologies involved. This is because there is a legitimate fear of over-fortification as manufacturers seek to use
fortification as a marketing tool.
Whatever are the issues that now surround food fortification in developed countries, there can be no question of the role which this practice has played in the past. The virtual elimination of micronutrient deficiencies from these countries has been attributed in large part to this action (Finch and Cook, 1981; Bauernfiend and DeRitter, 1991; DeRitter, 1991; LaChance and Bauernfiend, 1991; Hoffpauer and Wright, 1994; Wiemer, 1995).
Food scientists have risen to the challenges posed by micronutrient fortification. Evidence of their success is clearly demonstrated on the supermarket shelves in most developed countries. Technical problems such as the interaction of the added nutrients with the food carrier matrix due to the pro-oxidant and catalytic properties of many of the essential minerals as well as the susceptibility of many vitamins to destruction by heat, light and oxygen have been overcome for an ever widening range of applications.
1.4 Food Fortification in Developing Countries
The 1992 ICN conference held in Rome emphasised the importance of food based activities in their plan of action geared at addressing the issue of micronutrient malnutrition (FAO/WHO, 1992). Food fortification is one of the relevant modes of action. Advantages of food fortification relative to other modes of intervention have been widely noted and a result of these is that fortification programmes can be implemented and yield results within a short period (Austin et al., 1981; Arroyave, 1987; INACG, 1990; Mannar, 1991; Nestel, 1993). The focus of the international community has so far been on the three most prevalent deficiencies: vitamin A, iodine and iron. There are different considerations involved in the establishment of food fortification programmes in developing countries as opposed to developed ones. There are several steps in the implementation of a food fortification programme in developing countries. Having identified the need for nutritional intervention on behalf
of a population or a sub-group thereof and the required levels of fortification, then a suitable carrier must be identified, appropriate fortificants selected, the technologies used in the fortification process determined and some mechanism put in place to determine whether the nutritional objectives of the programme are being met. Selection of the carrier is a critical step and several required characteristics of the carrier have been noted (Arroyave, 1987; Mannar, 1991; Nestel, 1993).
The identified vehicle must be consumed in roughly constant quantities throughout the year by the majority of the population. The food must pass through a centralised point to facilitate a rigidly controlled fortification process. The addition of fortificants at the required levels must not affect the organoleptic qualities of the food.
It is important to emphasise that micronutrient fortification is not universally applicable. In some cases the high degree of decentralisation of food processing activities makes it impossible to regulate or even establish a viable fortification programme. In cases where subsistence farming is practised, fortification is not likely to be a practicable solution to nutrient deficiencies. It is imperative, before embarking on food fortification activity, to carefully define the context in which it is indicated.
2. NUTRIENT ADDITIONS TO FOOD - TECHNOLOGY
2.1 Cereals and Cereal based products
2.2 Milk and Milk Products
2.3 Fats and Oils
2.4 Accessory Food Items
2.5 Tea and Other Beverages
2.6 Infant Formulas
The following is not an exhaustive review of all food products which are fortified. Food products have been selected for discussion on the basis of their nutritional impact or their applicability to fortification programmes in developing countries.
2.1 Cereals and Cereal based products
2.1.1 Rice and other whole cereal grains
2.1.2 Flours, cornmeal and bread and pasta
2.1.3 Breakfast cereals
This is one of the most important areas for consideration of food fortification technologies. Foods from this category form the major component of diets around the world. This is especially true in the case of developing countries where dietary diversity is limited. On average, cereals provide 52% of caloric intake globally. For Africans and Asians they represent 60-75% of the caloric intake; for Latin Americans, 50%; and in the United States of America, 26% (Bauernfeind and DeRitter, 1991). In developing countries 95% of the population consume cereals as a dietary staple which also provide about 47% of the per capita protein intake.
Milling of cereal grains prior to their consumption is a common practice. During the milling process a substantial proportion of the nutrients are lost from the refined product. The fortification/enrichment of cereal grains can therefore be rationalised in more than one way. One valid reason is to restore to refined products, nutrients which have been removed during the milling process. Another reason is to improve the nutrient intake levels of target populations which are at risk of micronutrient deficiency.
2.1.1 Rice and other whole cereal grains
Among the cereals, rice presents unique problems in fortification. These are due to the fact that it is most commonly consumed as a whole grain and also in many countries, extensive washing of the grain prior to cooking is the normal practice. The earliest methods of rice enrichment involved the production of parboiled and converted rice. By this means nutrients from the bran layer were transferred to the starchy endosperm. The parboiling process involved the soaking of the rough rice , the application of heat followed by drying and milling. It was demonstrated that in this way 50-90% of the thiamine was retained (Misaki and Yasumatsu, 1985). The process for converted rice developed by Huzenlaub (Misaki and Yasumatsu, 1985) was similar to that for parboiling, but also employed pressure differences to facilitate transfer of nutrients. Acid parboiling, described by Kondo (Mitsaki and Yasumatsu, 1985) was similar to the parboiling except that it was carried out in the presence
of acetic acid.
After parboiling and converting, the next methods of enrichment involved the actual addition of nutrients to the milled products. Techniques used for this have been classified into two main groups 'powder type' and 'grain type' enrichment (Hoffpauer, 1992; Hoffpauer and Wright, 1994).
In powder type enrichment, a powdered pre-blended mixture of vitamins and minerals has been added at a rate of 1, 0.5. or 0.25 oz. per 100 lbs of rice (a w/w ratio of 1:1600, 1:3200 or 1:6400). For white parboiled rice, the normal practice has been to add the premix soon after milling as the heat and moisture at the grain surface at this point facilitates adherence of the powder. A major disadvantage of this method of nutrient addition has been that 20-100% of the nutrients are lost on washing. In the USA, rice enriched in this way must bear a label stating 'to retain vitamins do not rinse before or drain after cooking'.
In the second major type of enrichment, a powdered nutrient mixture has been applied to the milled rice grains followed by coating with a water insoluble substance (Cort et al., 1976; Hoffpauer, 1992). A fortified rice premix produced in this way has then been added to milled rice at a rate of 0.5%, to yield an enriched product conforming to the required standard of identity. In the United States of America, this standard requires between 2.0 - 4.0 mg of thiamine, 1.2 - 2.4 mg of riboflavin, 16 - 32 mg of niacin or niacinamide and 13 - 26 mg of iron per 100 lbs. of rice. It may contain 250 -1000 USP units of vitamin D and 500 -1000 mg of calcium. The requirement regarding riboflavin has been stayed pending final action. The objections regarding the use of this vitamin in the premix have been due to its role in the colour deterioration of the enriched grain. 'Grain type' or 'coated grain' enrichment have also been carried out by spraying the premix solution onto the rice
which is contained in a rotary cylinder, followed by hot air drying of the rice, application of a water insoluble sealant, addition of the iron compound and finally a second application of the water insoluble compound (Bauernfeind and deRitter, 1991; Cort et al. 1976). Water insoluble coatings which have been reported include an ethanol or isopropanol solution of zein, palmitic or stearic acid and abeitic acid. Other coating materials have contained ethyl cellulose. They dissolve at the elevated temperatures employed during cooking (Bauernfeind and deRitter, 1991). Using this 'coated grain' procedure, Cort et al. (1976) and Rubin et al. (1977) were able to successfully enrich rice with niacin, thiamine, pyridoxine, vitamin A, vitamin E, folic acid, iron, and zinc using expanded versions of the procedures already described. The water insoluble vitamins and minerals were added in different layers with intermittent coatings of shellac. Stability to rinsing treatments were
reportedly high, with vitamin losses in the range of 0.2-1.1%.
Ricegrowers Co-operative Ltd. (RCL) in Australia revised the HLR rice fortification procedure for the enrichment of rice with thiamine, niacin and iron (Bramall, 1986). The HLR process involved dissolution of vitamins in dilute sulphuric acid, application of vitamin solution to rice, application of a water insoluble substance, application of ferric pyrophosphate and talc followed by reapplication of a water insoluble layer and iron mixture before screening and packaging. Due to increased cost of raw materials, low factory output, use of hazardous materials, reported problems with browning of enriched grains, RCL modified the procedure to include the application of the nutrient mixture to the rice followed by drying, screening and packing. The nutrient mixture was composed of ferric pyrophosphate suspended in an acid solution of the vitamins. They reported that the browning found in the HLR premix on storage was due to the formation of ferric sulphates and that this problem
was eliminated with the use of an alternative acid. Acid hydrolysis at the surface of the rice grain provided a sufficiently sticky surface to ensure adhesion of the iron compound. Cost of the process was reduced and the factory output was doubled. There was no mention, however, of the stability of premix to nutrient loss through rinsing.
In the Philippines, attempts at fortifying rice by application of vitamin A followed by a water insoluble layer were abandoned since washing losses of between 10 - 20% were recorded (Florentino and Pedro, 1990; Murphy et al., 1992). Rice fortification with iron has also been tried in the Philippines using the coating method. The fortificant used in this programme was anhydrous ferrous sulphate. Some discolouration was found after 20 weeks of storage at room temperature and washing losses were 9%.
Ferric orthophosphate (white iron) is a recommended form of iron for use in the fortification of rice (Hoffpauer, 1992). This iron compound is almost water insoluble and has been preferred for mixing with milled rice due to its white colour. When it is oxidised or contains excessive moisture it may become tan, yellow, purple and or black. Hurrel (1985) reported that the bioavailability of ferric orthophosphate varied widely from batch to batch and was highly negatively correlated with particle size as was also found with elemental iron. This fortificant compound is more expensive than anhydrous ferrous sulphate. According to Hurrel (1985) the cost of ferric orthophosphate was about six times that of anhydrous ferrous sulphate, for the same level of total iron.
In Japan, a multinutrient enriched rice has been on the market since 1981. The first step in this procedure was acid parboiling in the presence of thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, pantothenic acid and pyridoxine. The second step involved coating the grain with separate layers of vitamin E, calcium and iron in separate layers and finally a protective coating material (Misaki and Yasumatsu, 1985). Modified atmosphere packaging, utilising aluminium laminate and carbon dioxide, ensured the stability of vitamin E during storage. The yellow or brown colour of the premix was not a problem in this case as it was used in the fortification of 'brown' rice.
Apart from these well established procedures there have been other innovations regarding alternative methods for rice fortification. Joseph et al. (1990) described an enrichment procedure using a premix containing thiamine, riboflavin, niacin and pyridoxine. This procedure involved soaking the milled rice in an acid medium containing the water soluble vitamins followed by the cross linking of starch granules in the enriched grains. The cross linking procedure itself was demonstrated to have caused significant vitamin loss, but the added vitamins were highly cook and wash stable. It is possible that this method could have some utility in the future.
Use of fortified simulated grains has featured prominently in attempts at rice fortification in the developing countries. Murphy et al. (1992) described the production of such a fortified rice product for use in the Philippines. The synthetic rice grains were produced by extrusion of rice flour in a pasta machine. The best formulation contained vitamin A stabilised by a mixture of tocopherol, ascorbate and lipids with a low level of unsaturation. Retinyl palmitate stabilised in an acacia matrix, type 250 SD (Sigma Chemical Co.) was the fortificant used. Retention of vitamin A after washing was reported to be 100%. Vitamin retention after cooking, however, ranged from 60 - 94%. The formulations which demonstrated the better storage stability, particularly at high humidity, suffered greater cooking losses. Drawbacks with this technology have been reported to exist with respect to blending with the natural product and in the consistency of the simulated grains after cooking
(Murphy et al., 1992; Hoffpauer and Wright, 1994). Field trials in Brazil showed no problems with acceptability of rice enriched in this way (Flores et al., 1995).
The enrichment of whole wheat grains with vitamin A has been attempted (Combs et al., 1994). The fortificant used was a premix comprised of concentrated vitamin A attached to wheat grains, for mixing at a level of 0.25% with wheat grains. The feasibility of this procedure was not determined. The fortification of whole grain cereals with soluble iron compounds is difficult because they promote oxidation of the lipid component of the grain, thus reducing the shelf life.
2.1.2 Flours, cornmeal and bread and pasta
In the fortification of flour the required nutrient mixture is mixed with an appropriate diluent to produce a premix, which is then accurately metered into the flour. The addition of vitamins B[1] and B[2], niacin, iron and calcium to wheat flour is a common practice in many developed countries. It is technologically feasible to add other vitamins and minerals as well. Cort et al (1976) successfully used two premixes to fortify wheat flour; the first comprised vitamin A, pyridoxine, folic acid, tocopherol acetate, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin and iron while the second contained calcium, magnesium and zinc.
The vitamin/iron premix demonstrated excellent stability on storage. The flour enriched with both premixes also demonstrated excellent stability on storage at room temperature. Under conditions of accelerated storage at elevated temperature (45 °C), however, there was substantial loss of vitamin A beyond 4 weeks of storage. Parrish et al. (1980) also reported good stability of enriched wheat flour stored at room temperature, but about 50% losses in flour stored at 40 °C for 6 months.
The form of vitamin A most commonly used in the fortification of flour was dry stabilised vitamin A palmitate (type 250-sd) powder form. The water soluble vitamins (thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, pyridoxine, folate and calcium pantothenate) are used in pure crystalline form. The mononitrate salt of thiamine is preferred for this use. Iron is normally used in its reduced elemental form. In the work of Parrish et al. (1980) ferrous sulphate was also used as the source of iron and there was no significant difference demonstrated between the flour enriched with ferrous sulphate and that enriched with elemental iron. It has been recommended that ferrous fumarate be used in the fortification of wheat flour within the P.L. 480 programme, due to its greater bioavailability (Combs et al., 1994). When mixing dry fortificants with dry foods, careful selection of the physical characteristics of the fortificant compound is important so as to ensure adequate mixing and to minimise
segregation on storage.
Rubin et al. (1977) investigated the stability of bread made from flour enriched by the 6 vitamins and 4 minerals described by Cort et al. (1976). They found that the inclusion of calcium and magnesium adversely affected vitamin A retention during the baking process. There was also an off-flavour detected in bread which included magnesium after 5 days of storage. Crumb colour and grain were also negatively affected by the nutrient multimixes tested by Rubin et al. (1977), with the greater affect occurring with the nutrient mix which included magnesium. Fortification of bread with zinc salts exerted no adverse effect on loaf volume, flavour or any other index of bread quality (Ranhotra, 1976).
Iodisation of bread has been carried out in the Netherlands and Tasmania (Dunn et al., 1986) by the addition of 2-4 ppm KIO[3] to the bread improver which was already in general use. KIO[3] has been used in bread production in the past, not as a fortificant but as an oxidising agent to improve dough quality.
The fortification of corn meal with 6+4 vitamin/iron mixture was shown to be technically feasible (Rubin et al., 1977; Parrish et al., 1980). Losses of vitamin A on storage at room temperature for up to six months were greater than with wheat flour but still remained below 20%.
In many countries pasta or noodles are commonly eaten and these can therefore be important vehicles for fortification. The manufacture of such products involves the production of a dough which is then extruded and dried. Enrichment can be through the use of enriched flour or alternatively, wet addition of a dispersion of the required vitamins can be carried out at the dough-making stage. Vitamin losses during production depend largely on the drying conditions employed. Dexter et al. (1982) enriched durum wheat flour with a vitamin mixture containing riboflavin, thiamine mononitrate and niacin for the production of spaghetti. They reported that high temperature drying treatments resulted in significant losses of riboflavin, whereas the other vitamins were stable to the processing conditions. In all cases cooking losses, estimated between 40 - 50%, exceeded those experienced during processing.
2.1.3 Breakfast cereals
The fortification of ready to eat breakfast cereals is a wide-spread practice. In the United States the general practice has been to provide 25% of the RDA of thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, pyridoxine, folate, ascorbic acid and vitamin A per 1 ounce. 10 or 25% iron, up to 20% RDA for calcium have also been added; vitamin D has also sometimes been included (Bauernfeind and DeRitter, 1991). Surveys have indicated that fortified breakfast cereals play an important role in ensuring nutritional adequacy of the diets of the U.S. population (Wiemer, 1995).
The minerals and the more heat stable vitamins like niacin and riboflavin have been added to the basic formula mix prior to processing (Johnson et al., 1988). The heat labile vitamins such as vitamins A, C and thiamine are usually sprayed onto the cereals after the high temperature processes such as oven or extruder. According to Johnson et al. (1988) two important considerations in the design of the spray system are: i) to ensure uniformity in spray coverage and ii) to optimise protection of both vitamins A and D. As the hydrophobic vitamins cannot form true aqueous solutions, they have been sprayed on in the form of an emulsion. The composition of the emulsion has been shown to greatly affect the vitamin stability. The inclusion of 15-20% sucrose into the spraying emulsion stabilised the vitamin A. It acted by forming a protective coating around the vitamin on drying. This fact explained the greater stability of vitamin A included in raisin bran as compared with cornflakes
(Johnson et al., 1988). In the latter case a no-sugar spray was used. Vitamin E can be added to the spray emulsion, it was at least as stable when added under these conditions.
Good storage stability of the fortified breakfast cereals was reported (Anderson et al., 1976). This was partly due to the fact that packaging materials with appropriate barrier properties have to be selected to ensure the maintenance of equilibrium moisture contents below about 5 %. Above this level there was textural deterioration of the product which was perceived as 'staleness'. Lund (1991) reported almost 60% loss of vitamin C from raisin bran on storage for a 12 month period. This was ascribed to the fact that the moisture levels in this cereal were maintained at a higher level to prevent hardening of the raisins. Improved procedures for the coating of raisins with a moisture barrier material prior to mixing with the material can minimise this problem. The addition of ascorbic acid was found to stabilise vitamin A to a greater extent than did phenolic antioxidants (Anderson et al., 1976). The addition of tocopherols did not provide any additional stability, possibly
because they were already present at optimal levels.
2.2 Milk and Milk Products
2.2.1 Liquid milk
2.2.2 Powdered milk
2.2.3 Other dairy products
2.2.1 Liquid milk
The production of a large proportion of milk on the market involves the removal of cream. Along with the cream, much of the fat soluble vitamins are also removed. The fortification of milk commonly involves the addition of vitamins A and D.
Since milk is an oil-in-water emulsion, the possibility exists to add vitamins in their oily form or use water dispersable forms of these. Ease of mixing has been identified as an advantage of using dry, water dispersable forms of the fortificant. However, the disadvantage of this was that vitamins were less stable in this form after addition to the milk as the protective coating dissolved leaving the vitamin susceptible to degradation (O'Brien and Robertson, 1993). Addition of oily vitamin preparations was recommended after dilution and pre-homogenisation with a suitable quantity of milk. Addition of the vitamin mixture prior to homogenisation of the bulk supply, facilitates uniform mixing. Metered injections of the vitamin preparation upstream to the homogeniser has been the standard set up in continuous operation plants. As both of these vitamins are sensitive to oxidation, care must be taken to minimise aeration particularly during mixing stages.
Many iron compounds have been assessed in the fortification of pasteurised whole milk. At pasteurisation temperatures below 79 °C off-flavours due to lipolytic rancidity developed but these problems were greatly reduced by increasing the pasteurisation temperature to 81 °C (Owen and MacIntire, 1975). De-aeration of the milk prior to the addition of iron compounds was also found to reduce flavour problems. The best fortification procedure was judged to be the addition of ferric ammonium citrate followed by pasteurisation at 81 °C. In this way fortified milk containing 30 ppm iron was found to be acceptable after 7 days storage. Levels of vitamin E, vitamin A and carotene were not affected by the presence of iron. In the production of iron fortified evaporated milk, ferric orthophsphate was shown to be useful (Krutz, 1973). The uniform distribution of the iron compound was, however, identified as a problem due to its low solubility.
Calcium fortification of milk and milk-based beverages has been carried out. Calcium fortificant preparations including stabilisers and emulsifiers have been used for this purpose to maintain calcium in suspension so as to improve mouthfeel and appearance of products (Anon., 1986). In Germany a milk-based fruit beverage has been marketed which is fortified with calcium, phosphorous as well as vitamins A, E, B and C.
2.2.2 Powdered milk
The fortification of powdered milk has been achieved by the addition of dry vitamin preparations to the milk powder as well as by vitamin addition to the liquid milk just prior to spray drying. As with other dry products, effective mixing has been best achieved in two steps: the initial dilution of the vitamin mixture with a suitable quantity of milk powder, followed by mixing into the bulk. Consideration of particle size and density are important to prevent separation of the components on storage.
In the iron fortification of powdered non-fat dry milk, ferrous sulphate at a level of 10 ppm was found to be stable for a period of 12 months. Ferric ammonium citrate and ferric chloride at a level of 20 ppm iron in the reconstituted product gave acceptable results (Coccodrilli and Shah, 1985).
2.2.3 Other dairy products
The addition of vitamins to other dairy products such as yoghurt and ice-cream has been practised and enrichment of cheese with iodine through the use of iodised salt has been approved in Germany.
In the case of ice-cream, there were no technological difficulties to overcome. The unit operations used in the manufacture of ice-cream are not highly destructive to vitamins. Vitamins are added in the dry form to the mix. Since whipping and consequent aeration of the mix is carried out around freezing temperature, oxidative losses of vitamins are minimal. Perhaps the greatest processing losses are due to pasteurisation of the mix.
In the production of yoghurt, the low pH conditions render it unsuitable as a carrier for vitamins such as vitamin A (O'Brien and Roberton, 1993). The water soluble B-vitamins are best used in a coated form, protected for odour and flavour considerations. When vitamins are added to the yoghurt by addition to the base, some vitamin loss can occur through metabolism by fermentation microorganisms (O'Brien and Roberton, 1993).
2.3 Fats and Oils
2.3.1 Margarine
2.3.2 Oil
2.3.1 Margarine
Margarine is a spread which has been widely used interchangeably with butter. For this reason, in many countries fortification of this spread with vitamins A and D is practised, since the food that it replaces is a good source of these vitamins. The vitamin A requirement is met using B-carotene as well as oil soluble vitamin A esters (Bauernfiend, 1991). The oil soluble vitamins are added in the required amounts to a portion of warmed oil which is then added to the bulk prior to homogenisation. Particularly in the case of margarines with a high content of polyunsaturated fatty acids, vitamin E has also been added. Due to the mild processing conditions only small overages are required to compensate for processing losses: 10 % for vitamins A and D and between 5-15% for vitamin E (O'Brien and Robertson, 1993).
2.3.2 Oil
Fortification of oil with vitamin A in the form of retinyl palmitate has been attempted in Brazil (Nestel, 1993). Storage studies demonstrated that after 18 months of storage in dark sealed containers losses of more than half of the vitamin content were experienced. When storage was not carried out in the dark, most of the vitamin content was lost after 6 months. Packaging of the fortified oil in opaque containers was therefore demonstrated to be a critical consideration.
Vitamin A fortified oil showed good vitamin retention after 5 months of storage in sealed metal containers at high temperature and humidity (Combs et al., 1994). Partially hydrogenised vegetable oil was used in the study and the fortificant was all-trans retinyl palmitate, at a level of 491 m g. 10 g. BHA and BHT were used as antioxidants
2.4 Accessory Food Items
2.4.1 Salt
2.4.2 Monosodium glutamate
2.4.3 Sugar
2.4.4 Sauces
Although staple foods are generally used as vehicles in food fortification programmes, at times when none can be identified which has all the required characteristics, it has been necessary to find other options. In outlining fortification policy in the Philippines, Parce (1995) states that condiments may be fortified but only with nutrients that are deficient in the diet and provided that such food is an appropriate vehicle for the micronutrient and is widely consumed by the general population or is intended for intervention programmes to address deficiency in a specific target population.
2.4.1 Salt
Salt iodisation began in 1922 in Switzerland and has been implemented in many countries as the major mechanism for eliminating iodine deficiency. Today, IDD remains a problem in many countries. WHO and UNICEF have established the goal of 'Universal Salt Iodisation' to be achieved by the end of 1995. Salt has been favoured as a carrier for iodine due to its wide spread coverage, effectiveness, simple technology involved and low cost (Mannar, 1988). Based on the suitability of salt as a widely used and low cost vehicle, fortification of salt with other nutrients has also been attempted (Nestel, 1993; Rao, 1985).
According to the Codex standard for food grade salt, use can be made of potassium or sodium iodides and iodates (FAO/WHO, 1995). The iodates have been found to be more stable than the iodides under a wide range of conditions. Stability studies of iodised salt using potassium iodate as the fortificant demonstrated that there was no significant loss of iodine on storage in polyethylene bags for up to two years (Chauhan et al., 1992; Silveira, 1993) and that boiling of the salt solutions led to negligible iodine loss.
There have been four major technologies used in the addition of iodine to salt. These are dry mixing, drip feed addition, spray mixing and submersion: the salient features of these procedures have been described by Mannar (1988). A thorough review of salt iodisation technology and quality control has been included in the recent text by Mannar and Dunn (1995).
According to Bauernfeind (1991), an acceptable iron fortificant for salt is one which does not discolour the salt nor impart a flavour or odour and remains stable and bio-available on storage. Ferrous fumarate, ferric orthophosphate and ferrous pyrophosphate have all been recommended by INACG (Nestel, 1993) for use with salt. Cook and Reuser (1985) report that the use of sodium acid pyrophosphate, ferric orthophosphate and ferric pyrophosphate as unacceptable due to poor bioavailability. To circumvent this problem, iron absorption enhancers, such as ascorbic acid and sodium acid sulphate, have been used. Another possibility is to use less stable iron compounds in conjunction with a stabiliser. Such combinations include ferrous sulphate/hexametasulphate and ferrous sulphate/sodium acid pyrophosphate. Sodium ferric EDTA provides adequate amounts of iron, but has been found to discolour refined salt (Cook and Reuser, 1985).
In the fortification of salt with iron, it must first be ground to a coarse powder to facilitate uniform mixing and distribution of the iron fortificant. Rao (1985) reported that a ribbon blender or a screw type conveyor mixer with a suitable feeder could be used. He also reported that packaging in unlaminated high density polythene bags was found to be satisfactory. The addition of both iodine and iron fortificants to salt can lead to the decomposition of the iodine compound and its subsequent liberation (Rao, 1985; Nestel, 1993). Nestel (1993) reported on the use of a fortificant mixture containing 40 ppm of potassium iodate, and 1000 ppm of iron as ferrous sulphate and 10,000 ppm of a permitted stabiliser which rendered good bioavailability of both iodine and iron after prolonged storage. Cost was identified as a constraint in the use of this fortificant system as it added 50% to the retail price of salt.
Fortification of salt with vitamin A has been attempted under laboratory conditions (Nestel, 1993). The fortificant used was dry vitamin A palmitate type 250 SD protected by a lipid. The fortificant was found to be unstable at moisture contents above 2%, since salt is hygroscopic, packaging material with an adequate moisture barrier must be used. Impurities in the salt were also found to destabilise the vitamin A. The particle size and shape must be such that uniform mixing could be achieved and segregation does not occur on storage.
2.4.2 Monosodium glutamate
MSG is a condiment which is widely used in many Asian countries. It has GRAS status in Codex Alimentarius as a flavour enhancer. This additive has been thoroughly scrutinised due to the allergic response which it has been alleged to induce in susceptible individuals (IFT, 1987; Alien, 1991). Recent studies have indicated that it is safe for the vast majority of people (IFT, 1987; Tarasoff and Kelly, 1993). It is worthy of note that the Joint Expert Committee on Food Additives concluded that MSG should not be used in infant foods even though there was no cause for concern about health risks (FAO/WHO, 1987).
Field studies on MSG fortification with vitamin A have been conducted in the Philippines and Indonesia (Bauernfeind, 1991; Nestel, 1993). In the Philippines dry vitamin A type 250 SD was used. This is vitamin A palmitate stabilised in an acacia-lactose matrix. The MSG was first ground to 100 mesh to facilitate mixing with the fortificant. Problems were encountered with segregation of fortificant and carrier, loss of vitamin A activity and colour deterioration of the fortified product. Vitamin A acetate 325 L, a granular fortificant stabilised in a gelatin - sucrose matrix, was used in place of the finely powdered vitamin A palmitate 250 SD. Under conditions of high humidity, there was hardening of the gelatin coat with associated loss of vitamin potency. In the Indonesian study, dry vitamin A palmitate type 250 CWS dispersed in an edible carbohydrate, stabilised with antioxidants and coated with a white protective layer, was used. This product was hot and cold water
miscible. This fortificant was demonstrated to retain over half of its potency when stored at 25 °C for 18 months. Under moist dark conditions, half of the activity is retained after 7 months. When subjected to light the fortificant is destabilised more rapidly, the uncoated form of the vitamin is less stable under these conditions. The fortificant mixture was added to MSG at the rate of 0.171 wt. %. The vitamin A was aggregated into clusters so as to minimise the problem of segregation during mixing and storage. Segregation of the product was still, however, identified as a problem. Colour deterioration of the fortified product was another constraint to the continued application of this technology (Soekirman and Jalal, 1991).
Iron fortification of MSG has also been attempted using micronised ferric orthophosphate and zinc stearate coated ferrous sulphate (Bauernfeind, 1991). The coated ferrous sulphate had reduced bioavailability relative to the uncoated form (Garby, 1985), but the fortified product was judged to have acceptable colour, taste, bioavailability and particle size properties. Preliminary investigations indicated that the inclusion of dry stabilised vitamin A (type 250 SD) into the iron fortified mixture might be technically feasible.
2.4.3 Sugar
Sugar has been found to be a suitable vehicle for nutrients in fortification programmes in Latin America and the Caribbean. In the vitamin A fortification of sugar, vitamin A 250-CWS was proven to be the most effective fortificant. The premix is produced by mixing sugar and fortificant in a revolving drum mixer. Physical separation of the fortificant beadlets from the sugar was prevented by the addition of an edible bonding agent. Stabilisers are added by first dissolving in warmed oil under anaerobic conditions, achieved by bubbling nitrogen through the oil, followed by intermittent addition to the fortified sugar with continuous mixing. Peanut, cotton seed, soya bean and coconut oils have all been used in this procedure. It has been suggested that shark liver oil be used in place of the vegetable oils. The natural vitamin A content of this source reduced the need for vitamin A fortificant by 10-12% (Lacera et al. 1983). The successful use of shark oil would be expected to
require rigorous deodorising and refining treatments and stabilisation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Satisfactory storage stability of the premix was obtained when packaged in double polyethylene bags with an outer paper layer, and stored in a cool, dry place.
The premix was added to the sugar such as to achieve vitamin A levels of 50 IU per g in the final product (Molina, 1991). Addition of fortificant can take place in the centrifuge at the end of the washing cycle in the sugar refining process, or along the transporting belts prior to packaging. Retention of vitamin A after 6 months at 25 °C was 92%. Higher losses were recorded with storage at 45 °C, with 76% retention of vitamin activity after 3 months.
Fortification of sugar with iron has also been attempted. Bauernfeind (1991) reported promising results using sodium ferric EDTA as the fortificant. Segregation of the fortificant and the carrier was not a problem as the iron compound became stuck to the sugar crystals at moisture contents exceeding 1% (Cook and Reuser, 1985). A major problem which exists with iron fortified sugar is that on addition to coffee or tea, there is marked discolouration. This phenomenon is reduced with the use of NaFeEDTA, but it is still evident.
2.4.4 Sauces
Iron fortification of strongly flavoured or dark coloured food products is often simplified due to the fact mat less care is required in consideration of the avoidance of off-flavours and off-colours. Largely for this reason iron fortification of curry powder demonstrated no technical difficulties. Nestel (1993) reported that NaFeEDTA was the fortificant used in the enrichment of curry powder in South Africa. In the fortification of fish sauces the major problem was the formation of a precipitate on addition of iron. When sodium iron EDTA was the fortificant, however, this phenomenon was greatly reduced. The inclusion of iron in an EDTA complex greatly restricted its availability for interaction with macro-molecules and other compounds in foods which could eventually lead to precipitation or other deteriorative reaction.
2.5 Tea and Other Beverages
2.5.1 Tea
2.5.2 Fruit juices and drinks
2.5.1 Tea
Brooke and Cort (1972) have reported on two procedures for the fortification of tea. Fine powdered vitamin A palmitate 250 SD was used by dry mixing with the tea dust. An emulsion of vitamin A palmitate, diluted with 50% sucrose solution was sprayed onto tea leaves. The added vitamin showed excellent storage stability for periods up to 6 months, and showed 100% recovery after brewing.
2.5.2 Fruit juices and drinks
In most cases the pH of fruit drinks and juices is below 4.5 and the heat treatment required is pasteurisation. Some loss of heat labile vitamins, thiamin, folic acid and ascorbic acid, occur as a result of the thermal treatment. The acidity of these drinks causes problems of stability with vitamin A, folic acid and calcium pantothenate. Carbonation of these beverages, with the resultant exclusion of oxygen, improves the stability of vitamins. The presence of sulphur dioxide in the fruit juices used in the production of these beverages have been shown to have a detrimental affect on thiamine content (O'Brien and Roberton, 1993).
Precautions which should be taken in the production of fortified liquid beverage have been outlined by DeRitter and Bauernfeind (1991). These included the use of stainless equipment, addition of vitamins at the latest possible stage, avoidance of excessive aeration or even de-aeration, rapid cooling after thermal treatment and the avoidance of readily autooxidisable ingredients. Data reported from a storage stability test of pasteurised multivitamin orange juice demonstrated 50% loss of vitamin A after 6 months of storage whereas B-carotene showed only about 6% loss. Riboflavin and thiamin showed good stability but vitamin C showed about a 23% loss (O'Brien and Roberton, 1993). Frozen orange juice concentrate containing added vitamins A, B[1], and C showed no vitamin A loss after holding at --10°F for 6 months (DeRitter and Bauernfeind, 1991). Beta-carotene and apocarotenal both showed good stability in fortified drinks but the latter was less stable on exposure to sunlight.
Problems associated with the iron fortification of fruit juices and drinks have been outlined as follows (Coccodrilli and Shah, 1985):
i. accelerated loss of vitamin C
ii. flavour and taste deterioration in the presence of thiamine, folic acid, vitamin A and vitamin C
iii. levels of fortification beyond 2.7 mg per serving result in metallic off-flavours
iv. decolourisation of some pigments.
The stability of a powdered breakfast drink fortified with iron, vitamin A and vitamin C was found to be very good. For organoleptic considerations ferrous gluconate was found to be superior to ferrous sulphate.
Fortification of beverages with calcium has become a popular practice. Minerals with a high nutritional requirement such as Ca, Mg and P create problems in the development of fortified foods (Clydesdale, 1991). Insoluble Ca and Mg salts cause lightening of food colour, whereas soluble salts may interact with other food components such as tannins to cause darkening. Minerals have also been reported to interact with anthocyanins containing vicinal hydroxyl groups causing a red to blue colour change (Clydesdale, 1991). At the required levels of fortification sparingly soluble compounds such as tribasic calcium phosphate, calcium sulphate and magnesiun oxide can cause chalky flavours. Conversely, the use of more soluble salts can lead to astringency due to high levels of the calcium and magnesium ions. The pro-oxidiant effect of many minerals have caused rancidity development in lipid-containing beverages. In 'slimming ' preparations or other beverages with a high protein
content, the addition of Ca or Mg salts have caused destabilisation of the protein component. Hirotsuka et al. (1984) reported on the use of soy lecithin to coat calcium ions for use in the calcium fortification of soy milk. This procedure prevented the Ca induced precipitation of soy proteins.
2.6 Infant Formulas
An adapted formula is designed to supply the total energy and nutrient requirements of full-term healthy infants during the first year of life. A follow-up formula designed to be a part of a mixed feeding regimen, can sometimes be introduced after 4-6 months. Other specialised formulas have been produced which take into account specific nutritional problems of infants.
The mineral content of cow's milk, from which many formulas are produced, is highly variable. Production methods have been adapted to control this source of variability. Operations have been included which remove most of the minerals, but at the same time some vitamins and other components of the milk are lost: technologies used include ion exchange, ultra filtration, electrodialysis, reverse osmosis and gel filtration. Mineral compounds are then added at the required levels. There must be careful selection of mineral compounds added to the formulas, as cereal products are highly susceptible to lipid oxidation during storage. In a study of iron fortification of infant cereals, Hurrell et al. (1989a) proposed the use of ferrous fumarate and ferrous succinate as they gave rise to no objectionable flavours odours or colours on storage. Ferrous sulphate coated with hygrogenated fats, mono- or di-glycerides and ethyl cellulose caused discolouration on reconstitution with hot milk
and hot water.
Although some allowance is made for the natural vitamin content of the ingredients used, most of the vitamins are added to the formula. The Codex Alimentarius Commission (FAO/WHO, 1994) have published an advisory list of mineral salts and vitamin compounds which can be added to formulas. Predetermined excesses of vitamins have to be added to allow for processing and storage losses. UHT processing followed by aseptic packaging has been preferred to in-can sterilisation since less nutrient losses occur in the former case. Losses have been noted particularly for vitamin C, thiamine, folic acid and vitamin B[6] (Hurrell et al., 1989b).
Iron absorption from formulas has been reported to be 5-10% compared to 50% for human milk. It has been suggested that bovine milk proteins or elevated calcium and phosphorus levels account for this difference. Zinc levels in formulas are also higher than in human milk to make up for reduced bioavailability.
3. IMPACT OF OTHER TECHNOLOGIES ON FORTIFICATION PROCEDURES
3.1 Thermal Processes
3.2 Packaging Materials
3.3 Irradiation and Microwaves
In order to achieve the required level of nutrients in fortified products reaching the consumer, manufacturers have to estimate processing and storage losses and add the necessary excess during production. The introduction of new processes, equipment and packaging materials can affect processing and storage losses and hence fortification procedures.
3.1 Thermal Processes
Thermal treatments in food processing serve multiple functions: destruction of microorganisms, inactivation of enzymes and toxic factors, modification of flavour and texture. In many cases the heat treatment is selected based on consideration of the required lethality of the process so as to render the product safe under stated conditions of storage.
The lethality of a process is a function of both temperature and time of exposure at each temperature. The Arhenius activation energy of spore inactivation is high as compared with that for vitamin destruction. For this reason, at high temperatures the microbiological requirements of the thermal process can be met with relatively low losses of vitamin being incurred. Heat treatments based on the principle of 'High Temperature Short Time' (HTST) or Ultra High Temperature (UHT) are less destructive to the vitamin content and require the addition of lower levels of excess vitamins to account for processing losses.
As the lethality of a process is determined by sum of lethal effects at the 'cold spot' of the product unit (can, pouch, etc.), innovations in equipment design which lead to the faster attainment of thermal equilibrium will also affect the thermal process which must be delivered and hence vitamin loss during processing. The introduction of agitating retorts and retorts which can be used in the sterilisation of materials in flexible packages as well as the development of flame sterilisation processes also can have an affect on fortification procedures.
3.2 Packaging Materials
The use of retort pouches and other deformable containers in thermal processing influence processing procedures and the extent of thermal degradation of nutrients. The important role of packaging in the application of aseptic processing technologies has important implications for fortification procedures. This is not only in terms of the UHT treatments which can be applied to thin liquid films prior to packaging, but also to the impact on storage losses. The shelf life of aseptically processed foods can exceed 1 year and storage losses over this entire period must be taken into consideration in the calculation of required overages. During aseptic processes the product is cooled prior to packaging into sterile containers, headspace oxygen and dissolved oxygen levels are therefore higher than for hot-filled products or for traditional thermal processes which involve exhausting or vacuum sealing prior to processing. Problems of vitamin loss in aseptically processed foods have
been attributed to dissolved and headspace oxygen, oxygen and light permeability of the packaging material and to commodity-specific reaction which are only dependent on storage temperature (Ryley and Kajda, 1994). In aseptically processed milk the dissolved and headspace oxygen lead to rapid initial losses of vitamin C activity. This in turn causes substantial losses in folate as vitamin C plays an important role in the protection of folate. Oamen (1989) also reported heavy losses of vitamins B[6], and B[12] during storage of aseptically processed milk.
Improvements in the barrier properties of plastics and laminates also impact on the potential for nutrient loss on storage of products other than those aseptically processed.
3.3 Irradiation and Microwaves
Irradiation is used to a limited extent in food processing and as such cannot be expected to impact upon fortification procedures to a large extent. One common use of food irradiation is in the prevention of insect infestation in grains. Losses of vitamin B[1] on irradiation of whole grains are small, but increase in the irradiation of milled grains. Losses of this vitamin can be reduced by exclusion of oxygen during irradiation and storage (Kilcast, 1994).
The increased use of microwave cooking on sous-vide and other cook-chill foods does not have a major effect on vitamin retention (Hill. 1994).
4. VITAMIN AND MINERAL FORTIFICANTS
4.1 Properties of Micronutrient Compounds
4.2 Other considerations in the use of fortificant compounds
Prudent handling of vitamin and mineral additives in food processing requires a sound understanding of the characteristics of these compounds: their stabilities to various unit operations, solubilities and reactivities with other compounds. Many forms of these nutrients have been developed to render them more suitable for use under a wide range of applications.
4.1 Properties of Micronutrient Compounds
4.1.1 Vitamin A
4.1.2 Vitamin D
4.1.3 Vitamin E
4.1.4 Vitamins of the B Complex
4.1.5 Vitamin C
4.1.6 Iron fortificants
4.1.7 Iodine compounds
4.1.8 Other mineral additives
4.1.1 Vitamin A
In vivo, this vitamin is generally found as the free alcohol or esterified with a fatty acid. The vitamin is available in pure form by chemical synthesis as vitamin A palmitate or the acetate, or recovered from molecularly recovered fish oil. It is a yellowish oily material which may crystallise into needlelike crystals (Parman and Salinard, 1981). Provitamins which are then converted to their active form, serve not only as nutrifyng compounds but also as colourants and anti-oxidants. The most common of these is beta-carotene.
Vitamin A is quite stable when heated to moderate temperatures in the absence of oxygen and light. Overall loss of activity during anaerobic heating may range from 5-50%, depending on time, temperature and nature of the carotenoids (Tannenbaum et al. 1987). In the presence of oxygen and light, there can be extensive loss of vitamin A activity through oxidation (Table 1). The presence of trace metals accelerates this reaction.
In dehydrated foods, vitamin A and provitamin A are highly susceptible to loss by oxidation (Labuza et al., 1978). The extent of this loss depends on the severity of the drying process, protection provided by packaging materials and conditions of storage. Vitamin A in pure form is unstable in the presence of mineral acids but stable in the presence of alkali.
Naturally occurring vitamin A is insoluble in water but soluble in oil. In this form the vitamin has limited applicability. Vitamin A fortificants are commercially available in a wide range of forms adapted for use under various conditions. For use in fat or oil based foods such as margarines, oils and dairy products, vitamin A as the acetate or palmitate have been used. They are stabilised with a mixture of phenolic antioxidants or with tocopherols. For mixing with dry products, a dry form of the fortificant was required with the appropriate size and density. Encapsulation of the vitamin in a more hydrophilic coat is commonly practised in order to achieve a more water dispersable product. Two materials used in encapsulation are gum acacia and gelatin. These dry forms of the vitamin are also stabilised using tocopherols or phenolic antioxidants.
4.1.2 Vitamin D
The principal forms of the vitamin are D[3] and D[2]. They are white, crystalline fat-soluble vitamins, formed by irradiation of the appropriate sterol followed by purification procedures. These compounds are sensitive to oxygen and light, with the D[3] form of the vitamin being slightly more stable. Trace metals such as Cu and Fe act as pro-oxidants.
As with vitamin A, commercially available forms include fat-soluble crystals for use in high fat content foods, and encapsulated, stabilised versions of the fortificant, suitable for use in dry products to be reconstituted with water.
As was stated for vitamin A, at the levels of water activity which exist in dehydrated foods, these fat-soluble vitamins are most susceptible to oxidative loss.
4.1.3 Vitamin E
Vitamin E is a slightly viscous, pale-yellow oily liquid obtained from molecular distillation of by-products from vegetable oil refining or by chemical synthesis. The naturally occurring form of the vitamin is the d-isomer. The synthetic compound is a racemic mixture of the d and 1 isomers. The 1-isomer doesn't have the full biological activity of the d-isomer, but due to the stability of the racemic mixture and the ease of purification, the IU of vitamin E has been defined as 1 mg dl-a tocopheryl acetate.
The free alcohol form of the vitamin is highly unstable to oxidation and is therefore widely used in foods as an antioxidant to stabilise the lip id component of foods. Esterified forms of the vitamin, commonly the acetate, are much more stable. For this reason, fortificants are usually of this form. As with the other fat soluble vitamins, cold water soluble forms have been produced by encapsulation within a suitable matrix.
4.1.4 Vitamins of the B Complex
Vitamin B[1], or thiamine, is a white crystalline solid with a characteristic yeast-like odour and a slight bitter taste. Thiamine is produced by chemical synthesis as the hydrochloride and mononitate salts. The hydrochloride is soluble to the extent of 50% in water as compared with 2.7% for the mononitrate (Bailey, 1991).
Thiamine is one of the most unstable vitamins. Its stability to heat and oxidation is greatest at a pH range of 6 and below. At higher values of pH it becomes increasingly unstable. Thiamine is susceptible to nucleophilic attack, therefore it is degraded by some mineral salts in aqueous foods.
Thiamine hydrochloride is the fortificant of choice in cases where dissolution in aqueous media is required. In most other cases the mononitrate is used due to its lower hygroscopicity. Thiamine is also commercially available in a coated form using mono- and di-glycerides of edible fatty acids.
Biotin is a white crystalline powder of low water solubility. It is generally commercially available in diluted form as the physiological requirement for this vitamin is so low. Hoffmann-La Roche sells a 1 % mixture of this vitamin with dicalcium phosphate dihydrate. Biotin is fairly stable to heat, air and light.
Vitamin B[2], riboflavin, is of an intense orange colour and low water solubility. A commercially available more water soluble form of this vitamin is the sodium salt of riboflavin 5'-phosphate. Riboflavin is generally stable under most processing conditions, but is unstable in alkaline medium. It is very sensitive to light, particularly in the presence of ascorbic acid.
Pantothenic acid, is a pale yellow, viscous, hygroscopic liquid which is very unstable. The most commonly used commercially available form is calcium pantothenate. This is a slightly hygroscopic white powder with no smell but a slightly bitter taste. Stability of this compound is greatest at pH values between 5 and 7.
Vitamin B[6], pyridoxine, is available commercially as the hydrochloride. Coated forms are also available as with all of the B-vitamins. This vitamin is quite stable to heat and atmospheric oxygen and heat, but degradation is catalysed by metal ions.
Niacin in the form of either nicotinic acid or nicotinamide, can be used in nutrient addition to foods. At very high levels, nicotinic acid has been shown to cause unpleasant side effects such as flushing and 'pins and needles'. This has led to some preference for nicotinamide. Both forms of the vitamin are stable to atmospheric oxygen, heat and light in the dry state as well as in solution.
Cyanocobalamin, the most important compound with vitamin B[12] activity, is commercially available as a crystalline, dark red, hygroscopic powder. Human requirements for this vitamin are very low and it is commonly sold highly diluted by a carrier. In the preparations sold by Hofmann-La Roche, for instance, it can be purchased diluted with mannitol or a mixture containing modified starches, citrate, citric acid, benzoate, sorbic acid and silicon dioxide. The selection of preparation depends, of course, on the end use. In solution it is most stable between pH values 4-7. It is unstable to oxidising and reducing agents and exposure to sunlight, but is fairly stable to heat (Bailey, 1991).
Folic acid is a yellow-orange, odourless, tasteless crystalline substance. It id moderately stable to heat and atmospheric oxygen. In neutral solution it is quite stable, but instability increases with a shift in pH in either direction. Folic acid is unstable to heat, light, sunlight, oxidising and reducing agents.
4.1.5 Vitamin C
Vitamin C or ascorbic acid is an odourless, white, crystalline compound which is stable in its dry form. Due to its high water solubility, losses due to leaching can be a problem in some processing procedures. Ascorbic acid is readily oxidised. In dehydrated citrus juices the degradation is dependant on both temperature and water activity. Other factors as well can influence the degradation behaviour of vitamin C, these include salt and sugar concentration, pH, oxygen, metal catalysts and ratio of ascorbic: dehydroascorbic acid.
Vitamin C addition to foods is commonly practised for reasons other than fortification. Commercially available forms of this vitamin include the free acid and the sodium and calcium salts of these, in powder as well as crystalline or granular form. For mixing with dry products, particle size and density are of course important considerations. A fat coated form of ascorbic acid is also available for enrichment purposes. Ascorbyl palmitate, is a form of the vitamin used for purposes other than fortification. It is used as an antioxidant in fats and oils and has also emulsifying properties (Anon. 1985). Other areas of food processing for which vitamin C has application are the prevention of browning in fresh and canned fruit and vegetables, acidification, curing of meat and prevention of haze formation in brewed products (Borenstein, 1987).
4.1.6 Iron fortificants
Iron compounds used in food fortification are commonly classified according to their solubility. Selection of an appropriate iron fortificant for any given application is based on the following criteria: organoleptic considerations, bioavailability, cost and safety (Hurrell and Cook, 1990).
The colour of iron compounds is often a critical factor when fortifying light coloured foods. For example white iron, ferric orthophosphate, is often the fortificant of choice in the enrichment of rice.
The use of more soluble iron compounds often leads to the development of off-colours and off-flavours due to reactions with other components of the food material. Infant cereals have been found to turn grey or green on addition of ferrous sulphate. Off-flavours can be the result of lipid oxidation catalysed by iron. The iron compounds themselves may contribute to a metallic flavour. Some of these undesirable interactions with the food matrix can be avoided by coating the fortificant with hydrogenated oils or ethyl cellulose.
Bioavailability of iron compounds is normally stated relative to a ferrous sulphate standard. The highly water soluble iron compounds have superior bioavailability. Bioavailability of the insoluble or very poorly soluble iron compounds can be improved by reducing particle size. Unfortunately this is accompanied by increased reactivity in deteriorative processes.
Sodium iron EDTA is less well absorbed than ferrous sulphate from foods which contain few inhibitors to absorption. In the presence of these inhibitors, however, the EDTA complex is better absorbed. Sodium iron EDTA also participates to a lesser extent in deteriorative reactions. The use of this compound reduces the problem of precipitate formation in foods such as fish sauces and tea. The use of this compound is not advised in developed countries where the population already receives close to the recommended acceptable daily intake of EDTA (Hurrell and Cook, 1990).
The problem of low bioavailability of some of the less reactive forms of iron is often circumvented by the use of absorption enhancers added along with the fortificant. Examples of such enhancers are ascorbic acid, sodium acid sulphate and orthophosphoric acid.
4.1.7 Iodine compounds
The most commonly used compounds in the iodisation of foods are the iodides and iodates of sodium and potassium. These are the additives allowed by Codex Alimentarius in the iodisation of salt. The iodide compounds (Bauernfeind, 1991) are cheaper, more soluble and have a higher iodine content (so that less is needed to achieve the same level of iodisation) than the corresponding iodates. Iodates are more stable under conditions of high moisture, high ambient temperature, sunlight, aeration and the presence of impurities. The use of iodate is therefore recommended for use in developing countries. Potassium iodide is well suited in cases where the salt is dry, free from impurities and has a slightly alkaline pH. Otherwise the iodide may be oxidised to molecular iodine and lost through evaporation. If excess water is present the iodide may be separated from the salt in the water film (FAO/WHO, 1991). Loss of iodide can be reduced through the addition of stabilisers such as 0.1%
sodium thiosulphate and 0.1% calcium hydroxide combined or 0.04% dextrose and 0.006% sodium bicarbonate (Kuhajek and Fiedelman, 1973). Calcium salts have been used with some report of off-flavour due to the calcium ions (Kuhajek and Fiedelman, 1973). The calcium compound is also much less water soluble than the sodium and potassium compounds and this further limits its applicability.
4.1.8 Other mineral additives
A range of mineral salts are available for fortification with Ca, Mg, P, Zn, Cu and Mn. Prudent selection of mineral compounds is based largely on consideration of mineral reactivity and solubility of the salt. The requirements of the fortificant vary according to the nature of the food product and its end use. To overcome problems of flavour, texture and colour deterioration due to addition of minerals, some companies have engineered new fortificant preparations which generally involve the use of stabilisers and emulsifiers to maintain the mineral in solution (Anon. 1986).
4.2 Other considerations in the use of fortificant compounds
4.2.1 Bioavailability of commercial preparations
4.2.2 Nutrient-nutrient interactions
4.2.3 Nutrient-matrix interactions
4.2.1 Bioavailability of commercial preparations
While the practice of coating many of the water soluble vitamins does offer protection against interaction with the food medium and development of organoleptic problems, it can create other difficulties. Slow dissolution of the coating in the gastrointestinal tract in order to free the active component can cause reduced bioavailability of the micronutrient (Borenstein et al., 1988). Care should therefore be taken in the use of such preparations that the nutritional objectives are being met.
4.2.2 Nutrient-nutrient interactions
When more than one fortificant is being added to a particular vehicle, consideration must be given to the interactions, both positive and negative, which could take place. An example of this is seen with vitamin C and iron (Johnson, 1994). Vitamin C has been shown to improve the absorption of iron (Cook and Rueser, 1983; Hurrel and Cook, 1990). Other studies have indicated that iron and other trace metals increase the rate of ascorbic acid destruction (Dennison and Kirk, 1982). This deteriorative reaction was dependent on their being sufficient moisture to facilitate the mobility of the metal ions and was therefore demonstrated not to be a factor at water activity levels below 0.4.
The presence of vitamin E has been shown to increase the bioavailability of vitamin A, one explanation of this is that tocopherol as a lipid phase antioxidant, stabilises vitamin A in the GI tract (Borenstein et al., 1988). Calcium has also demonstrated an inhibitory effect on iron absorption (Hallberg et al., 1992). Phosphorous negatively influences calcium absorption and due to this fact, calcium/osteoporosis claims can only be made in the United States if the calcium: phosphorous ratio is greater than 1:1 (Anon., 1993).
In solution, ascorbic acid has been shown to destabilise folic acid and cyanocobalamin (Ottaway, 1993). Ryley and Kajda (1994) reported that vitamin C in UHT milk played an important role in the protection of the folate content. Degradation products of thiamine have also been shown to accelerate the rates of degradation of folic acid and cyanocobalamine, whereas the presence of iron salts in solution reportedly have a stabilising effect on cyanocobalamin (Bailey, 1991). In solutions of the B-vitamins, riboflavin can cause the oxidation and consequent loss of thiamine. If ascorbic acid is included into the solution the reaction does not occur (Ottaway, 1993). This observation is of practical significance in cases where solutions of water soluble vitamins are sprayed onto foods during the fortification process. Riboflavin also promotes oxidative degradation of folic acid, but this effect can be minimised by deaeration. Riboflavin has also been implicated in oxidative loss of
vitamin C. Light-induced vitamin C loss from milk is reduced in the absence of riboflavin (Ottaway, 1993).
4.2.3 Nutrient-matrix interactions
Besides nutrient - nutrient interactions, other components of the food matrix may also affect the functionality of the fortificant. Selection of the vehicle in fortification programmes much be such as to avoid reduced bioavailability of nutrients due to the presence of anti-nutritional compounds. Some interactions of added nutrients with the food matrix have been noted but are poorly understood. For example, the absorption of iron from sugar fortified with ferric orthophosphate and ascorbic acid was shown to be greatly improved when added to maize porridge before cooking as compared with after cooking (Disler et al. 1975).
Ascorbic acid is involved in many browning reactions (Davies and Wedzicha, 1994). Vitamin B[6 ]B can take part in the maillard browning reactions under suitable conditions and thiamine can react with polyunsaturated fatty acids to produce a typical 'meaty' flavour and odour. Owing to such interactions, most of the water soluble vitamins are commercially available in coated form. The use of these coatings may be associated with problems of bioavailability (Section 3.8.1).
lodisation of salt and the compounds used for this have been widely studied in relation to the stability of the fortified salt. More research may be required if iodisation of processed foods through the use of iodised salt is to be widely practised. The available information on this topic has shown no problems with off-flavour and off-colour development in many common processing applications such as vegetable fermentation (Kosima and Brown, 1955), production of fresh pack pickles (Breed and Kendall, 1970) and canning of vegetables (Breed and Kendall, 1970; Kuhajek and Fiedelman, 1973). In some specific cases, however, the use of iodised salt might be problematic. Off-flavour development in a cake mix was shown to be due to the use of iodised salt in its manufacture (Sevenants and Sanders, 1987). There also needs to be more information on the stability of iodised salt under conditions experienced in vegetable fermentations.
5. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND CONTROL
5.1 Quality Assurance/Control in Food Processing
5.2 HACCP and QACCP
5.3 Analysis of Vitamins and Minerals
5.4 Role of Legislation and Food Control
5.1 Quality Assurance/Control in Food Processing
The maintenance of a well functioning Quality Assurance (QA) programme is essential if a consistent product is to result which meets all required standards. Such a programme should be based on Hazard Analysis and Quality Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP and QACCP) systems. HACCP and QACCP are more proactive than traditional approaches to QA/QC activities. The establishment of such programmes is the responsibility of QA personnel but the execution of it involves everyone in the company. To avoid ambiguity regarding responsibility for any QA function, it is important to assign specific HACCP/QACCP accountabilities to responsible persons and groups (Corlett, 1992).
A QA programme must consider all activities impacting upon product quality, from raw materials and ingredients used to product handling through distribution channels all the way to the final consumer. In respect of this, Wilson (1991) has outlined the following required components of a QA system:
i) Raw material control - standard specifications must be adopted for all ingredients which must then be inspected to ensure conformity;
ii) Process control - all chemical, physical and microbiological hazards as well as quality factors must be identified, critical control points (CCP) must be established, monitored and a record made of any action taken;
iii) Finished product control - this requires that the finished product be unadulterated, properly labelled and that the integrity of the finished be protected from the environment.
5.2 HACCP and QACCP
All food production activities must be monitored and controlled within the framework of an effective QA programme. The addition of nutrients to a food for the purpose of fortification adds to the control points which have to be considered. Poor manufacturing control leading to excessively high levels of nutrients in the finished product could have important health implications for the consumer if intake of the nutrient reaches the toxic dose. Conversely, low levels of nutrients in the finished product could render it nutritionally ineffective. This could also have serious health implications if the target population in the fortification programme was at high nutritional risk. Poor manufacturing control could also lead to other quality defects related to interactions of added nutrients with other components of the system.
The following steps in the implementation of a quality assurance programme in the production of a fortified food have been outlined by Wilson (1991):
i) Product specifications - All specifications for fortificants, food vehicle and any other ingredients must be documented as well as acceptable deviations of these. These include specification of particle size, colour, potency, level of fortification as well as any other requirement which might be deemed necessary.
ii) Product safety assessment - This involves an assessment of microbiological, chemical and physical hazards for all ingredients and the finished product
iii) Product analysis - Sampling and testing procedures for all ingredients and the finished product must be explicitly stated.
iv) Determination of critical and quality control points - Based on first hand knowledge of the total process (including the plant facility, equipment and environment) stages at which inadequate control could lead to unacceptable health risk or adversely affect product quality are identified. The system of controls and actions to be taken at each control point are documented.
v) Recall system - A mechanism must be put in place whereby product can be recalled if such action becomes necessary.
vi) QA audit - Periodic checks are necessary to verify that the QA system is effective and product quality is maintained up to the ultimate consumer.
vii) Feedback mechanism - Response to consumers and other relevant groups to correct any deficiencies discovered.
viii) Documentation of QA system - Details of the QA programme used in the production of the fortified food must be readily available to relevant individuals and organizations.
Shortcomings of many fortification programmes in the past have been due to failure to establish an adequate quality assurance programme. Evaluation of the fortification of sugar with vitamin A in Guatemala showed that only 30% of samples tested were fortified at levels within the legal limits (Nestel, 1993). A study of iodine content in iodised salt samples obtained from several plants in India also provided an example of the need for greater control in processing (Ranganathan and Narasinga, 1986).
In the determination of critical and other control points for any process accurate flow diagrams outlining the total process have been used (Pierson and Corlett, 1992). The construction of an accurate flow diagram for any given process requires first hand knowledge of the processing facility and its environs so that all factors which might be expected to impact on product safety could be identified. Annex 1 includes a list of common critical control points and examples of monitoring procedures in the processing of selected fortified foods, which are intended to demonstrate the main points of a quality assurance programme.
Recommendations of the FAO/WHO Expert Technical Consultation on "The Use of HACCP in Food Control' (1995c) included the following:
i. Use of HACCP serves to improve food safety control and should be applied on that basis;
ii. The elaboration of food safety policies by government and international agencies should use risk analysis as the basis for establishing food safety priorities and for focusing inspection resources. These policies should be implemented through national strategic plans;
iii. In the post Uruguay Round of GATT, the Codex Alimentarius Commission should recognise the importance of its role in harmonising and establishing food standards, guidelines and recommendations particularly as it relates to safety of food in international trade. Codex should develop a strategic plan which will include a strengthening of the scientific basis for risk analysis, equivalence and the elaboration of its standards, guidelines and other recommendations and should include specific instructions to the Codex Committees on incorporating HACCP.
5.3 Analysis of Vitamins and Minerals
Analysis of potency of fortificants and of vitamin and mineral content constitute an important component of the overall analytical requirements in QA/QC programmes for fortification processes. Development or selection of appropriate analytical methodologies must be based on consideration of accuracy and precision of measurements, available facilities and equipment, simplicity of procedure and rapidity of determination.
A list of relevant Codex Alimentarius reference methods are summarised in Table 2. There are also many other experimental methods which have been developed in various laboratories. The Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling is working in close cooperation with ISO, AOAC International and IUPAC to recommend protocols for determining the reliability of analytical test methods and results of laboratory analyses (FAO/WHO 1995d). The community bureau of reference of the Commission of European Communities (BCR) has set up a working group to compare analytical methods used in different laboratories in Europe. Walter (1994) summarised the methods most commonly applied to the analysis of vitamins in foods. HPLC is the technique of choice for many of the vitamins because of the reliability of the method, the rapidity of the determination and the often reduced requirement for rigorous preliminary clean up steps. The drawbacks associated with this technology, however, are
high equipment and materials costs and its lack of mobility. A comprehensive review of current methods used in the analysis of vitamins was provided by Lumely (1993).
For analysis of vitamin A content in the MSG fortification programme Muhilal et al. (1986) developed a quantitative spectrophotometric method. A semi-quantitative method was also described suitable for field testing in the MSG-vitamin A programme. A rapid quantitative method for the determination of vitamin A content in fortified sugar has been described by Aguilar et al. (1977). This is based on the Carr-Price procedure. Adaptations of the method, yielding semi-quantitative results, suitable for field testing have also been reported (Arroyave et al., 1979).
The determination of iodine content in iodised salt has traditionally been carried out using a titrimetric method. Recently a number of HPLC based methods have been used to a large extent. One such method described by de Kleijn (1983) was used by the Food Inspection Service in the Netherlands. It utilised reversed phase HPLC with uv detection, and had a detection limit of 2.9 ng KI. Modified HPLC procedures involving precolumn derivatisation have been developed to increase the sensitivity of the analysis. In this way Verma et al. (1992) reported a detection limit of 0.5 ng iodide. Another recent report involved a differential pulse polarographic method which did not require a separation or preconcentration step (Daneshwar et al., 1987). For qualitative testing in the field, simple test kits based on the reaction of starch with iodine are available (Anon, 1995). There are important restrictions to the use of the kits which are currently being used. These are reported to be
applicable over a restricted pH range. Additives commonly used in salt such free-flowing agents or stabilisers of added iodine cause the pH to be elevated above the valid range. In such cases, false negative results are obtained. Modification of this procedure to extend the functional range of testing conditions must be investigated. Users of such field kits need to be educated as to their correct use and their limitations.
In iron fortification programmes, quite often measurement of iron content is inadequate. Bioavailability of the nutrients has been determined by measurement of labelled isotopes absorbed from the diet of human subjects or less complex methods based on animal studies such as the haemoglobin repletion method. Simple chemical methods have been used to approximate bioavailability (Bjorn-Rasmussen et al., 1977).
There may be analyses other than the measurement of nutrient content or availability necessitated by a fortification programme. These might include the measurement of colour, particle size or moisture content as well as all testing required for the unfortified food. Based on the identification of critical and other control points, the analytical requirements of the overall quality assurance programme can be determined.
5.4 Role of Legislation and Food Control
The primary purposes of food legislation are to protect the health of the consumer and to protect the consumer from fraud. In the case of fortified foods, there is a need to ensure that the population is not at risk of receiving toxic doses of any micronutrient. Food laws must also ensure that the target population does not receive nutritionally ineffective levels of micronutrients. Procedures for monitoring premises where fortified foods are prepared, packed, stored or held for sale as well as mechanisms for penalising defaulters must be clearly defined within the food regulations. In Switzerland (Walter, 1994) samples of fortified products, both local and imported, are taken from the market annually for analysis of vitamin content by two specialised institutes. If vitamin content is found to be outside of established acceptable limits, the official government agency can disallow sale of the product.
Standards for fortified foods and labelling requirements must also be contained within the food regulations. Standards play an important role in the facilitation of trade, both nationally and internationally. When large differences exist between national standards, however, they can forn technical barriers to trade. In light of the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade, the development of international standards for fortified foods is an important step in the elimination of technical barriers.
It has been found that food law is managed most effectively in two parts: a basic food act and food regulations. The act itself should set out broad principles while the regulations should contain the detailed provisions governing the different categories of products. Within the regulations should be found lists of approved fortificant compounds and food standards stating the allowed levels of nutrients in the fortified foods. This organization gives some flexibility to food law as it is much more difficult to have laws amended than to revise regulations. Prompt revision of regulations may become necessary because of new scientific knowledge, changes in new processing technology or emergencies requiring quick action to protect the public health. With respect to regulations dealing with fortified foods, changes might be prompted as a result of safety evaluations on nutrient compounds or new information regarding the roles and optimal levels of specific micronutrients in the
maintenance of good health. Changes in food processing and packaging technologies could be shown to result in a significant reduction in processing and storage losses of micronutrients, thus requiring a revision in the allowed levels of addition of nutrients. In the face of demonstrated micronutrient deficiencies, regulations regarding standards for certain foods and levels of fortification may need to be revised.
6. FUTURE DIRECTIONS OF FORTIFICATION
6.1 Technical Problems Requiring Attention
6.2 Analytical Considerations
6.3 Health Implications of Micronutrients
6.4 Nutritional Implications of New Dietary Trends
6.5 Standardisation and Regulation
6.1 Technical Problems Requiring Attention
Loss of vitamin A on storage was found to be significant in a number of fortification processes. The solution to this problem might lie in the design of a new fortificant preparation in which vitamin activity is better protected. This approach has, however, in the past led to new problems regarding cost and bioavailability. Alternatively more studies might be carried out to determine critical factors pertaining to packaging materials or storage conditions which affect vitamin content.
Problems persist with iron fortification as well. Discolouration of the food vehicle due to the presence of iron hinders consumer acceptance in many cases. With the existing iron fortificants available commercially, trade-offs with respect to reactivity, bioavailability and cost must be accepted. Sodium ferric EDTA has several useful properties in respect of fortification, but its status as a food additive is only now being considered by Codex Alimentarius Commission for use as a dietary supplement for use in supervised food fortification programmes in populations where iron-deficiency anaemia is endemic (FAO/WHO, 1993). JECFA has requested that additional studies be carried out to assess the site of deposition of iron administered in this form.
Loss of vitamin C during storage, particularly due to the presence of oxygen, is a problem with many fortified foods. Possible solutions to this problem include the development of new, more highly protected vitamin fortificants or investigation of new packaging materials or storage conditions which promote increased vitamin stability.
The use of iodised salt in food processing is another area which requires attention. There are at least two distinct issues to be considered: the first is the role of iodine compounds in deteriorative reactions such as off-flavour development and discolouration, the second is the effect of processing operations on the iodine content of the fortified food. Some relevant data for selected food processes have been reported (Wirth and Keuhne, 1991a and b) but further research needs to be done. If, for example, the iodine fortification of fermented vegetable products was to be considered through the use of iodised salt in their production, it would be essential to know the effect of the iodine compound on product quality as well as the stability of the iodine compound under fermentation conditions.
6.2 Analytical Considerations
Many advances have been made with respect to the analysis of micronutrients in foods. According to Walter (1994) problems still remain with the analysis of vitamins which occur in very small concentrations such as vitamins D[3], B[12], folate and biotin.
Research is required into the development of appropriate analytical methods for use in the field. Such testing is a required component of quality assurance in food fortification programmes. 'Appropriate' is determined by such factors as availability of equipment and materials for testing, accuracy and precision of the testing method, simplicity and rapidity of the experimental procedure.
As analytical methodologies continue to be developed or modified there is a need to verify agreement of results obtained using different procedures. There may also be a need to standardise some aspects of experimental procedures.
6.3 Health Implications of Micronutrients
Fortification practices are predicated on our understanding of our physiological requirement for the micronutrients. This understanding has continued to be expanded. The possible preventative effect of antioxidative vitamins on cardiovascular disease and cancer is currently the subject of much investigation. Based on the findings of these investigations, an increase in the recommended daily allowances for these vitamins may be indicated (Walter, 1994). Since fortification procedures are based upon delivering a predetermined proportion of the RDA for the nutrients in question, such research will impact upon food fortification. Up to the present time, due to high variability between and within individuals, it has not been possible to establish generally accepted cut-off values for the health protective potential of B-carotene, vitamin E and vitamin C (Pietzrik, 1995).
RDA's and National Reference Values (NRV) for an expanding number of essential trace minerals are being determined. Continued international discussion and agreement on these is essential.
6.4 Nutritional Implications of New Dietary Trends
Consumer demand for low fat products has given rise to concern that the loss of fat soluble vitamins associated with the removal of fat could lead to inadequate intake of these vitamins among certain sectors of the population (Anon, 1995c).
The finding of the paper prepared by Germany for the Codex Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses was that it was premature to determine fortification requirements for lower tat products. Their recommendation was for intensive study of consumer behaviour before other measures be taken (FAO/WHO, 1995b).
6.5 Standardisation and Regulation
A thorough review of existing legislation pertaining to fortified foods needs to be carried out. This should provide the basis for suggested changes where it is found necessary. An example of the effect of legislation on fortification procedures was the use of a mixture of table salt and curing salt in the production of certain iodised sausages in Germany since iodine was allowed in table salt but not curing salt (Wirth and Kuhne, 1991).
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations have had significant implications for the work of the Codex Alimentarius Commission. The GATT Agreements on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and on Technical Barriers to Trade emphasize the need for international standards, guidelines and recommendations to facilitate international trade (Byron, 1993). The Codex Alimentarius Commission needs to work further on the development of standards for fortified foods. Such standards must of course be consistent with the general principles of the Commission regarding fortification. International standards must be sufficiently flexible to allow national governments to meet the specific nutritional needs of target populations while still providing guidance with respect to acceptable ranges of fortification and unambiguous definition of terms.
International standards for fortified foods used in food aid programmes need to be considered. This would facilitate the interchangeable use of foods coming from different sources in meeting the needs of target groups (Nestel, 1993; Combs et al., 1994), and could provide the standard which quality assurance programmes should demonstrate all food aid products to meet.
7. SUMMARY
Fortification of foods can be a useful tool in combatting micronutrient deficiencies. Its effectiveness depends on the skill and experience with which it is applied. It is not the appropriate tool in all situations and generally speaking, its use is required in combination with other techniques in order to obtain the optimal result. It is critical to identify all elements underlying any given nutritional problem: food security; inadequate dietary diversity; lack of nutrition education and the state of food processing locally are among the factors which must be considered in determining the most appropriate strategy to be used and hence role to be played by fortification.
The successful application of food fortification technology is based largely on consideration of the compatibility of vehicle, fortificant and process. Scientific and engineering advances have resulted in an increasing number of options regarding choice of fortificant compound and processing procedures. This has resulted in the improvement of food fortification technologies used for a range of products. It is important to realise that there is a limit to the possibilities of new technologies for example, multiple fortification of certain food vehicles may result in substantially increased cost and reduced bioavailability.
Adequate quality control of food fortification processes has often been overlooked in the past. If this practice continues it will not be possible to realise the benefits potentiated by upgraded technologies.
8. REFERENCES
Alien, D. H. 1991. Monosodium Glutamate. In Food Allergy: Adverse reactions to foods and food additives, (ed.) Metcalfe, D. D., Sampson, H. A. and Simon, C. A.. Blackwell Sci. Pub. Boston.
Anderson, R. H., Maxwell, D.L., Mulley, A. E. and Fritsch, C. W. 1976. Effects of processing and storage on micronutrients in breakfast cereals. Food Technol. 30:5, pp. 110-114.
Andersson, E. 1994. Le saviez-vous? Rapport du conseil de l'alimentation et de la nutrition Neerlandais. Med. et Nut. T. XXX No. 6.
Aguilar, J. R., Arroyave, G. and Gallardo, I. C. 1977. Manual de Supervision y control de programas de forticacion de azucar con vitamin A. INCAP Pub. E913, Guatemala.
Anon. 1995a. Indicators for tracking progress in IDD elimination. IDD Newsletter 10:4 pp. 38-40. Anon. 1995b. Calcium fortification monitoring. Food Labelling News 3:24 p. 9.
Anon. 1995c. Vitamin E fortification of fat-modified foods predicted. Food Chemical News; 37:42, 39-40.
Anon. 1993. Rediscovering Calcium Fortification. Prepared Foods; 129, p. 65.
Anon. 1990. Legal possibilities and practical recommendations: use of iodised salt in foods. Fleischerei, 41 (1) 48.
Anon. 1986. Tracing the marketing allure of calcium fortification. Food Eng.International, 11:12 pp. 17-18.
Arroyave, G. 1987. Alternative Strategies with emphasis on food fortification. In ACC/SCN State-of-the-art Series, Discussion Paper No. 2, pp. 87-91.
Arroyave, G., Aguilar, J. R., Flores, M. and Guzman, M. A. 1979. Evaluation of sugar fortification with vitamin A at the nutritional level. Scientific Publication No. 384, PAHO, Washington, DC.
Attig, G. A., Smitasri, S. and Ittikam, K. D. 1993. Promoting home gardening to control Vitamin A deficiency in NE Thailand. Food, Nutrition and Agriculture, 7, 18-25.
Austin, J. E., Belding, T. K., Pyle, D., Solon, F. S., Fernandez, T. 1., Latham, M. C. and Hopkin, B. M. 1981. Nutrtion intervention in developing countries - Study III: Fortification. Oelgeschlager, Gunn and Hain Publishers, Cambridge, MA.
Bailey, L. 1991. Vitamin and amino acid additives. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Bauernfeind, J. C. 1991. Foods considered for nutrient addition: fats and oils. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Bauernfeind, J. C. 1991. Foods considered for nutrient addition: condiments. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Bauernfeind, J. C. and DeRitter, E. 1991. Foods considered for nutrient addition: cereal grain products. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Bjorn-Rasmussen.E., Hallberg, L., and Rossander, L. 1977. Absorption of fortification iron. British Journal of Nutrition, 37:375.
Borenstein, B. 1987. The role of ascorbic acid in foods. Food Technology, 41 (11) 98-99.
Borentstein, B, Bendicch, A. and Wayseck, E. H. 1988. Bioavailability in fortified foods. Food Technology, 42 (10) 226-228.
Bouis, H. 1995. Enrichment of food staples through plant breeding: A new strategy for fighting micronutrient malnutrition. SCN News No. 12.
Bramall, L. D. 1986. A novel process for the fortification of rice. Food Technology Australia, 38:7, pp.281-284.
Brooke, C.L. and Cort, W. M. 1972. Vitamin A fortification of tea. Food Technology 26 (6) 50-52.
Breed, James N. and Kendall, David A., 1970. Problems in the Use of Iodised Salt in Processed Foods. Iodine Nutriture in the United States. Summary of a Conference. National Academy of Sciences.
Byron, D. H. 1993. Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems. Food Nutrition and Agriculture, 8/9 44-47.
Chauhan, S. A., Bhatt, A.M., Bhatt, M.P. and Majeethia, K.M. 1992. Stability of Iodised salt with Respect to Iodine Content. Research and Industry India, 37 (1) 38-41.
Clydesdale, F. M. 1991. Mineral additives. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Coccodrilli, G. and Shah, N. 1985. Beverages. In Iron Fortification of Foods, ed. F. M. Clydesdale and K. L. Wiemer. Academic Press. pp. 145-154.
Combs, G. F., Dexter, P. B., Horton, S. E. and Buescher, R. 1994. Micronutrient fortification and enrichment of P.L. 480 Title II commodities: recommendations for improvement. OMNI, Arlington, VA.
Cook, J. D. and Reuser, M. E. 1983. Iron fortification: an update. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 38 pp. 648-659.
Corlett, D. A. Jr. 1992. Putting the pieces together - developing an action plan for implementation of HACCP. In HACCP - Principles and Applications: (eds) Corlett, D. A. and Pierson, M. D.. Chapman Hall, NY.
Corlett, D. A. and Pierson, M. D. 1992. HACCP: definitions and principles. In HACCP -Principles and Applications: (eds) Corlett, D. A. and Pierson, M. D.. Chapman Hall, NY.
Cort, W. M., Borenstein, B., Harley, J.H., Osadca, M. and Scheiner, J. 1976. Nutrient stability of fortified cereal products. Food Technology, 30:4, pp. 52-62.
Davies, C. G. A. and Wedzicha, B. L. 1994. Ascorbic acid browning: the incorporation of C[1 ]from ascorbic acid into melanoidins. Food Chemistry 49, 165-167.
de Kleijn, J. P. 1983. HPLC applied to the determination of iodide in iodised salt. Deutsche Lebensmittel-Rundschau 79:6, p. 184.
Dennison, D. B. and Kirk, J.R. 1982. Effect of trace mineral fortification on the storage stability of ascorbic acid in a dehydrated model food system. J. Food Sci. 47, pp. 1198-1200, 1217.
DeRitter, E. and Bauernfeind, J. C. 1991. Foods considered for nutrient addition: juices and beverages. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
DeRitter, E. 1991. Foods considered for nutrient addition: dairy products. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Devadas, R.P. 1987. Currently available technologies in India to combat vitamin A malnutrition. In ACC/SCN State-of-the-art Series, Discussion Paper No. 2, pp. 87-91.
Dexter, J. E., Matsuo, R. R. and Morgan, B. C. 1982. Effects of processing conditions and cooking time on riboflavin, thiamine and niacin levels in enriched spaghetti. Cereal Chem. 59:5, pp. 328-332.
Dhaneshwar, R. G., Kulkarni, A. V. Zarapkar, L. R. 1987. Differential-pulse polarographic determination of iodide in common salt. Analyst, 112 (7) 1073-1074.
Disler, P. B., Lynch, S. R., Charlton, R. W., Rothwell, T. H., Walker, R.B. and Mayet, F. G. H. 1975. Studies on the fortification of cane sugar with iron and ascorbic acid. Br. J. Nutr. 34, 141-152.
Du Bois, I. 1991. Regulation of food fortification: other countries. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Dunn, J. T., Thilly, C. H. and Pretell, E. 1986. Iodised oil and other alternatives to iodised salt for the prophylaxis of endemic goitre and cretinism. In Towards the Eradication of Endemic Goitre, Cretinism and Iodine Deficiency, ed. J. T. Dunn, E. A. Pretell, C. H. Daza and F. E. Viteri. Scientific Publication No. 502, PAHO.
FAO, 1993. Preventing micronutrient deficiencies: food abundance and diversity are fundamental. Food, Nutrition and Agriculture, 7, 8-17.
FAO/WHO 1976. Guidelines for Developing an Effective National Food Control System. FAO Food Control Series No. 1, WHO Food Control No. 1.
FAO/WHO 1987. Report of the 31st Meeting of the Joint Expert Committee on Food Additives, Geneva.
FAO/WHO 1991. Consideration of iodisation of salt. CX/NFSDU 91/13. FAO, Rome.
FAO/WHO 1992. International Conference on Nutrition World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition.
FAO/WHO 1994. Codex Alimentarius, Volume 4, 2nd edition.
FAO/WHO 1994. Methods of analysis and sampling. Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme Codex Alimentarius Commission, Vol. 13, 2nd edition.
FAO/WHO 1993. Evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants. Forty-first report of the joint FAO/WHO Committee on food additives. WHO Technical Report Series 837, WHO Geneva.
FAO/WHO 1995a. Amendment of the Codex standard for food grade salt to include iodisation of salt. Codex Alimentarius Commission, CX/NFSDU 95/5.
FAO/WHO 1995b. Development of guidelines on the fortification requirements of lower fat products. CX/NFSDU 95/9, FAO, Rome.
FAO/WHO 1995c. The use of HACCP in food control. Food and Nutrition Paper 58, Rome.
FAO/WHO 1995d. Report of the 19th session of the Codex committee on methods of analysis and sampling. Alinorm 95/23, Rome.
Finch, C. A. and Cook, J. D. 1984. Iron deficiency. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 39, 471-477.
Florentino, R. F. and Pedro, M. R. 1990. Rice fortification in the Philippines. In Combating Iron Deficiency Through Food Fortification Technology. INACG, Washington, DC.
Flores, H., Guerra, N. B., Cavalcanti, A. C. A., Campos, F. A. C., Azevedo, M. C. and Silva, M. B. 1995. Bioavailability of vitamin A in a sythetic rice premix. J. Food Sci. 59:2, pp. 371-372, 377.
Fuller, C.E., Nelson, J.H., Smith, D. E., Swanson, J. L., Wells, F. B. and Crowley, P. R. 1974. A technology for the fortification of tea with vitamin A. Proc. IV Int. Congress Food Sci. and Technol. Vol. V pp 180-189.
Garby, L. 1985. Condiments. In Iron Fortification of Foods, ed. F. M. Clydesdale and K. L. Wiemer. Academic Press, pp. 165-170.
Hagen, R.E., Thomas, M. R. and Bushnell, J. J. 1991. Foods considered for nutrient addition: formulated special purpose foods. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Hallberg, L., Rossander-Hulten, L., Brune, M. and Gleerup, A. 1992. Calcium and iron absorption: mechanism of action and nutritional importance. European J. Clin. Nut., 46, pp. 317-327.
Hill, M. A. 1994. Vitamin retention in microwave cooking and cook-chill foods. Food Chemistry: 49, 131-136.
Hirotsuka, M., Taniguchi, H., Narita, H. and Kito, M. 1984. Calcium fortification of soy milk with calcium-lecithin liposome system. J. Food Sci. 49, pp. 1111-1112.
Hoffpauer, D. W. 1992. Rice enrichment for today. Cereal Foods World, 37:10, pp. 757-759.
Hoffpauer, D. W. and Wright, S. L. 1994. Enrichment of rice. In Rice Science and Technology. ed., W. E. Marshall and J. I. Wadsworth. Marcel Rekker, New York, NY.
Hurrell, R. F. 1985. Nonelemental Sources. In Iron Fortification of Foods, ed. F. M. Clydesdale and K. L. Wiemer. Academic Press, pp. 39-54.
Hurrell, R. F., Furniss, D. E., Burn, J., Whittaker, P., Lynch, S. R. and Cook, J. D. 1989a. Iron fortification of infant cereals. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 49 (6) 1274-1282.
Hurrell, R. F., Berrocal, R., Neeser, J. R., Schweizer, T. F., Hilpert, H., Traitler, H., Colarow, L. and Lindstrand, K. 1989b. Micronutrients in infant formula. In Micronutrients in Milk and Milk-Based Formula; (ed) Renner, E. and Barker, U. K.. Elsevier Applied Science Publishers.
Hurrell, R. F. and Cook, J. D. 1990. Strategies for iron fortification of foods. Trends in Food Science and Technology, (9), 56-60.
IFT 1987. Monosodium glutamate. Food Technol. 41:5, pp. 143-154.
INACG, 1990. Combating Iron Deficiency Anemia Through Food Fortification Technology - An Action Plan, XII INACG Meeting Washington, DC.
Johnson, L., Gordon, H. T. and Borenstein, B. 1988. Vitamin and mineral fortification of breakfast cereals. Cereal Foods World, 33:3, pp. 278-283.
Joseph, E. W., Liuzzo, J. A. and Rao, R. M. 1990. Development of wash and cook-proof methods for vitamin enrichment of rice grains. J. Food Sci., 55:4, pp. 1102-1104, 1107.
Kilcast, D. 1994. Effect of irradiation on vitamins. Food Chemistry: 49, 157-164.
Killeit, U. 1994. Vitamin retention in extrusion cooking. Food Chemistry 49, pp. 149-155.
Kojima, N. and Brown, H. D. 1955. The Effects of Iodised Salt in Processed Fruits and Vegetables. Food Technology 9:103.
Kuhajek, E. J. and Fiedelman, H.W. 1973. Nutritional iodine in processed foods. Food Technology, 27 (1) 52-53.
Kurtz, F. E., Tamsma, A. and Pallansch, M. J. (1973) Effect of fortification with iron on susceptibility of skim milk and non-fat dry milk to oxidation. J. Dairy Sci.; 56, 1139-1143.
Labuza, T. P., Tannenbaum, S. R. and Karel, M. 1970. Water content and stability of intermediate-moisture foods. Food Technol. 24:5, pp. 35-40.
Lacera, A., Mejia, L. A., Molina, M. R. and Bressani, R. 1983. Fortificacion de azucar con aceite de higado de tiburon para alimentacion Humana. In Proc. Int. Con. 'Marine Resources of the Pacific'. P. M. Arena, (ed) Ina Del Mar, Chile.
Lachance, P. A. and Bauernfeind, J.C. 1991. Concepts and practices of nitrifying foods. In Nutrient Additions to Food, ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Linke, H. 1985. Is the addition of vitamins or iodised salt permissable in meat products? Mitteilungsblatt der Bundesanstalt fuer Fleischforschung, Kulmbach, 87, 6313-6316.
Liu, L. and Parrish, D. B. 1976. Biopotency of vitamin A in fortified flour after accelerated storage. J. Agric. Food Chem., 27:5, pp. 1134-1136.
Lumely, I. D. 1993. Analysis of Vitamins. In The Technology of Vitamins in Food. ed.. P. B. Ottaway. Chapman Hall, Glasgow.
Lund, D. B. 1991. Engineering aspects of nitrifying foods. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Mannar, V. 1991. Fortification of foods to combat micronutrient deficiencies. Proceedings of 'Ending the Hidden Hunger' (a policy conference on micronutrient malnutrition), pp. 35-47.
Mannar, M. G. V. 1988. Salt iodination - Part 2. IDD Newsletter 4:4 pp. 11-16.
Misaki, M. and Yasumatsu, K. 1985. Rice enrichment and fortification. In Rice Chemistry and Technology, ed. B. 0. Juliano, American Association of Cereal Chemists, Minnesota, USA.
Molina, M. R. 1991. Foods considered for nutrient addition: sugars. In Nutrient Additions to Food. ed. J. C. Bauernfeind and P. A. Lachance. Food and Nutrition Press, Connecticut.
Muhilal, P.D. 1986. A pioneering project for combatting vitamin A deficiency. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 48, 1265-1276.
Murphy, P. A., Smith, B. Hauck, C. and O'Connor, K. 1992. Stabilization of vitamin A in a synthetic rice premix. J. Food Sci., 57:2, pp. 437-439.
National Research Council; Committee on Diet and Health, National Academy of Sciences 1989. Diet and Health. National Academy Press, Washington, DC.
Nestel, P. 1993. Food fortification in developing countries. U.S. Agency for International Development.
O'Brien, A. and Roberton, D. 1993. In The Technology of Vitamins in Food, ed. P. B. Ottaway. Chapman Hall, Glasgow.
Oamen, E. E., Hansen, A.P. and Swartzel, K.R. 1989. Effect of ultra-high temperature steam injection processing and aseptic storage on labile water-soluble vitamins in milk. J. Dairy Sci., 72, pp. 614-619.
Ottaway, P. B. 1993. Stability of vitamins in food. In The Technology of Vitamins in Food. ed., P. B. Ottaway. Chapman Hall, Glasgow.
Owen, D. F. and McIntire, J. M. 1975. Technologies of the fortification of milk products. In Technol. Fortification Foods. Proc. Workshop. 44-65.
Paden, C. A., Wollinsky, I., Hoskin, J. C., Lewis, K. C., Lineback, D. R. and McCarthy, R. D. 1979. Fortification of accessory food items with vitamin A. Lebensm. Wiss. u.-Technol., 12, pp. 183-188.
Parce, C. J. 1995. Micronutrient fortification of processed foods. Bulletin of Nutrtion Foundation of the Philippines. 35:11 pp. 1-3.
Parman, G. K. and Salinard, G. J. 1981. Vitamins as ingredients in food processing. In Fundamentals of Food Processing Operations, ed. J. L. Heid and M. L. Joslyn, AVI Publishing Co., Westport, Connecticut, pp. 188-208.
Parrish, D.B., Herod, L., Ponte, J.G., Seib, P. A., Tsen, C. C. and Adams, K. A. 1980. Recovery of vitamin A in processed foods made from fortified flours. J. Food Sci., 45, pp. 1438-1439.
Parrish, D. B., Eustace, W. D., Ponte, J. G. and Herod, L. 1980. Distribution of vitamin A in fortified flours and effect of processing, simulated shipping and storage. Cereal Chem. 57:4 pp. 284-287.
Pietrzik, K. 1995. Biomarkers for antioxidant vitamins. In B-carotene, Vitamin E, Vitamin C and Quercetin in the Prevention of Degenerative Disease - the Role of Foods -. Summary of a workshop held in June 1994. ILSI Europe Antioxidant Task Force, International Life Sciences Institute.
Ranganathan, S. and Narasinga-Rao, B. S. 1986. Stability of iodine in iodised salt. Indian Food Industry, 5(3) 122-124.
Ranhotra, G. S., Loewe, R. J. and Puyat, L. V. 1976 Bioavailability and functionality (breadmaking) of zinc in various organic and inorganic sources. Cereal Chem., 54:3, pp. 496-502.
Rao, B. S. N. 1985. Salt. In Iron Fortification of Foods, ed. F. M. Clydesdale and K. L. Wiemer. Academic Press, pp. 155-164.
Richardson, D. P. 1993. Food Fortification. In The Technology of Vitamins in Food, ed. P. B. Ottaway. Chapman Hall, Glasgow.
Rubin, S.H., Emodi, A. and Scialpi, L. 1977. Micronutrient additions to cereal grain products. Cereal Chem., 54:4, pp. 895-904.
Ryley, J. and Kajda, P. 1994. Vitamins in thermal processing. Food Chemistry: 49, 119-129.
Schauff, M. 1993. Changes to the cheese ordinance and other ordinances. Deutsche Milchwirtschaft, 44 (25/26) 1257-1261.
Sevenants, M. R. and Sanders, R.A. 1984. Anatomy of an off-flavour investigation: the 'medicinal' cake mix. Analytical Chemistry, 56 (2) 293A-294A, 298A.
Silveira, N. V. W., Rodas, M.A., Saruwtari, J.H. and deSouza, A. 1993. Iodine Content Stability in Salt after Boiling and Shelf Life. Revista do Institute Adolfo Lutz; 52 (1/2) 41-45.
Smitasiri, S. 1991. Encouraging production and consumption of micronutrient rich foods. Proceedings of 'Ending the Hidden Hunger' (a policy conference on micronutrient malnutrition), pp. 49-70.
Soekirman, A. and Jalal, F. 1991. Priorities in dealing with micronutrient problems in Indonesia. Proceedings of 'Ending the Hidden Hunger' (a policy conference on micronutrient malnutrition), pp. 71-88.
Solon, F. S., Latham, M. C., Guirriec, R., Florentino, R., Williamson, D. F. and Aguilar, J. 1985. Fortification of MSG with vitamin A: the Philippine experience. Food Technol. 39:11, pp. 71-77.
Steele, C. J. 1976. Cereal fortification - Technological problems. Cereal Foods World, 21:10, pp. 538-540.
Subar, A. F. and Bowering, J. 1988. The contribution of enrichment and fortification to nutrient intake of women. J. of Amer. Diet. Assoc. 88 (10) 1237-1242, 1245.
Tannenbaum, S. R., Young, V. R. and Archer, M. 1985. Vitamins and minerals. In Food Chemistry. 2nd edition, ed. 0. R. Fennema, Marcel Dekker Inc., NY. pp. 477-543.
Tarasoff, L. and Kelly, M. F. 1993. Monosodium L-glutamate: A double blind study and review. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 31 (12) 1019-1035.
Thomas, E.L., Burton, H., Ford, J.E. and Perkin, A.G. 1974. The effect of oxygen content on flavour and chemical changes during aseptic storage of whole milk after UHT processing. J. Dairy Res., 42, pp. 285-295.
Verma, K. K., Jain, A. and Verma, A. 1992. Determination of iodide by HPLC after pre-column derivatization. Anal. Chem., 64: 1484-1489.
Walter, P. 1994. Vitamin requirements and vitamin enrichment of foods. Food Chemistry: 49, 113-117.
West, K. and Sommer, A. 1987. Delivery of oral doses of vitamin A to prevent vitamin A deficiency and nutritional blindness. ACC/SCN State-of-the-art Series, Trition Policy Discussion Paper No. 2.
Wiemer, K. 1995. Impact of fortification on nutrient intake of the US population. Abs. ILSI Annual Meeting Jan 22-26, Cancun, Mexico.
Wilson, L. A. 1988. Proposed quality assurance guidelines for the ortification of MSG with White Vitamin A in Indonesia' project. Department of Food Technology, Iowa State University, Ames IA.
Wirth, F. and Keuhne, D. 1991. Manufacture of iodised meat products. Mitteilungsblatt der Bundesanstalt flier Fleischforschung, Kulmbach, 112, 216-220.
Wirth, F. and Keuhne, D. 1991. Manufacture of iodised meat products. Fleischwirtschaft, 71 (12)
ANNEX 1 - COMMON CRITICAL CONTROL POINTS IN THE PRODUCTION OF SELECTED FORTIFIED FOODS AND EXAMPLES OF MONITORING PROCEDURES
Infant Formula
Enriched Flour
Vitamin A enriched MSG
Infant Formula
(GMP-Health and Welfare Canada)
Critical Control Point
Monitoring Procedures
Receiving of raw ingredients
Each lot of purchased raw ingredient should be tested by approved methods to confirm compliance with specifications unless the manufacturer has records to show that the raw ingredient is consistently within specifications. There should be an ongoing programme to ensure the continuing reliability of each vendor.
Production of premix
Quantitative analyses should be carried out for each component in each batch of any bulk vitamin or mineral premixes manufactured 'in-house'.
Storage of premix
Vitamins and premixes should be reassayed for potency every three months to ensure that they continue to meet the required potency up to the end of their shelf-lives; or well documented data should be available to show that the above frequency of testing is not necessary.
Addition of vitamins or premix
Each weighing and/or addition of vitamins or premix should be initialled by the employee involved and the sheet checked and initialled by the supervisor.
Processing conditions
Critical stages of the manufacturing process should be monitored in such a way as to ensure that no unexpected nutrient losses ocurr during processing or after unpredictable delays. Monitor recording charts of time/temperature history during thermal processing or during drying.
Inventory control
Inventory control should be maintained on all raw materials by weighing, daily, the remainder of those raw materials which were utilised in the day's production.
Finished product control
Each lot should be sampled and tested for compliance with its chemical, microbiological and physical specifications prior to release by the QA/QC department. Testing for each lot should include analysis for protein and all added vitamins and minerals.
Enriched Flour
Critical Control Point
Monitoring Procedure
Receipt of raw materials
Each lot of a purchased raw ingredient should be tested by approved methods to confirm compliance with specifications.
Storage of vitamins/minerals
Monitor storage conditions to ensure that manufacturers' instructions are followed.
Addition of vitamins/minerals
Keep a permanent record of calculations for vitamin/mineral additions to the finished product to demonstrate whether additions theoretically give the correct range.
Regular testing and recording of the in-line accuracy of the metering pump.
Make a visual check every 1-2 hours to make certain that the vitamin preparation is being used up at a consistent rate and keep records of this.
Keep daily records showing actual vitamin uasge and actual flour production.
Vitamin A enriched MSG
(Wilson, 1988)
Critical Control Point
Monitoring Procedure
Receipt of white vitamin A
Verify that white vitamin A is being produced according to the required specifications.
Evaluate and keep records of colour, particle size and potency on arrival.
Storage of vitamin A
Monitor storage conditions in order to maintain optimal levels.
Addition of vitamin A
Weights of vitamin added should be initialled by the employee involved and checked and initialled by the supervisor.
Blending of vitamin/MSG mixture
Conditions used for mixing should be monitored and recorded. Use control charts to monitor percent variation of vitamin A in the fortified product.
Final product control
Check that blended MSG/white vitamin A potency meets specification.
Inventory control
Inventory control should be maintained on vitamin A and MSG by weighing, daily, the remainder of those raw materials which were utilised in the day's production.
<section>c</section>
ANNEX 5 - HISTORY OF TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FOR VITAMIN A FORTIFICATION OF FOODS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
CONFORT5
FAO TECHNICAL CONSULTATION ON FOOD FORTIFICATION:
TECHNOLOGY AND QUALITY CONTROL
ROME, ITALY, 20-23 NOVEMBER 1995
Patricia A. Murphy
Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition
Iowa State University
Iowa, USA
Introduction
Vitamin A (VA) deficiency causes the deaths of approximately 500,000 children each year in developing countries. Marginal vitamin A status probably contributes to reduced survivability in response to respiratory and diarrheal diseases and increases mortality 3-4 times. The health of children in developing countries is seriously compromised by their vitamin A status (Underwood, 1990).
Historically, three main approaches have been used to solve the deficiency problem. One has involved periodic dosing of children with vitamin A. This approach requires the consistent participation of families and governments at the village level (Rahmathullah et al., 1990). The second approach involves education of families on food selection to improve the vitamin A status of children. This is the true long-term solution but depends on an adequate supply of vitamin A rich foods and adequate income to purchase or produce these foods. The third approach involves food fortification (Muhilal et al., 1988). Although fortification is very common in developed countries, it is far less common in developing countries. However, the experience of fortification of sodium chloride with iodine in Nepal, Pakistan and other developing countries does suggest this strategy can work.
Vitamin A fortification of sugar was successfully implemented in Guatemala (Bauernfeind and Arroyave, 1986), but is not currently in practice. Monosodium glutamate has been explored as a potential vehicle for vitamin A fortification in the Philippines (Solon et al., 1985) and for Indonesia by my research group. For a variety of reasons, MSG fortification has not been implemented and will be discussed in this paper. Fortification of a wheat premix has been explored as an approach to bring vitamin A to the very poor in Bangladesh. Rice and synthetic rice fortification with vitamin A have been attempted for the Philippines (Murphy et al., 1992). Active government participation must continue for food fortification programs to succeed in developing countries.
Although the nutritional needs of children for vitamin A have been well recognized, the technical problems involved with food fortification to solve this deficiency are not as well recognized.
Historically, there has been only one major supplier of vitamin A, as retinyl palmitate or as retinyl acetate, for food fortification, Hoffman-La Roche (HLR). There are a few others companies now involved in vitamin A synthesis. For food fortification in developed countries, specific formulations of vitamin A were developed for specific food processing applications. Table 1 lists the major formulations that have been available currently or in the past. As an example. Vitamin A palmitate 250S (Palma-sperse ~) was developed for dry and fluid milk-based products. The product specifications indicate that it tends to cake with moisture exposure. The major portion of the matrix is composed of porcine gelatin, which can limit its applications in kosher and halal products. Development of a commercial vitamin A formulation requires a significant investment in time and technical expertise by the vitamin A manufacturer. Unless there is a continuing demand for new vitamin A
formulations, the technical expertise involved in the development of these products is not necessarily readily available. This facet of product development is probably not recognized nor appreciated outside of the food product development community. Thus, there may be a significant lag time between the recognized nutritional need for a vitamin formulation suitable for a specific food and the development of that product. Our experience at Iowa State University in vitamin A food fortification for developing countries will demonstrate the problems associated with the technical development of suitable fortificants for applications in these countries. We have worked on vitamin A fortification of several foods for developing countries including wheat, rice, salt and monosodium glutamate (MSG). The experiences in these product developments will be summarized in this document. The success, failures and "lessons learned" will be outlined.
Experience of Food Fortification Programmes
Salt
The criteria used to select a food for fortification in developing countries include: use by the target population; control of food production to confirm that fortification can be accomplished; and feasibility of fortification of locally produced food. Sodium chloride (or salt) is the most universal vehicle in most developing countries fitting the criteria above. Fortification of salt with iodine in Pakistan for the Himalayan foothills is an example of a successful food fortification program (Crowley et al., 1989). Successful VA fortification of salt would have applications not only in Asia but in Africa as well. Unfortunately, finding a suitable fortificant for salt is a major task. We investigated a number of commercially available fortificants for salt and enlisted the assistance of four commercial firms (Wright Enrichment; The Coating Place, Verona, WI; Balchem, Inc; Durkee Foods) to encapsulate (or coat) commercial VA forms to improve stability in salt. As with
technical problems described for VA fortification of MSG, the role of water in VA stability is a major hurdle yet to be successfully surmounted. A new commercial formulation of VA must be developed specifically for salt before fortification can be successfully used in developing countries. We can demonstrate very good stability of VA (with almost any commercially available formulation) in salt when water concentrations are very low (Table 2). But when water concentrations reach the level expected due to the humidity of the country where the fortified product will be used, the stability of VA is not sufficient for fortification programs. Even the new cores and coatings developed for successful MSG fortification were not sufficiently durable for salt fortification.
Wheat
In 1986, the Food Technology Branch of the Office of International Cooperation and Development of the United State Department of Agriculture (FTB-OICD-USDA) and Helen Keller International (HKI) identified wheat as a VA vehicle for the "poorest of the poor" in Bangladesh through the Vulnerable Group Development program and the Food for Work. It was determined that wheat was consumed by 20-25 million people or 25% of the population. It was established that if a VA premix using U.S. wheat could be produced, it would function as a vehicle for fortification of wheat in Bangladesh. The product was developed by Wright Enrichment, Crowley, Louisiana, USA, and evaluated at Iowa State University. Approximately 18 attempts at VA fortification whole wheat were tried. The successful product was produced through dispersion of vitamin A palmitate 250SD onto whole wheat kernels with other additives including edible shellac. Other forms of VA, pure VA oil and VA in vegetable oil, were not
suitable in chemical stability, although they were much easier to handle in processing. Wheat premix was fortified at 4 million lU/kg. This premix would be diluted with regular wheat to 10,000 lU/kg. The final products would yield a 10 lU/g level in finished food products. The fortified wheat was evaluated for VA storage stability, washing stability, milling stability, and cooking into chapatti stability. Wheat fortified with VA 250SD was stable for up to 51 weeks at 25°C at 75% relative humidity (RH)(Table 3). Approximately 20% of VA could be washed off the wheat with simple water washing. It was decided that washing would probably not be used with this product, unlike rice. The VA in fortified wheat was stable to milling operations under conditions designed to mimic those in Bangladesh. Chapatti making was performed at Iowa State University and at the Institute for Nutrition and Food Science at University of Dhaka (Tables 4, 5). VA concentrations were unchanged after
chapatti making indicating this fortified material was suitable for use in VA programs. HKI and FTB-OICD-USDA proceeded to initiate a field project with the wheat fortificant. Unfortunately, the Government of Bangladesh never approved proceeding with a demonstration project to confirm the feasibility of this fortification concept. The technical problem for VA fortification of wheat has been solved and specifications for the final product were developed but the technology remains to be implemented. The project was abandoned in 1988. The technology is still valid for other countries with major wheat or wheat flour consumption.
Rice
Rice has been successfully fortified with VA and other nutrients based on VA stability and losses due to precooking washing (Rubin, et al., 1977; Cort et al. 1976). However, these products have not been suitable for field use in the Philippines (Barrett, 1988). We evaluated an VA (250SD)-enriched rice produced by Wright Enrichment (Crowley, LA) similar to the VA-fortified wheat described above. Although the chemical stability of VA was adequate, the 15-20% water washing losses were deemed unacceptable for use in Philippine fortification programs. A synthetic rice was developed by the Bon Dente Company (Lynden, WA, USA) composed of rice flour and other ingredients and extruded through a dry pasta machine. If a suitable VA fortificant could be developed for this process, the earlier VA physical and chemical problems would be circumvented. Additionally, the production technology is suitable for transfer to developing countries. The Bon Dente Company is ready to transfer their
technology to developing countries who will use their technology. We have reported the results of this product development (Murphy et al., 1992).
The Bon Dente Company attempted to fortify their synthetic rice, called Ultrarice-, with several of the commercial VA preparations. VA palmitate 250 SD was determined to be the most chemically stable. The product was subjected to accelerated storage studies to simulate the temperature and humidity conditions in the Philippines. Washing stability, cooking stability and long-term storage stability were evaluated. Visual coloration was also evaluated. The premix must be white enough to not be distinguishable in a 1:200 dilution with regular rice. During storage, the Ultrarice must not darken enough to be distinguishable from regular rice. Nine initial products made by the Bon Dente Company were evaluated arid it was determined that the type of lipid and type of antioxidant used in the Ultrarice formulation were significant in the chemical stability of VA. We formulated 22 premixes and evaluated them for suitability. Trial and error are part of product formulation. A combination
of several antioxidants working in synergistic manner were needed to maximum VA stability for Philippine environmental conditions. The least saturated vegetable oil yielded the most stable VA Ultrarice. The use of accelerated shelf-life storage testing under several relative humidity conditions allows rapid decisions on suitable model products. "Rapid" is a relative term, of course, and involves about two months to mimic 1 year of in-field VA stability. Two years were needed to develop and test Ultrarice prototypes. Clinical trials were scheduled to begin in the Philippines under the supervision of the Food and Nutrition Research Institute. However, these trials apparently have never been conducted. Feasibility trials were conducted with the Ultrarice VA-fortified product in Brazil and their successes have been reported by Flores et al. (1994).
Attempts were made during Ultrarice prototype development to co-fortify with VA and iron. These attempts were unsuccessful due to discoloration during storage of the co-fortified Ultrarice and due to oxidation of VA by iron in premix. We have shown that VA fortification is feasible. Combination of two separately produced Ultrarices, one with VA and one with iron, is possible. Separate fortification of Ultrarice with iron should be attempted but considerable product development work remains to be conducted to demonstrate a functional product in the field especially in preventing discoloration.
MSG
Monosodium glutamate (MSG) was identified in the early 1980s as a vehicle for vitamin A fortification in Indonesia. Commercial forms of vitamin A (retinol palmitate) were identified as the most efficient approach for fortification. Early field trials in Indonesia used vitamin A palmitate 250 CWS. CWS is an abbreviation for cold-water-soluble indicating this form of vitamin A (VA) was developed to rapidly disperse in cold water (Table 1). This VA form is composed of retinyl palmitate emulsified in gum acacia with additional stabilizers and antioxidants, is bright yellow in color, and yields a VA concentration of 250,000 lU/g. The initial bioavailability studies of VA fortified MSG commercial size packets, conducted by Dr. Muhilal and colleagues in 1983 (Muhilal et al., 1988), demonstrated that this approach improved the VA status of the test population of children compared to the controls consuming unfortified MSG.
The MSG manufacturers and Government of Indonesia officials determined that the color of the fortified MSG must not deviate from the color of unfortified MSG. MSG is marketed in clear multilaminate packets showing its purity. Various initial attempts to coating the 250 CWS VA were tried including agglomeration of the VA beadlets with small MSG crystals or whitening of the beadlets with Klucel (hydroxypropylcellulose) -TiO2 combination. The whitening options were chosen to mask the yellow color of the VA beadlets. Due to the successful field bioavailability study, the chemical stability of VA in fortified MSG was not considered. However, it was learned later that, for the field bioavailability trials, the fortified MSG packets were prepared often and were not exposed to the usual commercial distribution system and environment in Indonesia.
The particle size of the commercial 250 CWS VA was determined to be too small to mix well and not segregate in MSG during fortification and distribution. The whitening process could be readily adapted to an agglomeration process that yielded a particle size distribution that matches the MSG crystal size and survives the fortification and distribution operations without breaking apart (Table 6, 7). This process was achieved in 1987 and was reported by Murphy et al. (1987). The color of fortified MSG was not significantly different from unfortified MSG. The commercial packets are fortified at 3000 IU VA/g MSG. The protocols for MSG fortificant evaluation are contained in Murphy et al., (1987).
Concurrently, other commercial VA forms from HLR were evaluated for the chemical VA stability in a water-saturated environment. VA forms 250 S, 250 SD, and 500 Palmabeads were studied. Their composition varies (Table 1). Greater stabilities were observed with gelatin matrices than the acacia ones. 250 CWS and 500 Palmabeads were whitened with Klucel/TiO2, with zein/TiO2, and calcium alginates. A sucrose-VA emulsion was evaluated as a fortificant but was too unstable for a MSG system.
The 250 CWS VA, coated and agglomerated with Klucel/TiO2, was chosen for the fortification field trials in Indonesia. The benchmark formulation, identified by the Coating Place (CP) lot number 8710xx, became the standard (Table 8). This pilot formulation was scaled-up to production level for use in Indonesia and identified as CP 880224-A. During the scale-up process from 1 kg to 1,600 kg, the degree of whitening was not as great as the benchmark formulation. Concurrent field trials with CP 8710xx-fortifled MSG in commercial packets showed a browning reaction occurring when the packets were stored under ambient Indonesian conditions in less than 2 months and was accelerated in sunlight. The browning of the entire package contents occurred faster at the lower, more humid elevations (Jakarta) than at lower humidities at higher elevations (Bogor). It was not clear at that time why the browning was occurring.
A visit by members of the working group formed by Helen Keller International (HKI) to Indonesia, in September 1989, determined that the whitened VA beadlets were melting in the fortified MSG packets. The packages were of high quality multiple laminate materials. However, the water transmission rate was great enough to disintegrate the water-soluble 250 CWS beads and allow browning of VA and discoloration of the MSG. The Indonesian humidity averages about 85% with a range from 75 to 100%. Lower elevations in Indonesia with higher humidities resulted in faster degradation of VA beadlets. It was determined that more water-impermeable beadlet coatings and more stable VA beadlets would be needed to survive the Indonesian climate. A change in MSG packaging material was not an option.
In late 1989, a number of new coatings were evaluated on 250 CWS VA beadlets. These coatings included ethylcellulose(EC)/TiO2, EC/Klucel/MYV/TiO2, AQ/MYV/TiO2 and others (Table 8). The coatings that maintained the best appearance in laboratory stress conditions were sent to Indonesia in fortified MSG packets for field evaluation. A new core material, identified as fish gelatin, 250 CWS-F, was evaluated in the laboratory and in Indonesia but yielded poor chemical and appearance stability. No new coating gave appearance stability that was better than the initial EC/TiO2 (CP 881103) coating. The VA chemical stability was very poor in the field. An equal performer to CP 881103 of the new coatings in the field for appearance was CP 891024-A2 (Table 3). It was concluded by the working team that new VA core materials must be developed to withstand the Indonesian environment. No commercially available HLR VA formulations were adequate, either in chemical VA stability nor in core
integrity. Additionally, it was determined that all potential candidates as fortificants must be field tested in Indonesia for VA stability and physical appearance (no browning, no beadlet melting, etc.)
A meeting of the HKI technical group with representatives of HLR took place in June 1990 at Nutley, NJ. The problems of VA-MSG fortification were presented and ideas for improved core stability were suggested by the VA working team. HLR-Basel was convinced to pursue this avenue. HLR decided to reformulate the beads with increased antioxidants to improve VA chemical stability and new matrix materials to improve core stability, and therefore, appearance.
HLR prepared a new core called 250 CWS-SPEZ (HLR lot # 102-901) ten months after the June, 1990 discussions. These were coated and agglomerated by the Coating Place with EC/MO/TiO2 (CP 910404-A1 and -A2) and with stearine/TiO2 (CP 910409-A1). The stearine coated beadlets had poor agglomeration quality and browned with time. The EC/MO/TiO2 coated beadlets had modest VA stability. These types were not tested in Indonesia.
HLR produced 8 new beadlet cores (Roche # 1-8) with improved antioxidant concentrations and new matrix materials to improve appearance stability. These were evaluated in the laboratory. The 3 best cores were coated with EC/Klucel/MYV/TiO2 and evaluated in the lab for appearance and VA stability. Two types, coated Roche # 3 and 4 (CP 910723 and 910724), were used to fortify MSG in packets and sent to Indonesia for field stability data. The new coated Roche # 3 and 4 were stable in appearance for less than 8 weeks in Indonesia. The size distribution of the new coated VA beadlets was evaluated and conformed to specifications for MSG blending. The Coating Place attempted to vary coating thickness and ingredients to improve appearance stability of Roche # 3 (CP 920309-xx and 920311-xx) (Table 8). None of the treatments improved the appearance stability over that of Roche # 3 alone.
HLR prepared a new beadlet using vitamin A acetate and unknown matrix materials. This VA form was coated, but not whitened, by HLR; then it was recoated and agglomerated by the Coating Place (CP 9209xx). The appearance stability is still very good. Field data from Indonesia reached week 25 with very little appearance change. The VA chemical stability of VA acetate was only one-half that of VA palmitate. HLR prepared a VA palmitate beadlet of unknown matrix and coated/whitened these beadlets (HLR lot # 9201-168). This beadlet was recoated and agglomerated by the Coating Place (CP 9305xx). The size distribution conformed to MSG fortification standards. The appearance stability in fortified MSG packets in Indonesia was greater than 25 weeks. The VA chemical is very good and matches the appearance stability. This final product was produced almost 2 years after HLR began dedicated development for the MSG market.
After development of this successful VA fortificant, a meeting was held in Jakarta, Indonesia, with representatives of HKI, the Government of Indonesia (GOI), the Coating Place and HLR in October, 1993. A national pilot field study was planned at that time. Subsequently, the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) withdrew all funding for this project from HKI, the lead agency, indicating the production of a VA fortificant had taken too long. No further contacts have been coordinated between representatives of HLR, the Coating Place nor GOI. The person responsible for coordination of VA programs at HKI has left the agency. The food technology experts had been involved in this program from 1985 to 1993.
Lessons from Past Fortification Programmes
There were a number of important lessons learned in this technical development of a suitable fortificant for MSG and other VA vehicles. Some of these lessons have previously been reported in Vitamin A Fortification of MSG in Indonesia: Summary of Project by Anne Ralte, HKI, for USAID Office of Nutrition Cooperative Agreement DAN-5116-A-0070-00 (1993).
1. Field testing of fortified MSG packets must be done in Indonesia, or country of intended fortification use, at several locations due to humidity differences to confirm the adequacy of the fortificant. Field testing requires 4-6 months to complete per prototype.
2. Development of new prototypes by HLR takes time. There is no known assured approach to take to produce a commercial fortificant without some experimentation (Table 8). Each commercial VA product was developed for a specific food product; none for MSG prior to July 1991. Development of a dedicated MSG fortificant took 2 years.
3. The MSG packets were not water-impermeable and observations by MSG manufacturers and field personnel were valid. Average Indonesian humidities of 85% or more caused degradation of VA beadlets and discoloration of MSG. Any VA fortification must take relative humidity into account during fortificant development.
4. MSG fortificant must meet specifications including: vitamin A chemical stability for the shelf-life of the fortified food; appearance stability must be > 6 months in the field; bioavailability of the fortificant; and physical stability including initial particle size distribution, agglomerate mixing stability, and initial whiteness when fortified at 3000 IU VA/g MSG. Other food fortifcants need their specifications to be developed.
5. Scale-up of fortificant production should be incremental rather than in big jumps.
6. Alternative foodstuffs for fortification should have been identified early on and evaluated simultaneously when technical difficulties were encountered with VA-MSG.
7. Initiate early oversight by a cross-functional team including: food scientists; production engineers; market researchers; marketers; economists/financial analysts; political and consumers groups.
8. Advertisement of fortification of product should be allowed for food.
9. Continued support by technical and governmental agencies.
10. Coalitions must be developed and maintained with partners in fortification; for example, with MSG these include grant agency groups, MSG manufacturers, consumers unions, technical agencies and USAID.
References
Barrett, F. 1988. Private Communication. USDA-OICD, Food Technology Branch, Washington, D.C.
Bauernfeind, J.C., and Arroyave, G. 1986. Control of vitamin A deficiency by the nutrification of food approach. In: Vitamin A Deficiency and its Control, Ed. By J.C. Bauernfeind, Academic Press, New York, pp. 359-388.
Cort, W.M., Borenstein, B., Harley, J.H., Oscadca, M. and Scheiner, M. 1976, Nutrient stability of fortified cereal products. Food Tech. 30(4):52-61.
Crowley, P.R., Barrett, F.F., Weil, R.P., Jr., Fellers, D.A. and Blocker, N.M. 1989. Final Report: Food Technology for Development Project RSSA STB-0831- R-AG-4207, 1969-1989, Food Technology Branch, Office of International Cooperation and Development U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC 20250. 157 p., September 30, 1989.
Flores, H., Guerra, N.B., Cavalcanti, A.C.A., Campos, F.A.C.S., Azevedo, M.C.N.A., and Silva, M.B.M. 1994. Bioavailability of vitamin A in a synthetic rice premix. J. Food Sci. 59:371-372, 377.
Muhilal, Pemeisih, D., Idjradinata, Y.R., Muherdiyantiningsih, Karyadi, D. 1988. Vitamin A-fortified monosodium glutamate and health, growth and survival of children: a controlled field trial. Am. J. Clin. Nutri. 48:1271-1276.
Murphy, Patricia; Hsu, Kenneth W.; Fratzke, Alfred; Hauck, Catherine. 1987. Fortification of monosodium glutamate with "white" vitamin A in Indonesia. September, 1987. Report to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of International Cooperation and Development.
Murphy, P.A., Smith, B., Hauck, C.C. and O'Connor, K. 1992. Stabilization of vitamin A in a synthetic rice premix. J. Food Sci. 57:437-439.
Rahmathullah, L., Underwood, B.A., Thulasiraj, R.D., Milton, R.C., Ramaswamy, K., Rahmathullah, R. and Babu, G. 1990. Reduced mortality among children in southern India receiving a small weekly dose of vitamin A. N. Eng. J. Med. 323:929-935.
Ralte, A. 1993. Vitamin A Fortification of MSG in Indonesia: Summary of Project, Helen Keller International, Inc. pp 19.
Rubin, S.H., Emodi, A. and Scialpi, L. 1977. Micronutrient additions to cereal grain products. Cereal Chem. 54:895-904.
Solon, F.S., Guirriec, R., Florentino, R, Latham, M.C., Williamson, D.F. and Aguilar, J. 1985. Vitamin A fortification of MSG, the Philippine experience. Food Technol. 39(11)71-77.
Underwood, B.A. 1990. Vitamin A prophylaxis programs in developing countries: past experiences and future prospects. Nutri. Rev. 48:265-274.
TABLE 1: COMMERCIAL VITAMIN A PREPARATIONS FOR FORTIFICATION
TYPE
INGREDIENTS
FOOD APPLICATIONS
250 CWS
Retinyl palmitate, acacia, sugar, modified food starch, BHT, BHA, sodium benzoate, tocopherol
Nonfat dry milk, dehydrated foods, dry cereals, beverage powders to be reconstituted before use.
250 S
Retinyl palmitate, gelatin, sorbitol, modified food starch, sodium citrate, corn syrup, ascorbic acid, coconut oil, BHT, tocopherol, silicon dioxide, BHA
Dry mix & fluid milk products
250 SD
Retinyl palmitate, acacia, lactose, coconut oil, BHT, sodium benzoate, sorbic acid, silicon dioxide, BHA
Foods & baked products, dehydrated potato flakes, dry milk
Retinyl palmitate, gelatin, invert sugar, tricalcium phosphate, BHT, BHA, sodium benzoate, sorbic acid, sodium bisulfite
Dry mix and fluid milk products
Emulsified RP
Sucrose - retinyl palmitate emulsion in water
Tea leaves
Oil
Retinyl palmitate, BHA, BHT
None
TABLE 2: EFFECT OF MOISTURE ON STABILITY OF VITAMIN A IN SODIUM CHLORIDE
Half-Life (days) 45°C
% Moisture
VA 250 SD
Balchem Coated
TABLE 3: PREDICTED SHELF-LIFE STABILITY OF VITAMIN A FORTIFIED WHEAT AT 25°C
Vitamin A Formulation
Relative Humidity (%)
Half-Life (Weeks)
250 SD
Oil
TABLE 4: VITAMIN A CONTENT OF FORTIFIED WHEAT PRODUCTS
Product
n
Vitamin A (lU/g)
Wheat
Flour
Chapatti
n) represents number of replicates.
TABLE 5: VITAMIN A CONTENT OF FORTIFIED CHAPATTIS PRODUCED AT UNIVERSITY OF DHAKA & IOWA STATE UNIVERSITY
Vitamin A (lU/g)
Sample
UD
ISU
Wheat Flour
Chapatti
Ground Chapatti
TABLE 6: PHYSICAL STABILITY OF VITAMIN A 250 CWS1 FOR MSG
FORTIFICATION RESISTANCE TO SEPARATION DURING MIXING
MSG Product
Vitamin A Type
Mixing Variability (%)
Sasa
Agglomerated White^1
Ajinomoto
Agglomerated White
Miwon
Agglomerated White
Reference^2
Agglomerated White
Reference
Yellow^3
Reference
Unagglomerated White
1 Vitamin A palmitate 250 CWS was whitened and agglomerated with Klucel/TiO2.
2 Reference MSG was manufactured by Miwon in Korea.
3 Commercial vitamin A palmitate 250 CWS.
TABLE 7: VITAMIN A 250CWS AND MSG PARTICLE SIZE
Mesh Size
MSG
250CWS
Percentage Agglomerated 250CWS
MSG source was Ajinomoto, Indonesia
TABLE 8: COATING RECORDS OF VITAMIN A PROTOTYPES FOR INDONESIAN MSG FORTIFICATION
CODE1
VA TYPE
COATING2 (%)
RATIO
OTHER CODES
8710XX
250 CWS
KLU/TiO2 (30)
880224-A
250 CWS
KLU/TiO2 (30)
250 CWS
EC/TiO2
891024-A2
250 CWS GRAN
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2 (30)
10E
891025-A1
250 CWS
AQ/MYV/TiO2 (?)
900102-A1
250 CWS
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2 (?)
900103-A1
250 CWS
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2/CAS
900103-A2
250 CWS
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2/CCA
900103-A3
250 CWS
AQ/KLU/MYV/TiO2
900117-A2
250 SD
EC/MO/TiO2 (30)
900716-A2
250 CWS
EC/MO (30)
910404-A1,2
250CWS-SPEZ
EC/MO/TiO2
910409-A1
250 CWS
STEARINE/TiO2
910716-A2
250 CWS
EC/MO/TiO2 (30)
7A, JA
910716-A1
250 CWS-F
EC/MO/TiO2 (35)
7C, JC
910723-A1
Roche If 3
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2 (35)
10E
910724-A1
Roche # 4
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2 (35)
10E
910729-A1
Roche # 3
EC/MO/TiO2 (30)
910725-AQ
Roche # 7
EC/MYV/TiO2 (35)
920309-A1
Roche # 3 + KHP
EC/KLU/COV/TiO2 (35)
920309-A2
Roche # 3 + KHP
EC/COV/TiO2 (35)
920309-A3
Roche # 3 + KHP
EC/KLU/COV/TiO2/TLC(35)
920311-A2
Roche # 3
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2 (35)
920311-A4
Roche # 3 + KHP
ERS/ATEC/TiO2 (35)
920924-A1
HLR ACETATE
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2 (35)
930408-A1
HLR 102-901
(250CWS-SPEZ)
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2 (35)
9305xx
HLR 9201-168
EC/KLU/MYV/TiO2 (35)
1 Code represents year-month-day-run by the Coating Place.
2 EC = Ethylcellulose
AQ = Aquacoat
ERS = Eudragit
COV = Tocopheryl succinate
KLU = Klucel = Hydroxypropylcellulose
HLR = Hoffman La Roche-Basel
MO = Mineral oil
MYV = Myvacet
ATEC = Citroflex
TiO2 = Titanium dioxide
CCA = Calcium carbonate
TLC = Talc
CAS = Calcium sulfate
KHP = Potassium hydrogen phosphate
<section>d</section>
ANNEX 6 - REQUIREMENTS FOR EFFECTIVE FORTIFICATION IN FOOD AID PROGRAMMES
CONFORT6
FAO TECHNICAL CONSULTATION ON FOOD FORTIFICATION:
TECHNOLOGY AND QUALITY CONTROL
ROME, ITALY, 20-23 NOVEMBER 1995
Patricia Dexter
Nutritionist
Food Science Department
University of Arkansas
Arkansas, USA
Introduction
One of the primary goals stated for food aid is to combat world hunger and malnutrition and their causes. Fortification of food aid aims to contribute to the micronutrient intake of vulnerable groups, in particular young children and pregnant and lactating women. Greater attention is now being given to expanding the role of food aid in meeting the full nutrient needs of ever increasing numbers of refugees and displaced person in emergency situations. Fortification of food aid for displaced persons and refugees was endorsed at the ICN in the World Plan of Action for Nutrition which included the following recommendation:
"donor countries and involved organizations must... ensure that the nutrient content of food used in emergency food aid meets the nutritional requirements if necessary through fortification, or ultimately supplementation" (FAO/WHO, 1992a).
This paper examines requirements for effective fortification in food aid programmes. The extent that food aid commodities are currently enriched/fortified by food donors is reviewed based on available information. Criteria and limitations for food aid fortification are briefly discussed. Considerations for establishing quality control measures and international guidelines for fortified foods in food aid programmes are offered. These topics are presented as suggested by the organizers of this meeting (Annex 1).
Some Recent Trends in Food Aid
Food aid plays an integral part of many development programmes. It is estimated that approximately 60 percent of the total development aid budget of the US is comprised of food aid (USAID, 1994). Food aid is a key element of the European Union development policy, and The Union and its fifteen Member States are jointly responsible for 53 percent of the total world food aid for needy populations (EC, 1994). Although food assistance may include food aid in the form of concessional food sales to governments, this paper focuses on food aid provided as donations in support of regular programs such as maternal and child health, school feeding or food-for-work programs, or as part of relief and emergency programs.
Multilateral food donations channeled through the World Food Programme (WFP) have steadily increased since the late 1980s (WFP, 1995). However, compared to the eighties and early nineties, there has been a decline in new commitments for regular development food aid programmes to World Food Programme (WFP) due in part to the increased needs for emergency situations. The share of aid budgets devoted to disaster relief and humanitarian aid has increased by more than 500 percent since the early eighties (WFP, 1994). Much of the current discussion on fortification of food aid is focussing on the micronutrient adequacy of emergency and relief feeding programs. In 1994, over 40 percent of the total world food aid supported refugee or other relief operations. Of the new commitments made to WFP in 1994, 81 percent in value terms (73 percent in tonnage) were committed to emergency programmes (WFP, 1994). In the U.S., emergency food aid is the largest single component of overall
disaster relief worldwide, in most years.
Attention to the micronutrient quality of food aid is not new. Vitamins A and D have been added to non-fat dried milk powder provided as food aid for many years. With a serious domestic shortage of nonfat dry milk in the mid-sixties, formulations were developed for fortifying a supplementary blended food (cornmeal, nonfat dry milk powder, soy flour, wheat flour) primarily for young children (Combs, 1967). The need to provide sufficient amounts of essential micronutrients in early child food supplements was well understood. The initial blended foods developed were corn-soy-milk (CSM) and wheat-soy-milk (WSM). These blends were fortified with eleven vitamins and six minerals. With a shortage of nonfat dry milk in the early 1970s, CSM was reformulated to what is known today as CSB (corn soy blend). Other processed cereal commodities have also been enriched or fortified with B vitamins, iron and vitamin A. Increased attention to vitamin A deficiency in the 1980s resulted in
increased levels of vitamin A added to the processed cereals and soy-fortified cereals.
Current Practices and Use of Fortified Food Commodities
Enriched or fortified food aid commodities presently provided through the WFP include blended foods such as corn soy blend, processed cereals (including wheat flour, corn(maize) meal, soy-fortified processed cereals), vegetable oil, HEP biscuits, dried skim milk powder, and salt (iodized). (P. Dijkhuizen/WFP. Personal communication. August 1995). These commodities are either donated by donor countries or purchased by WFP. Nearly half of the food commodities distributed by WFP in 1994 were purchased by WFP of which sixty percent were obtained from developing countries (WFP, 1994).
The largest share of fortified and enriched food aid commodities originates from the United States, primarily under the Public Law 480 (PL 480) Title II commodity programme. The U.S. government donates agricultural commodities to support emergency and non-emergency or regular food aid programmes under the PL 480 Title II programme managed by USAID. Under amendments made to the PL 480 in 1966, the U.S. government is allowed to pay for enriching, fortifying, and blending donated foods. This placed greater emphasis on the use of food commodities as nutritional supplements, particularly for young children, pregnant women, and lactating mothers. The specifications for enrichment and fortification are provided in the announcements issued by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. These announcements include information on required levels and forms of fortificants to be added to various commodities, and on blending, packaging and labeling requirements. The vitamin and mineral premixes
added the processed cereals and blended foods are specified in the announcements. Table 1 indicates the premixes currently added to various PL 480 Title II commodities.
Current enrichment and fortification practices of food aid donors are generally not well documented and information from food donors regarding these practices is not readily available. A recent review of the fortification and enrichment practices of the PL 480 Title II programme however was conducted by USAID (Combs, et al 1994). The following summary by commodity draws from that review with additional information from other donors and agencies when available.
Blended Foods
Blended foods purchased from developing countries by WFP must meet guidelines established by WFP for processed cereals. Product specifications for precooked fortified blended foods ordered by UNHCR/UNICEF/WFP are based on the Guidelines on Formulated Supplementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children of Codex Alimentarius (FAO/WHO CAC, 1991). The Guidelines provide reference daily nutrient requirements that should be considered in formulating supplementary food and indicate that 100 grams of the supplementary food should provide approximately 2/3 of the reference daily requirements. The vitamin/mineral premix developed for this purpose was referred to as UNIMIX. Levels of vitamins and minerals included in UNIMIX to are listed in Table 2. Since its original formulation, levels of added vitamins and minerals have been adjusted (D. AInwick/UNICEF. Personal communication. September, 1995) resulting in a new specification known as Super Unimix. Currently WFP maintains a
listing of blended foods that are acceptable.
The United States contributes over 70 percent of the blended foods provided through WFP. Corn Soy Blend (CSB)* and to much lesser extent Wheat Soy Blend (WSB) are provided by the U.S. through the Title II PL 480 programme. The current fortification levels of CSB and WSB are based on original formulations developed in the 1960s. Eleven vitamins and six minerals were added at levels which were to provide at least half of the National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council (NAS-NRC) Recommended Dietary Allowances for a one to three year old child. Vitamin B 12 was added at a level to provide 100 percent of the RDA at that time. Some changes have been made to the fortification levels of CSB since the original formulations were developed. These have included increasing the levels of added vitamin A, changing the source of calcium from calcium sulfate to TCP (tricalcium phosphate), and using a more stable form of vitamin C. In addition, recommendations have been made to
change the level and source of iron, however agreement has not yet been reached to implement suggested changes. Current levels of vitamins and minerals added CSB are listed in Table 2. Most blended foods are produced under batch process conditions. Dry ingredients are preblended together. Vitamin and mineral premixes are added individually and then blended for uniform distribution (Barret and Ranum, 1985).
* Although the term CSB is sometimes used generically to refer to all blended foods, in this paper CSB refers specifically to the blended food formulated in accordance with the USDA specifications and made available through the Title II PL 480 program.
The European Commission provides a precooked cereal based weaning food suitable for infants and young children 4 months and older. Levels of vitamins and minerals in the final product are specified as listed in Table 2.
Blended foods have been used primarily as supplementary food for young children and pregnant and lactating women through Maternal and Child Health programmes. Over 50 percent of the blended foods provided through the PL 480 Title II programme has been used by the large Integrated Child Development Service (ICDS) programme in India. Originally designed to provide approximate 25 percent of the energy of young children and pregnant and lactating women, more recently blended foods have been considered for distribution in general rations for emergency situations and refugee feeding.
Although food fortification is not to be considered a universal panacea in alleviating nutritional deficiencies among refugees, it has been considered to be important in the short term (Henry and Seaman, 1992). Several recent workshops and meetings have highlighted the importance as well as some of the limitations of fortification of food aid commodities for these purposes (Golden, 1995; Toole, 1994; ACC/SCN, 1994; ACC/SCN 1993, Refugees Studies Program, 1991). WFP has developed ration and food aid requirements which include the recommendation that a suitable blended food, fortified with essential vitamins and minerals be included wherever possible when fresh foods are lacking (WFP, 1991). Blended foods are to be obtained locally in some countries (e.g. faffa in Ethiopia) or imported as food aid. In a recent Memorandum of Understanding between UNHCR and WFP, it is stated that "to assist in preventing micronutrient deficiencies, WFP will provide a micronutrient fortified
blended foods to populations wholly dependent on food aid" (WFP/UNHCR, 1994). WFP and UNHCR are in the process of revising a set of single definitive nutritional guidelines and are exploring mechanisms to provide blended foods including diversified donor supply, emergency stockpiling and increased local production in recipient countries.
Arriving at acceptable levels of fortification for blended foods is receiving a great deal of attention. UNICEF and WFP are currently engaged in a dialogue to best determine specifications for use of blended foods in emergency feeding programmes (D. AInwick/UNICEF. Personal communication, October 1995). A recent report submitted to the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) in response to a request by WFP provides a detailed discussion of key issues in establishing nutrient criteria for fortified blended foods to be used in refugee feeding programmes, including using nutrient density as a basis for fortification levels (Beaton, 1994). A subsequent CIDA report points out that although blended foods originally designed for feeding programmes for young children have been used in refugee feeding programs with apparent benefits in preventing outbreaks of classical deficiencies such as scurvy and pellagra, the current composition of these foods could be better tailored
to the overall nutrient needs of the refugee population. Local fortification using centralized mills or at the community-level or if needed the household level using a fortification mix is recommended. This is viewed as more cost-effective than importing costly fortified blended commodities, with the associated high costs of packaging and transport. Costs of local milling and processing are also examined. The report notes that local milling capacity to support refugee feeding in Africa needs to be assessed and that some work is currently underway by FAO, the Micronutrient Initiatives programme and UNICEF to gather this information (Beaton, 1995). Consideration of local fortification and enrichment in special circumstances under carefully controlled conditions was recommended in the review made of the PL 480 Title II programme (Combs, et al, 1994).
A recent meeting convened by the Action International Contre la Faim (AICF) also examined ways of improving the micronutrient content of supplementary foods, particularly for refugees (Golden, 1995). This group noted that numerous blended foods using various vitamin and mineral formulations have been used in supplementary feeding programmes with very little information available on the rationale for the formulations used or evaluations of the products. The meeting agreed that it is important to develop the capacity of regional food industries to boost the production of high quality blended foods in areas where food crisis are likely to occur however, in the first few months of emergency operations imported foods would still be required (Golden, 1995).
Processed Cereal
Generally, processed cereal food aid commodities include wheat flour, cornmeal, bulgur, rice, and soy-fortified cereals (eg. bulgur, cornmeal, sorghum). Processed cereals are used for distribution in food-for-work programs, maternal and child health programs and emergency relief. Over 50 percent of the processed cereals provided through the PL 480 Title II were used for emergency programmes in 1993.
Wheat flour made available through PL 480 Title II is enriched in accordance with standards of identity for enriched wheat flour established by the US Food and Drug Administration. The standard of identity for enriched wheat flour specifies minimum and maximum levels of iron, thiamin, riboflavin and niacin per pound of flour. In addition to the these nutrients, vitamin A and calcium are added according to the USDA/ASCS specifications.
Under the PL 480 Title II programme other processed cereals (except rice) are also fortified with iron, calcium, thiamin, niacin, riboflavin and vitamin A. These nutrients are added in the form of an "enrichment ingredient" mix as specified in the USDA announcements. Soy-fortified cereals including soy-fortified bulgur, cornmeal, sorghum grits, wheat flour, and instant corn soy masa flour are also fortified with the "enrichment ingredient" premix. See Table 1.
Vegetable Oil
Compared to fortifying blended foods with vitamin A, fortification of vegetable oil is less costly and studies indicate that vitamin A added to vegetable is more stable. Sweden was the first country to provide vegetable oil fortified with vitamin A. Recently Canada has also made available to WFP cannola oil fortified with vitamin A. Vegetable oil distributed through the Title II programme is used primarily for emergency programs, and maternal and child health programmes. Approximately 20 percent of the vegetable oil distributed in the Title II programme is monetized. Title II vegetable oil is not currently fortified with vitamin A, although recommendations to do so have been made. (Combs, et. al, 1994).
High Protein Biscuits
Levels of essential vitamins and minerals in high protein biscuits provided by the EC are specified. The biscuits made of cereals, vegetable fats, sugar, vegetable or diary proteins, dried milk and added vitamins and minerals are to provide 60-80 percent of the RDA per 100 grams.
Dried Skim Milk Powder
Current WFP policy regarding the use of dried skim milk powder in non dairy development projects is that it must contain vitamin A. UNHCR policy is to accept, supply and distribute dried skim milk only if it has been fortified with vitamin A. Non fat dry milk shipped under the Title II programme of PL 480 contains vitamins A and Vitamin D. Skimmed milk powder made available through the EC must contain vitamin A and D.
Salt
It is UN policy that all salt programmed for food aid and distributed to beneficiaries has to be iodine fortified. Only iodized salt is purchased and accepted from donors. (WFP Memorandum, 1994b).
Whole Grains
Procedures exist to enhance the micronutrient content of whole grains and milled rice. However because of disadvantages in using whole grains as a vehicle for fortification and substantial costs, whole grain fortification has not been recommended for food aid programmes. (Combs, et. al, 1994).
Costs and Nutritional Impact of Fortification of Food Aid
The costs of enrichment and fortification ingredients used for PL 480 Tide II commodities was found to be relatively low compared to the total value of the commodities (Combs, et. al, 1994). It was estimated that the costs for the fortificant ingredients were less than 2.5 and 5.0 percent of the value of the processed cereal and blended foods, respectively. However, these costs only reflect the costs of the fortificants, other costs associated with the enrichment, including blending, packaging, and quality control measures were not included in these estimates.
Ideally food stuffs should be available to the target groups which can provide a wide range of naturally occurring essential nutrients. When this is not possible, fortification becomes an option. Supplementation for high risk groups may still be needed. For example, it is recognized that fortified food stuffs cannot be expected to provide the levels required to meet the increased nutrient needs of pregnant and lactating women. The role that fortified food commodities plays in preventing and controlling micronutrient deficiencies may be direct through increased consumption of micronutrient rich foods or indirect through transfer of income to poor people. In refugee feeding programs, fortification can play an important role reducing the risk of micronutrient deficiencies (Henry and Seaman, 1992; Toole 1992).
Few impact studies have been conducted, although it is generally recognized that providing increased levels of micronutrients known to be limited in the diets of recipients will contribute to improved micronutrient status. Recently, fortification of maize meal with niacin was shown to be effective in controlling pellagra in Malawi (Toole, 1994). To estimate the micronutrient contribution made by fortified commodities, calculations have been made based on nutrient content of various enriched and fortified foods consumed in recommended amounts within a locally available diet (Beaton, 1995; Combs, 1994; Toole, 1994). Calculations indicate that fortified blended foods make an important contribution towards meeting the recommended nutrient allowances for targeted groups (young children, pregnant and lactating women, and refugees) for essential nutrients which would otherwise be limiting in a cereal based diet. Information on actual food intakes is limited however, and it is
recognized that fortified foods targeted for consumption by various vulnerable groups are shared among other family members or may be traded.
Quality Assurance and Quality Control Measures
At the ICN it was recognized that some of the main concerns of food fortification activities are related to technical and distribution problems, and the lack of adequate legislation and effective control systems for the fortification process (FAO/WHO, 1992b). Establishing an effective quality assurance programme relevant for food aid programs appears to be a particular challenge. It is often not clear who is responsible and at what point for ensuring the micronutrient quality of the rations provided. Ideally, quality control measures for levels of micronutrients added to fortified and enriched commodities would be in place from point of manufacture of vitamin/mineral premixes, through processing, blending, packaging, transport, storage and distribution to consumption of the particular fortified commodity.
Quality control measures are included in the USDA announcements for the various types of food purchased and include or reference all requirements that contractors must meet. One of the requirements is that all products must be inspected at the contractor's facility . USDA publishes the policies and procedures for sampling, inspecting and certifying processed commodities along with the routine tests required and fees (USDA, 1994). Routine laboratory tests including moisture and ash analyses are specified for each commodity. "Spot" tests are performed on fortified commodities to determine the presence of iron in those commodities with added iron. Analyses are also performed to determine the presence of calcium in those products with added calcium, if the calcium source is not TCP. Some studies on nutrient stability have indicated that poor blending of the premix into the processed cereal may be responsible for varying levels of micronutrients in the final product (Combs, et
al, 1994). USDA is currently examining additional measures which may be taken to assess the fortification and enrichment levels of other added nutrients.
Conformity to vitamin content requirements of skimmed milk powder provided by the EC is to be monitored using reference methods established within Commission Directives for vitamin A content and AOAC methods for vitamin D.
In addition to analyzing micronutrient content, monitoring the moisture content of fortified commodities is also important to assess the potential for loss of micronutrients. Low moisture content of foods retards losses in the micronutrients, spoilage from molds and insects, and adverse changes in flavor and color. USDA announcements specify that the moisture content of CSB should not exceed 10 percent. Studies have indicated that low moisture content can be accomplished and it has been recommended to keep moisture of blended foods at 8.5 percent or less (Combs, et. al, 1994). The specifications by the EC for cereal based weaning food require that the moisture content be governed by good manufacturing practices to ensure minimum nutritive loss and to prevent the multiplication of microorganisms. (Official Journal of the European Communities, 1991).
Criteria for Fortification of Food Aid and Limiting Factors
Criteria for effective food fortification in food aid programmes should be based on criteria similar to that for general food fortification: These have been identified as *:
* Taken from joint statement issued by the Council on Food and Nutrition of the American Medical Association and the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Research Council. Improvement of the Nutritional Quality of Food. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 205:868-869
i) The intake of the nutrient is below the desirable level in the diets of a significant number of people.
ii) The food used to supply the nutrient is likely to be consumed in quantities that will make a significant contribution to the diet of the population in need.
iii) The addition of the nutrient is not likely to create an imbalance of essential nutrients
iv) The nutrient is stable under proper conditions of storage and use.
v) The nutrient is physiologically available from the food.
vi) There is reasonable assurance against excessive intake to a level of toxicity.
The above criteria related to efficacy, nutrient stability, safety and quality assurance are complicated by a number of limiting factors associated with food aid programs. These include:
1. Varying uses of a given fortified commodity: The use of a particular fortified food aid commodity may vary by programme. Logistically, it is difficult for large food donors to tailor similar fortified commodities for a given target group. For example, under the PL 480 Title II programme most vegetable oil is used in emergency and MCH programmes but approximately 20 percent is monetized. Although fortification of oil used in monetized programs may not be warranted, it is not considered feasible to handle both fortified and unfortified oil since diversions of food stuffs in emergency situation is common. Fortified foods targeted for one specific group may be diverted to another programme or population group with varying needs.
2. Unknown consumption levels of various food aid commodities: Estimates of actual intakes of the various fortified commodities are needed to better determine acceptable and safe levels of various fortificants. Given the lack of readily available information on consumption of various food aid commodities, assumptions have been made for the actual intakes.
3. Lack of information on nutrient stability for specific food aid commodities under varying storage/relative humidity conditions, and preparation methods: Additional information is needed on the stability of added nutrients, particularly vitamins A and C. Studies conducted on nutrient stability and interactions, and sensory evaluation are limited for fortified food aid commodities.
4. Varying fortification/enrichment policies and practices by donor countries: Similar commodities used for the same programme may or may not be fortified depending on the practices of the food donor country. Lack of consistency in various agency guidelines and donor policies make planning programmes difficult particularly when multiple sources of commodities are used in combination to meet needs of target groups such as in emergency feeding of refugees or displaced persons.
5. Poor bioavailability of added nutrients in diets of food aid recipients: Since cereal grains high in phytates are often the primary source of calories for food aid recipients the bioavailability of nutrients, particularly of iron may be limited. Increased rates of parasitic infections and other infections and illnesses compromise the nutritional status of beneficiaries and also reduce the absorption and availability of added nutrients. Consideration of these factors have been taken into account in some recent calculations for fortification levels in supplementary foods to be used by moderately malnourished persons (Golden, 1995). Bioavailability issues will effect the selection of the most appropriate fortificant.
6. Costs associated with delivering micronutrients through processed fortified food commodities: Although the costs of fortificant ingredients is relatively low compared to the overall cost of processed cereals, costs of packaging, labeling, handling, and appropriate quality control measures needs to be considered in evaluating the costs of fortification as an effective means to provide limiting nutrients in the diets of vulnerable groups. As discussed earlier, local fortification may reduce these costs.
Need for International Guidelines
As mentioned earlier, some guidelines exist for enrichment of food commodities including the addition of vitamin A to dried nonfat milk and the addition of iodine to salt. WFP provides some guidance on appropriate levels of nutrients to be added to blended foods produced locally. Codex Guidelines for Formulated Supplementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children serve as a basis for the UNIMIX specifications. Product specifications have also been developed by UNICEF for a precooked fortified blended food known as "Super UNIMIX" which has been manufactured in Kenya for use in Somalia. UNICEF and WFP are currently engaged in discussions to revise nutrient specifications for blended foods. There are, however no overall international guidelines for the enrichment and fortification of food aid commodities.
The role of an FAO/WHO Expert Panel or existing Codex Committees in establishing guidelines for food aid commodities needs be examined. The Codex Alimentarius Commission was established to implement the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme with the purpose to protect the health of the consumer and to ensure fair practices in food trade. The various specialized Committees of the Commission have established more than 200 individual commodity food standards and numerous guidelines. Codex is cited as the international organization whose standards, guidelines, and recommendations should be the basis for harmonizing food quality and safety measures. Under the recent GATT agreement. Codex standards and guidelines are recognized as a trade reference by the World Trade Organization. Guidelines established for food aid commodities should not impinge on the ability of food donors to respond to emergency requests.
Some of the ongoing work by Codex committees may contribute to efforts to establish international guidelines for optional fortification of various food aid commodities, although the relevance of existing standards to food aid commodities have not been specifically discussed by Codex committees (S. Doyran/FAO. Personal communication. September, 1995). The 19th Session of the CAC(1991) adopted the Guidelines on Formulated Supplementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children, with the objective of facilitating the preparation of supplementary foods from locally available material. Processed cereal-based foods are best known and most widely used. The Guidelines included guidance on technical nutritional aspects including the addition of vitamins and minerals. Reference daily requirements for older infants and young children are provided in the guideline. In addition, a Standard for Processed Cereal-Based Foods (CODEX STAN 74-1981) has been developed for foods prepared
essentially from one or more cereals and/or starchy root products that are used as supplementary foods. Vitamins and minerals and iodized salt are to be added in conformity with national legislation where the product is sold. To avoid overlap between the Guideline and the Standard, there was discussion to integrate the Guideline into a single Standard. The Commission however, later proposed that they remain separate and that the Standard for Processed Cereal Based Foods be revised.
Evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food additives may also effect the use of fortificants. Most recently the provisional use of NaFeEDTA has been viewed as an opportunity to encourage the use of this fortificant more widely in food aid commodities (INACG, 1993).
Developing international guidelines would provide food donors with guidance on acceptable and safe enrichment and fortification practices. Guidelines could aim to encourage similar ranges of fortification levels for food aid commodities to be used for similar purposes and would facilitate their proper use. The relevance of existing Codex guidelines and standards including those related to use of food additives should be identified and in particular terminology in use should be clarified. Providing criteria for labeling of enriched and fortified food aid products that is appropriate for areas receiving commodities would be helpful. Guidelines on minimum acceptable quality control measures to assure presence of added nutrients, ie "spot tests" or other semi-quantitative measures could also be provided. Increased costs associated with establishing guidelines would need to be considered. For example, costs associated with changes in processing, labeling, packaging and technical
oversight would need to be evaluated. Possible constraints that guidelines may place on food donors also need to be examined to avoid any unnecessary restrictions on current food donor policy.
Conclusion
Increased attention is being given to fortification of food aid commodities, particularly for foods targeted for emergency and refugee feeding. Shrinking resources allocated for international development is driving discussions on determining the most cost effective means to improve the micronutrient status of vulnerable groups and assessing the role that food aid may play. As the need for emergency food aid increases, there will be greater significance to establishing criteria for fortification of these commodities for both imported and locally fortified commodities. Decisions on fortification and enrichment practices would be facilitated with better information than is currently available on the use of various commodities. Much more attention needs to paid to improving quality control measures to better assure the micronutrient content in the final product.
Acknowledgements: The writer would like to acknowledge the following persons providing information/background reports for this paper: Anne-Marie De Backer, European Commission; Pieter Dijkhuizen, World Food Programme; Selma Doyran, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme; David AInwick, UNICEF; Robert Moore, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Washington DC; Sonya Rabeneck, Canadian International Development Agency; Peter Ranum, Atochem, Buffalo NY; John Sharpe, USDA/FGIS, Washington DC. The writer also thanks Gerald F. Combs Sr., University of Southern Mississippi, who kindly provided comments for the paper. The writer however, accepts full responsibility for interpretations and recommendations offered.
References
ACC/SCN, 1995. Report on Workshop on the Improvement of the Nutrition of Refugees and Displaced People in Africa. Machakos, Kenya. 5-7 December 1994. Report pending.
ACC/SCN Nutritional Issues in Food Aid. Papers from Symposium held at the ACC/SCN 19th Session hosted by the World Food Programme, Rome 24-25 February 1992. ACC/SCN Symposium Report. Nutrition Policy Discussion Paper No. 12. Geneva. August 1993.
Barrett, F. and P. Ranum. 1985. Wheat and Blended Cereals in Iron Fortification of Foods, edited by F. Clydesdale and K. Wiemer, Academic Press, Inc. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Pub. New York.
Beaton, G.H.. 1994. Nutritional Quality Criteria in Refugee Feeding. March 1994. Report prepared for CIDA.
Beaton, G.H. 1995. Fortification of Foods for Refugee Feeding. Final Report to the Canadian International Development Agency. August 1995.
Combs, G. F. 1967. Development of a supplementary food mixture (CSM) for children. Protein Advisory Group Bulletin 7. pp. 15-24.
Combs, G., Dexter, P., Horton S. 1994. Micronutrient Fortification and Enrichment of PL 480 Title II Commodities: Recommendations for Improvement. Technical Review Paper. November 1994. Prepared for USAID Contract No. HRN-5122-C-00-3025-00 by the OMNI project.
European Commission. Official Journal of the European Communities No C 114 of 29 April 1991. Fifth Amendment to the Commission communication on the characteristics of products to be supplied as food aid. 93/C 34/03.
European Commission. 1994. European Community Food Aid. Activity Report 94. Directorate General for Development - Food Aid Unit. EC DGVIII/B/I. Brussels.
FAO/WHO. 1992a. World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition. International Conference on Nutrition. FAO. Rome.
FAO/WHO. 1992b. Major Issues for Nutrition Strategies: Preventing Specific Micronutrient Deficiencies. Prepared for the International Conference on Nutrition. FAO. Rome.
FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius. Guidelines on Formulated Supplementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children. CAC-GL 08-1991. Codex Alimentarius, Volume 4 - 1993.
FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius. Codex Standard for Processed Cereal-Based Foods for infants and Children. CODEX STAN 74-1981. Codex Alimentarius, Volume 4 - 1993.
Golden, M.H.N., A. Breind, and Y. Grellety. 1995. Report of meeting on supplementary feeding programmes with particular reference to refugee populations. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 49:137-145.
Henry, C.J.K. and J. Seaman,. 1992. The Micronutrient Fortification of Refugee Rations to Prevent Nutritional Deficiencies in Refugee Diets. Journal of Refugee Studies. Vol. 5. No. 3/4. pp 359-367.
INACG, 1993. International Nutritional Anaemia Consultative Group. A Report of the International Nutritional Anemia Consultative Group. Iron EDTA for Food fortification.
The Nutrition Foundation. Washington, DC. September 1993.
Refugees Study Program. 1991. Report of the International Symposium. Responding to the Nutrition Crisis Among Refugees: The Need for New Approaches. Oxford, March 1991.
Toole, M.J. 1992. Micronutrient Deficiencies in Refugees. The Lancet. 339: pp 1214-1215.
Toole, M. 1994. Preventing Micronutrient Deficiency Diseases. Report submitted to Workshop on the Improvement of the Nutrition of Refugees and Displaced People in Africa. Background Paper #2. December 1994.
UNCHR/WFP. 1994. Memorandum of Understanding on Joint Working Arrangements for Refugee, Returnee and Internally Displaced Persons Feeding Operations. January 1994.
USDA Federal Grain Inspection Service. 1994. Processed Commodities Handbook. Washington DC August 1, 1994.
USAID/BHR 1994. World Food Day Report. The Presidents Report to the U.S. Congress. Washington, DC. October 16, 1994.
WFP/UNHCR. 1991. Guidelines for calculating Food Rations for Refugees. World Food Programme, Rome 1991.
WFP. 1990. Guidelines for the Use of Dried Milk Powder in All WFP-Assisted Projects and Operations. Memorandum 25 May 1990.
WFP. 1991. Food Aid in Emergencies. Book A: Policies and Principles. First Edition. September 1991.
WFP. 1994a. Annual Report 1994. Linking Relief with Development. Rome.
WFP. 1994b. Iodized salt. Memorandum. 21 November 1994.
WFP. 1995. The Food Aid Monitor - World Food Aid Flows, Number 25. Interfais (International Food Aid Information System). June 1995.
Annex 1.
Requirements for Effective Fortification in Food Aid Programmes
i) To what extent are foods fortified with micronutrients currently used in food aid programs and to what extent should they be used?
ii) What factors limit the use of food fortification in food aid programmes?
iii) Is fortification being used effectively to meet the nutrition needs of target populations. What procedures have been established to determine whether the micronutrient requirements of target populations are readily met?
iv) Does the existence of different fortification practices in various donor countries have a negative impact on the effective implementation of food aid programmes?
v) What quality assurance methods for fortified foods are required at various stages of the process, from manufacturer to consumption by the target population. To what extent are they in place?
vi) Would the development of international standards for fortified foods facilitate the more effective use of such foods in international food aid programmes. What problems might be envisaged in achieving this? vii) What further work needs to be done to optimize the use of food fortification in food aid programmes?
Table 1
Enriched and Fortified P.L. 480 Title II Commodities Shipped in 1993
Enrichment and Fortification Ingredients
Commodity Total (MT)
Vitamin A and Calcium
Vitamins A and D
Vitamin Premix(a)
Mineral Premix(b)
Enrichment Ingred.(c)
Processed Blended Foods
Corn soy milk
x (d)
x
Instant corn soy milk
x
x
Wheat soy milk
x
x
Wheat soy blend
x
x
Corn soy blend
x
x
Instant corn soy blend
x
x
N/A
Soy Fortified Cereal Foods
Soy-fortified bulgur
x
Soy-fortified cornmeal
x
Soy-fortified sorghum grits
x
Soy-fortified wheat flour
x
Soy-fortified rolled oats
Instant corn soy masa flour
x
Processed Foods - Other
Rice
Bulgur
x
Cornmeal
x
Wheat flour(e)
x
(e)
Rolled oats
Vegetable oil
Whole grains
Corn
Wheat
Sorghum
Dairy Products
Nonfat dried milk
x
Dried Beans/Pea
Beans
Peas
Lentils
TOTAL SHIPPED
Adapted and updated from Table 2.7 in (Combs, et. al, 1994)
Source: USDA/ASCS Specifications - given in Announcements, February 1994, and community shipment data from USAID/BHR.
(a) "Vitamin Premix" includes thiamine, riboflavin, vitamin C (stabilized ethyl-cellulose coated), pyridoxine, niacin, pantolhenate, folic acid, vitamin B-12, vitamins A (palmitate-stabilized), D and E.
(b) 'Mineral Mix" includes calcium, phosphate, zinc, iron, and iodine in iodized salt.
(c) "Enrichment ingredients' include vitamin A, iron (fumarate), calcium, thiamine, niacin, and riboflavin.
(d) "x" indicates the addition of nutrients or premix.
(e) Wheat flour used in PL 480 Title II must be enriched in accordance with latest standards of identity for enriched wheat flour, ie iron, thiamin, riboflavin and niacin are added at levels which are similar to levels provided in the enrichment ingredients specified by USDA/ASCS. In addition, USDA/ASCS specifies that calcium and vitamin A must be added.
Table 2: Levels of Vitamins and Minerals in Blended Foods (per l00g dry wt.)
CSB(a)
UNIMIX(b)
EC(c)
Vitamin A (IU)
250-750 mcg
Vitamin D (IU)
5-15 mcg
Vitamin E (mg)
Vitamin C (mg)
20 (min.)
Thiamine (mg)
0.5 (min.)
Riboflavin (mg)
0.3 (min.)
Vitamin B6 (mcg)
0.3 (min.)
Niacin (mg)
6 (min.)
Panto. Acid (mcg)
Folic Acid (mcg)
25 (min.)
Vitamin B12 (mcg)
0.7 (min.)
Calcium (mg)
600 (min.)
Phosphorus (mg)
Iron (mg)
10 (min.)
Zinc (mg)
10 (min.)
Iodine (mcg)
Sodium (mg)
300 (max.)
Source:
(a) Corn Soy Blend. USDA/ASCS specifications for vitamin/mineral content of premix added to CSB. Calculations made from mg/pound to mg/100 grams are taken from Combs, et al (1994). Product contains approximately 376 Kcal per 100 g.
(b) Information provided by WFP. Product Specification for Precooked Fortified Blended Food. Specifications for 'UNIMIX" blended foods ordered by UNHCR/UNICEF/WFP, based on providing at least 2/3 of the reference daily requirements listed in CODEX Guidelines on Formulated Supplementary Foods for Older Infants and Young Children. Product to contain not less than 400 Kcal per 100 g.
(c) European Community - Cereal Based Weaning Food - for infants and young children 4 months and older. Official Journal of the European Communities. No. C 114 of 29 April 1991. 5th Amendment to Commission communication on the characteristics of products to be supplied as food aid (93/C 34/03). Final product is to contain levels listed.
<section>e</section>
ANNEX 7 - LEGISLATION PERTAINING TO FOOD FORTIFICATION
Tables 1-4 were compiled mainly from information solicited by facsimiled inquiry of the relevant authorities in various countries. Information included in the tables regarding existing micronutrient deficiencies and dietary patterns were obtained from country papers prepared for the ICN conference held in 1992. In cases where other sources were used for legislation information, this has been noted.
Table 1: Review of Legislation Pertaining to Salt lodisation
COUNTRY
LEVEL OF IODINE (ppm)
STATUS
COMPOUNDS USED
*Argentina
KIO[3]
Bolivia
Mandatory
KIO[3]/KI
*Brazil
Mandatory
KIO[3]/KI
Colombia
Mandatory
KI
Costa Rica
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Ecuador
Mandatory
KI
El Salvador
Mandatory
KIO[3]
*Guatemala
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Haiti
No Legislation
Honduras
Mandatory
KIO[3]
*Mexico
KI
*Nicaragua
KIO[3]
*Panama
KIO[3]
*Paraguay
KIO[3]
Peru
KIO[3]/KI
Uruguay
Mandatory
KIO[3]
*Venezuela
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Canada
Mandatory
KI
USA
Voluntary
KI
**Austria
Mandatory (for complete salt)
KI
**Finland
Voluntary
KI
**France
Voluntary
Nal
Germany
Voluntary
NaIO[3]/KIO[3]
**Greece
Voluntary
KI
Hungary
Voluntary
KI
Italy
KI
**Netherlands
KIO[3]/KI
Norway
Voluntary
**Poland
Voluntary
KI
**Spain
Voluntary
Sweden
Voluntary
NaI/KI
**Switzerland
Mandatory
KI
UK
Voluntary
Angola
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Bhutan
Mandatory
Central African Republic
KIO[3], CaIO[3], KI
Cote D'lvoire
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Ethiopia
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Gambia
Mandatory
Kenya
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Lesotho
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Malawi
Mandatory
Maurtania
Morocco
KIO[3]
Nigeria
Mandatory
KI
South Africa
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Tanzania
Mandatory
Zambia
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Iran
Mandat. by 12/95
Lebanon
Mandatory
KIO[3]/KI
Myanmar
10% of production must be iodised
Pakistan
Leg. in process to make mandatory
KIO[3]
Sri Lanka
Voluntary
Thailand
Mandatory
KIO[3]
Turkey
Voluntary
Vietnam
Mandatory
Australia
Voluntary
1 Values represent required levels at production, retail, consumer;
^2 Values represent required levels at production and retail
*Source-Dunn et al., 1985; **Source-du Bois, 1991.
Table 2: Review of Legislation Pertaining to Rice Fortification
COUNTRY
WIDELY USED
STATUS OF FORT.
LEG. ON RICE FORT.
m -NUT DEF.
Angola
Y
No legislation
I, Fe, vit A
Burkina Faso
Non-trad.
Voluntary
No legislation
vit A, Fe, I
Cote d'lvoire
Y
Voluntary
No legislation
Ethiopia
N
No legislation
vit A, Fe, I
Gambia
Y
No legislation
Fe, folate, I, Ca B[2], Vit A
Lesotho
N
Voluntary
No Legislation
I, Fe, niacin, vit A
Malawi
Voluntary
Must meet nutr. lab. Req.
Fe, vit A, I, niacin
Maurtania
Y
No Legislation
Fe, folate, Fe
Morroco
Y
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, I, vits A, D
Mozambique
Y
No legislation
Fe, I, vit A
Nigeria
Y
Voluntary
No legislation
South Africa
No legislation
Tanzania
Y
No Legislation
Fe, folate, I, Vit. A
Canada
Prohibited
Colombia
Y
Voluntary
1 serving of enriched food must contain 60-150% RDA
Fe, I, Ca, Vits A, B[1], B[2], C, niacin
Costa Rica
Y
Voluntary
No Legislation
Fe, I
Cuba
Y
Voluntary
No Legislation
Vits A, C, B[1], Fe
El Salvador
Y
No legislation - Is not fortified
Fe, Vit A, I
Haiti
No legislation
Peru
Voluntary
No legislation
Uruguay
No legislation
Vit D, Fe, I
Philippines
Y
Voluntary
>4.4 mg B[1], >35.2 mg niacin, >28.6 mg Fe (per kg enriched rice)
Fe, I, Vits A, B[1]. B[2]
Singapore
Voluntary
one serving must contain at least 50% of RDA
Sri Lanka
Y
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Thailand
Y
Voluntary
>4.0 mg [B1], 3.0 mg[ B2], 37 mg niacin. Others may be permitted
Turkey
Y
Voluntary
in accordance with Codex
Fe, I, Ca, Vits C, D, B[2], B[6]
Vietnam
Y
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Australia
Prohibited
New Zealand
Prohibited
(Review of legislation pertaining to m -nutrient addition to foods is under way)
Finland
Prohibited
Only restoration allowed
Hungary
Voluntary
1 serving must contain > ^1/[3] RDA
Norway
Prohibited
Sweden
May be allowed with special permission
UK
Voluntary
Only covered by food safety act - must be safe
Table 3: Review of Legislation Pertaining to Wheat Flour Fortification
COUNTRY
WIDELY CONSUMED
STATUS
LEG. ON WHEAT FLOUR FORTIFICATION
m -NUT DEF.
Angola
Y
No legislation
Vit A, I, Fe
Burkina Faso
Non-trad
Voluntary
No legislation
Vit A, I, Fe
Cote D'lvoire
N
Voluntary
No legislation
Vits A, C, I
Ethiopia
N
Draft standard proposal exists
vit A, Fe, I
Gambia
N
No legislation
Fe, folate, I, Ca, B[2]
Lesotho
Y
Voluntary
No spec. legislation
I, Fe, niacin, Vit A
Malawi
Voluntary
Must meet nutr. Labelling requirement
Fe, I, Vit A, niacin
Maurtania
N
No legislation
Fe, folate, I
Morocco
Y
No legislation
Fe, I, Vits A
Mozambique
Y
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
South Africa
No legislation
Tanzania
N
No legislation
Fe, folate, I, Vit A
Canada
Y
Mandatory
(mg/kg) B[1] 4.4-7.7; B[2 ]2.7-4.8; Niacin 35-64; Fe 29-43. The following are voluntary; pantothenic acid 10-13; B[6] 2.5-3.1; folate 0.4-0.5; Ca 1100-1400; Mg 1500-1900
Bolivia
Y
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Costa Rica
Y
No legislation
Fe, I
Cuba
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, Ca, Vits B,. C, A
Ecuador
Voluntary
(mg/kg)B[1]- >2.0,B[2]-> 2.6, niacin - > 35.3, Fe- >24..0, Ca->1,100.
El Salvador
N
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Haiti
No legislation
Honduras
N
Voluntary
(mg/kg) B[1] - 4.4, B[2] -2.6, niacin - 35.2, Fe -28.7, Ca- 1100.
Fe, I, Vit A
Peru
No legislation
Uruguay
Y
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit D
Lebanon
Y
Prohibited
Pakistan
Y
No legislation
Fe, I, B-vits.
Philippines
N
Voluntary
Rec. addition of Fe and B vits to 1/3 of RDA
Fe, I, vits A, B[1], B[2], Ca Vit C
Singapore
Y
Voluntary
If fortified, 1 serving must contain 50% of RDA of added nutrients
Sri Lanka
Y
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Turkey
Y
Voluntary
No legislation (ref Codex)
Fe, I, Ca, Vits B[2], B[6], C, D
Vietnam
Y
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Australia
Y
Voluntary^1
(mg/kg) Thiamine ->6.4; (mg/kg)^2 B[1]-<15; B[2]-11.; niacin-70; B[6]-11; E-72; folate-2.9; Fe-86; Mg-2300; Zn-52
New Zealand
Prohibited
Review of leg. on nut. addition to foods is being undertaken.
Finland
Prohibited
(restoration allowed)
Hungary
Voluntary
1 serving must contain 1/3 of RDA
Malta
Y
Voluntary
Mandatory for brown or whole meal flour. (mg/kg) B[1], B[2] - 2.4; niacin - 16.0; Fe - 16.5
Norway
Prohibited
Sweden
Voluntary
(mg/kg) 4-8 thiamine HCl 1.5-3 B[2], 40-80 nicotinic acid, 3.5-7 pyridoxine HCl, 65-90 Fe.
Switzerland
Voluntary
(mg/kg) 4.4 - B[1], 2.0 -B[2], 50 - niacin, 29 - Fe.
UK
Voluntary
(mg/Kg)>2.4-B[1], 16-niacin, 16.5 - Fe, 940 to 1560 - Ca.
1 Mandatory for thiamine
^2 Maximum claim allowed
Table 4: Review of Legislation Pertaining to Margarine Fortification
COUNTRY
STATUS
LEG. ON MARGARINE FORTIF.
m -NUT DEF.
Angola
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Burkina Faso
No legislation
Vit A, Fe, I
Cote D'Ivoire
Voluntary
No legislation - ref. Codex
Ethiopia
Voluntary
There exists a draft std. proposal
Vit A, Fe, I
Gambia
No legislation
Fe, folate, I, Vits A. B[2]. C
Lesotho
Voluntary
No specific legislation - ref. Codex
Fe, I, Vit A, niacin
Malawi
Voluntary
(m g/l00g) 810-990 Vit A, 5.2-8.8 Vit D
Fe, I, Vit A, niacin
Maurtania
Fe, folate, I
Morocco
Voluntary
(m g/100g) 600-900 Vit A; 6.25-7.5 Vit D; 1-2 IU Vit E
Fe, I, Vit A, D
Mozambique
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Nigeria
Voluntary
No specific legislation - ref. Codex
Fe, I, Vit A D
South Africa
No legislation
Tanzania
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, folate, I, Vit A
Canada
Mandatory
(m g/l00g)> 1000 Vit A; 13.3 Vit D; Voluntary addn of 0.6 IU Vit E/g linoleic acid
Colombia
Mandatory
(m g/l00g) 600-900 Vit A; 5-10 Vit D
Ca, Fe, I, Vits A, B[1], B[2], C, niacin
Cuba
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, Vits A, B[1], C
Ecuador
Mandatory
(m g/100g) 600-900 Vit A; 5-10 Vit D
El Salvador
Voluntary
Vit A - according to ???
Fe, I, Vit A
Haiti
No legislation
Honduras
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Peru
No legislation
Uruguay
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit D
Myanmar
No legislation
Pakistan
Mandatory
(m g/100g) - Vit. A; Vit. D may be added
Fe, I, B-vits.
Philippines
Voluntary
585 m g/100g Vit A. Other vits may be added with permission.
Fe, I, vit A, B[1], B[2]
Sri Lanka
Voluntary
(m g/100) 1000 - Vit A; 7.5 - Vit D
Fe, I, Vit A
Thailand
No legislation
Turkey
Voluntary
No legislation - ref. Codex
Fe, I, Ca, Vits B[3], B[6], C, D.
Vietnam
Voluntary
No legislation
Fe, I, Vit A
Australia
Mandatory
(m g/100g) >850 - vit A; >5.5 -vit D.
New Zealand
Voluntary
Vits A and D permitted
Finland
Voluntary
(m g/100g) 500-1000 Vit A; 5-10 Vit D
Hungary
Voluntary
1 serving must contain > 1/3 RDA
Malta
Voluntary
natural and synthetic tocopherols -not limited; Ascorbyl palmitate/stearate < 500 ppm
Norway
Voluntary (may become mandatory)
(m g/100g) 900 - Vit A; 8 - Vit D
Sweden
Mandatory
(m g/100g) 900 - 1500 Vit A; 7.5 -10 Vit D
UK
Mandatory
(m g/100g) 800 - 1000 Vit A; 7.05 -8.82 Vit D
<section>f</section>
FAO TECHNICAL PAPERS
FAO FOOD AND NUTRITION PAPERS
1/1 Review of food consumption surveys 1977 - Vol. 1. Europe, North America, Oceania, 1977 (E)
1/2 Review of food consumption surveys 1977 - Vol. 2. Africa, Latin America, Near East, Far East, 1979(E)
2 Report of the joint FAO/WHO/UNEP conference on mycotoxins, 1977 (E F S)
3 Report of a joint FAO/WHO expert consultation on dietary fats and oils in human nutrition, 1977 (E F S)
4 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of thickening agents, anticaking agents, antimicrobials, antioxidants and emulsifiers, 1978 (E)
5 JECFA - guide to specifications, 1978 (E F)
5 Rev. 1 JECFA - guide to specifications, 1983 (E F)
5 Rev. 2 JECFA - guide to specifications, 1991 (E)
6 The feeding of workers in developing countries, 1976 (ES)
7 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of food colours, enzyme preparations and other food additives, 1978 (E F)
8 Women in food production, food handling and nutrition, 1979 (E F S)
9 Arsenic and tin in foods: reviews of commonly used methods of analysis, 1979 (E)
10 Prevention of mycotoxins, 1979 (E F S)
11 The economic value of breast-feeding, 1979 (E F)
12 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of food colours, flavouring agents and other food additives, 1979(E F)
13 Perspective on mycotoxins, 1979 (E F S)
14 Manuals of food quality control:
14/1 Food control laboratory, 1979 (Ar E)
14/1 Rev.1 The food control laboratory, 1986 (E)
14/2 Additives, contaminants, techniques, 1980 (E)
14/3 Commodities, 1979 (E)
14/4 Microbiological analysis, 1979 (E F S)
14/5 Food inspection, 1981 (Ar E) (Rev. 1984, E S)
14/6 Food for export, 1979 (E S)
14/6 Rev.1 Food for export, 1990 (E S)
14/7 Food analysis: general techniques, additives, contaminants and composition, 1986 (C E)
14/8 Food analysis: quality, adulteration and tests of identity, 1986 (E)
14/9 Introduction to food sampling, 1988 (Ar C E F S)
14/10 Training in mycotoxins analysis, 1990 (E S)
14/11 Management of food control programmes, 1991 (E)
14/12 Quality assurance in the food control microbiological laboratory, 1991 (E)
14/13 Pesticide residue analysis in the food control laboratory, 1993 (E F)
14/14 Quality assurance in the food control chemical laboratory, 1993 (E)
14/15 Imported food inspection, 1993 (E)
14/16 Radionuclides in food, 1994 (E)
15 Carbohydrates in human nutrition, 1980 (E F S)
16 Analysis of food consumption survey data for developing countries, 1980 (E F S)
17 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of sweetening agents, emulsifying agents, flavouring agents and other food additives, 1980 (E F)
18 Bibliography of food consumption surveys, 1981 (E)
18 Rev. 1 Bibliography of food consumption surveys, 1984 (E)
18 Rev. 2 Bibliography of food consumption surveys, 1987(E)
18 Rev. 3 Bibliography of food consumption surveys, 1990 (E)
19 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of carrier solvents, emulsifiers and stabilizers, enzyme preparations, flavouring agents, food colours, sweetening agents and other food additives, 1981 (E F)
20 Legumes in human nutrition, 1982 (E F S)
21 Mycotoxin surveillance - a guideline, 1982 (E)
22 Guidelines for agricultural training curricula in Africa, 1982 (E F)
23 Management of group feeding programmes, 1982(EFPS)
23 Rev.1 Food and nutrition in the management of group feeding programmes, 1993.(E F S)
24 Evaluation of nutrition interventions, 1982 (E)
25 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of buffering agents, salts; emulsifiers, thickening agents, stabilizers; flavouring agents, food colours, sweetening agents and miscellaneous food additives, 1982 (E F)
26 Food composition tables for the Near East, 1983 (E)
27 Review of food consumption surveys 1981, 1983 (E)
28 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of buffering agents, salts, emulsifiers, stabilizers, thickening agents, extraction solvents, flavouring agents, sweetening agents and miscellaneous food additives, 1983 (E F)
29 Post-harvest losses in quality of food grains, 1983 (E F)
30 FAO/WHO food additives data system, 1984 (E)
30 Rev. 1 FAO/WHO food additives data system, 1985 (E)
31/1 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of food colours, 1984 (E F)
31/2 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of food additives, 1984 (E F) -- _ -
32 Residues of veterinary drugs in foods, 1985 (E/F/S)
33 Nutritional implications of food aid: an annotated bibliography, 1985 (E)
34 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives, 1986 (E F)
35 Review of food consumption surveys 1985, 1986 (E)
36 Guidelines for can manufacturers and food canners, 1986 (E)
37 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives, 1986 (E F)
38 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives, 1988 (E)
39 Quality control in fruit and vegetable processing, 1988(E FS)
40 Directory of food and nutrition institutions in the Near East, 1987 (E)
41 Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods, 1988 (E)
41/2 Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Thirty-fourth meeting of the joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1990 (E)
41/3 Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Thirty-sixth meeting of the joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1991 (E)
41/4 Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Thirty-eighth meeting of the joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1991 (E)
41/5 Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Fortieth meeting of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1993 (E)
41/6 Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Forty-second meeting of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1994 (E)
41/7 Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Forty-third meeting of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1994 (E)
41/8 Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Forty-fifth meeting of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1996 (E) 42 Traditional food plants, 1988 (E)
42/1 Edible plants of Uganda. The value of wild and cultivated plants as food, 1989 (E)
43 Guidelines for agricultural training curricula in Arab countries, 1988 (Ar)
44 Review of food* consumption surveys 1988, 1988 (E)
45 Exposure of infants and children to lead, 1989 (E)
46 Street foods, 1990 (E/F/S)
47/1 Utilization of tropical foods: cereals, 1989 (E F S)
47/2 Utilization of tropical foods: roots and tubers, 1989 (E FS)
47/3 Utilization of tropical foods: trees, 1989 (E F S)
47/4 Utilization of tropical foods: tropical beans, 1989(EFS)
47/5 Utilization of tropical foods: tropical oil seeds, 1989 (E F S)
47/6 Utilization of tropical foods: sugars, spices and stimulants, 1989 (E F S)
47/7 Utilization of tropical foods: fruits and leaves, 1990 (E FS)
47/8 Utilization of tropical foods: animal products, 1990 (E FS)
48 Number not assigned
49 JECFA specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives, 1990 (E)
50 Traditional foods in the Near East, 1991 (E)
51 Protein quality evaluation. Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation, 1991 (E F)
52/1 Compendium of food additive specifications Vol. 1, 1993 (E)
52/2 Compendium of food additive specifications Vol. 2, 1993 (E)
52 Add. 1 Compendium of food additive specifications - Addendum 1, 1992 (E)
52 Add. 2 Compendium of food additive specifications - Addendum 2, 1993 (E)
52 Add. 3 Compendium of food additive specifications - Addendum 3,1995 (E)
52 Add. 4 Compendium of food additive specifications, 1996 (E)
53 Meat and meat products in human nutrition in developing countries, 1992 (E)
54 Number not assigned
55 Sampling plans for aflatoxin analysis in peanuts and corn, 1993 (E)
56 Body mass index - A measure of chronic energy deficiency in adults, 1994 (E F S)
57 Fats and oils in human nutrition, 1995 (E F)
58 The use of hazard analysis critical control point (HACCP) principles in food control. 1995 (E F S)
59 Nutrition education for the public, 1995 (E F S)
60 Food fortification: technology and quality control, 1996(E)
Availability: September 1996
Ar - Arabic
C - Chinese
E - English
F - French
P - Portuguese
S - Spanish
Multil - Multilingual
* Out of print
** in preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Sales and Marketing Group, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
This report of a technical meeting, convened by FAO in November 1995. on the technology and quality control aspects of food fortification, records the issues covered and the conclusions and recommendations reached, and includes a number of background papers. Food fortification, the addition of one or more essential nutrients to a food for the purpose of preventing or correcting a deficiency of those nutrients in target populations, is one approach to achieving the objective of eliminating or substantially reducing important micronutrient deficiencies. The FAO/WHO International Conference on Nutrition, held in 1992, recognized the widespread occurrence of micronutrient deficiencies and recommended steps to eliminate Iodine and vitamin A deficiencies before the end of the decade and to reduce substantially other important micronutrient deficiencies. food-based approaches as the most effective way to address these problems.
