<title>The Role of FAO Regional Fishery Bodies in the Conservation and Management of </title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION
1. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has a global mandate to promote and, when appropriate, to recommend national and international action pertaining, inter alia, to fisheries research, conservation and development. This mandate has been used by the FAO to respond to the needs and requests of its members on a national, regional and global levels during a period when the legal regimes of the Oceans in general and those of fisheries in particular have gone through a number of fundamental changes.
2. The establishment of the 200 nautical miles Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in Article 57 of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), brought most of the living resources of the seas under the exclusive jurisdiction of coastal states. The main consequence of the extended jurisdiction was the intensified fishing activities by distant water fishing nations (DWFNs) on the high seas which has adversely affected a number of areas including the Northwest Atlantic, the Southwest Atlantic, the Northeast Pacific, the East Central and Southwest Pacific. The severity of the problems associated with high seas fishing have caused the international community, the UN and the FAO to re-examine the problems and recommend practical solutions.
3. The important role of the regional fishery organizations in the management of high seas resources has long been recognized. They are the most appropriate means through which a more effective conservation and management of the fisheries resources can be achieved. These bodies, including FAO regional fishery bodies are, therefore, expected to play a more constructive and effective role in the light of the recent developments in high seas fishing.
4. This document provides a brief account of the recent developments concerning the management of high seas resources and describes the structure and functions of the FAO regional fishery bodies and their future role in the management of the high seas fisheries.
<section>2</section>
I. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS CONCERNING HIGH SEAS FISHING
(i) Cancún Declaration on Responsible Fishing
5. The concept of responsible fishing was first raised at the FAO committee on Fisheries (COFI) in April 1991. In May 1992, the Government of Mexico, in close consultation with FAO, organized the International Conference on Responsible Fishing that led to the adoption of the Declaration of Cancún. The Conference requested FAO to draft an International Code of Conduct for Responsible Fishing, as set out in the Declaration. The principles embodied in the Declaration include (a) cooperation by States on bilateral, regional and multilateral levels to establish, reinforce and implement effective means and mechanisms to ensure responsible fishing n the high seas, (b) States fishing on the high seas should cooperate with other States to ensure conservation and rational management of the living resources, and (c) States should cooperate to deter reflagging of vessels to avoid conservation and management measures.
(ii) Rio Conference (UNCED)
6. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), held in rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992, adopted the Rio Declaration and Agenda 21. Chapter 17 of Agenda 21 sets out a Programme of Action for Sustainable Development for the Protection of the Oceans and Coastal Areas. It points out that the management of high seas fisheries, including the adoption, monitoring and enforcement of effective conservation measures, is inadequate in many areas and some resources are over-utilized. It further notes that "there are problems of unregulated fishing, overcapitalization, excessive fleet size, vessels reflagging to escape controls, insufficiently selective gear, unreliable databases and lack of sufficient cooperation between States". The Conference called upon States to inter alia (a) negotiate, where appropriate, international agreements for the effective management and conservation of fishery stocks, (b) convene, as soon as possible, an inter-governmental
conference under United Nations auspices, with a view to promoting effective implementation of the provisions of UNCLOS on straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, and (c), take effective action to deter reflagging of vessels by their nationals as a means of avoiding compliance with applicable conservation and management measures for fishing activities on the high seas.
(iii) Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas
7. Following the Cancún and Rio Declarations on the need to deter reflagging of fishing vessels on the high seas, the FAO Council, at its Hundred and second Session held in Rome in November 1992, agreed that the Organization should draw up an Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas. The Agreement was approved unanimously by the FAO Conference at its Twenty-seventh Session in November 1993 and circulated for acceptance on 14 February 1994. The Agreement provides for the responsibility of flag States to take measures including the authorization of fishing operations on the high seas to ensure that their flag vessels do not undermine the effectiveness of international conservation and management measures. It further provides for the establishment of a data base on fishing vessels authorized to fish on the high seas and the exchange of information on such vessels.
(iv) FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries
8. The FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries was adopted by the FAO Conference at its Twenty-eighth Session, Rome, 20 October to 2 November 1995. The Code consists of twelve Articles and sets out principles and international standards of behaviour for responsible practices with a view to ensuring the effective conservation, management and development of living aquatic resources, with due respect for the ecosystem and biodiversity. The first five deal with nature and scope, objectives, relationship with other international instruments, implementation, monitoring and updating, and special requirements of developing countries. Article 6 deals with general principles while the remaining Articles cover specific subjects. These are: Fisheries management, fishing operations, aquaculture developments, integration of fisheries into coastal area management, post-harvest practice and trade, and fisheries research. The Code places a great emphasis on the regional and
sub-regional fisheries organizations for its implementation. The application of the Code is voluntary and it contains provisions that have already given binding effect by means of other obligatory legal instruments. The Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas forms an integral part of the Code. The FAO regional fishery bodies with their long and close associations with their members as well as their traditional involvement in most aspects of fisheries of their members and the regions they cover are well placed to implement the Provisions of the Code.
(v) Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks
9. The Agreement on Straddling and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks was reached in New York in August 1995. It was adopted by the Conference and is now open for signature. The Agreement will enter into force 30 days after the date of deposit of the thirtieth instrument of ratification or accession. The objective of the Agreement is "to ensure the long-term conservation and sustainable use of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks through effective implementation of the relevant provisions of the [LOS] Convention". It is, by far, the most detailed and comprehensive international legal instrument on the subject of conservation and management of straddling and highly migratory fish stocks. The following Provisions in the Agreement are relevant to any discussion concerning the role of the FAO regional fishery bodies in the management of high seas fisheries.
10. Part III of the Agreement is entitled "mechanisms for International Cooperation Concerning Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks". In general, coastal States and States fishing on the high seas shall cooperate in relation to straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks either directly or through appropriate subregional or regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements. The purpose of such cooperation is to agree on conservation and management measures with respect to particular fish stock(s) where there is evidence that such stock(s) may be under threat of over-exploitation or where a new fishery is being developed for such stock(s). Where a regional or sub-regional fisheries body exists and has the competence to establish conservation and management measures for straddling and highly migratory fish stocks, States fishing for the stock(s) on the high seas and coastal States with an interest in the stock(s) are to give effect to
their duty to cooperate by participating in the work of that body. States with an interest in the stock(s) which are not parties to an existing fishery organization or arrangements are encouraged to participate in the work of the organization. Only those States which are members of such an organization or participants in such an arrangement, or which agree to apply the conservation and management measures established by such organization or arrangement, are to have access to the fishery resources to which those measures apply.
11. Article 9 of the Agreement entitled "Subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements" states that:
"1. In establishing subregional or regional fisheries management organizations or in entering into subregional or regional fisheries management arrangements for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks, States shall agree, inter alia, on:
(a) the stocks to which conservation and management measures apply, taking into account the biological characteristics of the stocks directly concerned and the nature of all the fisheries involved;
(b) the area of application, taking into account Article 7, paragraph 1, and the characteristics of the subregion or region, including socio-economic, geographical and environmental factors;
(c) the relationship between the work of the new organization or arrangement and the role, objectives and operations of any relevant existing fisheries management organizations or arrangements; and
(d) the mechanisms by which the organization or arrangement will obtain scientific advice and review the status of the stocks, including, where appropriate, the establishment of a scientific advisory body.
2. States cooperating in the formation of a subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement shall inform other States which they are aware have a real interest in the work of the proposed organization or arrangement of such cooperation."
12. The Provisions embodied in Article 10 of the Agreement entitled "Functions of subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements" are of particular relevance to the future role of the FAO regional fishery bodies:
"In fulfilling their obligation to cooperate through subregional or regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements, States shall:
(a) agree on and comply with conservation and management measures to ensure the long-term sustainability of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks;
(b) agree, as appropriate, on participatory rights such as allocations of allowable catch or levels of fishing effort;
(c) adopt and apply any generally recommended international minimum standards for the responsible conduct of fishing operations;
(d) obtain and evaluate scientific advice, review the status of the stocks and assess the impact of fishing on non-target and associated or dependent species;
(e) agree on standards for collection, reporting, verification and exchange of data on fisheries for the stocks;
(f) compile and disseminate accurate and complete statistical data, as described in Annex I, to ensure that the best scientific evidence is available, while maintaining confidentiality where appropriate;
(g) promote and conduct scientific assessments of the stocks and relevant research and disseminate the results thereof;
(h) establish appropriate cooperative mechanisms for effective monitoring, control, surveillance and enforcement;
(i) agree on means by which the fishing interests of new members of, or participants in, the organization or arrangement will be accommodated;
(j) agree on decision-making procedures which facilitate the adoption of conservation and management measures in a timely and effective manner;
(k) promote the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with Part VIII;
(l) ensure the full cooperation of their relevant national agencies and industries in implementing the recommendations and decisions of the subregional or regional fisheries management organization or arrangement; and
(m) give due publicity to the conservation and management measures established by the organization or arrangement."
13. Under Article 13, States are required to cooperate to strengthen existing subregional and regional fisheries management organizations and arrangements in order to improve their effectiveness in establishing and implementing conservation and management measures for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. The Agreement also provides detailed provision on Compliance and Enforcement (part VI) and Peaceful Settlement of Disputes (part VIII). In general, States parties to a subregional or regional fishery management organization or arrangement are obliged to enforce the conservation and management measures adopted by that body and the disputes arising from the adoption of such measures are to be settled by compulsory means should it become necessary. These provisions go beyond the present commitment by States in the work of existing fishery management organizations.
14. The main problem concerning the present state of high seas fisheries has been the application of the open access principle by States whose vessels are engaged in high seas fishing. Central to the principles embodied in the Declarations of Cancún and Rio, the Provisions of the Compliance Agreement, FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks is the clear and unequivocal responsibility of States. Unless States accept their responsibility and are willing to discharge their duties no progress will be made in respect of the proper and effective conservation and management of the high seas resources. The mechanisms by which regional and subregional fishery organizations are established or restructured in order to discharge their conservation and management duties effectively depend entirely on the political will of States which are parties to these bodies.
15. The requirements embodied in the provisions of the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks have two immediate implications for existing regional or subregional fishery bodies. One is that the mandate of almost all existing fisheries organizations, including those of FAO fishery bodies, dealing with the conservation and management of high seas fisheries may need to be reviewed with a view to improving their effectiveness. The second implication is that the existing bodies may need substantially increased budgets to implement the provisions of the UN Agreement. Thus, States will need to commit themselves both politically and financially to the work of the regional or subregional fishery bodies if the management of high seas resources is to be carried out effectively.
(vi) Rome Consensus on World Fisheries
16. On 14 and 15 March 1995 a Ministerial Meeting on Fisheries was held in Rome at the invitation of the Director-General of FAO to review the state of world fisheries and the FAO follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). The meeting adopted the Rome Consensus on World Fisheries. In the discussion, the Ministerial Meeting noted the FAO analysis which indicated that the problems of overfishing in general, and overcapacity of industrial fishing fleets in particular, threaten the sustainability of the world's fisheries resources for present and future generations. It recognized the need for continuing international cooperation and coordination toward reestablishing sustainability of world fisheries. It stated that improved fisheries conservation and management, along with better protection of fisheries from harmful sea- and land-based
activities, are crucial to maintaining world fish resources and aquatic ecosystems. the particular importance of the fisheries sector for small island developing States was noted.
17. To respond effectively to the current fisheries situation and the difficulties that can be foreseen in satisfying growing demand for fish and in conserving aquatic ecosystems, the Rome Ministerial Meeting urged that governments and international organizations take prompt action to:
- reduce fishing to sustainable levels in areas and on stocks currently heavily exploited or overfished;
- review the capacity of fishing fleets in relation to sustainable yields of fishery resources and where necessary reduce these fleets;
- strengthen and support regional, sub-regional, and national fisheries organizations and arrangements for implementing conservation and management measures;
- keep under review the effectiveness of conservation and management measures for ensuring the long-term sustainability of fisheries and aquatic ecosystems;
- continue and, when possible, increase technical, financial, and other assistance to developing countries, in particular to least developed countries, to support their efforts in fisheries conservation and management, and in aquaculture development;
- encourage States to further develop ecologically sound aquaculture as an important contributor to overall food security;
- strengthen fisheries research and increase cooperation among research institutions;
- increase consultation on fisheries with the private sector and non-governmental organizations;
- effectively implement the relevant rules of international law on fisheries and related matters which are reflected in the provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea;
- consider ratifying the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas.
(vii) Kyoto Declaration and Plan of Action on the Sustainable Contribution of Fisheries to Food Security
18. The Kyoto Conference on the Sustainable Contribution of Fisheries to Food Security was held in Kyoto, Japan, from 4 to 9 December 1995. The representatives of 95 States agreed on a set of immediate actions to be taken by States either directly or in cooperation with other states, or through FAO in cooperation with other appropriate intergovernmental organizations and/or regional fishery management organizations or arrangements.
19. These immediate actions included:
- To assess and monitor the present and future levels of global, regional and national production, supply and demand of fish and fishery products and their effects on food security, employment, consumption, income, trade and sustainability of production;
- to enhance subregional and regional cooperation and establish, where it is considered appropriate, subregional and regional fishery conservation and management organizations or arrangements for straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks; and cooperate to strengthen, where necessary, existing subregional and regional fishery conservation and management organizations and arrangements in order to carry out their assigned task;
- to conduct, within their competences and, where appropriate, in cooperation with regional and other intergovernmental organizations, integrated assessments of fisheries in order to evaluate opportunities and strengthen the scientific basis for multispecies and ecosystem management;
- to identify and exchange information on potential mechanisms to reduce excess fishing capacity and implement action on programs to reduce excess capacity , where and when appropriate, as soon as possible;
- to develop, promote and facilitate the exchange of information on the use of efficient and standardized methodologies for the study of social, cultural and economic characteristics of fishing and associated activities; and, in particular, attempt to develop methods designed to permit verifiable indicators of the importance of such characteristics and their interaction and compatibility with management objectives;
- to promote the exchange of information amongst research institutes and other relevant entities aiming to: (i) increase opportunities for the sustainable use of unexploited or underexploited species as human food; and (ii) promote and support research activities in order to ensure improvement in scientific knowledge of existing fishery resources;
- to strengthen coordination of national and international research programs aiming to simulate environmentally sound aquaculture and stocking, giving emphasis to the development of international guideline for the development and management of activities in particular on: (i) the impacts on the environment and biodiversity; (ii) the application of biotechnology; and (iii) the health of cultured stocks.
(viii) Resolution Adopted by the 95th Inter-Parliamentary Conference
20. The 95th Inter-Parliamentary Conference was held in Istanbul, Turkey, from 15 to 20 April 1996. The Conference discussed the Conservation of World Fish Stock in order to provide an important source of protein and ensure the continued viability and economic stability of fishing around the world.
21. The Conference adopted a Resolution which included the following paragraphs:
- Urges States to sign and ratify the UNCLOS (1982), the UNCLOS implementing Agreement (1995) and other relevant agreements, all of which are of importance for the management, conservation and exploitation of living marine resources;
- emphasizes in particular the importance of the UNCLOS (1995) Implementing Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks as a practical and enforceable means to end high seas overfishing, as well as the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (1995) and the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas (1993), both adopted by FAO Conferences;
- calls on States to promote and strengthen scientific research, including studies on the effectiveness of multispecies management and the ecosystem process-orientated approach, as the basis for the sustainable development of fisheries and aquaculture activities in order to ensure food security;
- also calls on States to ensure the sustainable and rational utilization of all living marine resources, including marine mammals, in order to optimize the sustainable yield of protein resources to satisfy human need worldwide;
- urges all fishing nations to adopt legislation and implement necessary measures in order to ensure responsible fisheries management, including zoning and mapping of fishing grounds for sustainable fishing; and
- urges States to make every effort to minimize environmental degradation of inland waters and marine and coastal areas, especially by protecting habitats and spawning grounds, as the preservation of freshwater, brackish water, marine and coastal environment is a prerequisite for achieving the sustainable development of fisheries.
<section>3</section>
II. REGIONAL APPROACH TO FISHERIES MANAGEMENT
22. The important role of regional and subregional fisheries organizations in the conservation and management of the high seas fisheries has long been recognized. The provisions of UNCLOS concerning the role of regional and subregional fisheries organizations are reiterated, emphasized and expanded by the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. The core of the UN Agreement is that high seas fisheries must by managed effectively on a regional or subregional basis through existing fisheries organizations or arrangements or by establishing new ones. The Rome Consensus on World Fisheries adopted by the FAO Ministerial Conference on Fisheries (Rome, 14-15 March 1995) urged the governments and international organizations to take prompt action, inter alia, to:
"reduce fishing to sustainable levels in areas and on stocks currently heavily exploited or overfished; to strengthen and support regional, sub-regional, and national fisheries organizations and arrangements for implementing conservation and management measures."
23. Regional and subregional fisheries organizations must first and foremost identify with the region or the subregion they are representing. They must manage and be seen to manage the resources of the region in the interest of the coastal States of the region and DWFNs with legitimate interest in the conservation and management of the resources of that region. To be able to respond quickly and efficiently to the conservation and management needs of a region or a subregion it is imperative that the relationship between the fisheries organizations and their members become more of a partnership bridging the gap between the advisory and decision-making functions.
(i) Present Fisheries Organizations
24. There are more than twenty regional and subregional fishery bodies whose mandates include the conservation and management of high seas fisheries. some have full regulatory powers while others have an advisory role related to management issues. The functions of these bodies vary from dealing with a single species or a group of closely related species such as the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization (NASCO), the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (I-ATTC) and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC), to those based more on a region and covering a whole range of species within their areas of competence such as the North-West Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO), the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission (NEAFC), and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).
25. There are other fishery organizations which do not have conservation and management functions but provide scientific advice relating to conservation and management such as the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) and the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES). In addition, there are a number of regional economic and other organizations that have intensified their activities in the field of fisheries such as the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), the European Community (EC), the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC), the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), the Pacific Economic Cooperation Conference (PECC), the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), and the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC). Although regional economic groupings are, in most cases, based upon linguistic, economic interests or political affinities which
might not always coincide with fisheries natural conservation and management areas, they represent, however, strong links among their members. Regional fishery bodies should be encouraged to increase further their cooperation with these groupings since they could provide the necessary political will for implementing conservation and management measures
(ii) Measures Required to Make Fishery Organizations More Effective
26. The FAO Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing, held in Rome in September 1992, discussed the role of regional fisheries organizations and outlined a number of measures required to make regional fisheries organizations more effective. These requirements should form an integral part of any fishery management organization whose main objective is the effective conservation and management of the fisheries resources of the high seas.
1) Membership and Participation
27. It is of paramount importance that the membership of a regional or subregional fisheries organization or arrangement include all the countries in the region as well as those which have a legitimate interest in the conservation and management of the resources covered by that body. Membership should entail active participation in the work of the fishery organization as well as a clear commitment towards achieving its objectives.
2) Mandate to Adopt Management Measures
28. To be effective in the conservation and management of the resources, regional and subregional fisheries organizations must have a clear mandate to discharge their management duties. In addition, they should have mechanisms through which they receive scientific advice related to management issues. Whether such advice is provided by internal sources or external organizations, they should be conceived by the organizations' members as fair and neutral and free from national interests, politics and economics.
3) Implementation of Management Measures
29. The effectiveness of fisheries management organizations depend on the commitment of their members to implement the regulatory measures adopted by them. Annual reports of many fisheries management organizations bear witness to the number of regulatory measures adopted by them and which have not been implemented by their members. One of the existing problems for many fisheries organizations with management powers is the inclusion of the objection procedure in the conventions or agreements establishing them. Many contracting parties have used this to avoid the implementation of management measures. Members States of a fisheries management organization should promptly and without delay give effect to the management measures adopted by that organization. Any objection should be settled in accordance with provisions of disputes settlement incorporated in the conventions or agreements.
4) Role of Flag States
30. A major problem faced by many fisheries management organizations is the undermining of their regulatory and other conservation measures by countries not parties to the conventions or agreements who allow their flag vessels to be used for fishing on the high seas. The Provisions of the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks and the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels on the High Seas are designed to tackle this problem. The FAO Code of Conduct on Responsible Fisheries also addresses this problem.
5) Control, Surveillance and Enforcement
31. Regional and subregional fisheries organizations or arrangements must have a mechanism through which their conservation and management measures are enforced. Thus, control, surveillance and enforcement must be part of the activities of any fisheries organization whose mandate includes the conservation and management of fisheries resources.
6) Accountability of Fisheries Organizations
32. Accountability of the regional or subregional fisheries organizations concerning their functions is a new concept. The FAO Technical Consultation on the High Seas Fishing acknowledged that fisheries organizations were accountable to their members. The UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks provides (Article 36) for a review conference, to be held four years after entry into force of the Agreement, to assess the adequacy of the Agreement and, if necessary, to propose means of strengthening the substance and methods of implementation of those provisions in order better to address any continuing problems in the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks.
7) Compulsory Settlement of Disputes
33. Most conventions and Agreements establishing fisheries organizations do not include any provision concerning the settlement of disputes. Articles 27 to 32 of the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks require that regional and subregional fisheries management organizations or arrangements dealing with straddling and highly migratory fish stocks adopt procedures for compulsory settlement of disputes to ensure the expeditious resolution of disputes relating to the conservation and management of these stocks. The adoption of settlement disputes procedures is indispensable if the decisions of the fisheries management organizations or arrangements concerning the conservation and management measures are to be applied without delay.
8) Financing
34. A regional or subregional fisheries organization needs adequate funding to be able to function properly. Many requirements by the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks mean that most existing bodies will need a budget which could meet those requirements. To have a mandate for conservation and management without the financial means to execute them will not improve the effectiveness of the fisheries organizations. Member States of a regional or subregional fisheries organization or arrangement should agree among themselves as to how the financial needs of their organization should be secured.
9) Effective Cooperation between Fisheries Organizations
35. Cooperation between fisheries organizations operating in the same area or overlapping areas as well as those dealing with highly migratory and straddling fish stocks, is essential. At the FAO Technical Consultation on High Seas Fishing (Rome, 1992), I-ATTC reported that "there is a high degree of overlap among the extant tuna organizations and this will increase as more regional bodies are created". Greater efficiency could be achieved if the regional bodies worked together more closely through for example, an "umbrella mechanism". The management issues related to straddling stocks depend on their biological characteristics and, in particular, on the degree of mixing between the EEZ and high Seas compartments of stocks. In many instances where mixing is considerable because of random dispersion, ontogenic or seasonal migrations, the stock should be managed as one single unit and management measures must be harmonized over the entire range of distribution of the stock. In
this context, cooperation is seen as an essential part of conservation and management functions of fisheries organizations.
<section>4</section>
III. THE FUTURE ROLE OF FAO FISHERY BODIES IN THE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE HIGH SEAS RESOURCES
36. With the entry into force of the UNCLOS in November 1994, the Convention will have a marked impact on the practice of States, particularly those which are parties to it as well as on the activities of international organizations competent in the fields of fisheries. The Convention places a great emphasis (Articles 116 to 120) on the need and desirability of cooperation concerning the conservation and management of fisheries resources of the high seas. Together with the Provisions of the Agreement to Promote Compliance with International Conservation and Management Measures by Fishing Vessels in the High Seas and those of the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, subregional and regional fisheries organizations are expected to play a more comprehensive, constructive, effective role in the conservation and management of the high seas resources.
37. With the exception of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission which covers the tuna stocks of the Indian Ocean, all other FAO fishery bodies were set up before the new fisheries regime was incorporated in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention. Each body was set up by FAO to address a wide range of fisheries needs of a region and its members and covered all marine living resources within its area of competence. The terms of reference of these bodies have been periodically reviewed and changed in order to make them more responsive to the needs of the regions for which they had been set up. The recent developments concerning the conservation and management of the high seas resources have underlined the shortcomings of the existing fisheries organizations, including those of the FAO fishery bodies, and require fundamental changes in the functions of these organizations.
38. The role of fisheries organizations on conservation and management issues is now expected to include effective implementation of the management measures they adopt through a series of mechanisms including monitoring, control, surveillance and enforcement as well as the compulsory settlement of disputes. FAO regional fishery bodies have always had an advisory role. Any management measures proposed by these bodies were recommendations which could not, if rejected, be imposed on member States. It is in this context that the future role of these bodies will have to be examined. As bodies established within the framework of FAO, their powers and functions are all subject to the Organization's Constitution.
(i) The Constitutional Position of FAO
39. Within the UN system, FAO has the mandate to collect, analyse, interpret and disseminate information relating to nutrition, food and agriculture (including fisheries and marine products). The Organization is entrusted to promote and where appropriate, recommend national and international action with respect to scientific, technological, social and economic research as well as the improvement of education and administration relating to nutrition, food and agriculture. It is also the function of the Organization to promote and, where appropriate, recommend national and international action with respect to inter alia the conservation of natural resources.
40. The role of FAO in relation to the natural resources is to recommend national and international action for their conservation. The degree of FAO involvement in the management of fishery resources was extensively discussed at the Sixth Session of COFI in 1971. The concept of management was recognized as being wider than concern with the stocks alone and included at least concern with fishery development. While the importance of COFI as a world body, responsible for reviewing the general progress in management, was emphasized, the Committee "pointed out that neither FAO nor its regional fishery bodies have powers to enforce regulations. For this reason, some delegations felt that effective management would in every instance require a treaty-based commission or other body". At its Ninth Session held in Rome in October 1974, the Committee on Fisheries emphasized the growing importance of regional fisheries bodies, and the need for increased support to them, and strongly
urged FAO to give greater support to its regional bodies, and other regional activities. The Committee re-emphasized the role that it could play in discussing problems of management and development that were of common interest to many regions. It stressed the importance of having appropriate national or international machinery to ensure that management measures agreed upon were properly implemented and enforced. The 1984 FAO World Conference on Fisheries Management and Development acknowledged the political nature of the management of fisheries by outlining the role of the governments. Recognizing this fact, the FAO Technical Consultation on High Seas fishing, held in Rome in September 1992, emphasized that the effectiveness of regional fishery bodies and hence their ability to manage high seas fisheries on a sustainable basis was dependent upon inter alia the political will of the States concerned.
41. Under Article VI-1 of the FAO Constitution, the Conference may establish commissions or regional commissions "to advise on the formulation and implementation of policy and to coordinate the implementation of policy". The Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC), the Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission (WECAFC) and the Regional Fishery Advisory Commission for the Southwest Atlantic (CARPAS), were all established under Article VI-1 of the FAO Constitution. None of these bodies can, under the FAO Constitution, perform direct management functions, but must rely on addressing recommendations on management measures to their members.
42. Article VI-2 of the FAO Constitution provides that the Conference, the Council, or the Director-General on the authority of the Conference or Council may establish committees and working parties to "Study and report on matters pertaining to the purpose of the Organization". The Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic (CECAF) was established under Article VI-2 of the Constitution.
43. The FAO regional bodies established under Article VI of the Constitution are all dependent on the Organization for financial and secretariat support. None has an autonomous budget and their expenses are met by the Organization's Regular Programme and ad hoc voluntary contributions by member States. The terms of reference and reporting procedures of these bodies are determined by the Conference, the Council, or the Director-General on the authority of the Conference or Council. Within the specific mandates provided in Article VI of the Constitution, the commissions or committees established under this Article can only perform advisory functions.
44. According to Article XIV of the FAO Constitution, the Council, under rules to be adopted by the Conference, may, by a vote concurred in by at least two thirds of the membership of the Council, approve and submit to Member Nations agreements concerning questions relating to food and agriculture which are of particular interest to Member Nations of geographical areas specified in such agreements and are designed to apply only to such areas. Article XIV agreements, though adopted within the framework of the FAO Constitution, have a legal life of their own. They can therefore provide for different and greater contractual obligations among the parties thereto that extend beyond the obligations already assumed under the FAO Constitution.
45. The Conference pointed out that:
"The procedure of multilateral agreements has been used on several occasions to establish commissions and committees entrusted with specific tasks which fall within the general terms of reference of the Organization.
Indeed the Conference has already pointed out that agreements concluded under Article XIV of the Constitution should only be used when the purpose is to provide for "financial or other obligations going beyond those already assumed under the Constitution of the Organization".
46. Bodies established under Article XIV of the Constitution fall into one of the three following categories:
(a) bodies entirely financed by the Organization;
(b) bodies that, in addition to being financed by the Organization, may undertake cooperative projects financed by members of the body;
(c) bodies that, in addition to being financed by the Organization, have autonomous budgets.
47. During the Twenty-six Session of the FAO Conference in November 1991, amendments were adopted to Part R of the Basic Texts of the FAO, which were intended to devolve more independence and autonomy on Commissions established by agreements concluded under Article XIV of the Constitution, and in particular, those with autonomous budgets. The amendments were intended to allow for more independent decision-making by such bodies in such matters as the adoption of management measures, the approval of autonomous budgets, amendments to the constitutive agreements, adoption of financial regulations and rules of procedure, and the selection and appointment of the secretary of the Commission concerned.
(ii) The Present Mandates of FAO Fishery Bodies in Relation to High Seas Fisheries
(a) Fishery Bodies Established under Article VI
48. The fishery bodies established under Article VI of the Constitution have limited power in management of the resources of the high seas. They were set up as advisory bodies and in some cases have acquired a competent status as technical bodies capable of providing scientific advice necessary for conservation and management decisions. The Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC), the Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission (WECAFC), the Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic (CECAF), and the Regional Fisheries Advisory commission for the Southwest Atlantic (CARPAS) were all established under Article VI of the FAO Constitution. CECAF has undertaken some management initiatives but its role under the Organization's Constitution remains an advisory one. With the establishment of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC), the IOFC will need a more appropriate structure in order to address other fisheries problems of the region on a sub-regional basis. CARPAS has not
been active since 1974.
(b) Fishery Bodies Established under Article XIV
49. The Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission (APFIC) and the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM) were established by agreements concluded under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution. The Agreement for the Establishment of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) adopted by the FAO Council in 1993, entered into force in March 1996.
50. Article IV of the Agreement establishing APFIC provides a broad mandate for the Commission in respect of the management of the fisheries. The purpose of the Commission includes the promotion and the full and proper utilization of living aquatic resources by the development and management of fishing and culture operations. Its functions in respect of management is to formulate and recommend measures and to initiate and carry out programmes or projects to conserve and manage resources.
51. Article III of the Agreement establishing GFCM defines the purpose of the Council as to promote the development, conservation, rational management and best utilization of living marine resources. The Council has the mandate to formulate and recommend measures for the conservation and management of living marine resources which could include regulating fishing methods and fishing gear, prescribing the minimum size for individuals of specified species, establishing open and closed fishing seasons and areas, regulating the amount of total catch and fishing effort and their allocation among Members. Such Recommendations should be adopted by a two-thirds majority of Members of the Council present and voting. The recommendations of the Council are subject to objection procedure and if objections are made by more than one-third of members of the Council, the recommendation does not become binding on any Member.
52. The Agreement establishing IOTC gives the Commission the power to adopt, by a two-third majority of the Members present and voting, regulatory measures. Subject to objection procedure, Members of the Commission must take action, under their national legislation, to make effective the provisions of the Agreement and to implement conservation and management measures which have become binding.
(iii) The Implementation of the Provisions of the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks by FAO
(a) Justification for Regional Management Fishery Bodies
53. It is imperative that prior to any changes to the existing institutional arrangements of the FAO regional fishery bodies their members are convinced that such changes are necessary, justified and beneficial to them and the regions or the sub-regions. The implementation of the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks should be considered when the management of such stocks is concerned. Thus there is no justification in restructuring the existing FAO regional fishery bodies in accordance with the provisions of the UN Agreement if such stocks are not present in the areas covered by these bodies or for which there are already independent fisheries management organizations dealing with them.
54. While it may thus not be appropriate to restructure all of FAO regional fishery bodies in order to bring them into line with UN Agreement it is, however, necessary that the role of FAO fishery bodies in relation to the conservation and management of the resources of the high seas is clearly determined and defined by their members and the Organization. Whether they are required to function as technical/scientific bodies or technical/scientific bodies with advisory roles on management issues or function as management bodies they must be given a clear mandate and support to discharge their duties. In this respect, the restructuring of these bodies should take note of the measures discussed (paras. 26-35) with a view of strengthening these bodies and making them more effective.
(b) Constitutional Implications
55. FAO regional fishery bodies and in particular those established under Article VI of the Constitution, are essentially non-political entities which operate within the framework of the Organization and its overall objectives. This characteristic has ensured the impartiality of these bodies in respect of their objectives, functions and activities. The establishment of the IPFC (now APFIC) in 1948 and the GFCM in 1949 preceded even the first codification of the law of the sea by the UN in 1958. Other FAO fishery bodies with a mandate for high seas fisheries were established long before the adoption of UNCLOS in 1982. The main activities of these bodies have been helping their members in educational, technological, scientific, and research programmes related to fisheries.
56. The management of the resources, especially when it involves the allocations of allowable catch, levels of fishing effort and monitoring, control, surveillance and enforcement are highly political. Such functions can only be undertaken properly by bodies established by separate agreements under Article XIV of the Constitution or alternatively outside the framework of FAO entirely.
(c) Financial Implications
57. The FAO regional fishery bodies are for the most part dependent on the Organization for financial and secretariat support, and their expenses are met by the Organization's Regular Programme and ad hoc contributions by member States. In this context, the implementation of the recommendations of the regional fishery bodies and their subsidiaries concerning their work and even their regular sessions may be and indeed have been delayed or cancelled due to the financial constraints on the Organization. In addition, many projects which were funded by external budgets have been instrumental in the progress and achievements of these bodies. Support from donors has been declining in recent years and many projects have been phased out or terminated. Only the newly established Indian Ocean Tuna Commission has an autonomous budget.
58. At its Twenty-eighth Session (Rome, 20 October - 2 November 1995), the FAO Conference adopted the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries. In doing so, the Conference urged FAO to strengthen Regional Fisheries Bodies in order to deal more effectively with fisheries conservation and management issues in support of subregional, regional and global cooperation and coordination in fisheries.
59. The future role of FAO Regional Fishery Bodies in the Conservation and management of the high seas fisheries, as well as their role in providing advice to developing countries on the implementation of the Code, can only be effected if necessary funds to meet these obligations are made available.
60. The financial implications of strengthening FAO Regional Fishery Bodies, as urged by the Conference, are very significant. The non-FAO fisheries organizations operate on annual budgets ranging from U$ 500,000 to over U$ 1,000,000 paid by members' contributions. The restructuring of these bodies, with a view to strengthening them, provide an excellent opportunity for the FAO and the members of these bodies to agree on viable solutions for their future. There are three ways by which the existing FAO regional fishery bodies can be strengthened in order to perform management functions.
i) Independent Bodies
61. Members of the existing FAO fishery bodies may wish to establish independent fishery bodies under international agreements to replace the existing ones. In this case, the agreements will provide provisions relating to the budgets and funding of the new bodies (e.g., ICCAT). Like all independent fishery organizations, the expenses of the new bodies will be met by members' contributions. These bodies can be given full powers to adopt regulatory measures (total allowable catch and allocations) , as well as implementing all the measures relating to monitoring, control and surveillance, and enforcement and settlement of all disputes.
ii) Bodies Within the Framework of FAO
62. Some of the existing FAO regional fishery bodies could become independent bodies operating under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution. As bodies operating within the framework of FAO, they can have autonomous budgets and administrative independence. Financial commitment towards their budgets by their members is an integral part of this process. These bodies can have management powers to adopt regulatory measures, although it may not be thought appropriate for them, as they operate within the framework of the Organization, to get involved in matters relating, for example, to enforcement.
iii) Bilateral or Multilateral Agreements
63. In restructuring the existing FAO regional fishery bodies, the fisheries resources of some smaller areas currently covered by IOFC, WECAFC and APFIC can be more effectively managed through bilateral, trilateral or multilateral agreements or arrangements. Member States can agree among themselves to establish the most suitable institutional arrangements for the management of the resources concerned.
(d) Other Arrangements
64. Under Article 117 of UNCLOS "All States have the duty to take, or to cooperate with other States in taking, such measures for their respective national as may be necessary for the conservation of the living resources of the high seas". The need for cooperation between States on conservation and management of the living resources of the high seas is further emphasized in Article 118 of the Convention.
65. The UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks requires States to cooperate through sub-regional or regional fisheries management organizations or arrangements for the conservation and management of such stocks. Article 1 of the Agreement defines the term "arrangement" as "a cooperative mechanism established in accordance with the Convention and this Agreement by two or more States for the purpose, inter alia, of establishing conservation and management measures in a subregion or region...".
66. The conservation and management of some fisheries resources and in some areas, particularly at sub-regional levels, may be carried out more effectively by cooperation between two or more States through agreements without having to formally establish fishery management organizations. In addition, many fisheries management organizations don not have the power to implement the regulatory measures (monitoring, control surveillance and enforcement as well as settlement of disputes). It may be both necessary and desirable that members of these organizations use the term "arrangement" for establishing a mechanism through which the regulatory measures adopted by their Commissions are effectively implemented.
<section>5</section>
IV. SOME POSSIBLE OPTIONS ON STRENGTHENING THE FUTURE ROLE OF FAO REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES
67. Excluding the constitutional and financial implications associated with giving the FAO Regional Fishery Bodies a comprehensive and clear mandate for the conservation and management of the fisheries of the high seas or strengthening them, there are other considerations which will have to be taken into account while deciding the future role of these bodies.
68. The first consideration is that the main objective of the Organization should be to help these bodies to reach an independent status, i.e., to give the overall responsibility of these bodies to their members. The member States of these bodies should, therefore, be responsible for the activities of these bodies and the bodies should be accountable to their members. An independent regional or sub-regional fishery body with its secretariat and technical support unit located in the region or sub-region has the advantage of accessing the political will of its members as well as being able to identify and react quickly to the general and particular fisheries needs of the region or sub-region and its members.
69. The second consideration is to maintain the impartiality of the FAO Fishery Bodies as long as they remain within the framework of the Organization. The non-political nature of these bodies has been instrumental in providing a platform for dialogue and cooperation among their members. In some areas, notably parts of the Indian Ocean, the South China Sea and the Western Central Atlantic, fisheries cooperation may not continue among some members if FAO were to withdraw its direct involvement in the fisheries of these areas.
70. The third consideration is that FAO Regional Fishery Bodies have had different mandates and have performed different functions according to the needs of the regions and the extent of support they have received form their members. Consequently, any restructuring of these bodies should reflect on the realistic objectives and functions to be assigned to these bodies in the future.
71. The final consideration is that even without a mandate to manage fisheries of the high Seas, any FAO body which continues to have an advisory role must be financed adequately and receive active support from its members in order to perform its functions and achieve its objectives. They should be able to hold their regular sessions and carry out their intersessional activities. Of the present FAO regional fishery bodies, some are potentially management bodies and are ready to undertake management functions either as independent fisheries management organizations or as management bodies operating under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution (IOTC model). These are GFCM, CECAF, the Gulfs Committee of IOFC and APFIC Committee on Marine Fisheries.
72. The following suggested options for each FAO Regional Fishery Body have been drawn up taking into account of relevant factors discussed so far in this document. In addition, a more detailed analysis of the possible fishery management scenario and a model institutional arrangements for future fisheries management of the CECAF area is presented. This will serve as a model for similar studies to be undertaken on other FAO regional fishery bodies. The options proposed in this document are not by any means exhaustive but they indicate the practical directions these bodies may be expected to take in the very near future.
(1) General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM)
I) Present Structure
73. GFCM was established by an Agreement concluded under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution in 1949. The Agreement establishing the Council entered into force in 1952. The area of competence of the Council is the Mediterranean and the Black Sea and connecting waters (FAO Statistical Area 37). Membership of the Council is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO. Members of the United Nations, any of its Specialized Agencies or the International Atomic Energy Agency may be admitted by a two-thirds majority of the Council's members. GFCM is financed and administered by the Organization. Under Article III of the Agreement establishing GFCM, the purpose of the Council is to promote the development, conservation, rational management and best utilization of living marine resources in its area of competence. It has the mandate to formulate and recommend measures for the conservation and management which includes regulating fishing methods and fishing gear,
presenting the minimum size for individuals of specified species, establishing open and closed fishing seasons and areas, and regulating the amount of total catch and fishing effort and their allocation among its members. The recommendations are adopted by a two-thirds majority of members present and voting and are subject to objecting procedure.
The Council has the following subsidiary bodies:
(i) GFCM Executive Committee
(ii) GFCM Committee on Fisheries Management
(iii) Working Party on Fisheries Economics and Statistics
(iv) GFCM Committee on Aquaculture
II) Considerations
74. Coastal States in the Mediterranean have not declared extended fisheries jurisdiction and therefore the Mediterranean for the most part remains a high seas area. With the exception of Greece (6 miles), Syria (35 miles) and Algeria (32-52 miles), all other States bordering the Mediterranean Sea have 12 miles territorial sea. In some areas of the Mediterranean Sea, the continental shelf extends far beyond 12 miles and stocks occurring on the shelf are therefore accessible to fishermen form outside the region. Demersal straddling stocks are found in the Gulf of Lions and the Gulf of Gabes and pelagic straddling stocks exist probably in most parts of the Mediterranean Sea. There is also the question of tuna which is currently managed by the Council and is also within the mandate of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT). Thus the unique fisheries aspects in the Mediterranean makes it a prime candidate for adopting the Provisions of the
1995 UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. This cannot be done easily by a body which is financially and administratively dependent on FAO and is ultimately responsible to the Organization.
75. The countries bordering the Black Sea (Bulgaria, Georgia, Romania, Turkey, Ukraine, and the Russian Federation) are currently negotiating to establish a Commission for the conservation and management of the living resources of the Black Sea. With the establishment of a new fishery body for the Black Sea, the Council will have a reduced area of competence as well as a possible reduction in its membership.
76. The membership of the Council consists of a number of very important fishing nations which could meet all scientific and technical requirements of the Council. At its Twenty-First Session (Alicante, Spain, May 1995), the Council called for strengthening of GFCM and proposed voluntary contributions from members to supplement the regular budget provided by FAO. It must be pointed out that in the light of serious financial cuts in the budget of the Fisheries Department, the present level of support for the Council through the Regular Programme of FAO may not be possible to maintain. For a body to function properly and effectively a firm financial commitment by its members is of paramount importance. In addition, other FAO regional fishery bodies such as WECAFC, CECAF, and IOFC serving less developed areas, are in greater needs of the Organization's financial, technical and scientific support.
77. As a result of the decentralization policy, all of FAO regional fishery bodies are, or shortly will be, located on Regional Offices of the Organization or located in a member country. Possibilities of the GFCM Secretariat being located in a member country to host the Secretariat outside the Organization need to be investigated. This could reduce the Organization's expenditure for hosting GFCM as well as demonstrate the rationale regarding its policy on decentralization.
III) Proposed Options
a) Amendments of the Present Agreement
78. FAO, in consultation with member countries of GFCM, could amend the present Agreement. The amendments could include provisions for strengthening GFCM, providing for an autonomous budget and greater administrative independence. The changes could re-establish GFCM on the same footing as IOTC. The new GFCM might still fall short of being able to meet all the requirements of the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.
b) To Establish an Independent Commission
79. Under this option, members of the Council could terminate the Agreement establishing GFCM in accordance with the Provision of Article XIV of the Agreement. Under the aegis of FAO or other arrangements, GFCM members could agree on a new treaty for the establishment of a new intergovernmental fishery organization for the conservation and management of the fisheries resources of the Mediterranean Sea. GFCM could remain operational until the new body is in place. Cooperation between FAO and the new fishery body could, thereafter, be determined in accordance with the Provisions of Article XIII of the Organization's Constitution. The new independent body could be in a position to fully implement the Provisions of the UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks.
(2) Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission (APFIC)
I) Present Structure
80. APFIC was established by an Agreement concluded under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution in 1948. The area of competence of the Commission is broadly defined as the "Indo-Pacific area" although in 1990 the Commission agreed that in practice it would give priority to marine fishery resources in the FAO Statistical Area 71. Membership of the Commission is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO. Other States that are Members of the Untied Nations, any of its Specialized Agencies or the International Atomic Energy Agency may be admitted as members by a two-thirds majority of the Commission's membership. APFIC is financed and administered by the Organization. Article IV of the Agreement establishing APFIC provides a broad mandate for the Commission in respect of the management of the fisheries. The purpose of the Commission includes the promotion and the full and proper utilization of living aquatic resources by the development and management of fishing and
culture operations. Its function in respect of management is to formulate and recommend measures and to initiate and carry out programmes or projects to conserve and manage resources. The Commission has the following subsidiary bodies:
(i) Executive Committee
(ii) APFIC Committee on Marine Fisheries
(iii) APFIC Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Committee
(iv) Joint Working Party on Fish Technology and Marketing
(v) Joint Working Party on Fishery Statistics and Economics
(vi) Working Party on Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries
(vii) Working Party on Marine Fisheries
II) Considerations
81. Following the recommendation of the Eighteenth Session of COFI (Rome, April 1989), the Commission established an Ad hoc Committee (Twenty-third Session, May 1990) to draw up a report reviewing the structure, functions and responsibilities of IPFC and its subsidiary bodies. The report of the Ad hoc Committee was considered by the IPFC Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the South China Sea (CDMSCS) at its Seventh Session held in Kowloon, Hong Kong, in July 1991. The Committee also had the report of its own Working Group on the Structure, Functions and Responsibilities of CDMSCS. It decided that (i) the Commission should not be disbanded but be restructured, (ii) the membership of the Commission should be enlarged, (iii) IPFC should have an autonomous budget, and (iv) the work of CDMSCS should be strengthened.
82. At its Twenty-fourth Session (Bangkok, Thailand, 23 November - 4 December 1993), the Commission, taking into account the report of the Ad hoc Committee, the views of the CDMSCS and the report of the IPFC Executive Committee, decided to adopt a number of changes concerning its structure, functions and responsibilities. These included (i) changing the name of the Commission to Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission (APFIC), (ii) establishing an Inland Fishery and Aquaculture Committee, (iii) disbanding the Special Committee on Management of Indo-Pacific Tuna and the Standing Committee on Resource Research and Development (SCORRAD), and (iv) concentrating on the development and management of the marine fisheries in the South China Sea. The Commission did not address some of the fundamental issues concerning its own future. The functions and responsibilities of the two Committees are very distinct from one another. They are geographically separated and the functions envisaged for
the Marine Fisheries Committee have no bearing on the functions of the Committee for Inland Fishery and Aquaculture. These bodies can exist and function independently pursuing their own separate mandates. This means that there is little justification for the existence of the Commission itself as well as that of its Executive Committee since there will be practically nothing for either of them to do.
83. At present, there are nine fishery bodies in the Pacific Ocean. These are Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (I-ATTC), International Pacific Halibut Commission (IPHC), North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC), Council of the Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Agreement (CEPTFA), Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Organization (OAPO), South Pacific Permanent Commission (SPPC), South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency (SPFFA), Pacific Salmon Commission (PSC), and North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES). In addition, there are a number of regional organizations which also deal with fisheries including Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC), Marketing Information and Advisory Services for Fish Products in the Asia/Pacific Region (INFOFISH), Asia/Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), and Pacific Economic Cooperation (PECC). The region as a whole is well covered by these bodies except for the management of
the resources of the South China Sea which is the responsibility of APFIC.
III) Proposed Options
a) Amendments to the Agreements Establishing APFIC
84. Under this option, APFIC will remain as an Article XIV body with an autonomous budget, more management powers and greater flexibility. It could have the following subsidiary bodies:
(i) The IOFC Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal could become a subsidiary body of APFIC. This would provide greater conservation and management powers enjoyed by bodies operating under Article XIV.
(ii) The Committee on Marine Fisheries would remain as a subsidiary body of APFIC with greater management and administrative powers.
b) Terminating the Agreement Establishing APFIC and Promoting the Committee on Marine Fisheries to a Commission under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution
85. The Commission and the Executive Committee of APFIC do not appear to serve a useful purpose. Consideration could therefore be given to terminate the Agreement. FAO, in consultation with the countries concerned could consider the establishment of a new Commission for the Conservation and management of the main resources of the South China Sea and the Eastern Indian Ocean (Area 51) under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution. The new commission could have autonomous budget and management powers similar to those provided in the Agreement establishing IOTC could be given to the new commission.
c) Establishing an Independent Commission to Replace the Committee on Marine Fisheries
86. Under the aegis of FAO or other arrangements a new international treaty could be negotiated by the Countries of the South China Sea. The treaty could establish an independent commission to deal effectively with the conservation and management of the fisheries resources in the South China Sea.
d) The Future Arrangements for the Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Committee
87. In 1994, the total fish supply from inland resources in Asia reached 15,279,042 tons (77.5% of total inland production). Thus the importance of inland fisheries in the region is obvious. Like other FAO inland fishery bodies, this Committee could be restructured and strengthened to perform effective advisory functions. This could be done by establishing this Committee as a commission under Article VI of the FAO Constitution.
(3) Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC)
I) The Present Structure of IOFC
88. IOFC was established by the Council in 1967 under Article VI-1 of the FAO Constitution. The area of competence of the Commission is the Indian Ocean and its adjacent seas (FAO Statistical Areas 51 and 57), excluding the Antarctic area. Membership in the commission is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO. The commission and its subsidiary bodies are financed and administered by FAO. The Commission's terms of reference as set out in paragraph 2 of its Statutes are:
(i) To promote, assist and coordinate national programmes over the entire field of fishery development and conservation;
(ii) to promote research and development activities in the area through international sources, and in particular international aid programmes, and
(iii) to examine management problems with particular reference, because of the need to take action, to those relating to the management of offshore resources.
The Commission has four subsidiary bodies:
(i) Committee for the Indian Ocean Tunas;
(ii) Committee for the Development and Management of the Fishery Resources of the Gulfs (the Gulfs Committee);
(iii) Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Southwest Indian Ocean (SWIO); and
(iv) Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal (BOB).
II) Considerations
89. The recent developments concerning high seas fisheries have made it clear that regional and subregional fishery organizations should play a more active and effective role in the conservation and management of the resources of the high seas. These bodies should have proper mandate and firm commitments by their members in order to function effectively. The IOFC and its subsidiaries have an advisory role which is not appropriate for dealing with management issues. If there is a need for conservation and management of the high seas fisheries in the Indian Ocean, the present institutional arrangements will have to be fundamentally changed.
90. FAO has responded positively to the need of the region by establishing the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) which will deal with the tuna and tuna like species on a regional basis which is necessary for the conservation and management of the tuna stocks. This has two implications on the functions of IOFC. First, the IOFC Committee for the Indian Ocean Tuna will be abolished. Secondly, the membership of the Commission will be substantially affected since many present members joined the Commission for its involvement with tuna fishing. With the abolition of the Committee for the Indian Ocean Tunas the remaining three Committees are, subject to minor adjustments to their geographical coverage, well placed to serve the countries bordering the Indian Ocean on a subregional basis. The adjustments could provide for proper conservation and management of the resources of the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea which so far have been only nominally covered by the
Commission.
91. The IOFC, like other FAO regional fishery bodies, has not been able to hold its sessions regularly. The financial constraints on the Organization in recent years have caused the delay or even cancelation of regular sessions and the implementation of its recommendations. The Commission has held three sessions in the past ten years (1985,1989,1994). For a body to be effective, it needs to hold it sessions regularly and be able to carry out its programmes of work.
92. The participation of the members at regular sessions of the Commission has been very poor. At its last session (Mombasa, Kenya, November 1994) only fourteen out of forty five members attended; not enough to provide a quorum necessary for making decisions. Non-FAO fishery organizations whose budgets are met by members' contributions and have more specific functions enjoy a better participation and support by their members. It is, therefore, imperative that any restructuring of the Commission should include proper support and commitments, including financial commitment, by the members.
III) Proposed Options
93. With the establishment of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission to manage tuna and tuna-like species throughout the Indian Ocean, one of the main region-wide tasks of the IOFC, operating through its Committee on the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna, would be removed. There are a few other highly migratory or transboundary fish stocks but the range of migration of such stocks is too poorly known at present to allow for the establishment of a Commission. Other fish stocks in the Indian Ocean are more localized, with fisheries based on those stocks demonstrating diverse conditions in the various localities. It would appear more logical to look more to the strengthening of fisheries management at the sub-region level. The IOFC Committees (Committee for the Development and Management of the Fishery Resources of the Gulfs, Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Southwest Indian Ocean, and Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay
of Bengal), subject to minor adjustments to their geographical coverage, are well placed to serve the countries bordering the Indian Ocean on a subregional basis. The adjustments could provide for proper conservation and management of the resources of the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea which so far have been only nominally covered by IOFC.
a) Transforming the Existing Three Committees of IOFC into New Commissions under Article XIV with New Management Mandates, Autonomous Budgets and New Areas of Competence
94. Agreements could be concluded under Article XIV to establish fishery commissions to replace the three subsidiary committees. The structure of constructive agreements under Article XIV is preferred because of the possibility of enhanced powers and flexibility that go with it.
(i) Fishery Commission for the Eastern Indian Ocean
95. This commission could replace the Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal. Its area of competence could be extended but would correspond mainly to that of the FAO Statistical Area 57. In order to be effective, it could be endowed with management power and an autonomous budget. Full participation and support by the countries in the sub-region would be essential if conservation and management measures are to be adopted and implemented at the sub-regional level. It would
appear that the region is homogeneous enough to provide such support. Another alternative is to set up a new BOB committee as a subsidiary body of APFIC.
(ii) Fishery Commission for the North West Indian Ocean
96. At present, the Arabian Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea fall under the area of competence of IOFC. With the exception of the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman whose fisheries are covered by the Gulfs Committee, there is no sub-regional mechanism in place to deal with the other areas. In addition, the biological characteristics of the fisheries of the Persian Gulf have little in common with those of the Gulf of Oman or Arabian Sea. Similarly, the Red Sea has its own distinct biological characteristics. The fisheries of the Gulf of Oman and the Gulf of Aden however have much in common with those of the Arabian Sea.
97. A commission for the North West Indian Ocean could thus be established to deal with the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Oman, the Arabian Sea and the Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea. The commission could have three geographical subsidiary bodies dealing with the fisheries of the three specific areas - the Persian Gulf, the Gulfs of Oman and Aden and the Arabian Sea and lastly the Red Sea. The management decisions of the three Sub-commissions would be taken by their members and not by the commission. The area of competence would correspond to the northern part of FAO Statistical Area 51.
(iii) Fishery Commission for the South West Indian Ocean
98. The present SWIO Committee appears to be well placed to become a commission under Article XIV with management power and an autonomous budget. Its area of competence would correspond to the southern part of the FAO Statistical Area 51. The region comprises countries which have many similar problems and aspirations. There are, at present, a number of other organizations promoting collaboration in this area, e.g. Organization for Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC) and the Western Indian Ocean Tuna Organization (WIOTO). Most countries are also members of economic groupings e.g. the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) while a few belong to the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC). Such economic groupings could in the future provide the nucleus for injecting the political will required for management decisions.
b) Independent Commissions
99. The Director-General of FAO in consultation with the member countries of the IOFC three Committees, convenes conferences of plenipotentiaries with a view to establishing independent fishery Commissions for the three sub-regions. Cooperation between FAO and the new bodies will be agreed according to the provisions of Article XIII of the FAO Constitution.
c) Future Role of IOFC
100. Even if the fisheries management function is devolved to new and strengthened commissions at the sub-regional levels, there may still be a role for the IOFC to play at a region-wide level in the area of research and data collection and dissemination. The Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC) is another ocean-wide body but its mandate and activities extend beyond fisheries. Thus, in the interest of the region as a whole consideration should therefore be given to redefining the mandate of the IOFC. It may be feasible to reconstitute the Commission as an Indian Ocean Marine Fisheries Research Committee under Article VI.2 of the FAO Constitution as an organization whose functions would be of purely scientific and technical nature. The purpose of such a body would be to promote and coordinate marine scientific research in order to advance scientific knowledge of the region and its living resources, to promote the collection and exchange of information related to
marine scientific research in the area concerned, and to cooperate closely with fisheries and fisheries related organizations in the region. Its membership could consist of Coastal States and distant water fishing nations. In view of the lack of adequate information on the resources and their interaction in the Indian Ocean, the existence of such a body seems to be desirable to supplement the information that would be acquired by the regional bodies.
IV) Financial Implications to the Organization
101. In transforming the existing three IOFC Committees into commissions under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution, the Organization would not have any financial responsibility towards these bodies since the new commissions would have their own autonomous budgets. However, if a region-wide body is established by FAO to promote and coordinate marine scientific research in order to advance scientific knowledge of the region, the cost will not be substantial.
(4) Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic (CECAF)
I) Geographical Coverage and Membership
102. The Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic (CECAF) was established under Article VI-2 of the FAO Constitution in 1967 to replace the Regional Fisheries Commission for Western Africa (RFCWA). The Statutes of CECAF define its area of competence as the Eastern-Central Atlantic between Cape Spartel and the Congo River. This area mostly coincides with FAO Statistical Area 34. The membership of CECAF consists of Members whose territories border the Atlantic Ocean from Cape Spartel to the mouth of the Congo River and those Member Nations and Associate Members fishing or conducting research in the area. At present, all the coastal countries of the area covered by CECAF are members of the Committee. Other members of CECAF are Cuba, France, Greece, Italy, Japan, Korea, (Rep. of), Norway, Poland, Romania, Spain, and the USA.
II) Marine Resources
103. The continental shelf off this area is fairly narrow and most catches are taken inside 200 miles. The highly migratory species in the area are tune and tuna-like species and possibly oceanic sharks. Only oceanic horse mackerel (Trachurus picturatus) is known to migrate between the coast of Sahara and the offshore seamounts possibly reaching the Cape Verde Islands. This pelagic straddling stock is exploited by Eastern Europe fleets and by coastal countries. The main shared stocks in CECAF region are Sardinella aurita, Trachurus trachurus, Scomber japonicus, Cephalopods/Cuttlefish, small pelagics, demersal resources, Sardinella maderensis, and Trachurus trecae. Of these, Scomber japonicus, Trachurus trachurus and Trachurus trecae do straddle between the EEZs and the high Seas.
III) Structure and Mandate
104. The Committee has four subsidiary bodies:
(i) Sub-Committee on Management of Resources within the Limits of National Jurisdiction
(ii) Sub-Committee on Fishery Development
(iii) Working Party on Resources Evaluation
(iv) Working Party on Fishery Statistics
The Terms of Reference of CECAF, as amended in 1992, include:
(a) to keep under review the state of these resources and of the industries based on them;
(b) to promote the collection, interchange, dissemination and analysis or study of statistical socio-economic, biological and environmental data and other marine fishery information;
(c) to establish the scientific basis for regulatory measures leading to the conservation and management of marine fishery resources, to formulate such measures through subsidiary bodies, as required, and to make appropriate recommendations for the adoption and implementation of these measures;
(d) to encourage, recommend and coordinate training and extension activities in all aspects of marine fisheries; and
(e) to assist Member Governments in formulating programmes to be implemented through international aid sources to achieve the objectives described in (a), (b), (c), (d) above.
IV) CECAF Activities
105. CECAF has been very successful in achieving the objectives for which it had been set up by FAO in 1967. With the help of "CECAF Projects", funded by UNDP from 1973 to 1985 and other donors since then, the Committee has carried out many activities in the fields of collecting statistics, assessing resources, management principles, training and regional cooperation. It has played an important role in coordinating the management of fisheries in West Africa and has created an awareness on the part of senior officials as to the economic importance of fisheries. These activities and the promotion of the development of international collaboration have been instrumental to the development of management structures as well as the establishment of some research centres in the region.
106. CECAF, through extensive activities related to its advisory functions, has become the only organization capable of providing scientific advice and technical support to its members and other fishery organizations in the region. Its important role in the coordination of the fishery activities of its members and those of the fishery bodies in the region is well acknowledged by its members and those organizations. In 1992, the terms of reference of CECAF were amended in order to give the Committee more power in respect of the Conservation and management of the resources of the region. The function of the Committee concerning the conservation and management of the high Seas resources is still of an advisory nature. In the past, CECAF has recommended a number of management measures which have been implemented by its members.
107. At its Twelfth Session (Accra, Ghana, 27 April-1 May 1992), the Committee's members recognized unanimously that CECAF had played in the past and should continue to play in the future, an invaluable role as the main technical body for cooperation in fisheries management and development in the region. They also expressed their concern at the infrequency of meetings which could undermine the overall efficiency and that quality of the Committee's technical work. It was recognized by the Committee that the general activities of CECAF, as well as any additional activities would have to remain within the Organization's overall budget and programme. CECAF members were also informed that traditional donors were now reluctant to support institutions on a long-term basis and therefore it was imperative for the Committee to consider appropriate arrangements to have adequate support on a more regular basis.
108. At its Thirteenth Session (Dakar, Senegal, 18-20 December 1995), the Committee discussed the decision of COFI (Twenty-first Session, March 1995) concerning the future role of the FAO fishery bodies. It decided that a thorough analysis of the future role of CECAF should be prepared by the Secretariat. This document should be then circulated to all CECAF members by June 1996 in order to enable them to discuss it at the Tenth Session of CECAF Sub-Committee on Management of Resources within the Limits of National Jurisdiction provisionally scheduled for December 1996.
V) Other Fishery Organizations in the Region
(i) International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT)
109. ICCAT was established by the International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, signed in Madrid, Spain on 14 May 1966 and entered into force on 21 March 1969. The area covered by the Convention is defined as "all waters of the Atlantic Ocean, including the adjacent seas". the species covered by the Commission are the tuna and tuna like fishes (The Scombriformes with the exception of the families Trichiuridae and Gempylidae and the genus Scomber) and such other species exploited in tuna fishing in the Convention area which are not covered by other international organizations. ICCAT has
regulatory powers and its conservation and management measures are subject to the objection procedure.
(ii) Sub-Regional Commission on Fisheries (Commission sous-régionale des pêches) (CSRP)
110. The Convention establishing a Sub-Regional Fisheries Commission was signed at the First Extraordinary Conference of Ministers in charge of fisheries from Cape Verde, the Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Mauritania and Senegal in Dakar, Senegal, on 29 March 1985. Guinea became a member of the Commission in 1987. The Convention does not define the precise area covered by the Commission but references are made to "Sub-Region" and the EEZs of the Contracting parties. The membership of CSRP consists of Cape Verde, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Mauritania and Senegal. The Convention covers all fishery resources within its area of competence. The main objective of the Commission is to harmonize the long-term policies of member States in the preservation, conservation and exploitation of the fisheries resources for the benefit of their respective populations. The Commission consists of the Conference of Ministers, the Coordinating Committee, and the Permanent Secretariat. The
Conakry Convention concerning determination of conditions for foreign access to exploitation of the living resources in off-shore areas of CSRP Member States was signed by the Commission's member States in 1989.
(iii) Regional Fisheries Committee for the Gulf of Guinea (Comité régional des pêches du Golfe de Guinée)(COREP)
111. The Regional Fisheries Committee for the Gulf of Guinea was established by the Convention Concerning the Regional Development of Fisheries in the Gulf of Guinea, signed at Libreville, Gabon on 21 June 1984. The area of competence of the Committee is defined as the Central and Southern Gulf of Guinea. The species covered by the Committee are all living resources within its area of competence. The Convention is open for signature and accession to States bordering the Gulf of Guinea. the present members are Congo, Gabon, Sao Tome and Principe, and Zaire.
112. The main objectives of the Convention inter alia are (i) determine a concerted attitude towards the activities of foreign fishing vessels and give priority to the needs of fishing vessels originating from member countries; (ii) harmonize the national regulations with a view to having a unified regulation fixing the conditions of fishing and the control of fishing operations in the area covered by the Convention, and (iii) collect the maximum scientific, technical and economic data on fishing operations. The organs of the Committee are the Council of Ministers and the Secretariat. The Secretariat is based in Libreville, Gabon. To support the Committee, the EC is funding specific projects established in each of the member countries as well as some sub-regional activities.
(iv) Ministerial Conference on Fisheries Cooperation Among African States Bordering the Atlantic
113. A Ministerial Conference on Fisheries Cooperating Among African States Bordering the Atlantic Ocean was held form 30 March to 1 April 1989 in Rabat, Morocco. The Conference unanimously adopted the Rabat Declaration which referred to the common will of all the States of the region to strengthen and develop their fisheries cooperation namely in the fields of assessment and conservation of fisheries resources as well as the promotion of marine scientific research; development of fisheries production and land infrastructure; marketing of fishing products; enhancement of vocational and technical training; solidarity with land locked and other geographically disadvantaged African States; and all other actions likely to contribute to the development of the fisheries sector in the region. The Regional Convention on Fisheries Cooperation Among African States Bordering the Atlantic Ocean was adopted at the Second Session of the Ministerial Conference in Dakar, Senegal on 5 July
114. The objectives of this Convention are: (a) to promote an active and organized cooperation in the area of fisheries management and development in the Region; (b) to take up the challenge of food self-sufficiency through the rational utilization of fishery resources within the context of an integrated approach that would embrace all the components of the fishing sector; (c) to stimulate the national economic sectors through the direct and secondary effects resulting from fishery resources exploitation, bearing in mind the importance of the fisheries sector in the economic, social and nutritional development process of the people of the Region; (d) to enhance, coordinate and harmonize their efforts and capabilities for the purpose of conserving, exploiting, upgrading and marketing fishery resources, considering in particular fish stocks occurring within the waters under the sovereignty or jurisdiction of more than one Party; and (e) to reinforce solidarity with African
land-locked States and geographically disadvantaged States of the Region. The institutional framework of the Convention comprises the Conference of Ministers, the Bureau and the Secretariat. The Conference of Ministers is the governing and decision-making body with respect to fisheries cooperation among the Parties. The Bureau is the coordinating organ of the Conference of Ministers and the Secretariat is the executive organ.
VI) Management Measures and their Implementation
115. There are highly migratory species, a few straddling stocks and a number of shared stocks in the CECAF region. While the management of tuna and tuna-like species is the responsibility of ICCAT, there is no fishery body in the region with management advisory mechanism in relation to straddling and shared stocks. The two sub-regional bodies are well placed to execute management measures at sub-regional level. The Western Gulf of Guinea remains without a sub-regional body. The Ministerial Conference has the political power to execute management measures at regional level. The future restructuring of CECAF should take account of the existing bodies in the region. A mechanism by which management issues are properly addressed and management measures are adopted is needed in the region.
VII) Proposed Options
a) Transforming the Existing Committee into a Scientific Commission by an Agreement concluded under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution with an Autonomous Budget
116. Under this option, FAO in consultation with the members of the Committee and other fishery organizations in the region, could conclude an agreement under Article XIV of the Organization's Constitution to establish a commission which could be financed entirely by members' contributions. The new body could become purely a scientific and technical commission providing conservation and management advice to its members as well as to the fishery organizations in the region. The functions and activities of the new commission would be very similar to those of ICES in the North Atlantic.
b) Transforming CECAF into a Management Body under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution with an Autonomous Budget
117. An Agreement could be concluded under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution to establish a fishery commission to replace the present Committee. The new commission would be financed by the members and could have management powers similar to those of IOTC.
c) Establishing an Independent Commission to Replace CECAF
118. It would also be possible, if CECAF members so wished, to replace CECAF with an independent fishery commission. In this case, a Conference of Plenipotentiaries would establish a new body under an international agreement. Serious considerations should, however, be given to the existing management bodies in the region and the possible future management functions of the new body. The agreement would provide detail provisions concerning the functions, activities and powers of the new commission.
(5) Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission (WECAFC)
I) Present Structure of WECAFC
119. WECAFC was established by the Council under Article VI.1 of the FAO constitution. The area covered by the Commission is all marine waters of the Western Central Atlantic Ocean (FAO Statistical Areas 31 and part of 41). Membership of WECAFC is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of FAO. The Commission and its subsidiary bodies are financed and administered by the Organization. The purpose of the Commission is to promote the optimum utilization of the living aquatic resources of the Western Central Atlantic by the proper management and development of the fisheries and fishing operations. The terms of reference of the Commission include:
(a) to keep under review the state of these resources and of the industries based on them;
(b) to promote the collection, interchange, dissemination and analysis or study of statistical socio-economic, biological and environmental data and other marine fishery information;
(c) to establish the scientific basis for regulatory measures leading to the conservation and management of marine fishery resources, to formulate such measures through subsidiary bodies, as required, and to make appropriate recommendations for the adoption and implementation of these measures;
(d) to encourage, recommend and coordinate training and extension activities in all aspects of marine fisheries; and
(e) to assist Member Governments in formulating programmes to be implemented through international aid sources to achieve the objectives described in (a), (b), (c), (d), above.
The Commission's subsidiary bodies are:
(i) Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Lesser Antilles
(ii) Working Party on Assessment of Marine Fishery Resources
(iii) Working Party on Fishery Economics and Planning
II) Considerations
120. The area covered by WECAFC is one of the most diverse area in terms of cultural, economical and political structures and backgrounds regarding its members. This diversity is, inevitably, reflected in their policies and approach to fisheries matters. According to FAO, the total amount of fish landed from the Western Central Atlantic (FAO Statistical
Area 31) in 1994 was 2,241,379 mt, including the catches by DWFNs. In 1993, the island nations in the region (with the exception of Cuba) had limited landings while the United States, the Central and Latin American members of WECAFC and the DWFNs with well developed fisheries sector, were the main beneficiaries of the resources of the high seas.
121. Flying fish, dolphin fish, the Atlantic sailfish, the white marlin, the blue marlin and the king mackerel occur as straddling stocks in the Western Central Atlantic. Stock assessment, data collection and other information in the EEZs of many WECAFC members are patchy and incomplete. There is an urgent need for such studies as well as closer collaboration among the Commission's members on these subjects. At present, there is no mechanism through which the requirements of 1995 UN Agreement on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks can be implemented in that region. Only in the Lesser Antilles an attempt was made (1986) to examine and identify the shared fishery resources. Further studies to update that work and to assess the shared stocks in other areas covered by WECAFC are badly needed.
122. There is a lack of coordination concerning fisheries activities of the existing organizations in the region. Extensive collaboration between WECAFC and ICCAT, CARICOM, OECS and OLDEPESCA is necessary to focus on common interests in the fisheries of the region in order to identify and promote better conservation and management of the fisheries resources in the region. At its last session (Caracas, Venezuela, November 1995), the Commission's Members discussed the role of WECAFC and requested the Secretariat of the Commission to prepare a comprehensive report on this subject.
123. At the last session of COFI (Rome, March 1995), some delegations requested FAO to consider the reactivation of WECAFC in the interest of more adequately meeting the fishery needs of the member countries, especially those of small island States and developing countries. At its last session (Caracas, Venezuela, November 1995), WECAFC extensively discussed its role and delegates agreed that the decision on the future of WECAFC would have to be made by members at the political level because of the obligations and commitments that might be involved. The Commission recommended that FAO conduct a comprehensive assessment of the situation of fisheries in the region in respect of the future role of the Commission and the prospects for enhancing regional cooperation in the region. Based on a thorough review of the regional and subregional fishery sector, the study should:
- identify the main obstacles to and opportunities for fisheries development, and present the strategic regional and subregional management option;
- identify the main areas for possible cooperation among the countries of the WECAFC region;
- identify organizations, arrangements and mechanisms available to address adequately the cooperation issues identified;
- elaborate possible proposals for the future structure and mandate of WECAFC based on analysis of the identified regional cooperation issues and mechanisms;
- present cost estimates of the functioning of WECAFC for each of the proposals.
III) Proposed Options
a) Restructuring WECAFC under Article VI.1
124. FAO, in consultation with WECAFC members, could revise the terms of reference of the Commission. More emphasis could be placed on stock assessments, data collections and research programmes, particularly in relation to shared stocks, straddling stocks and highly migratory fish stocks. A regional project on shared stocks in the WECAFC region could be prepared by FAO for submission to donor agencies. The Commission could intensify its role to promote cooperation and collaboration on fisheries matters among its members and the existing regional organizations. The work of the Commission could become of a purely scientific and technical nature. Active support by its members is essential while FAO should increase its technical support for the Commission, so it can hold its sessions regularly and carry out its intersessional activities in accordance with its terms of reference.
125. In restructuring WECAFC, the Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Lesser Antilles, could be promoted to an Article XIV commission. This commission could have management powers and financed by its members.
b) Transforming WECAFC to a Management Body under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution
126. The second option could be to promote WECAFC to a management body under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution. The new commission could have management powers and be financed by its members. In this case, the Committee for the Lesser Antilles could become a commission under Article XIV as proposed in the preceding paragraph, or remain as a subsidiary body of the new commission.
c) To Establish an Independent Body to Replace WECAFC
127. It would also be possible to replace WECAFC with a new independent fishery commission. FAO should consult the WECAFC members on the possibilities of establishing an independent commission under an international agreement.
IV) Financial Implications to the Organization
128. If WECAFC is to function properly and effectively as an FAO body, the Organization will have to increase its technical and if possible financial support. Thus the technical/scientific support by the Organization will have to be increased in order to enable WECAFC to function properly. Members of WECAFC should also undertake to actively support the Commission and participate in its work.
(6) Regional Fisheries Advisory Commission for the Southwest Atlantic (CARPAS)
I) Present Structure
129. CARPAS was established by a Resolution of the FAO Conference in 1961. The area covered by the Commission is the Southwest Atlantic and inland waters of member States (Part of FAO Statistical Area 41). Membership is restricted to FAO Member Nations which belong to the American Continent and have coasts bordering on the Western Atlantic Ocean South of the Equator. The Commission is financed and administered by FAO. Its terms of reference are to promote fuller use of the marine resources in the Western South Atlantic in accordance with Sound economic and scientific principles; to coordinate studies, research and techniques; and to determine common needs.
The Commission has the following subsidiary bodies:
(i) Working Party on Fisheries Statistics
(ii) Ad Hoc Working Party on Fishery Economic Development in the Southern Atlantic
(iii) Working Party on Biological Research and Evaluation of Fishery Resources
II) Considerations
130. CARPAS has not been active since 1974.
III) Proposed Options
a) Reviving the Commission under Article VI.1
131. FAO could consult CARPAS members (Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay) with a view of reviving this body with new terms of reference and structure under Article VI.1 of the FAO Constitution.
b) Transforming the Commission to an Article XIV Body
132. FAO, in consultation with CARPAS members, could prepare an agreement under Article XIV of the Organization's Constitution for the establishment of a commission for the conservation and management of the region to replace CARPAS. The new body, with autonomous budget, could have management powers similar to those of IOTC.
c) Establishing an Independent Body
133. FAO could initiate consultation with CARPAS members with a view of exploring the possibilities of establishing a new independent fisheries commission to replace CARPAS.
<section>6</section>
V. INLAND FISHERIES
(i) Management of Inland Fisheries
134. The world's total production from inland fisheries has increased steadily in the past twenty years. It reached 19 173 642 tons in 1994, comprising just over 20 percent of the world's total landings of all fisheries. Furthermore, inland fisheries are directly related to food security, particularly in Asia and Africa where they provide food, income and employment on a large scale. In 1994, the total fish supply from inland resources in Asia reached 15 279 042 tons, while in Africa it amounted to 1 880 632 tons. Aquaculture represents some 70% of this production and as such plays an important role in the use of inland resources of Asia and Europe. The overall contribution of aquaculture to fish production is significant and rising whereas the capture fisheries sector is more static.
135. The problems associated with the management of inland fisheries are very diverse and complex. fish stocks are affected by a number of factors including pollution (eutrophication, toxic wastes, acid rain), river engineering (impoundments, land drainage, flood alleviation), habitat loss through land reclamation and removal of riparian vegetation, afforestation, introduction of non-native species, and overfishing. Thus the management of inland fisheries is different in nature to that of marine fisheries and is basically focused on protection, mitigation and rehabilitation. These are important components of any inland fisheries management strategy.
136. Excluding the large international lakes and rivers for which international cooperation is vital for the management of their fisheries, most management measures relating to thousands of lakes, reservoirs, ponds, rivers and estuaries throughout the world need national initiatives and actions. the management of inland fisheries is invariably part of an overall management strategy of these waters. Multiple use of these waters mean that management objectives have to be prioritized among users. For example, a dam may provide electricity and water for agricultural purposes affecting at the same time the floodplain and the migratory route of some species. Management strategies are by nature a set of compromised objectives. These objectives are often set by authorities at local, regional or national levels.
137. International inland fisheries bodies are not expected to manage the inland fisheries of member States. They play the role of promoting a common viewpoint as well as coordinating and facilitating the works of individuals and national institutions on many aspects relating to the management of the inland fisheries. Experiences and views exchanged, shared and discussed are often beneficial and sometimes fundamental to member States in their approach to the management of their inland fisheries.
(ii) Role of FAO Inland Fishery Bodies
1. European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC)
I) The present structure of EIFAC
138. EIFAC was established by the Council in 1957 under Article VI-I of the FAO Constitution (Resolution 2/26). Its area of operation is Europe (FAO Statistical Area 05) and its membership is open to all European Member Nations of the Organization whose territories are situated wholly or partly in the European region. The Commission and its subsidiary bodies are financed and administered by the Organization. The terms of reference of the Commission are:
(1) to assist in the collection and dissemination of pertinent information;
(2) to propose and assist in the organization of appropriate symposia;
(3) to promote liaison and cooperation among governmental organizations;
(4) to advise on the evolution of an organized approach among interested governments of this region toward the development of inland fisheries as may seem desirable and feasible; and
(5) to advise on any other matters appropriate to the promotion of the development and utilization of the inland fisheries within the competence of the Organization.
139. At its Nineteenth Session held in Dublin, Ireland, in June 1996, the Commission established a new Sub-Commission IV to deal with social and economic issues. Thus the four Sub-Commissions would regroup existing and possible new activities. The Commission, as restructured, has the following subsidiary bodies:
Sub-Commission I:
- Working Party on Fishing Gear Selectivity
- Working Party on Crayfish
- Working Party on Eels
- Working Party on Electric Fishing
- Working Party on Introductions and Stocking
- Working Party on Brackishwater Fisheries and Aquaculture
Sub-Commission II:
- Working Party on Fish Diseases and their Control
- Working Party on Water in Aquaculture
- Working Party on Fish and Crustacean Nutrition
- Working Party on Prevention and Control of Bird Predation
- Working Party on Aquatic Resources Management in Aquaculture
Sub-Commission III:
- Working Party on Influence of Management Practices on the Environment
- Working Party on Effects of Physical Modifications of the Aquatic Habitat on Fish Populations
- Working Party on Accumulated Toxicants in Fish
Sub-Commission IV:
- Working Party on Recreational Fisheries
- Working Party on Legislation Concerning the Aquatic Environment in EIFAC Countries
- Working Party on Education in Fisheries Management
- Working Party on Resolution of Conflicts within River Catchments
- Working Party on Social and Economic Data for Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture
2. Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America (COPESCAL)
I) The Present Structure of COPESCAL
140. COPESCAL was established by the Council in 1976 under Article VI-I of the FAO Constitution (Resolution 4/70). Its area of operation is Latin America and its membership is open to all Member Nations and Associate Members of the Organization which are serviced by the Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean. The terms of reference of the Commission are:
(a) to promote, coordinate and assist national and regional fishery and limnological surveys and programmes of research and development leading to the rational utilization of inland fishery resources;
(b) to assist Member Governments in establishing the scientific basis for regulatory and other measures for the conservation and improvement of inland fishery resources; to formulate such measures through subsidiary bodies as required, and to make appropriate recommendations for the adoption and implementation of these measures;
(c) to encourage efforts on a national basis and, when appropriate, to coordinate such efforts on a regional basis with a view to preserve the quality of water;
(d) to assist in the development of aquaculture and stock improvement, including the control of fish diseases, the importation and introduction of exotic species;
(e) to assist in appraising the economic and recreational values of inland fisheries and their development;
(f) to promote and assist in the utilization of the most effective fishing craft, gear and techniques;
(g) to promote and assist with activities for the processing, preservation and marketing of fish and fish products;
(h) to encourage education and training through the establishment or improvement of national and regional institutions and by the promotion and the organization of symposia, seminars, study tours and training centres;
(i) to assist in the collection, interchange, dissemination and analysis of data related to inland fisheries;
(j) to assist Member Governments in formulating national and regional programmes to be implemented through sources of international aid to help achieve the objectives referred to in the preceding paragraphs;
(k) to perform such other functions as are related to the rational management and development of inland fisheries in the Region.
141. The Commission has the following subsidiary bodies:
- Executive Committee
- Working Party on Fishery Resources
- Working Party on Fishery Technology
- Working Party on Aquaculture
3. Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa (CIFA)
I) The Present Structure of CIFA
142. CIFA was established by the Director-General in 1971 under Article VI-2 of the FAO Constitution following the decision of the Council at its Fifty-Sixth Session (Resolution 1/56). Its area of operation is Africa (FAO Statistical Area 01) and its membership is selected by the Director-General from African Member Nations and Associate Members of the Organization on the basis of their active interest in inland fishery development in Africa and of their potential contribution to the effective discharge of the functions of the Committee. The terms of reference of the Committee are:
(a) to promote, coordinate and assist national and regional fishery and limnological surveys and programmes of research and development leading to the rational utilization of inland fishery resources;
(b) to assist Member Governments in establishing the scientific basis for regulatory and other measure for the conservation and improvement of inland fishery resources, to formulate such measures through subsidiary bodies as required, and to make appropriate recommendations for the adoption and implementation of these measures;
(c) to promote and coordinate efforts on a national and regional basis to prevent damage to the aquatic environment, including the prevention and control of water pollution;
(d) to assist in the development of fish culture and stock improvement, including the control of fish diseases and the importation of exotic species;
(e) to promote and assist in the utilization of the most effective fishing craft, gear and techniques;
(f) to promote and assist activities concerned with the processing, preservation and marketing of fish and fish products;
(g) to encourage education and training through the establishment or improvement of national and regional institutions and by the promotion and the organization of symposia, seminars, study tours and training centres;
(h) to assist in the collection, interchange, dissemination and analysis of statistical, biological and environmental data and other inland fishery information; and
(i) to assist Member Governments in formulating national and regional programmes to be implemented through sources of international aid to help achieve the objectives referred to in the preceding paragraphs.
143. The Committee has the following subsidiary bodies:
- Sub-Committee for the Development and Management of the Fisheries of Lake Victoria
- Sub-Committee for Lake Tanganyika
- Sub-committee for the Protection and Development of the Fisheries in the Sahelian Zone
- Working Party on Aquaculture
- Working Party on Stock Assessment
- Working Party on Floodplain Fisheries
- Working Party on Pollution and Fisheries
4. APFIC Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Committee (AIFIC)
144. AIFIC was established as a result of restructuring of APFIC in 1993 and has not held any session yet. It is a subsidiary body of APFIC operating under Article XIV of the FAO Constitution. The terms of reference of AIFIC are:
a) to keep under review the state of these resources, of the industries based on them and of their environment;
b) to formulate and recommend measures an to initiate and carry out programmes or projects to:
i) increase the efficiency and sustainable productivity of inland fisheries and aquaculture;
ii) conserve and manage resources;
iii) protect resources from pollution;
c) to keep under review the economic and social aspects of fishing communities and recommend measures aimed at improving the living and working conditions of those involved in inland fisheries and aquaculture and otherwise at improving their contribution to social and economic goals;
d) to encourage, recommend, coordinate and undertake, as appropriate, research, training and extension activities in all aspects of sustainable inland fisheries and aquaculture;
e) to assemble, publish and disseminate information regarding the living inland aquatic resources, fisheries based on these resources and aquaculture;
f) to direct and provide guidance to the relevant Working Parties established under this Committee; and
g) to carry out such other activities as may be necessary for the Commission to achieve its purpose as defined above.
145. The Committee has the following subsidiary bodies:
- Working Party on Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries
- Joint Working Party on Fishery Statistics and Economics
- Joint Working Party on Fish Technology and Marketing
The two Joint Working Party will also serve APFIC Committee on Marine Fisheries.
(iii) Strengthening of FAO Inland Fishery Bodies
146. Strengthening of FAO inland fishery bodies does not require fundamental changes to the present structure and functions of these bodies. They need an increased financial and resources support by their members in addition to those already provided by the Organization.
<section>7</section>
ANNEX I
SUMMARY INFORMATION ON FAO REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
GFCM
General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean
International Agreement under aegis of FAO (Article XIV of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Albania, Algeria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, Libya, Malta, Monaco, Morocco, Romania, Spain, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, and former Yugoslavia Mediterranean, Black Sea and connecting waters To promote the development, conservation and management of living marine resources; to formulate and recommend conservation measures; to encourage training cooperative projects.
APFIC
Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission
International Agreement under aegis of FAO (Article XIV of FAO Constitution)
Bangkok
(Thailand)
Australia, Bangladesh, Cambodia, China (People's Republic of), France, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea (Rep.of), Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, UK, USA, Viet Nam. Indo-Pacific area (including inland waters) To keep fishery resources under review; to formulate and recommend conservation and management measures; to keep under review the economic and social aspects of fishing; to encourage training and research.
IOTC
Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
International Agreement under aegis of FAO (Article XIV of FAO Constitution)
To be determined Eritrea, EC, India, Japan, Korea (Rep.of), Madagascar, Mauritius, Pakistan, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, UK Indian Ocean and adjacent seas north of the Antarctic Convergence To promote cooperation in the conservation of tuna and tuna like species and also promote their optimum utilization, and the sustainable development of the fisheries.
IOFC
Indian Ocean Fishery Commission
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-1 of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Greece, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Rep.of), Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Korea (Rep.of) Kuwait, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, Myanmar, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Portugal, Qatar, Saudi Arabia (Kingdom of), Seychelles, Somalia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Tanzania, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, UK, USA, Viet Nam.
Indian Ocean and adjacent seas (excluding the Antarctic area) To promote programmes for fishery development and conservation; to promote research and development activities; to examine management problems with particular reference to offshore resources.
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
WECAFC
Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-1 of FAO Constitution)
Bridgetown (Barbados) Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, France, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Japan, Korea (Rep.of), Mexico, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Panama, Saint Christopher and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Spain, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, USA, Venezuela. Western Central Atlantic Ocean To facilitate the coordination of research; to encourage education and training; to assist Member Governments in establishing rational policies, to promote the rational management of resources that are of interest for two or more countries.
CARPAS
Regional Fisheries Advisory Commission for the Southwest Atlantic
Resolution of FAO Conference (under Article VI-1 of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay Southwest Atlantic and inland waters of member countries To develop organized approach among members for the management and regional exploitation of marine and inland fishery resources; to encourage training and cooperative investigations.
EIFAC
European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-1 of FAO Constitution)
Rome (Italy) Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, EC, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, UK. Inland waters of Europe To assist in the collection of information, to promote cooperation among governmental organizations; to advise on the development of inland fisheries.
COPESCAL
Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-1 of FAO Constitution)
Santiago (Chile) Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela. Inland waters of Latin America To promote research for the rational utilization of inland fishery resources; to assist in establishing scientific basis for regulatory measures; to assist in the development of aquaculture; to encourage education and training.
Body Establishment Headquarters Membership Area of competence Main functions
CECAF
Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-2 of FAO Constitution)
Accra, Ghana. Benin, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, EC, Equatorial Guinea, France, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Italy, Japan, Korea (Rep.of), Liberia, Mauritania, Morocco, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Romania, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Spain, Togo, USA, Zaire. Eastern Central Atlantic between Cape Spartel and the Congo River To promote programmes of development for the rational utilization of fishery resources; to assist in establishing basis for regulatory measures; to encourage training.
CIFA
Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa
Resolution of FAO Council (under Article VI-2 of FAO Constitution)
Accra (Ghana) Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe Inland waters of Africa. To promote programmes of research for the rational utilization of inland fishery resources; to assist in establishing scientific basis for regulatory measures; to assist in the development of fish culture; to encourage education and training.
ANNEX II:
SHARED STOCKS IN THE AREAS COVERED BY FAO REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES
1. IOFC
Ø Red Sea: All large scombrids; probably most small clupeoids and carangids but this will depend on the location of the stocks as those most affected will be those near maritime boundaries. But nothing is known (or at least documented) about stocks structure of small pelagics in the Red Sea. Areas of special concern are most likely to be handled on a bilateral or multilateral basis, eg, head of gulf of Eilat/Aqaba; head of Gulf migration could e handled by a series of bilateral treaties.
Ø North West Arabian Sea: Myctophids: Iran (Islamic Rep. of) and Oman and possibly UAE; also maybe Pakistan, Yemen and India but not essential. Tunas, Tunalike species already covered by IOTC. Scomberoids covered by Tuna Commission ? If not then Iran (Islamic Rep. of), Oman, UAE and Pakistan. Possibly Yemen and India.
Ø Gulf of Aden: Small pelagics: Yemen, Somalia, possibly Djibouti.
Ø Persian Gulf: Some shrimp, most large demersals (eg, serranids, breams, etc.) some small pelagics, large pelagics.
2. CECAF
For CECAF, the following shared stocks (for which evaluation exists) and countries concerned are listed.
Ø Sardinella aurita: Morocco, Mauritania, Senegal, The Gambia
Ø Trachurus trachurus: Morocco, Mauritania, Senegal, The Gambia
Ø Scomber japonicus: Morocco, Mauritania
Ø Cephalopods/cuttlefish: Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Sierra Leone
Ø Small pelagics: Western and Central Gulf of Guinea
Ø Scomber japonicus: Western and Central Gulf of Guinea
Ø Demersal resources: Western and Central Gulf of Guinea
Ø Sardinella aurita Congo and Gabon and S. maderensis:
Ø Trachurus trecae: Congo and Gabon
3. WECAFC
1) Bilateral
Shrimp for Venezuela and Trinidad. There are also moves towards spiny lobster between Cuba and Bahamas. The penaid shrimp of the Gulf of Mexico (US/Mexico).
There are probably several groundfish stocks, such as the snappers and groupers, which are shared between two or a small number of states in the region. There is not much information, at this stage, on stock identity of such species in the region.
2) Subregional
The shrimp resources of the Guyanas-Brazil continental shelf are the topic of a WECAFC ad hoc Working Group and are an obvious example of a sub-regionally shared stock, along with many of the groundfish species that occur in the same area. The flying fish resource of the Lesser Antilles is supporting a growing fishery in the southeastern Caribbean. Other less abundant small pelagics may also justify consideration.
Again, several of the groundfish species may justify sub-regional management.
Caribbean spiny lobster is an important and widely distributed species in the region. Major producers include Cuba, USA, Nicaragua and Honduras. Again, the stock structure is not well understood. Adult distribution would certainly suggest shared stocks, but widespread distribution and movement of larvae could result in sub-regional or even regional distribution of a single stock.
3) Regional and extra-regional
The group referred to within WECAFC as "coastal pelagics" require regional approaches to management. These include Atlantic Spanish mackerel and king mackerel, blackfin tuna and dolphinfish.
4. GFCM
1) Bilateral arrangements
Sardine stocks of the Sea of Alboran between Morocco and Spain are already covered by EC agreements. Internally to the EC, similar arrangements apply to internal seas, such as the Gulf of Lions for groundfish.
2) Subregional arrangements
Special management regime for groundfish. Notable here are the Gulf of Gabes and Straits of Sicily (Tunisia, Libya, Malta and Italy), the Adriatic and Northern Ionian Seas (Italy, Albania, Craotia, Greece, Slovenia and possibly Montenegro ?), and the Black Sea.
3) Regional and extra-regional
Bluefin tuna is the most noteworthy resource that spawns in the Mediterranean and extends into the Atlantic. ICCAT has data and maps on this species. Swordfish can probably be regarded as a regional resource, as can Bonito and minor pelagics such as Dolphin fish.
5. APFIC
Eastern Indian Ocean (Area 57)
(1) tuna and tuna-like fishes. This area falls within the coverage of the proposed IOTC, therefore, those resources (including small tunas) may well be covered by IOTC.
(2) round scads (Decapterus spp.): some shared stocks have been identified include:
Ø Sri Lanka - Southern part of India
Ø Malaka Strait (Thailand-Malaysia-Indonesia)
(3) chub mackerel (Rastrelliger spp.):
Ø Malaka Strait (Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia)
Ø Andaman Sea (Myanmare, Thailand)
Ø Bay of Bengal (Sri Lanka, India, Bangladesh, Myanmare)
(4) Hilsa toli
Ø India-Bangladesh, Myanmar
Western Central Pacific
(Area 71):
(1) tuna and tuna-like fishes: Philippines and Indonesia. SEAFDEC may facilitate for such an initiative with a close cooperation with SPC/FFA.
(2) chub mackerel (Rastrelliger spp.):
Ø Southern Gulf of Thailand (Thialand, Cambodia, Vietnam)
Ø Eastern Gulf of Thailand (Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam)
Ø Gulf of Tonkin (Vietnam and southern China)
Ø Southern part of South China Sea (Indonesia, East Malaysia)
Ø Sulu Sea (Indonesia, Philippines)
(3) round scads (Decapterus spp.)
Ø Gulf of Thailand (Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam)
Ø Gulf of Tonkin (Vietnam and China)
Ø Southern part of SCS (Indonesia, Malaysia)
Ø Sulu Sea (Indonesia, Philippines)
(4) no study has yet been made on the potential shared resources between Indonesia and Australia in the Arafura Sea. However, potential shared resources include: sharks, roundscads, jacks, etc. Good cooperation between the two countries in fisheries in recent years may lead to such joint management in the future.
<section>8</section>
ANNEX III:
FAO REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES: MEETINGS, ATTENDANTS AND COSTS 1/1/1993 TO 1/4/1996
Note: The entire FAO Fisheries Department acts as the Secretariat for FAO Statutory Bodies. It is therefore impossible to provide more accurate monetary figures for all the indirect costs in connection with the organization of the Sessions. The figures shown are to be regarded as indicative since they cover mainly the costs of the documentation, consultants, travel of the staff of the Secretariat and the travel of the experts appointed in their individual capacities.
FAO REGIONAL FISHERY BODIES AND THEIR SUBSIDIARIES
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM)
20th Session, Malta
GFCM
21st Session, Alicante, Spain
GFCM
Executive Committee
Rome, Italy
GFCM
Committee on Fisheries Management
- - - - Last Session was held in Rome, Italy
GFCM
Working Party on Fisheries Economics and Statistics
- - - - Last Session was held in Rome, Italy
GFCM
Committee on Aquaculture
(Former Working Party on Artificial Reefs and Mariculture
- - - - The Working Party last met in November 1989. Now a Committee, its First Session is scheduled for September 1996.
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
Asia-Pacific Fishery Commission (APFIC)
24th Session of APFIC, Bangkok, Thailand
APFIC
66th Session of Executive Committee,
Bangkok, Thailand
APFIC
Committee on Marine Fisheries
Yogyakarta, Indonesia
APFIC
Committee on Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries
- - - - First Session scheduled to be held in April 1997.
APFIC
Working Party on Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries
- - - - Scheduled to meet in March 1997.
APFIC
Working Party on Marine Fisheries
- - - - First Session scheduled to be held in October 1997.
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
APFIC
Joint Working Party on Fisheries Statistics
- - - - First Session scheduled to be held in January 1997
APFIC
Joint Working Party on Fish Technology and Marketing
Cochin, India
Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC)
10th Session
Mombasa, Kenya
IOFC
Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal
8th Session, Dhaka, Bangladesh
IOFC
Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal
9th Session, Jakarta, Indonesia
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
IOFC
Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in Southwest Indian Ocean
- - - - Last Session was held in Madagascar in 1990.
IOFC
Committee for the Development and Management of the Fishery Resources of the Gulfs
8th Session, Muscat, Oman
IOFC
Committee for the Management of Indian Ocean Tuna
- - - - Last Session was held in Bangkok, Thailand in 1990. With the establishment of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC), this Committee will be abolished.
Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic (CECAF)
13th Session
Dakar, Senegal
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
CECAF
Sub-Committee on Management of Resources Within the Limits of National Jurisdiction
9th Session, Agadir, Morocco
CECAF
Sub-Committee on Fishery Development
10th Session, Dakar, Senegal
28 2 - - Held in conjunction with CECAF 13th Session.
CECAF
Working Party on Resources Evaluation
10th Session, Accra, Ghana
CECAF
Working Party on Fishery Statistics
5th Session, Accra, Ghana
20 2 - 24 000 Held in conjunction with the 10th Session of the Working Party on Resources Evaluation.
Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission (WECAFC)
8th Session, Caracas, Venezuela
WECAFC
Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Lesser Antilles
5th Session, Roseau, Dominica
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
WECAFC
Working Party on Assessment of Marine Fishery Resources
- - - - Last Session was held in St. George's, Grenada in 1989.
WECAFC
Working Party on Fishery Economics and Planning
- - - - Last Session was held in St. George's Grenada in 1989.
Regional Fisheries Advisory Commission for the Southwest Atlantic (CARPAS) - - - - No Session has been held since 1974.
CARPAS
Working Party on Fisheries Statistics
- - - - No Session has been held since 1971.
CARPAS
Working Party on Biological Research and Evaluation of Fishery Resources
- - - - No Session has been held since 1969.
CARPAS
Ad hoc Working Party on Fishery Economic Development in the Southwest Atlantic
- - - - No Session has been held since 1975.
European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC)
19th Session, Dublin, Ireland
- - - - A number of changes to EIFAC subsidiary bodies were approved at this Session. The changes are subject to the approval by FAO.
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
EIFAC
18th Session, Rome, Italy
EIFAC
Executive Committee
Rome, Italy
EIFAC
Working Party on Eel
Olsztyn, Poland
EIFAC
Working Party on Effects of Physical Modification of the Aquatic Habitat on Fish Population
Lyon, France
EIFAC
Working Party on Water Quality Criteria for European Freshwater Fish
_ - - - Work carried out by correspondence, meeting held during main Session (18th Session) of the Commission.
EIFAC
Working Party on Stocking
Thonon, France
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
EIFAC
Working Party on Fish-Farm Effluents
- - - - Last meeting was held in Hungary in 1991.
EIFAC
Working Party on Introduction of Exotic Species into Europe
- - - - Last meeting was held in France in 1987.
Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America (COPESCAL)
7th Session, La Paz, Bolivia
COPESCAL
Executive Committee
- - - - Work carried out during the main session of the Commission.
COPESCAL
Working Party on Aquaculture
Cartagena, Colombia
COPESCAL
Working Party on Aquaculture
Tegucigalpa, Honduras
COPESCAL
Working Party on Fishery Resources
Montevideo, Uruguay
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
COPESCAL
Working Party on Fishery Technology
- - - - Last meeting was held in Cartagena, Colombia in 1992.
Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa (CIFA)
9th Session, Harare, Zimbabwe
CIFA
Sub-Committee for the Protection and Development of the Fisheries in the Sahelian Zone
Banjul, Gambia
CIFA
Sub-Committee for the Development and Management of the Fisheries of Lake Victoria
7th Session, Kisumu, Kenya
21 3 1 000 32 000 With the establishment of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization, this Sub-Committee will be abolished.
CIFA
Sub-Committee for Lake Tanganyika
6th Session, Lusaka, Zambia
CIFA
Working Party on Aquaculture
Harare, Zimbabwe
Sessions of statutory bodies
and their subsidiaries
Attendance Duration
working days
Direct costs (US$) Indirect costs (US$) Notes
CIFA
Working Party on Pollution and Fisheries
Accra, Ghana
CIFA
Working Party on Stock Assessment
- - - - Last met in Zambia in 1985. Organized in conjunction with the main Session of CIFA
CIFA
Working Party on Floodplain Fisheries
- - - - Correspondence Working Group
ANNEX IV
BUDGETARY STRENGTH OF SOME FISHERY ORGANIZATIONS
(All in US$^*)
I-ATTC 3,016,731 3,015,762**
ICCAT 1,082,700 1,140,390
NASCO 457,600 459,260
PSC 1,600,000 1,600,000
ICES 2,433,900 2,486,850
PICES 440,000 440,000
NAFO 600,000 550,500
NEAFC 1,138,308 1,170,000
CCAMLR 1,147,820 1,227,820
IBSFC 201,240
The converted figures from other currencies into US$ are not precise.
** For financial years 1992/1993 and 1993/1994 and does not include supplemental budget relating to tuna-dolphin programme
