<title>International workshop on the development of rural radio in Africa: Ouagadougou, 10-14 June 1996</title>
<section>1</section>
Contents next
Samba Ousmane Toure, Director of CIERRO, died on 2 July 1996, shortly after this workshop.
Samba Toure was a pioneer of rural radio and tirelessly defended the right of rural people to be heard. He contributed to the professional training of rural radio specialists throughout Africa and it is thanks to his commitment and dedication that CICERO is a centre of excellence in this field.
Apart from his professional qualities, all those who knew him as a friend recognised his exceptional personal qualities, always generous, ready to listen and full of wisdom. We shall miss him greatly.
This document is dedicated to his memory.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The organisers of the workshop would like to thank all those who have given their time, energy and resources in order to contribute to the success of this workshop:
* FAO's representation in Ouagadougou, which gave valuable logistical and administrative support;
* CTA, which sponsored the delegates from four anglophone countries;
* National Organizing Committee, chaired by Mr Francis Kabore, of the Ministry of Communication and Culture;
* CERRO, which mobilised all of its intellectual and logistical capacity to ensure the successful outcome of the workshop;
* chairmen and rapporteurs of plenary sessions and working groups;
* the hard working and competent secretariat team led by Ms Augustine Rouamba with Ms Celine Kando and Ms Evelyne Rouamba;
* translators and interpreters;
* receptionists.
Special thanks go to:
* His Excellency Mr Ablasse Ouedraogo, Minister for Foreign Affairs, for having placed the Ministry conference room et the disposal of the workshop;
* His Excellency Mr Claude Nurikyor Somda, Minister of Communication, for the logistical support given to the workshop,
* His Majesty, the Larlhe Naba Tigre, for the cultural and recreational evening which he held for all workshop participants.
ABBREVIATIONS
ACCT
Agence de La francophonie
AFBO
Association des femmes du Burkina, section de Ouahigouya
AIB
Agence d'infonnation du BuTkina
AMARC
Association mondiale des radio diffuseurs communautaires
BBC
British Broadcasting Corporation
CECI
Centre canadien d' etudes et de cooperation internationale
CESAO
Centre d'etudes economiques et sociales d'Afrique de l'Ouest
CIERRO
Centre interafricain d' etudes en radio rurale de Ouagadougou
CIRTEF
Conseil international des radios et televisions d'expression francaise
CNCR
Centre national de concertation et de cooperation des ruraux, Senegal
IDRC
International Development Research Centre, Canada
CRPA
Centre regional de promotion agropastoral, Burkina Faso
CTA
Centre technique de cooperation agricole et rurale
DDC
Cooperation suisse au developpement
EDC
Education Development Center, Washington USA
ENDA
Environnement et developpement africain
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
UNFPA
United Nations Population Fund
FUGN
Federation des unions des groupements NAAM, Burkina Faso
GRET
Groupe de recherche et d'echanges technologiques, France
GTZ
Deutsche Gesellschaft Fur Technische Zusammenarbeit
INADES
Institut africain pour le developpement economique et social
UNIDO
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
ORTM
Office de radiotelevision du Mali
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
RFI
Radio France internationale
RNB
Radiodiffusion nationale du Burkina
SONABEL
Societe nationale Burkinabe d'electricite
UIT
Union internationale de telecommunications
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund
URTEL
Union des radiodiffuseurs fibres, Mali
URTNA
Union des radios et televisions nationales d'Afrique
USAID
United Nations Agency for International Development
WREN
World Radio for Environment and Natural Resources, United Kingdom
1. INTRODUCTION
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) organized an international workshop in order to exchange views and discuss the development of rural radio in Africa. The workshop was held in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso from 10 to 14 June 1996.
The workshop objectives were:
* to assess the present status of rural radio in Africa,
* to identify major constraints to its development,
* to define a global plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa;
* to identify financial and other resources required.
The workshop was organised in collaboration with the Government of Burkina Faso and the Union of National Radio and Television of Africa (URTNA).
The workshop brought together 73 participants representing rural radio from 21 African countries as well as major bilateral and multilateral organisations working in this sector.
In advance of the workshop, reports were prepared for each of the 21 countries involved. These assessed the present status of rural radio, institutional and legal constraints, and development objectives. An assessment of FAO's contribution to the development of rural radio in Africa was also drawn up. A summary of these documents and a report on general constraints experienced in the development of ruIa1 radio in Africa were presented, in French or English, to all workshop participants.
These workshop documents are available in French and English, with the exception of the introductory papers and the annexes, which are reproduced only in their language of origin.
List of participating countries:
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
List of participating institutions and organizations:
ACCT, BBC, CECI, CERRO, CIRTEF, CESAO, CNCR, IDRC, CTA, DANICOM, Deutsche Welle, EDC, ENDA, GRET, GTZ, INADES, PANOS, Radio Nederlands, Radio Swiss International, ITU, UNDP, UNESCO, UNFPA, UNICEF, UNIDO, URTNA, WREN, French and Swiss cooperation agencies.
2. SUMMARY OF WORKSHOP ACTIVITIES
The workshop was held from 10 to 14 June 1996 in the conference room of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The programme and list of participants are supplied as an annex.
10 June 1996
This first day was taken up with the official opening ceremony, an introductory discussion session and the presentation of the summary reports of the studies which had been completed in advance of the workshop.
The official opening ceremony was chaired by the Minister of Communication and Culture, Burkina Faso, who made the opening speech after short statements by the Secretary General of URTNA, the Director General of Culture and Multimedia of the International Francophone Cooperation Agency and the FAO Representative in Burkina Faso.
The plenary session was chaired by Ibrahima Sane, Director of Radio, Senegal.
The discussion panel on the development of rural radio in Africa, for which the moderator was Jean Pierre Ilboudo of FAO, was preceded by an introductory paper presented by Jacques Sultan, FAO.
The panel members introduced the following issues for discussion:
* The role of rural radio as a public service (Bernard Feller, Intermedia, Consultant, Swiss Cooperation Agency for Development - DDC, Bern Switzerland);
* What type of radio: public, community, association, private, local, regional and/or national stations? (Samba Ousmane Toure, Director of CERRO, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso);
* Rural radio, democracy and pluralism (Diana Senghor, The Panos Institute, Paris, France);
* Rural radio within an integrated multimedia approach (Michael Laflin, Educational Development Centre, Washington, USA);
* What farmers' associations say about rural radio (Pierre Claver Tassembedo, Director of Voix du Paysan, Ouahigonya, Burkina Faso);
* Cooperation and coordination: Towards a plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa (Dominique Hounkonnou, CTA, Wageningen, The Netherlands).
The text of these presentations can be found in chapter 6.
An excellent debate followed which provided an opportunity to identify the principal constraints to the development of rural radio in Africa today.
Following the discussion, summary reports of the studies made prior to the workshop were presented by the three consultants, Jean Baptiste llboudo, Michael Pickstock and John Madjri (1) These reports were made available to participants in either French or English.
The presentations reviewed the status of rural radio in eleven francophone, five anglophone and one lusophone country, and were based on the studies by national consultants in each country, and on the assessment of FAO's contribution to the development of natal radio in nine francophone/lusophone countries in Africa.
The rural radio scene appears to be quite varied. Its popularity with rural people is well known but its function and development are handicapped, if not actually blocked, by many constraints which may be related to the standard of equipment) the legal or institutional framework, insufficient financial resources and lack of training and audience research.
A useful discussion followed these presentations. It confirmed what became the central theme of the workshop, that rural radio in Africa has reached a crossroads and that new solutions must be found to ensure its survival and development:
* From the point of view of recognising the importance of rural radio by governments and its role within national policies for communication for development,
* From the point of view of the identity and legal position of rural radio, which should be disengaged from tight control by the State while nevertheless preserving its public service broadcasting mission. In effect, it is a question of finding the right balance between the social mission of rural radio and the necessity of joining the communication "market" and generating and managing its own revenue;
* From the point of view of the role of rural radio, which should be to bring it closer to its public. This should favour community and association based radio stations which should nevertheless be part of a wider network between all types of stations in order to cover the needs of all rural people. The idea of partnership is considered essential for the development of rural radio;
* From the point of view of equipment, which should be adapted to the needs of rural radio and should be managed, renewed and well maintained by the stations themselves,
* From the point of view of human resources, which means that training should be undertaken and also intensified and diversified;
* From the point of view of audience research programmes, which should be further developed in order to allow rural radio to adapt better to its future role, to better understand its audience, to identify the most appropriate legal and regulatory controls and to put in place programmes and equipment appropriate to its mission.
11 June 1996
The second day was devoted to presentations by bilateral and multilateral organisations and to deciding the constitution of the three working groups.
The plenary session was chaired by Ms Aida Opoku Mensah, PANOS, London.
Organizations working with African rural radio presented outlines of their programmes during the morning session. These were CTA, ACCT, UNICEF, IDRC, Cooperation franchise, GTZ, ITU, Deutsche Welle, PANOS and UNESCO. The texts of these statements are available upon request.
The contribution made by these organisations to rural radio in Africa is diverse and a function of their different programmes of operation. Many are experiencing a decrease in available funds.
The organisations nevertheless indicated their interest in continuing to support rural radio in Africa, while preserving the diversity and plurality of their approaches and yet subscribing to a common framework for the development of rural radio in Africa. Such an approach would allow better complementarily of support and a better use of financial resources. An objective shared by all is the reinforcement of national capacity with a view to leading rural radio to true autonomy.
The salient themes of these interventions were as follows:
* to develop forms of rural radio that are closer to their audiences;
* to allow community organisations to use radio as a tool for local development;
* to use radio as a means of supporting democracy and pluralism;
* to give women greater access to radio, not only as listeners but also as contributors permitted to express their views on air;
* to develop ways of undertaking ruIa1 audience research and measuring the impact of programmes;
* to develop a programme of research that will allow radio to be combined with other means of communication with the rural community;
* to find ways of allowing rural radio to be more independent, administratively, financially and editorially;
* to favour FM frequencies as the preferred option for transmission and to take advantage of the opportunities offered by solar energy and other appropriate technologies;
* to develop national radio equipment manufacturing capability.
In general, the speakers recognised the importance of the initiative of FAO, URTNA and the Government of Burkina Faso in organising this workshop. In addition, Hey indicated both their desire to improve international cooperation and their willingness to integrate their future programmes in support of rural radio into a common framework of action.
The workshop was then divided into working groups in order to consider in greater depth the themes that had emerged during the preceding sessions. Three groups were formed:
Group 1: Infrastructure, technological choices and equipment
Group 2: The mission of rural radio and its legal, institutional and regulatory framework
Group 3: A new agenda for research and training
12 June 1996
This third day was principally devoted to meetings of the three working groups and to the presentation of their results and conclusions.
The plenary session for the presentation of working groups' results and conclusions was chaired by Mr Abdoulaye Sidibe, Director General of Radio and Television, Mali.
From Group 1 it became apparent that strong political commitment was considered to be a necessary precondition to the development of radio for the benefit of rural communities, and that access to radio as a public information service should be recognised as a right.
A firm commitment to rural radio should be defined within national communication policies for development, recognising the stimulus that rural radio plays in the processes of development.
At the level of technological options, the working group indicated that digital and satellite technologies were beyond the reach of African rural radio stations, considering the financial investment that they imply. It was, however, recommended that options favouring the use of FM and solar energy should be systematically explored as well as the possibility of setting up a system of central purchasing in order to reduce costs of imports. Local industries for the production and assembly of radio equipment should be encouraged.
It was also recommended that the development of infrastructure and technical equipment should be pursued in close collaboration with the telecommunications system in each country. There was also a need for particular attention to be paid to protecting technical equipment from the devastating effect of lightning.
From Group 2 it emerged that the principal missions of rural radio concern the rapid diffusion of information to the rural community in general, raising awareness, stimulating action and presenting an opportunity for social dialogue. These missions should be within the general framework of public service.
The legal statutes of rural radio should be adapted to these missions and support their realisation. These statutes are of very different types and their adoption implies a prior analysis of the role of rural radio and the constraints which are encountered.
The principal constraints identified by Group 2 are:
* low political priority to develop communications in the rural sector and the absence of policies or national strategies of communication for development;
* the absence of legal, administrative and financial autonomy for rural radio and the problems that rural radio organisations experience in generating and managing their own resources in an independent manner;
* excessive centralisation of rural radio organisations at national level, and the lack of independence for regional and local broadcasting stations;
* the ambiguous nature of the status of personnel and the consequent lack of motivation; poor technical equipment and insufficient financial resources allocated to public rural radio stations;
* the lack of autonomy for rural radio in terms of access to transmission and the low priority given to rural programmes in broadcast schedules.
The group therefore recommended that each country should undertake a study to establish a legal framework for rural radio, bearing in mind the need to:
* inscribe the mission of rural radio within a general policy on communication for development,
* seek legal and institutional procedures which will confer upon rural radio a greater administrative and financial autonomy;
* develop an entrepreneurial spirit, seek profitability and apply marketing methods;
* indicate in all development programmes and projects a communication component, and ensure within this the establishment of sufficient resources for rural radio;
* involve partners and listeners in the direction and content of radio output.
Group 3 confirmed the strategic importance of training and research for the development of rural radio in Africa. It emphasised the key role played by CERRO in this respect, as well as the need to create a similar institution for anglophone Africa. In situ professional training should be the priority but training courses in other countries should also be given consideration. Training of technicians, engineers and marketing specialists should also be strengthened. Training of producers should be based on a methodology which is appropriate to the local social environment. In this respect participatory rapid rural appraisal should be one of the many tools at the disposal of rural radio producers and programme makers. Teaching levels should be adapted to the different types of radio station which currently exist. They should correspond to the needs identified by radio stations, which should also formulate their own training programmes. A particular effort should be made to train
women for a variety of jobs within the rural radio sector.
Choices, as they relate to training, should be made which favour existing training institutions and structures. Coordination between different training centres should be promoted through anetwork to be administered by CIERRO for the exchange of documents, programmes and training materials, and field study visits. It was also judged essential that CIERRO should commence training courses at tertiary level. Training of trainers should be strengthened through existing initiatives, notably the rural radio training kit produced by FAO, UNICEF and CIERRO. A network of trainers in rural radio should be developed on this basis.
A major programme of research should be undertaken in order to better understand the nature and vocation of ruIa1 radio as it exists at present. It is also important to understand the audience and the impact of programmes upon listeners in order to develop programmes that are more interactive and participatory, particularly involving women.
Research should also be undertaken in order to better identify the criteria for making rural radio stations profitable, their position within the rural communication market and the economic conditions for their sustainability. One aspect of research should be concerned with technology, taking into account the new communication tools available, and studying how equipment and infrastructure can be better adapted to the needs of ruIa1 radio.
13 June 1996
On this fourth day, the conclusions and recommendations of the working groups were formulated and a plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa was presented.
The plenary session was chaired by Mr Tunji Arokoyo of Nigeria.
In order to facilitate and harmonize the work of the groups, FAO had presented a methodological framework and a draft plan of action. The framework provided a means of presenting the conclusions of the groups in concrete terms: a description of the context and basis for action, proposals, objectives and activities. A draft of a declaration, defining the framework and principal axes of the plan of action, was also proposed.
On the basis of these proposals, and after a general debate in plenary session, the workshop again divided into working groups. To the three groups already fanned, a fourth group was added which consisted of representatives of international cooperating partners and the representative from URTNA. This group discussed mechanisms for international cooperation for undertaking the plan of action.
14 June 1996
The fifth and final day was devoted to the presentation of the work of the groups, to a debate in plenary session, to the adoption of the declaration and plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa and to the official closing ceremony.
The plenary session was chaired by Mr Dominique Hounkonnou of the Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation (CTA).
The groups proposed a number of amendments to the draft declaration and plan of action presented by FAO. The text of the declaration and plan of action can be found in chapter 3.
The official closing ceremony of the workshop took place during the afternoon of 14 June under the chairmanship of the Minister of Public Affairs and Administration, deputizing for the Minister of Communication and Culture, and in the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The speeches made by the Minister of Public Affairs and Administration and the FAO Representative were preceded by the presentation of the final report of the workshop by Mr Jean Baptiste Ilboudo of CERRO and its adoption.
The closing ceremony was followed by a reception hosted by the Minister of Communications and Culture.
Conclusions
This workshop was an excellent opportunity for all those concerned with the development of rural radio in Africa to meet.
The participation of 21 francophone, anglophone and lusophone African countries, at a senior level within national radio networks or rural radio, is evidence of the interest of those countries in the strengthening of this particularly important sector for rural development.
The presence of the principal UN organisations, representatives of bilateral and multilateral cooperation agencies, organisations that act as partners in African rural radio such as ACCT,
CIRTEF, CTA, IDRC, GTZ, Deutsche Welle, DANICOM, the French and Swiss Cooperation Agencies, PANOS, GRET, CECI and INADES, as well as representatives of a number of other public and private organisations and associations, brought a breadth of experience to the discussions and stimulated a lively debate with pertinent contributions both during plenary sessions and in the working groups.
The contribution of the government of Burkina Faso, from the welcome given to all the participants to the working conditions which made possible the smooth running of the workshop, was a determining factor in the success of this meeting. URTNA and CIERRO made a valuable contribution to the organisation, management and running of the workshop.
The workshop highlighted the need of African rural communities for dynamic, lively, democratic and interactive radio. The diversity of initiatives undertaken in this sector and the interest shown in this form of communication show that rural radio is alive and in a phase of expansion, even if development efforts and resources are somewhat scattered.
It is essential for governments and their partners to commit themselves to the development of sustainable rural radio. This means taking innovative decisions and defining new policies, whether in terms of the legal and institutional framework or in terms of infrastructure, equipment, training and research.
The Ouagadougou workshop was intended to be an important stage in this process because it provided the opportunity to define a common plan of action based on a detailed analysis of the situation of ruIa1 radio in Africa and a dialogue between those most closely involved in this sector.
Finally, a declaration and plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa was adopted by the workshop.
FAO, URTNA and the Government of Burkina Faso were asked to accept responsibility for follow-up to the workshop, and to seek means of financing and establishing the activities defined by the plan of action. The following tasks would be undertaken:
* to publish documents relating to the Ouagadougou workshop;
* to present the plan of action to the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa,
* to establish a mechanism of cooperation appropriate to the different partners concerned;
* to develop proposals for projects requiring finance in collaboration with the countries and institutions concerned,
* to organize a meeting of donors to examine specific proposals.
(1) Rural radio in Africa - Summary of national studies: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal (Jean Baptiste Ilboudo, CIERRO)
Rural radio in Africa - summary of national studies: Gambia, Ghana, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe (Michael Pickstock, WREN)
FAO's contribution to the development of rural radio in Africa - synthesis of the evaluation mission: Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Guinea Guinea Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger
Contents next
<section>2</section>
back Contents next
3. DECLARATION
African countries are finding themselves confronted by many significant changes, politically, economically and socially. These changes have been brought about by a process of democratisation and pluralism, a desire for peace, decentralisation of economic and political decision-making and the encouragement of the private sector to take over many functions previously undertaken by the state.
In this context, the major challenges to be met are: to improve agricultural production while preserving the natural resource base in order to meet the need for food security for a rapidly growing population; to improve standards of living, health, education and nutrition, particularly for women and children; to create income and employment opportunities; and to preserve cultural heritage.
These challenges will not be met without active popular participation of the population, for which communication is a strategic factor.
The Windhoek (1991) and Bamako (1993) declarations emphasized the necessity for developing independent and pluralistic radio and press.
Radio remains the most popular, viable, accessible and cost-effective means of communication for rural people. Radio can overcome the barriers of distance, illiteracy and language diversity better than any other media.
There have been a number of developments that have led to significant changes in the use of radio for reaching rural audiences. The introduction of new technology, the reduction in cost of FM transmitters and the replacement of state broadcasting monopolies by private sector and association-based radio has, in recent years, led to the development of new forms of radio both in urban centres and in rural communities.
This evolution has provided opportunities for a diversity of approaches to the use of radio, and much more effective coverage of audiences in terms of territory and meeting differing socioeconomic and linguistic needs. From now on, all those who are involved in development, particularly those operating at the grassroots level, can make use of this form of communication, either by playing an active role in the conception and production of rural programmes for broadcast by existing radio stations or by establishing their own radio stations. Despite these promising trends, rural radio nevertheless suffers from initiatives that are too widely dispersed and from lack of resources.
Today rural radio is at a crossroads. Decisions must be made and a number of problems addressed in order to allow rural radio to develop in a coordinated manner so that it may fulfil its mission to provide information and opportunity for dialogue and contribute to rural development:
* First, the development of rural radio must be confirmed as a priority objective of governments and their partners within the national strategy for the communication of development objectives.
* Appropriate legal and institutional measures must be established for the different forms of rural radio that already exist in order to encourage their development and complementarily.
* Rural radio stations should be provided with the infrastructure, equipment and consumables that are best suited to their tasks and their environment
* Research and training programmes should be expanded and strengthened in order that rural radio can carry out its tasks effectively and develop so that it can respond to future development needs.
* Inter-African cooperation should be pursued and reinforced.
Finally, it is essential that all those involved in rural development (governments, international partners, NGOs, local groups and associations, the private sector, etc.) should support and encourage the development of rural radio in Africa. To achieve this it is necessary to identify all available means for establishing mechanisms for cooperation and follow-up which will allow the planning and mobilisation, in a coordinated and complementary way, of all appropriate human, technical and financial resources. One such mechanism could be to find a linkage with the UN's Special Initiative for Africa.
We invite all partners in development to consider this Ouagadougou plan of action as a framework within which to define and implement actions for the development of rural radio in Africa.
4. PLAN OF ACTION
Mission and legal and institutional mechanisms
Basis for action
The development of rural radio at national, regional and local level to meet the needs of rural people implies a respect for pluralism by the State and others. It also requires a concerted effort to develop a more coordinated development of rural radio stations which at the present time operate within many different legal and regulatory frameworks.
It is therefore essential, at a time when new radio stations are rapidly multiplying in both urban and rural areas, that appropriate political, legal and regulatory measures be adopted at national, regional and local levels in order to harmonize the legal status and define the mission and terms of reference for the operation of rural radio. Licensing and allocation of transmission frequencies must be awarded on a statutory basis and the formation of networks should be encouraged.
Furthermore, the adoption of appropriate legal statutes will enable rural radio stations to acquire administrative, financial and editorial autonomy while maintaining a general public service mission.
These legal and regulatory changes should be accompanied by institutional measures that can make it possible for rural radio stations to fully assume their role in promoting and sustaining rural development. To this end, all development actions should be associated with determining the direction and definition of radio programmes to ensure that the themes of the programmes and the manner in which they are treated reflect the diversity of needs and the multiplicity of opinions and approaches of rural radio stations
Objective: To establish for each country an appropriate legal, regulatory and institutional framework in order to favour the development of rural radio in its many forms.
Activities
a) To define and put into place national communication for development policies. To define the role and function of rural radio stations within the framework of these policies in order to legitimise the mission of rural radio in the overall rural development process and to commit all national and international partners to a joint action covering the information and communication needs of all sectors of rural development.
b) To identify, study and adapt the legal statutes that are most appropriate to the roles of rural radio in its various forms.
c) To adopt regulatory measures aimed at granting and increasing administrative, editorial and financial autonomy of rural radio.
d) To establish teens of reference, supervise the implementation of public service missions, deal with matters relating to legislation and the granting of permits, licenses and allocation of transmission frequencies and to regulate advertising revenue in order that radio stations derive some benefit.
e) To propose legal, institutional and technical provisions which will promote the creation of a network of rural radio stations at the local, regional and national levels. These provisions should make optimal use of all existing resources in order to meet the needs of listeners, ensure the best possible territorial and linguistic coverage and reinforce democracy and participation.
f) To set up a joint authority for intersectorial consultation and coordination between all those concerned in order to develop programming which recognizes listener interests and which assists rural radio stations to cover themes relating to economic, social and cultural development. Such an authority would also help rural radio stations to gain access to the technical, financial and human resources required. The composition of this authority should be adapted to the context of rural radio at different levels: local, regional and national.
Infrastructure, equipment and technological choices
Basis for action
The survival of rural radio stations is threatened by the lack of resources available for equipment and technical infrastructure. As a result of this there are serious operational and maintenance problems. In general, rural radio stations do not have their own equipment and they experience great difficulty in obtaining spare parts. To ensure sustainable development of rural radio it is essential to establish, at national level, a development plan for technical equipment and infrastructure. At both national and regional levels, appropriate technical solutions should be sought in order to make rational use of existing equipment.
Objective 1: To establish in each country a broadcasting development plan reflecting the advantages of shared use of technical infrastructure and equipment with PTT, broadcasting organizations etc.
Objective 2: To develop wherever possible a national manufacturing capability for the production, assembly and marketing of radio equipment
Activities
a) To establish a system for circulating information about existing technical facilities. The ITU, in cooperation with other agencies, should be invited to produce a manual giving technical parameters for transmitters in order to improve management of frequencies at national level. The manual could also provide guidelines for the design, construction, acoustics and air conditioning of technical sites.
b) To develop a plan which favours FM transmission for broadcasting.
c) Each country to seek means by which import duties on all broadcasting equipment destined for rural radio are reduced or even eliminated.
d) To implement, with the support of UNIDO, a series of needs assessments and feasibility studies with a view to establishing local industrial units for the manufacture of radio equipment, receivers and consumables (batteries, tapes and cassettes). These studies should lead to the formulation of projects in a form which can be presented to funding partners.
e) To undertake a feasibility study into the possibility of establishing central purchasing in order to reduce the cost of acquiring radio equipment.
New directions for training and research
Basis for action
Training and research are crucial to the development of rural radio in Africa. At the national level they must tee considered a priority.
A research and training sector must be established in each country to cover the needs of all those involved in rural radio. It must carry out a research programme on all aspects of the development of rural radio and set up a programme that takes into account the training needs of all categories of specialists: producers, technicians, documentalists, managers, trainers and audience research specialists as well as for specialists in new information technology. This training programme should also address all the new techniques and methods of participatory research with rural communities. It should also take into account the need for other means of communication in order to extend the impact of rural radio in the field.
At inter-African level, a mechanism for coordination and support to national research and training programmes should be established with the support of international agencies. A network of researchers and African rural radio trainers should be set up, as well as an international resource centre. CERRO could carry out this duty for francophone countries and similar bodies could be created for anglophones and lusophones.
At international level collaboration between the principal agencies concerned with rural radio in Africa should be reinforced in order to coordinate research and training support to the different countries and to inter-African organisations.
Objective 1: To develop in each country and at inter-African level, training programmes and tools which relate to the needs of rural radio and grass-roots community workers within a wider framework of communication for development.
Objective 2: At inter-African level, to establish or reinforce a programme of research into the development of rural radio in all its aspects - legal, institutional, social, cultural, economic and technical - as well as its impact.
Activities
a) To evaluate the training needs of each station, taking into account the specific nature of the station, the personnel involved and the need to develop the production and broadcasting capability of the station. Develop a training strategy.
b) To develop a national training programme for each country taking into account the needs identified at station level.
c) Set up, or improve, training structures for rural radio at national level.
d) Improve access to training for women working in rural radio as well as for personnel from community, commercial or NGO radio stations.
e) Establish tertiary level training at CERRO.
f) Develop a training programme in marketing at CERRO for studying rural audiences, how to develop projects and how to conduct participatory research.
g) Develop and strengthen programmes for training of trainers.
h) Set up structures for the coordination and follow up of training at national and inter-African
level.
i) Develop at inter-African level a data file of resource personnel and institutions.
j) Support the URTNA proposal for the establishment of a training institution similar to CIERRO for anglophone countries.
k) Develop a research programme covering the following points:
* the changing role of rural radio;
* the corresponding technical, social, economic, cultural, legal and institutional implications,
* the kind of programmes which should be produced by rural radio, taking into account approaches involving audience participation, use of national 1aTIguages and the opportunities for social dialogue offered by rural radio;
* the development of ways to analyse rural audiences and to measure the impact of programmes on rural development;
* equipment and technical infrastructure best adapted to the needs of rural radio in economic, technical and cultural contexts.
1) Seek finance and funding partners in order to establish a programme of research.
m) Establish a mechanism by which the research results can be shared.
International coordination for the implementation of the plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa
Basis for action
International coordination and partnerships to implement this plan of action are essential in order to mobilize technical and financial resources. This cooperation win promote rational and cost-effective initiatives, avoid duplication and maximise the use of existing resources. This international collaboration win cooperate with existing institutions currently working to support rural radio and rural communication. Institutions such as CERRO will continue to play an important role in this process. Particular attention win be given to the UN System-wide Special Initiative on Africa which promotes the development of human resources, especially women, health, sustainable development, peace and democracy. Rural radio plays a central role in this endeavour and should continue to do so.
Objective: To develop international cooperation in order to implement and follow up the plan of action.
Activities
a) To develop, in accordance with the recommendations of the workshop, a package of project proposals for which funding should be sought.
b) To explore and establish appropriate mechanisms for consultation among all partners, including governments, aid agencies, professional groups, NGOs and the private sector.
c) To organize a meeting of donors in order to submit project proposals relating to rural radio. International funding agencies such as the World Bank, UNDP, and the EU should be invited to take an active role.
d) To complement the meeting of donors, the plan of action should be submitted to the UN System-wide Special Initiative on Africa in view of the important role that radio will play in achieving its objectives.
The conclusions of the Ouagadougou workshop win also be presented at the round table discussions on communication for development organized by UNESCO for September 1996 in Harare, to be attended by UN Agencies, NGOs and universities.
As organisers of the workshop, URTNA, FAO and the Government of Burkina Faso are required to implement follow up to the workshop and to identify the necessary funding required.
5. PREPARATORY DOCUMENTS
National studies on the current status of rural radio have been prepared for each country by national consultants. These were written in English or French according to the official language of the country. A list of these studies can be found in Annex VI.
Two summaries of these studies have been prepared by Mr Jean Batiste Ilboudo of CERRO, for the French-speaking countries, and Mr Michael Pickstock of WREN for English-speaking countries. These summaries were distributed to all the participants in the workshop in French and English.
An evaluation mission of FAO ruIa1 radio projects in nine French-speaking African countries has been undertaken by Mr John Madjri of CESAO. A summary report of this mission was distributed to all the workshop participants in English and French.
A position paper, "Development of rural radio in Africa: past, present and future", has been prepared by FAO. It was distributed to the participants of the workshop in French and English. The text of this document follows in chapter 6.
back Contents next
<section>3</section>
back Contents next
6. DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL RADIO IN AFRICA: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE
Introduction
Major challenges face the majority of African countries in the context of rural development. Among these is the need to secure food supply for rapidly expanding populations which requires a significant improvement in production and productivity of crops, livestock and fisheries while simultaneously avoiding a deterioration or destruction of the natural resource base. Other challenges are to create employment and opportunities for income generation in order to improve living conditions (education, nutrition and health) and to adapt to the external requirements of the world economy and to structural adjustment policies.
These challenges must be seen in the context of the important changes taking place in Africa: the decentralisation of economic and political decision making; the strengthening of democracy and pluralism; the encouragement of the private sector to take over some of the functions previously performed solely by governments; and to encourage all those who are part of rural communities to establish autonomous groups and organisations for the production, processing and marketing of their produce.
The changes facing rural society in Africa are therefore very significant in terms of their need to develop methods and systems of production, business management, supply and sale, land tenure, the organisation of communities, and in terms of new relationships with central government. For these changes to succeed and become a permanent part of the new environment of rural African society, it is essential that the risks and benefits are known and accepted by all, that resources are mobilised in the best possible manner, and that the rural communities have the information, knowledge and exchange systems of enable them to adapt to the technical, economic and social situations which are developing so rapidly.
Information, knowledge and technology are strategic factors in these changes and they must be distributed, exchanged, broadcast and adopted at faster rates in order to allow the rural world better control of its production tools, its integration into economic systems, to improve living standards, and to manage and protect its natural resources. The rural communities must also have the means for communication to enable them to express their viewpoints, to maintain a dialogue and debate among themselves and with their partners, and to exchange experiences, knowledge and techniques.
Finally, most African societies are characterised by a wide diversity of ethnic and linguistic groups spread over extensive territories, and with limited means of communication (roads, transport, telecommunications, etc.), poorly developed distribution of electricity, and still very low levels of literacy and education.
Rural radio to meet the challenges of development
In such a context, radio broadcasting has always been the safest most reliable and cheapest way of communicating win rural communises, crossing the barriers of displace, illiteracy and diversity office groups concerned.
For many years, those in charge of development have used Ibis medium to broadcast a variety of technical, social, economic or polecat messages to rural people in a wide range of languages and over large areas. These messages were open designed and produced specially for rural target groups by the various technical ministries concerned, agro-industrial companies or training institutions. Generally the programmes took the form of round table discussions, interviews, magazine programmes or public awareness or social mobilizaton campaigns.
This form of vertical communication has continued for a long time with little audience participation and interaction. It has been focused on the distribution of messages and instructions directing rural people rather than taking into account their needs and aspirations, or initiating a dialogue with them.
However, taking into account the mediocre results of this unilateral and authoritarian approach to communication, attempts have been made progressively to try and reach out to rural audiences and make communication more interactive.
Regional radio stations have been created to better cater for the socio- economic and linguistic needs, listening clubs or radio clubs have been started to create a dialogue with audiences, encouraging them to take concrete action and to give a better feedback on the impact of programmes. Regional correspondents have also been appointed who are responsible for collecting local information and incorporating this in national broadcasts.
All these efforts to improve communication with rural people demonstrate the value of radio to those who are promoting development and increases their awareness of the need for a more open form of communication which is more directed towards meeting the needs of the rural audience. However, these efforts have continued to be dispersed, isolated and unresponsive to the measures undertaken to improve the situation. These early forms of rural radio have had an uncertain existence that has depended on the good will of public authorities and on their external partners to finance their production and broadcasting activities.
Since the beginning of the 80s, FAO and several bilateral and multilateral aid agencies working together have drawn lessons from these past experiences, and started a programme to support rural radio. They have developed a new approach based on the mobility of modern equipment, interaction with audiences and an inter-disciplinary content of programmes. They have created mechanisms for cooperation between the main partners in order to transform this new radio into an autonomous means of dynamic communication that is in permanent dialogue with the population and at their service.
In the same period, new types of local and community radio have appeared in rural areas. Their aim has been to encourage closer communication within communities, to take better account of their economic, social, cultural and linguistic needs and to create the dynamics of solidarity and development in the communities concerned.
In urban areas, the increasing access to broadcast frequencies and the democratisation of the controlling authorities in many countries has permitted the appearance on the FM band of private, commercial or socially motivated radio stations, which have offered audiences new forms of alternative radio, often aimed at young listeners and with no link to the authorities or to government
Finally, farmers' associations in several countries have also begun to create radio stations with a view to organizing networks to meet their own communication needs at village, regional or country level.
Thus, in twenty years, the concept of rural radio has developed considerably:
* from a form of radio strictly oriented to agricultural production towards a radio embracing all aspects of development, reflecting the social, educational and cultural needs of the rural population;
* from an instructive radio giving information and messages towards an interactive radio with dialogue, debate and exchange of ideas;
* form a centralised radio based on the capitals and large urban centres towards a multitude of stations scattered at regional and local level;
* from a radio restricted by government legislation and with administrative functions under governmental control towards private stations with a variety of legal and organisational statutes and structures.
Rural radio is therefore progressively transforming itself into a method that supports communication within rural communities, and between communities and the current economic, political and social centres of power.
Some development concepts for rural radio
In the media environments that are evolving, there is a profusion of initiatives that are developing, new partners are appearing and there is continuing deregulation and disappearance of monopolies. This has created a new situation in which several concepts of rural radio have emerged, which are more complementary than competitive to each other:
* a concept based on classical public service broadcasting with the aim of using the medium for information, mobilisation and motivation of rural people in order to make them more aware of the opportunities, more involved in the developing process and to improve their production capacity;
* a concept based on communication within the community level and incorporating the developing of synergy and local solidarity, and freedom of expression for all those involved in rural development within the communities;
* a concept based on the emergence of new trends from within the community through village groups, producer associations and other organisations. These have begun to create their own radio stations with a view to taking their place at community level while creating networks linking extensive areas;
* a concept based on small stations, which are located within communities and are devoted to relevant issues, e.g. to combat major health problems (onchocerciasis or AIDS), local agricultural problems (rice, cotton, irrigation, crops and livestock), and to be at the service of the women members of the communities, etc.;
* a concept based on networks of commercial stations initially created in the urban environment but then developing in rural areas. These should originate with private business people and programmes should be partly financed by advertising income, and be aimed at the youth. These stations may also need to get income by offering relay facilities for part of the day to international broadcasting organisations, but they must also address the major topics of development.
This great diversity of partners and initiatives in rural radio should provide an opportunity for the development of rural radio as it encourages a multiplicity of approaches, greater coverage of territory, closer contacts and a better reflection of the existing linguistic and socio-economic diversity. It also offers more opportunities for the various people involved in development (village communities, decentralised authorities, producer groups and associations, economic operators, etc.) to use this means of communication themselves.
However, since the potential for advertising revenue is greater in the urban areas than in the rural sector, there is a danger that the rural areas will be overlooked. This would be to the detriment of the rural areas, which would be excluded from the benefits of radio stations in their locality. Thus, while these new initiatives must be based principally on commercial, political or religious organisations, their public service mission must not be ignored since this alone can guarantee a degree of equitability and justice in the treatment of citizens with regard to their access to information and media.
At a time when new technology and world-wide information networks are attracting much international attention and already diverting a substantial proportion of available financial resources, it is important to emphasize that for rural Africans radio remains the only means of communication within their reach. Radio alone is adapted to their economic, social and cultural conditions and gives them both access to information and provides them with a source of expression and communication. It has to be recognized that the credibility and survival of African rural radio is now threatened. To survive and develop, it must adapt to a rapidly changing environment and meet a number of challenges with regards to infrastructure and equipment, the legal and institutional mechanisms governing it, its capacity to meet the needs of its listeners, to form networks, and to train its staff. All the international partners must combine their forces and support this approach.
Defining perspectives
These hopes and concerns were presented to FAO by various governments in the form of a request for the Organization to consider the matter and arrange an international meting of all partners in order to draw up a plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa.
This meeting in Ouagadougou is the latest part of the series of international meetings that have been organized in recent years by UNICEF, the Cultural and Technical Cooperation Agency (ACCT), the World Association for Community Radio Broadcasters (AMARC), the Agricultural and Rural Cooperation Centre (CTA), the Panos Institute and other organisations.
This meting has been preceded by extensive analysis and assessment work, which has been carried out by national consultants in 21 African countries in order to produce a report on the current state of rural radio in a cross-section of the region. Their reports reveal the existing institutional organisations, the technical situation of equipment and infrastructure, the programme techniques and formats used, the problems found, the projected development plans and the needs expressed to implement them.
An assessment was also carried out in nine countries in which FAO has contributed to the start or relaunch of rural radio projects in the last ten years.
This preparatory work is reported in the studies and summary reports are at the disposal of participants of this workshop in English and French.
The objectives of this Ouagadougou meeting are:
* to summarize the present situation of rural radio in Africa,
* to identify the main obstacles to its development;
* to measure the existing assets and constraints with regards to all the countries and technical and financial partners represented; and
* to seek international agreement for innovative solutions for the future.
The meeting's aim is to agree on an outline for a plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa and to find the technical and financial means necessary for its implementation.
Missions - legal and institutional matters
A general mission of public service
Rural radio has many tasks and it is important to place them in the general framework of its public service mission. The essential objective is to give the rural world access to information and knowledge, and participating in the dialogue, expression of views and decision making which is necessary if rural people are to control their economic, social and cultural environment and play a full part in the development of the country.
This public service mission of rural radio must not be confused with what has often been the appropriation of the means of information and communication by a Government or political party that has unilaterally broadcast social, educational or ideological messages. In contrast, the public service mission of rural radio has to be at the service of everyone, without distinction of language, or ethnic, religious or philosophical grouping, age, sex, or proximity to or distance from the decision making centres. Public service thus means equality of treatment with regard to all the public, and covering an the territory concerned, offering a diversity of topics in programmes and languages to cover all questions relating to rural development and guaranteeing an equality of treatment and expression to an the various segments of the public concerned. Finally, public service means a guarantee of independence of rural radio from political, economic or religious influence and control.
It is also important to distinguish clearly the definition of the public service tasks of rural radio from the performance of these tasks. The definition of a public service mission must be one that bypasses individual interest to take account of community interest. In this definition, the State, in equal collaboration with an social, economic and cultural partners, should continue itself to playing the roles of encouragement, information and arbitration.
The performance of this task may lie with various operators. It may be entrusted to public, pare-public, group association, community, or private bodies provided that they confirm to the common rules which are defined and accepted by an those involved as part of the specifications that define the rights and obligations of each party, and provided they have the characteristics required to be entrusted with a public service mission.
A specific mission for rural radio
This mission includes objectives at various levels. Thus, rural radio must be:
* a means of rapid dissemination of economic, social and cultural information that is necessary to the rural population in a sufficient diversity of languages and over a sufficiently wide geographic area to cover the entire rural population concerned;
* a support of interactive communication, dialogue and debate between the people involved in the main rural development issues;
* a platform for the expression of democratic and pluralist opinions, needs and aspirations of rural communities;
* a medium for entertainment, information, conservation and awareness of the oral and musical heritage of the rural environment;
* a means for social enquiry in the rural endowment and for social studies which are essential for the definition and planning of programmes and development projects, and for monitoring and assessing their implementation, results and impact;
* a means of social awareness and mobilisation;
* a medium which, combined with other means of social or educational communication for the public or individuals, becomes an educational vehicle for the transfer or exchange of knowledge and techniques, and contributes to the implementation of multimedia campaigns on a wide variety of development topics.
Implementation of this mission: competition or network?
The benefits of development, the strategic importance of access by rural populations to information and knowledge, and the lack of existing means for this in most countries, make it imperative for existing radio stations to be complementary and to form networks. What then are the implications of this at The legal, regulatory and institutional levels?
Legal and regulatory levels
If an the needs of the rural population are taken into account, the implementation of these tasks at national, regional and local levels, requires the concerted and complementary mobilisation of the radio stations at these various levels despite their need to operate according to a diversity of rules and statutory regulations. At a time when new radio stations are springing up rapidly both in urban and rural areas it is essential to take the appropriate legal and regulatory measures at the national, regional and local levels in order to:
* harmonise the various existing legal statutes and allow each station to choose the legal form and status best suited to its needs;
* produce mandates that conform to the constitution and mission of the stations, defining the conditions of performance of their public service role while preserving their independence;
* produce codes and ethical rules for operation that are adapted to the new conditions created by the appearance of new players in the radio environment;
* grant operating permits and frequencies on legally founded bases;
* regulate the economic activities initiated by these stations;
* encourage and facilitate the creation of networks in order to: optimise the efficiency of the stations; improve the coverage of the various localities and regions of the country; ensure equitable treatment of all citizens in terms of access to information; and ensure the use of the various languages spoken in these countries et rational, regional and local levels.
The examination of legal and regulatory matters is already proceeding in several countries where thorough studies on these matters have been completed or are in progress (1). These studies must be distributed widely in order to inspire similar actions in each country concerned.
It is important to emphasise that the rural radio stations or similar broadcasting organisations that develop from the public sector must not escape examination and revision of the legal status and regulatory conditions that govern their operation. In fact, their central position, the experience they have accumulated over the years, the competence of their staff, the extent of the means they have available to them in teens of technical equipment and capacity for production, broadcasting, engineering, maintenance and training, must all give these stations or organizations a pivotal role in the development of the various forms of rural radio, and give them an important role for coordinating, consulting, training and supporting all other stations in operating in the rural sector.
In most cases, the present statutes of these public service rural radio stations prevent them from playing this role and give them a poor image with the other players involved in this sector. Therefore, their statutes must be modified to give them greater autonomy legally, administratively and financially in order to provide them with a capacity for negotiation with ad the other partners concerned. This would allow them to conclude agreements and contract, to be present at all levels where initiatives are taken in rural development mattes; to be recognised as a force for making proposals to the other patties concerned; and would give them the authority to generate financial resources and manage these independently. While maintaining their general public service mission under the new statutes, rural radios should be separated from the central services of national radio broadcasting, which would give them the administrative, financial and editorial autonomy their require.
The institutional level
Legal and regulatory modifications must be accompanied by institutional changes that will allow rural radio to play a full role as an instrument of promotion and support of rural development to meet the needs of rural audiences in terms of access to information, knowledge and culture, and in terms of expression, communication and exchange of ideas, experience and technical knowledge.
To achieve this, it is essential that:
* the main players in development are involved in the orientation and definition of radio programmes at national, regional and local levels in order that the topics included in these programmes and their treatment reflect the diversity of needs and plurality of opinions and approaches;
* the relations with the audience are fully interactive and rural communities are represented in programming committees in order to participate in deciding the content and orientation of programmes;
* the various segments of the audience are known in terms of their composition, listening habits, needs and preferences, and that the impact of programmes is measured;
* rural radio programmes a e the source of multimedia outreach and combination with other means of mass or local communication, in particular the rural press and traditional means of communication such as theatre, recitals and songs;
* rural radio plays a role as a means of social study and investigation of the environment in order to give development partners information on the rural environment so that they may understand community needs better and make appropriate responses.
In order to achieve these objectives, precise institutional measures must be undertaken:
* the creation of systems and mechanisms of coordination between the main panned concerned: ministerial departments, decentralized rural cooperatives, non-governmental organisations, representatives of the public, business people and external partners;
* the creation of multi-disciplinary teams for the conception and production of radio programmes with the technical competence to cover all topics of rural development.
* the creation and operation of mechanisms that allow the various partners in rural development to analyse and utilise the information collected by rural radio in the field, to measure the impact of programmes and to build multimedia links.
These regulatory measures and institutional mechanisms for cooperation, multi-disciplinary action and interactivity, are often cumbersome and difficult to set up. However, they are essential to guarantee that rural radio coves the topics of development, takes into account the characteristics and needs of it audiences, and opens the way for multimedia links. It is the responsibility of the institutions concerned to find more flexible ways of making these structures operational and effective.
Several countries have already taken interesting initiatives in the legal and institutional fields by setting up rural radios as directorates or general directorates, giving them autonomous statues at an administrative and financial levels, and entrusting the operation and responsibility of regional and local stations to them, together with responsibility for programmes in national languages.
Equipment, infrastructure and technological choices
Some serious inadequacies
The reality of African rural radio in practice reveals serious inadequacies in terms of equipment and infrastructure which threaten the very survival of the stations. The production equipment is old (sometimes over twenty years old) and always over-used. Having been acquired from different donors and cooperation paroles or via aid mechanisms, the equipment is often of diverse origins or are end-of-series products. This causes serious problems with maintenance and supply of spare pasts and leads to the graveyards of technical equipment with which all stations are familiar.
Rural radios rarely have specific equipment; they generally share the few available studios and equipment with other departments and services of national radio. When placed in competition with other sectors, the needs of rural radio generally do not take priority either in terms of production facilities or broadcast slots. The result is that rural radio programmes cannot be broadcast at the most convenient times for rural audiences or in a sufficient spread of languages to cover the needs of the main communities.
The production equipment and transmitters of regional stations are in an even worse condition. Sometimes they may be non-operational for months or even years at a time. Where equipment needs and options have been investigated by national technical manages for central radio broadcasting before acquisition, it is generally more standardised and in better running order. This is the case in particular for stations created under the local rural radio development programme supported by the Cultural and Technical Cooperation Agency (ACCT). The problem which arises however is that of maintaining this equipment, as competent technicians are often far removed from the radio sites and a breakdown can immobilise a station for several weeks or even months at a time.
Mobile production equipment (tape recorders, sound equipment, vehicles equipped for site visits or reporting) are scarce and over-worked. Production consumables (tapes, batteries, cassettes) are also very scarce because of difficulties of supply and cost. This difficulty of access to mobile production facilities and consumables is a major obstacle to rural broadcasters completing their tasks and often forces them to produce their programmes in the studio, which goes against the whole spirit of having an interactive approach with the rural people.
The situation regarding transmitters is also poor. in most cases they are very old and unreliable and the medium or short wave transmitters used by national and regional stations often fall far short of covering all the target area.
Frequency modulate (EM) transmitters are still rare in rural locations apart from local community-type stations which generally use low power transmitters rarely exceeding a broadcast radius of 50 kilometres.
With regard to reception, receives that are available on the market are of diverse origin, often of mediocre technical quality and do not provide value for money. There is no after sales service for receives nor any maintenance system or supply of spare parts. Batteries are also expensive and of poor technical quality.
Budgets for the replacement of old equipment, acquisition of spare parts and maintenance are low or even non-existent. Moreover, they often depend on one-off donations from external partners, which constitute only a partial response, providing no continuity for dealing with the existing problems.
Adapting equipment to the needs of rural radio
The scarcity of equipment and inadequate technical infrastructure and funds constitute major obstacles to the proper operation and development of rural radio in Africa, despite the fact that the unique and specific nature of rural radio should be reflected in the equipment and infrastructure that is adapted to its needs and environment.
* Rural radio stations are often far from any urban centre or favourable technological environment. Therefore, they need robust, reliable equipment with an independent energy supply.
* This equipment must be easy to maintain and repair with a supply of spare parts which are both technically and financially available.
* Production and transmitting equipment at national, regional and local stations must correspond to specific technical standards and should be as standardised as possible in order to avoid problems of operations, maintenance, repair and supply of spare parts.
* Receivers must also be robust, reliable, of good technical quality and adapted to the broadcast standards of the various rural radio stations. Good quality batteries must be available on the market at prices affordable by rural families.
* The buildings and other facilities at production premises and logistics must be better adapted to the technical, economic and cultural environment of rural radio stations.
Search for collaborative solutions
The search for solutions to these problems of equipment and infrastructure is an absolute priority and must be undertaken in conjunction with the various partners at national, inter-African and international levels.
At national level
The production of plans and projects for the development of technical equipment and infrastructure for rural radio is an essential starting point. However, these plans and projects must be standardised for the national, regional and local elements and should include the following points:
* Study of equipment currently in use in rural radio stations, analysis of technical performance, use and methods of operation and maintenance.
* Study of existing infrastructure: studios, technical and editing suites, offices, documentation centres, etc.; analysis of function and usage, search for solutions involving national sources of production, which encourage the use of locally available materials and which are cheap and adapted to the economic, social and cultural context of the stations.
* Analysis of the technical options for the production of broadcast equipment, and the definition of technical specifications which lead to more efficient, more rational and cheaper operation and maintenance of equipment.
* Feasibility study for the installation of a central system for the supply of equipment and consumables to the various radio stations in the country.
* Study of rural radio/telephone interfaces and the possibilities offered by the development of new information and communication technologies such as digitalisation, interconnection of radio stations through world-wide networks and the use of telecommunications satellites.
* Study of the various types of receivers on the market used by the rural population and analysis of their technical performance, adaptation to national broadcast standards, expected operating life, purchase price and maintenance costs. Also the availability, cost and life of the various types of batteries available on the market.
* Study of the potential market for rural radio equipment (production, broadcast equipment, receivers, batteries, tapes and cassettes) in the existing industrial environment, and the investment capacity of national and international businesses (entrepreneurs, banks, equipment, manufacturers, distribution and sale systems, etc.) to finance local needs.
* Feasibility study for the establishment of local industries for the manufacture and distribution of production, broadcast and reception equipment and consumables (batteries, tapes, cassettes, etc.).
At the inter-African and international levels
* Coordination and publication of studies undertaken at national level into the infrastructure and equipment that is best adapted to rural radio's objectives: premises and infrastructures, fixed and mobile equipment, broadcast equipment, receivers, consumables, etc.
* Coordination at inter-Africa and international levels of the studies undertaken at the interface between radio broadcasting and telecommunication in the rural environment, with the new world networks of information and communication, and on the use of this new technology.
* Support for the creation of an inter-African consultation mechanism on the equipment, infrastructure and materials that are most appropriate to the needs of the various types of station and are the most economical and the easiest to maintain.
* Creation of a supply network for equipment and consumables.
* Support for the installation of local industries for production of equipment and consumable materials.
* Implementation of an international programme of construction or rehabilitation of radio stations at national, regional and local levels, involving national supplies and using local equipment, and with the participation and support of the international agencies, banks, private investors, technical partners, and bilateral and multilateral funds.
New directions for training and research
As discussed in previous chapters, rural radio in its present form represents a recent development in communication and still has very little structure with regard to legal, regulatory and institutional aspects, and in terms of infrastructure, equipment and technological choices.
The same applies to training and research.
Training: dispersed and inadequate initiatives
There is only one training institution specialising in rural radio. This is the Inter-African Centre for Rural Radio (CIERRO) in Ouagadougou which was created by URTNA. In almost twenty years of existence, CERRO has trained producers and technicians specialising in rural radio in most francophone African countries. CERRO offers a two year course leading to a diploma recognised by the public authorities in the countries concerned, and it provides short training courses and retraining sessions. Its functions also include research, documentation and dissemination of information in rural radio. There is no institution of a similar nature in anglophone or lusophone countries in Africa.
Rural radio staff who have benefited from training, from institutions other than CERRO, have generally been trained at centres which do not specialise in rural radio. These include schools of journalism, training centres linked to national radio and television, public information institutions in many African countries, universities and foreign communication training institutes such as the National Audiovisual Institute (INA) in France, the German Radio Training Centre in Germany, the Radio Netherlands Training Centre, the BBC Training Centre, UK, etc.
It is important to note, however, that most rural radio staff have not had any long-term initial training and have generally either been trained on the job or, at best, they have attended short training courses. These short courses attempt to meet the ever growing need for training that has resulted from the numerous new stations that have been established in recent years, and such courses are generally arranged by various external partners committed to rural radio, often in collaboration with CERRO. The training is frequently provided as part of a project for initiating or rehabilitating rural radio or is an initiative responding to topical concerns such as environment, health, nutrition, security of food supply, and population, where rural radio is to be used as a medium for information, mobilisation or education.
In particular, these have been projects supported by ACCT, UNICEF, FAO, CTA, UNESCO, and German, Swiss, and Dutch aid agencies as well as other partners.
These training sessions are sometimes addressed to mixed groups and may consist of radio produces and presenters, who often have had no initial training, technicians from various ministries involved in development, public institutions, NGOs, and other bodies associated with rural development.
The courses are generally focused on basic or further training in radio production techniques, reporting from the field, public radio shows, magazine programmes, micro programmes, serial productions and radio drama.
Because of the financial and logistic support offered by external partners, such training can be of great benefit for field-work by providing the transport and other essential resources and consumables such as properly equipped vehicles, fuel, generators, mobile recording equipment, sound and lighting equipment for making programmes in villages and for public broadcasts, tapes, cassettes and batteries. This kind of assistance can also include the material and financial means to arrange game shows in villages, to buy prizes for the games, and provide payments for local musicians and presenters.
These financial and technical inputs allow training and production work to benefit from opportunities to undertake field trips for collecting sufficient audio material in order to provide the rural radio programmes with recordings from the rural environment on a continuing basis. However these training courses are rarely monitored by national broadcasting organisations and, when trained staff return to their stations, they are often unable to apply the training they have received due to a lack of transport, mobile production equipment, finance and consumables.
Thus staff trained in production of rural radio programmes (by CERRO or other training courses) are often allocated to other sectors of radio or other media (newspapers, television, |press agencies, ministerial press departments, private sector, etc.). This occurs despite the fact that these individuals are on the staff of national radio. Alternatively, when trained staff are from ministries, development organisations, NGOs, etc., they may not be authorised to carry out production activities as past of the rural radio teams.
Training in specialist areas other than production is not covered systematically or on any significant scale. This is particularly the case for technical work (sound recording, editing, maintenance, programming work, administration, management and research). However, several notable initiatives have been taken in these fields by ACCT, CIRTEF, UNESCO, UNICEF, FAG, Swiss aid agency, GTZ, CTA and other organisations: short term twining courses have been organised to cover aspects of operation and maintenance of equipment, the organisation of print and sound archives, the management and administration of local stations, marketing and audience research. However, these initiatives have been sporadic and uncoordinated.
In December 1992, a seminar was organised in Bordeaux, France, by ACCT, which brought together various organizations involved in the development of rural and community radio in francophone Africa. The conclusions and recommendations from this seminar stressed in particular the need for closer cooperation between all partners and called for a coordinated approach to the training needs of African rural radio at local, regional or national levels, including the training of trainers from African rural radio, and the joint production of training tools.
In 1993, FAO, UNICEF and CIERRO took an important initiative in this direction as part of a joint project aimed at the development and experimentation of a multimedia training package in rural radio and the training of thirteen trainers from eight West and Central African countries. These trainers now have the knowledge and teaching tools to enable them to meet training needs for the production of rural radio programmes in their respective countries.
A first assessment of this initiative was presented during another international meeting organised by ACCT in Bamako, Mali, in November 1994, and it appears that these trainers and the equipment that is available have not been used sufficiently to carry out the training of new rural radio producers despite there being a real need in these countries. There are two main reasons for this:
* the demands for training are rarely taken into account systematically in African rural radio. Training activities are more often determined by the external organisation making the offer of training than by the need to meet any internal demand that is linked to a development plan for rural radio and specific trying plans for staff.
* In the countries concerned, there has been no training follow-up procedure, although this is an essential requirement for the planning of training activities, utilising teaching materials and the reinvestment of knowledge given to trainers.
* The production techniques taught in the training sessions require access to means of production (portable recorder, production equipment, vehicles, consumables, travelling costs) and these are lacking in most of the countries surveyed. As a result, training cannot be spread throughout the countries.
This assessment reveals the need to make training a national priority and to examine training plans and programmes in the context of existing inadequacies of equipment and infrastructure, and of those legal, institutional and economic limitations which prevent rural radio from actually performing its appointed task in an autonomous and sustainable way.
If these elements are not combined, the investment in training risks being totally wasted, either because it cannot be reinvested due to the lack of infrastructure, equipment and means of production and broadcast, or because the structure of rural radio does not have the statutory means and resources necessary for the completion of these tasks. Finally, trained staff may feel free to leave and will invest the knowledge and technical skills which they acquired during their training elsewhere.
New directions necessary
In each country
* Training must be regarded as a priority. It must be the subject of a complete study at national, regional and local levels in relation to the perspectives of development of infrastructure and equipment at these various levels. Also, needs must be identified in the public structure of radio and within the associated or private community stations.
* Each station must define its own training plans, taking into account the specific nature of its tasks, the situation of each member of staff concerned, the development of programming and the transmitting capacity of the station.
* Analysis of needs must go beyond the training of producers and presenters and must also include the training of operating and maintenance technicians, managers, researchers, archivists, trainers and posts linked to the development of new information technology.
* The training of rural radio producers and presenters must be open to all the new techniques and methods of participatory research and social study appropriate to the rural environment. It must also include techniques of person-to-person communication and complementary audiovisual media that can extend the activities of radio on the ground.
* A mechanism for coordinating and monitoring training problems must be set up in order to develop a training programme for trainers, to plan all necessary initial and further training activities, find the human, technical and financial resources required at national or international levels, and propose ways of recognising the various types of twining received by awarding suitable diplomas or certificates.
At inter-African and international levels:
At inter-African and international levels, CERRO must remain the central tuning element but its tasks must tee adapted and its funding increased in order to allow it to:
* continue and extend its traditional task of basic training of producers and technicians in rural radio;
* develop an "a la carte" training programme for the new structures, specific training for the different types of local and community radio stations, training in station management, training in documentation and management of sound archives, training in audience research and assessment of programme impact, and training of trainers, etc.;
* develop a consultancy capacity for training and support the implementation of the structures and mechanisms for coordinating and monitoring training problems within each country;
* create mobile training teams able to design and lead training sessions on demand;
* develop multimedia training tools to support the implementation of training sessions for the various sectors concerned.
The international development partners in African rural radio must coordinate their support for CIERRO, assist the setting up of a similar institute for the English and Portuguese speaking African countries, and support the efforts made within each country to meet its training needs.
The resources provided by new information and communication technologies must be mobilized further to develop long distance training and to facilitate the circulation and exchange of programmes and training tools.
Research, an under-developed priority sector
Every development plan for rural radio in Africa must be based on a network of stations with well defined tasks and statutes, and infrastructures and equipment' which are adapted to the socio-economic context and operating conditions of each station. Staff must be competent and motivated. Such ambitions are impossible without putting in place research capacity; this is essential if rural radio is to better direct its actions, in particular with regard to programme structure and content and information about the audience, and to gain a better understanding of future trends in order to anticipate demands on and responses by rural radio.
Research programmes that exist have remained very cautious and inadequate in most of the countries reviewed and the existing stations have usually been created with minimum investment and without any real preliminary studies being undertaken. This is certainly the reason for the lack of cohesion found in this sector and the precarious nature of existing organisations, unsuitable equipment, poorly defined statutes and specifications, random programming, unidentified audiences, broken down or non-existent equipment and inadequate operating budgets.
Some efforts have been made recently with the support of various external partners, particularly in the field of audience research and equipment adapted to the needs of local and community stations. However, these efforts remain sporadic and dispersed and the sustainability of these initiatives is compromised by a lack of follow-up to initial external assistance.
Therefore, it is essential to define and implement in each country, and at inter-African level, research programmes based on the following:
* Research into new forms of radio which have appeared recently, their capacity to provide public service broadcasting, and to meet the demand and needs of rural populations and to form networks
* Research into the most appropriate legal arrangements to permit these stations to survive and adapt to the political, socio-economic and cultural context of the various countries concerned.
* Research into the royal audience (structure, composition, listening habits, etc.) and measurement of the impact of rural radio programmes. Development of operational tools for research and assessment.
* Research into more interactive programming formats which are better adapted to the needs of rural audiences.
* Research into equipment and infrastructure adapted to the tasks rural radio has to undertake at local, regional and national levels, and the existing capacity for the development of local industries to produce radio equipment and materials et rational or regional levels.
* Research into the use of new information technology (INTERNET, digitalisation, satellites, etc.) in order to improve rural radio performance.
* Research into multimedia extensions which may be developed from rural radio activities and feedback from the rural environment.
Towards a plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa
Rural radio, in its various forms, configurations and networks, constitutes an essential tool for meeting the challenges facing rural African societies. It must provide rural people with the means for information and expression, and the communication and exchange networks they need to control its economic, social and cultural environment.
As part of its general public service mission, rural radio must guarantee democracy and pluralism, it must be more autonomous on the administrative and financial levels, it must function better technically and be more profitable economically.
To meet these challenges, political, institutional, technical and economic conditions must be combined in each country concerned and at an inter-African level. The technical and financial partners in international cooperation must combine their efforts and coordinate their support to implement an overall development plan for African rural radio.
Political and institutional levels
Governments must undertake to make the development of rural radio a priority. This commitment must strongly confirm the wish of each country to give rural people the means of jinformation, communication and access to knowledge which win help eliminate the inequality that exists presently between the urban and rural areas.
The development of rura1 radio must be included in the national policies and strategies for communication for development. The definition and adoption of such strategies must legitimise the rural radio's mission in the development process and involve all national and international partners in a common action platform covering the information and communication needs of all development sectors: food security, protection and management of natural resources, health, nutrition, education, culture, etc.
Rural radio stations must form networks at local, regional and national levels in order to make optimum use of all existing means to meet the needs of the audiences, provide the best possible territorial and linguistic coverage, and reinforce democracy and participation.
In each country, a coordinating mechanism must be set up to define the specifications for the different rural radio stations, control the performance of their public service mission, administer matters relating to legislation and the allocation of broadcasting permits and frequencies, ensure cohesion of infrastructure and technical equipment, and to coordinate training and research programmes.
Similarly, inter-sectoral coordination mechanisms covering all partners involved in rural development must operate in each country in order to legitimise the mandates of rural radio programmes to allow them to address all topics of economic, social and cultural development, and to encourage the mobilisation of all those technical, financial and human resources that are necessary for the implementation of these programmes.
The study of the legal statutes must be adapted to the tasks given to rural radios in their different situations. This must include the adoption of regulatory clauses that extend the administrative and financial autonomy of the public rural radio structures, and the creation of networks between national, regional and local levels. The implementation of good coordination between the actors and partners is the main element which must be included in the political and institutional plan of each country concerned in order to ensure the long-term development of their rural radios.
Equipment and infrastructure
A development programme for rural radio in Africa is not possible without a complete reassessment of existing equipment and infrastructure and the current technical conditions for the purchase, installation, operation and maintenance of the existing equipment, materials and infrastructures.
This reassessment must be undertaken with the aid of international technical and financial partners and should take into account:
* the need for technically appropriate equipment and infrastructure which is appropriate technically and economically to meet the social and cultural characteristics of the environment;
* the diversity of the needs of all those involved in rural radio development (public sector, private operators, cooperative movements, non-governmental organisations, decentralised public authorities);
* the need for greater standardisation of equipment,
* the development of radio production and broadcasting technology and the new conditions being created by the development of the new information and communication systems and networks,
* the need to develop in Africa an industrial capacity for manufacturing equipment for producing programmes, broadcasting and reception, and to set up networks for consultation and cooperation between stations and also centralised purchasing.
Training and research
Training and research are essential to the development of rural radio in Africa and must be considered a priority at the national level. A research and training sector must be set up in each country for all personnel involved in the implementation of new forms of radio in rural development. At inter-African level, a mechanism for coordination and support of national training and research programmes must also be put in place with the support of international partners. This task could be entrusted to CERRO for the francophone countries and to equivalent structures for the anglophone and lusophone countries. These initiatives must be based on a network of African researchers and trainers in rural radio and on the creation and operation of an international resource centre in this area.
At international level, cooperation between the main partner organisations involved in rural radio in Africa must be continued and intensified in order to coordinate the support given to the various countries and to the inter-African structures for research and training. In particular:
* refining rural radio's mission and the technical, legal and institutional implications of this development;
* development of audience research and techniques for the measurement of programme impact;
* research into technical equipment and infrastructures adapted to the objectives of African rural radio and the economic, technical and cultural context of the environment,
* development of training programmes and tools to provide an the needs of rural radio.
(1) Study redefining the legal or institutional framework of rural radio and the identification of potential partners using rural radio, Cabinet Diallo, Legal Advisors. Bamako, Mali. FAO, July 1994
back Contents next
<section>4</section>
back Contents next
7. DISCUSSION PANEL ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL RADIO IN AFRICA
The workshop began with a panel discussion between six specialists of rural radio in Africa. Each of them had prepared an introductory address on one of the themes to be discussed. The text of these addresses follows.
LE ROLE DE SERVICE PUBLIC DES RADIOS RURALES
Expos introductif, par M. Bernard Feller, Consultant de la Coopration suisse au dveloppement (DDC)
Introduction
"Le rle de service public de la radio rurale": le titre du sojet que la FAO m'a demande de developper parat innocent, mais il cache un pige.
A premire vue, en effet, le rle de service public de la radio rurale est une vidence.
Si les radios rurales africaines (comme c'est le cas de certains des partenaires avec qui travaille la Cooperation suisse):
* sont des radios de dveloppement qui, anne aprs anne, favorisent l'autopromotion paysanne et valorisent les cultures traditionnelles;
* mettent dans les langues que parlent les gens dans leur vie quotidienne;
* travaillent, comme certains de nos partenaires, avec la volont de rinsonter la radio africaine;
c'est que tous les critres du service public sont runis: intrt gnral, galit, qualit, continuit, ancrage social. La radio rurale n'a donc pas un rle de service public, elle est, presque  elle seule, le service public dans des pays o les ruraux reprsentent la majorit de la population.
Pourtant, le rle de service public des radios rurales merite une rflexion puisque (et c'est l que se trouve le pige):
* la radiodiffusion de service public, formellement, n'existe pas en Afrique o partout prvaut encore, notamment dans la tte des journalistes, le modle de la radio d'tat;
* certaines radios rurales ne sont pas aussi imaginatives et creatrices que je les ai dcrites- preuve en est ces "paniers de la mnagre" et ces "comes et lgendes" que l'on trouve dans les grilles de programme, pratiquement sous la mme forme, depuis trente ans (a qui la concurrence va faire le plus grand bien),
* les etats ruines ne sont pas en mesure de maintenir une structure de communication au service de l'intert gnral;
* tout cela alors que le pluralisme radiophonique est en train de crer dans le secteur priv des radios qui sersont elles aussi l'intert gnral la ou elles sont implantes.
I1 y a donc probleme.
La thse que je vais developper est la suivante: le contexte des medias africains est tres favorable a un nouveau developpement de la radio rurale et, en mme temps, a l'emergence d'un veritable service public de radiodiffusion, different de celui qui prvaut en Europe puisqu'il devra s'appuyer sur toutes les radios existantes, qu'elles soient publiques ou privees, commerciales ou associatives.
La notion de service public
La notion de service public en radiodiffusion est assez particuliere et prte facilement a confusion. Plutt que d'en donner une definition rigide, nous allons essayer d'en montrer les contours par quelques brefs eclairages en la situant dans son contexte historique; en montrant a quoi elle s'oppose, en l'abordant enfin par le biais de ses contenus possibles, de son organisation et de son financement
Le contexte historique
Des les debuts de l'audiovisuel, deux approches differentes se sont developpees. D'un cte celle des Etats-Unis, essentiellement commerciale, qui pour satisfaire les besoins du consommateur s'en est remis presque completement au marche (le service public existe aussi aux Etats-Unis, modestement, mais le legislateur ne lui attribue qu'une fonction regulatrice). D'un autre cote, l'approche du reste du monde qui a vu dans la production audiovisuelle un element de culture lie a des questions d'intrt general qui concernaient l'Etat.
L'approche essentiellement commerciale represente ce qu'un grand patron du service public canadien avait decrit comme "l'erreur historique des Etats-Unis". En effet, si l'audiovisuel des Etats-Unis s'etait developpe sous forme de service public, les series televisees, que nous regardons tous, seraient sans douse differentes.
L'erreur historique du reste du monde, c'est la radio etatique, simple courroie de transmission du haut vers le bas, sont les pires exemples sont les radios de propaganda sovietique et nazie.
Le service public est ne de la prise de conscience, par quelques Etats eclaires, du fait que l'intert gnral serait mieux servi s'ils ne se mlaient pas de la production des programmes. Le modele pour tous les professionnels du service public, c'est la BBC britannique. D'autres pays tels que le Canada, la Republique federale allemande, la Hollande, les pays scandinaves, la Suisse ont une tradition bien etablie de service public. La France a rejoins le club bien plus tard.
Le point faible du service public est qu'il s'est exerce longtemps dans une situation de monopole. Sans concurrence, il est reste probablement trop elitaire. Avec l'avenement du pluralisme, il a du passer d'une logique de producteurs a une logique de consommateurs.
Le service public, par opposifion
On saisit mieux le service public en disant a quoi il s'oppose. En general, on oppose la radio de service public aux radios privees, aux radios commerciales en particulier. A mon avis, il s'oppose bien davantage a la radio etatique.
Le service public n'est ni la radio de l'Etat, ni encore moins la radio du Gouvemment, ni encore moins la radio du prefet. I1 est la radio de tout le monde. Ce qui implique des exigences d'organisation, sur lesquelles je reviendrai, mais aussi une attention particuliere pour les minorites et les faibles, un esprit de tolerance et d'ouverture democratique.
Le service public par ses contenus
Le service public se definit souvent lui-mme par l'attention qu'il voue a la culture. La question des lors est: queue culture? Par exemple, il a ete reproche a la BBC, du temps de son monopole, d'etre elitiste.
En Afrique, le service public reste pratiquement le seul, parmi les radios nationales, a faire de l'information nationale et internationale.
En Suisse, la loi demande au service public: de contribuer a la libre formation de l'opinion des auditeurs en fournissant une information generale, diversifiee et fidele; de pourvoir a la formation generale et au divertissement, de developper les connaissances civiques; de tenir compte de la diversite des populations et de favoriser l'ouverture sur le monde; de donner la preference a la production audiovisuelle suisse et europeenne.
Le service public, a mon avis, se caracterise surtout par son respect des minorites et de tous les segments de son public. Il est le media de tout le monde et non pas seulement des courants majoritaires. Ce qui implique un ton mesure et une palette de programme etendue.
Quoi qu'il en soit, les contenus ne suffisent pas a definir le service public puisqu'il est toujours concevable qu'ils soient aussi ceux de telle ou telle radio privee.
Le service public par des critres d'organisation
C'est par son financement et par son organisation que se definit le mieux le service public:
L'organisation
La fin des monopoles a pour consequence que les radios d'etat doivent se transformer pour devenir, elles aussi, pluralistes. Pour passer du statut de radio gouvernementale ou de radio d'etat a celui de radio de service public, quatre conditions au moins doivent etre reunies:
* Participation de la societe civile, et en particulier des ruraux et des femmes, aux organes de controle de la societe de radiodiffusion (conseil d'administration elargi par exemple).
* Les radiotelevisions echappent au controle direct des gouvernements.
L'independance redactionnelle, administrative et financiere des entreprises de l'audiovisuel est assuree:
* l'autonomie redactionnelle signifie que les animateurs ne reoivent de directives que de leurs chefs hierarchiques;
* l'autonomie financiere signifie que la radio gere elle-mme le budget qui lui a ete alloue;
* l'autonomie administrative signifie que le directeur de la radio rurale choisit et organise librement son personnel.
Bref, la radio est geree comme une entreprise.
Transparence financiere. Les entreprises du service public doivent etre gerees d'une maniere telle qu'elles ne pesent pas demesurement sur les ressources de l'Etat (qui sont les ressources de tout le monde); ou alors elles doivent ceder la place a des medias plus competitifs. Service public oui, mais pas a n'importe quel prix.
Les radios rurales sont des radios de developpement. Pour elles, l'autonomie (redactionnelle, financiere et administrative) est-elle aussi importante que pour les radios nationales? L'experience a montre que oui.
Les collaborateurs foufouldophones des radios rurales, etudiant les raisons de l'echec des campagnes radiophoniques pour une meilleure matrise des feux de brousse, ont mis en evidence, en premier lieu, le manque d'autonomie des radios rurales. Effectivement, comment faire un travail en profondeur si les sorties de la radio rurale sont liees exclusivement a celles du prefet ou des services techniques et si les plans de campagne sont mis en echec par le manque de carburant?
Les redacteurs en chef des radios nationales se sont reunis a Dakar en 1994, et a Madagascar en 1995, sous les auspices de 1'URTNA, pour reflechir sur l'information en periode de crise. Ils ont raisonne a partir d'etudes de cas. Concernant le conflit Senegal-Mauritanie, ils ont constate:
* qu'une dispute entre eleveurs et agriculteurs, comme il s'en produit helas beaucoup, n'aurait pas degenere en conflit intemational si une radio regionale senegalaise avait ete operationnelle dans la region rurale concernee;
* que lorsque la crise a pris une dimension nationale et internationale, le manque d'autonomie des medias gouvernmentaux senegalais avait jete de l'huile sur le feu.
Avec une lucidite digne d'eloge, les confreres senegalais ont eux-mmes fait la demonstration qu'ils avaient, a tous les stades, reagi (aux propos de l'opposition, du gouvernment, d'une radio internationale) au lieu d'agir dans le sens de l'apaisement des emotions et de l'intert gnral.
Le financement
Le financement direct ou indirect par l'Etat constitue un des points communs des services publics de radiodiffusion. Il peut s'agir d'une allocation budgetaire, d'une redevance que l'Etat preleve aupres des usages ou d'un acces reglemente au marche publicitaire. Ces financements du service public relevent de decisions politiques, quelque soit le statut juridique de la radiodiffusion. En Suisse, la forme juridique du service public de la radiotelevision est celui d'une simple association de droit prive.
Etat des lieux
Le modele qui predomine encore en Afrique francophone est celui de la radio rurale centralisee au sein d'une radio d'Etat. Par manque de moyens de deplacements et de moyens tout court, les animateurs en sont reduits a faire du prechi-precha en studio, en attendant d'eventuelles sorties sur le terrain financees par telle ou telle organisation internationale. A devoir couvrir toutes les langues nationales du pays, ils n'en sersont aucune correctement. Le principal merite de ces radios, aujourd'hui, est d'exister et de se prter a la decentralisation. Notons que malgre ce cadre contraignant, certaines emissions ont reussi a maintenir leur credibilite. C'est le cas en paraculier de Poi Kan Poi au Mali et de Dissoo au Senegal.
La forme moderne de la radio rurale professionnelle, c'est la radio rurale regionale qui allie proximite et efficacite. Il en existe en Guinee, au Niger et au Senegal. Malheureusement ces radios qui emploient des journalistes ruraux professionnels et qui se deplacent dans les villages, qui font des reportages et des magazines, coutent plus d'argent qu'elles n'en peuvent gagner par leus propres moyens. Un appui de l'Etat est indispensable.
Avec ses partenaires, la Cooperation suisse au developpement a analyse tres soigneusement le budget de fonctionnement des radios rurales regionales. Nous sommes arrives a la conclusion que la capacite d'autofinancement de ce type de radio (avis et communiques, disques de l'auditeur, publicise, budget IEC des projets, etc) ne saurait depasser 20 pour-cent de l'ensemble des couts de fonctionnement (amortissements y compris).
C'est pourtant a l'echelon regional que le rapport impact/prix de la radio rurale est potentiellement le meilleur. D'ou son importance strategique. Mais les Etats africains n'ont plus les moyens de maintenir leurs structures de communication dans les zones rurales et encore moins d'investir. Quant a la cooperation internationale, elle s'enthousiasme pour les radios rurales privees, ce qui est tres bien, mais elle tend a abandonner les radios rurales du secteur public, ce qui est dommage du point de vue de l'efficacite. Si vous m'autorisez une image routiere: les pistes rurales sont tres importantes, mais elles ne doivent pas nous faire oublier les routes departementales sur lesquelles elles debouchent.
Les radios locales de type communautaire, commercial, politique ou religieux sont la grande nouveaute qui apporte fraicheur et dynamisme au paysage mediatique partout ou le pluralisme radiophonique a deja ete introduit. La ou elles sont portees par une communaute motivee, elles ont de bonnes chances d'obtenir des contributions suffisantes, soit directement par les communautes de base, soit par l ' intermediaire des fils et filles du village qui ont cree des societes culturelles dans la capitale. Mais elles ont rarement les moyens d'employer des journalistes et animateurs ruraux formes ou de s'equiper pour faire des reportages. Leur apport au pluralisme est immense, mais leur impact est limite par leur manque de puissance de diffusion et de mobilite. Il faudrait par exemple 350 radios de type communautaire pour couvrir un pays comme le Cameroun.
Les radios commerciales ne doivent pas etre sous-estimees quant a leur potentiel de radios rurales. Tout d'abord, dans les capitales et dans les villes secondaires ou elles sont implantees, elles ont su seduire un public proche de ses origines rurales. Elles debordent aussi sur les zones rurales, ce dont les projets qui ont des budgets de communication se sont aperus.
Ma conviction est que dans une situation ou l'Etat n'est pas en mesure de maintenir une structure de communication au profit de l'ensemble des populations - faut-il le rappeler: il y a encore beaucoup de zones rurales a ce jour qui ne recoisont aucune radio de leur pays, il faut jouer les complementarites et n'exclure aucune capacite. Je vais m'expliquer en prenant l'exemple du Mali.
Situation au Mali
J'ai eu l'occasion de visiter la plupart des radios rurales locales du Mali, c'est-a-dire celles implantees en dehors de Bamako. Certaines sont communautaires, certaines semi-publiques, certaines privees a connotations politiques ou religieuses. J'ai ete surpris de constater que, malgre la diversite des entreprises:
* les programmes etaient sensiblement les mmes, sans douse parce que les realises du monde rural sonttres contraignantes et que des bons communicateurs ne peuvent que les refleter;
* toutes ces radios font de la publicite ou aspirent a en faire;
* aucune ne fait de benefice.
Des lors, sont-elles si differentes qu'il faille jeter l'ostracisme sur tel ou tel type de radio comme le font certains?
Au Mali, la FAO a appuye une solution qui prefigure ce que pourraient etre les nouvelles complementarites. Il s'agissait d'apporter un appui communication aux chambres d'agriculture; celles-ci sont des organisations professionnelles privees et decentralisees qui en sont au stade de l'implantation. Avec l'aide de la FAO, les chambres d'agriculture ont finance dans toutes les radios locales situees en dehors de Bamako, au mme prix dans tout le pays, une heure de programme par mois co-produite par la chambre et la radio locales sur un sojet agree en commun. Mais pour tre efficaces les chambres d'agriculture se devaient de toucher l'ensemble du pays. Or, les radios rurales locales ne forment qu'une quinzaine de petites arrosoirs mediatiques, autour de centres urbains secondaires. Autrement dit, quelques gouttes d'eau dans l'immense Mali.
Les chambres d' agriculture ont alors sponsorise la meilleure emission de l 'ORTM a destination du monde rural, Poi Kan Poi, dont je parlais tout a l'heure, ce qui leur a assure la "visibilite" qu'elles recherchaient. En contre-partie, Poi Kan Poi s'est engage a diffuser sur les antennes de la radio nationale les meilleurs elements produits dans les radios locales. Cette solution donne satisfaction a tout le monde:
* les chambres d'agriculture se font connaitre dans tout le monde;
* les animateurs de la radio nationale qui ont rarement l'occasion de sordr sur le terrain, sont contents de recevoir des elements produits dans les villages;
* les auditeurs de la radio nationale sont contents d'entendre ce que font les radios de Niono ou de Koutiala;
* et les plus contents de tous sont les animateurs des radios locales qui de temps aautre peuvent se faire entendre dans tout le pays et qui ont pris conscience qu'ils forment un reseau.
Ce cas particulier laisse entrevoir ce que pourrait tre la radiodiffusion de service public en Afrique.
Vers un service public elargi de la radio rurale
Dans une situation, comme c'est le cas en Afrique, ou les moyens de diffusion et de production radiophoniques sont tres insuffisants, il est dans l'intert gnral que tous les ruraux accedent a une radio rurale. Et si l'Etat n'est pas en mesure de fournir lui-mme une structure de communication adequate, il faudrait servir l'intert gnral avec tous les moyens existants, done aussi avec les radios privees.
Dans cette hypothese, les radios rurales locales pourraient recevoir des mandats de service public partiels. Par exemple, l'autorisation de diffuser serait accordee si la radio s'engage a emettre quelques heures dans les langues minoritaires. et pas seulement dans la langue majoritaire, si elles acceptent de faire quelques programmes participatifs ou de diffuser aussi de la musique traditionnelle et pas seulement de la musique pour les jeunes.
I1 serait souhaitable que les radios privees, qui acceptent d'accomplir certaines taches de service public, puisse acceder au financement de l'Etat. Helas, la plupart du temps, celui-ci n'en a pas les moyens.
L' aide internationale pourrait-elle contribuer au financement du service public elargi tel que je viens de le definir?
Personnellement je pense que ce serait une situation beaucoup plus seine que celle ou des radios privees recoivent des appuis exterieurs, au detriment d'autres, sans qu'on sache tres bien pourquoi. Les autorites independantes de l'audiovisuel pourraient etre chargees de la repartition de ces fonds exterieurs. Elles le feraient en examinant, de cas en cas, la part du service public dans chaque entreprise de radio rurale, publique ou privee.
QUELLES RADIOS RURALES: PUBLIQUES, COMMUNAUTAIRES, ASSOCIATIVES, PRIVEES, LOCALES, REGIONALES, NATIONALES?
Expose introductif, par M. Samba Ousmane Toure, Directeur du CIERRO
Des emissions radiophoniques traitant des questions d'hygiene et de sante diffusees dans les annees 50, en passant par les emissions agricoles et les radios club des annees 1960, les radios rurales africaines en cette fin de 20eme siecle, malgre le manque de moyens et des structures peu adaptees, ont joue un ro1e considerable au service du public en mobilisant les ressources humaines, en modifiant des conceptions solidement ancrees de travail par l'acquisition de techniques nouvelles et en suscitant un dialogue permanent entre tous les acteurs du developpement. Plus concretement, la radio rurale a considerablement contribue a l'augmentation de la production et de la productivite de toutes les activites du monde rural. Elle a aussi contribue a l'amelioration des conditions de vie de la population par l'adoption de nouvelles regles d'hygiene et de nutrition.
Les radios rurales ont egalement joue un r1e culturel par la valorisation des langues nationales et de certaines formes d'expressions culturelles telles que les comes, les legendes, le theatre et la musique.
Face au nouveau defi qu'est la consolidation du processus democratique, des programmes sont consacres a l'education civique qui est une composante essentielle visant au developpement de la citoyennete, au respect des droits et devoirs de chacun.
La situation d'aujourd'hui
Dans un paysage mediatique en mutation avec la levee des monopoles, l'arrivee de nouveaux acteurs et en raison de projets d'ajustement structurels qui font de la rentabilite la reference fondamentale, les radios d'Etat pour leur propre survie sont en train de se restructurer. Ainsi, d'un status de radio d'Etat avec un fonctionnement tres centralise, plusieurs radios se transforment en radios de service public avec des modifications de statut par la creation d'offices, ou d'entreprises. Cette modification de statut s'accompagne d'une decentralisation des activites par la creation de stations regionales, provinciales et locales pour mieux repondre, dans un environnement de concurrence, aux preoccupations des populations.
Les radios rurales elles aussi revendiquent legitimement plus d'autonomie et des statuts leur permettant de generer des ressources par la vente de leurs produits radiophoniques et leurs prestations de service. Il reste cependant que la recherche du profit ne devrait pas se faire au detriment de la mission de mobilisation du public pour atteindre les objectifs de developpement.
Aujourd'hui, donc, le paysage radiophonique comprend dans plusieurs pays:
* des chanes nationales, regionales et provinciales qui sont des demembrements des radios d'Etat,
* des radios locales mises en place avec l'aide de l'Etat et gerees par des communautes villageoises,
* des radios associatives souvent implantees dans les zones rurales par les groupements villageois et les ONG;
* des radios confessionnelles installees dans les centres urbains;
* des radios privees commerciales installees dans les centres urbains.
Pour completer ce tableau, signalons la presence de radios internationales relayees a partir de certaines capitales par des emetteurs en FM.
L' analyse schematique des programmes de ces differents acteurs montre que les radios regionales et provinciales evoluent comme des radios de type classique et que ces programmes sont souvent des repliques de la radio nationale avec des emissions essentiellement destinees a l'elite. Ces radios devraient a notre avis retrouver leur vocation naturelle de radio rurale pour repondre aux preoccupations de son auditoire. Une exception toutefois: la Guinee, qui a reussi la decentralisation de sa radio par la creation de stations regionales rurales autonomes, avec une structure souple de coordination dans la capitale.
Les radios rurales locales installees ou renovees avec l'aide de l'ACCT
Ces radios sont implantees dans les zones rurales souvent tres eloignees de la capitale Ces radios apres une periode difficile de demarrage connaissent une dynarnique nouvelle. Elle est essentiellement due a l'installation de l'energie solaire qui diminue les charges recurrentes supportables par la communaute et par une meilleure formation des comites de gestion investis de la mission de generer des ressources. Ces radios retrouvent un peu partout leur vocation au service des communautes rurales.
Les radios associatives installees en zone rurale malgre un manque de formation de leurs agents ont des emissions essentiellement axees sur les preoccupations du monde rural.
Les radios confessionnelles et commerciales
En plus des emissions surtout de divertissement pour les radios commerciales, et religieuses pour les radios confessionnelles, ces radios consacrent plusieurs programmes a destination du monde rural en langues nationales. En effet, ces radios implantees dans les centres urbains ont un important auditoire periurbain defavorise vivant dans les mmes conditions que le monde rural et partageant les mmes preoccupations.
En conclusion
On peut dire que tous les acteurs du paysage radiophonique consacrent, a des degres divers, des programmes a destination du monde rural qui constituent ou la totalite ou la bonne partie de leur auditoire. Il est a notre avis urgent d'etablir une coherence et une synergic des actions actuellement dispersees de tous ces acteurs. Chacun en fonction de sa vocation, de ses preoccupations, devrait partiaper a l'elaboration d'un consensus national et placer ses efforts dans la voie qui sera acceptee per tous en fonction d'objectifs partages pour un developpement harmonieux de la nation.
RADIO RURALE, DEMOCRATIE ET PLURALISME
Expose introductif, par Mme Diana Senghor, PANOS Paris
En 1989, le CIERRO realisait avec 1'AMARC une etude sur la radio rurale. Les resultats n'etaient pas tres encourageants, ni sur l'etat, ni sur l'avenir des radios.
L' etat: des auditeurs, voire des animateurs en fuite; des programmes generalement en decalage par rapport a la demande des auditeurs, pour peu qu'on les ecoutat. Quant a la viabilite economique de ces radios, elle semblait entierement suspendue aux perfusions aleatoires d'une aide exterieure capricieuse.
Les perspectives, quant a elles, ne semblaient guere plus rejouissantes en depit de la bonne volonte de quelques professionnels et de quelques donateurs. Les projets de decentralisation, avec les radios regionales peis les radios locales apparaissaient mme a certains esprits chagrins comme la derniere ruse de gouvernements soucieux d'encaisser l'argent du beurre -le transfert des charges aux communautes -, mais de garder le beurre, - le controle sur les ondes et le pouvoir sur les stations. En 1989, il n'existait aucune station privee a deux exceptions pres. En 1995, selon une tentative de recensement que nous avons effectuee, a l'Institut Panos, avec l'appui de l'ACCT, il en existait pres de 70, dont plus de la moitie etait installee en milieu rural.
Le propos de cet expose est de tenter d'apporter quelques elements de reponse a la question: Comment l'avenement d'un certain pluralisme de l'information a renouvele la problematique de la radio rurale?
L' emergence des radios privees est une des formes du pluralisme de l'information, mais il y en a d'autres: le pluralisme de l'information se marque notamment par la garantie en termes juridiques du pluralisme d'expression politique avec l'egal acces des medias aux partis politiques, par la mise en place d'organes de regulation, et aussi par l'evolution des statuts et du role des radios publiques.
Mais ces innovations institutionnelles, si elles ont indubitablement fait progresser le pluralisme d' expression politique ont eu des effets beaucoup plus rents sur le pluralisme d'expression sociale et, dans certains cas, elles ont eu certains effets pervers. L'emergence des radios privees semble avoir entrane des bouleversements plus spectaculaires, plus radicaux. Tout se passe comme si certaines radios privees etaient parvenues a relever certains defis sur lesquels il y a six ens on observait que les radios rurales se cassaient les dents.
Le defi de la popularit: Il i a tres peu de sondages sur les radios privees, mais les deux sondages que l'on a montrent leur popularite: un sondage realise par Sud FM au Senegal qui montrait que 89% des auditeurs enquetes ecoutaient la radio. Un autre sondage, realise a Douenza au Mali, qui montrait que le nombre des auditeurs, en six mods, avait double.
Les radios privees semblent avoir releve le defi de la programmation . Les stations privees ont bouscule certaines traditions concernant a la fois les contenus et les genres des emissions radiophoniques. Les contenus qu'elles privilegient sont indubitablement les sujets de societe. Une radio situee a Sikasso, au Mali, consacre trots heures par jour, six jours par semaine aune emission sur les relations communautaires, sur les relations entre sexes, sur la polygamie, sur
les relations entre generations, entre groupes ethniques La culture egalement se taille une place de choix, avec les comes, la musique, la medecine traditionnelle.
Ces emissions ne sersont pas seulement a conserver et a entretenir un patrimoine culturel issu de la tradition, mais elles suscitent aussi de nouvelles creations populaires, comme les sketchs, sur radio Bamako, qui sont animes par un couple d'animateurs qui met en scene les problemes des relations entre hommes et femmes, ou bien radio Banjul, qui s'est attachee une troupe de theatre.
Une troisieme caracteristique aussi de ces contenus, c'est que ce sont des informations de proximite, souvent parce que necessite oblige. Mais de necessite, les stations privees ont su faire vertu. Faute de moyens, il est plus facile de recueillir des informations locales que des informations nationales. Et puis, au bout du compte, ce sont les competences locales, le veterinaire de l'endroit ou le juriste, dont ces stations savent tirer parti. Les contenus techniques et mme educatifs ont done tendance a s'effacer derriere les contenus informatifs ou distractifs, et n'est-ce pas ce que les auditeurs, interroges dans l'enquete de 1989, demandaient. Les stations semblent subvertir la fonction traditionnellement dominante dans les radios rurales dans les annees 90: instruire les auditeurs pour les rendre meilleurs producteurs ou meilleurs consommateurs, bref de meilleurs acteurs du developpement. Si l'on considere les genres privilegies par les stations, on peut se demander si
le resultat n'est pas plutot de faire des auditeurs des citoyens, des acteurs de la democratie. Les genres privilegies favorisent en effet tres nettement l'interactivite. Ils sont eux aussi le produit d'une logique de penurie. Si les interviews et les tables rondes sont adoptees, c'est qu'elles exigent moins de savoir-faire professionnel ou d'argent qu'un magazine ou qu'un reportage. En donnant beaucoup d'importance au direct avec les auditeurs, ces stations paraissent autoriser l'expression publique d'opinions qui jusque-la etaient chuchotees, notamment par des groupes, les jeunes, les femmes, qui n'avaient pas droit a la parole. Peut-etre aussi a cause de l'anonymat qu'elles autorisent, il semble bien que les stations privees commencent a semer les graines d'une culture democratique.
Il y a deux autres defis que semblent avoir releve les stations privees: c'est le defi de la motivation du personnel et le defi du financement.
Les radios privees, en general, dans les etudes que nous avons pu effectuer, utilisent un grand nombre de personnel, entre 10 et 40, qu'elles remunerent a des taux souvent tres derisoires, entre 1 500 et 10 000 francs CFA. Mais ces animateurs, que l'on appelle des pigistes ou des benevoles restent. Pourquoi? Il est bien possible que les radios aient su faire jouer des leviers sociaux et psychologiques qu'on n'avait guere pense a utiliser jusque-la, en tous cas a la radio, comme le prestige, la notoriete et mme simplement pour les jeunes sans emploi une occupation.
Le financement: Les couts d'equipements ne sont pas tres eleves, parfois 20 millions de FCFA, de 10 millions a 40 millions de FCFA avant la devaluation du franc CFA pour quelques stations sur lesquelles nous avons fait porter l'enquete. Pourtant il faut trouver ces financements. Eh bien, les stations y arrivent. Comment? La floraison des radios privees revele la capacite de leurs promoteurs a mobiliser des fonds locaux, assez rarement dans le secteur moderne des investissements (par exemple Sud FM a pu obtenir quelques credits bancaires), et plus frequemment dans le secteur informel, par exemple les commercants.
Certains commercants ont accepte pour des raisons de solidarite sociale, de prestige social, de financer certaines radios dans leur ville. Ces financements, il faut bien l'avouer, proviennent parfois de sources suspectes, notamment les partis politiques.
Et les radios associatives elles-mmes, qui commencent a creer des radios locales, revelent qu'elles ont une meilleure connaissance des circuits et des procedures de financement de la cooperation internationale.
En resume, l'experience menee par des stations privees commencent a apporter quelques indications sur les differents roles que les radios peuvent jouer. En participant, voire en suscitant la constitution d'opinions publiques, elles montrent qu'elles peuvent veritablement jouer un r1e civique. En provoquant, en encourageant de nouvelles formes d' expression et de creativite, elles jouent un role culturel, et enfin en exploitant des ressorts sociaux que l' on croyait inconnus ou oublies, le mecenat, le benevolat, elles suscitent des dynamiques economiques et sociales.
Ces radios privees ont done en un temps tres court, en moins de cinq ens, explore des pistes nouvelles dans le domaine de la programmation, du financement, de la mobilisatiion des ressources humaines.
Leur emergence renouvelle non seulement la problematique des radios rurales dans la region, mais en 1996, en illumine le developpement et les perspectives. Pourtant ces experiences ont des limites et se heurtent a des contraintes fortes.
Les limites: d'abord, il serait hatif de tirer des conclusions generales a partir de quelques experiences menees par quelques radios. Les stations privees demeurent encore vraiment une terre inconnue.
D'autre part, ces experiences sont souvent pleines d'ambiguite et de risque. La popularise des stations ne se nourrit-elle pas et ne s'entretient-elle pas des penchants les moins recommandables de leurs publics: les replis identitaires, l'intolerance religieuse? Pourtant il faut reconaitre que les derapages ont jusqu'a present ete exceptionnels dans les radios en Afrique de l'ouest et beaucoup plus exceptionnels, en tous cas, que dans les journaux prives de la region.
Certaines stations associatives, mme en milieu rural, accordent une place que l'on pourra juger exorbitante a. des musiques qui sont loin d'etre des musiques du terroir. Ces stations seraientelles les chevaux de Troie de la mondialisation culturelle? Ce que l' on observe pourtant, c 'est que le marche, c'est-a-dire les annonceurs, et notamment les annonceurs institutionnels, et le public, sont finalement parvenus a moderer certaines overdoses dans les stations les plus anciennes. Si vous vous souvenez d'Horizon FM a ses debuts et prenez Horizon FM au Burkina maintenant, je crois que la quantise musicale a nettement diminue.
Mais le marche est-il de nature a assurer, a lui seul la participation du public a la confection d'une grille des programmes? C'est douteux. Enfin une troisieme limite est constituee par le biais urbain. Ce biais urbain ne compromet-il pas l'extension des radios privees en milieu rural. En 1995, pourtant, le Mali et le Burkina etaient les seuls pays dont le nombre de stations privees installees en milieu rura1 depassait le nombre de stations privees implantees en ville. Aujourd'hui, c'est aussi le cas pour la Guinee Bissau et pour la Cte d'Ivoire. La tendance semble donc au developpement spontane de radios privees en zones rurales et cette tendance semble se maintenir.
Les stations se heurtent a des contraintes qui sont tout a fait reelles actuellement. Si la penurie des ressources humaines et financieres a provoque des innovations fertiles et surprenantes, elle compromet aussi la qualite des programmes, leur diversite et mme la viabilite des stations.
Ces contraintes ne sont pas nouvelles. Alors, retour a la case depart du "radio pessimisme"? Non, parce que la liberalisation du paysage radiophonique ouest-africain a engendre ou mis a jour de nouvelles ressources locales. Des ressources institutionnelles d'abord: ainsi certains Etats ont-ils mis en place des fonds d'aide a la presse. Le gouvernement senegalais ou le gouvernement malien qui viennent de mettre par exemple 200 millions de francs a la disposition de la presse. D'autre part, la liberalisation du paysage mediatique a suscite ou renforce la constitution d'organisations professionnelles.
Desormais, a cote des associations d'editeurs, de joumalistes, commencent a apparaitre des associations de radiodiffuseurs, au Mali et au Burkina, a l'echelle regionale. En mai demier s'est constitutee a Banjul, Waba, la premiere organisation regionale des radiodiffuseurs prives, independents de l'ouest africain. Ces organisations commencent a s'attaquer a certaines des contraintes mentionnees plus haut. Par exemple au Senegal, les editeurs de presse se sont associes avec l'appui de PANOS, du Gouvernement canadien et du Gouvemment senegalais, pour creer une cooperative d'achat, pour le papier de presse, qui en reduirait le cout de 30%. On s'attaque au probleme economique.
En Cte d'Ivoire, des redacteurs en chef ont etabli un observatoire de la deontologie. On s'attaque a la question des contenus d'information et a leur qualite. Au Mali, l'Union des radiodiffuseurs fibres, 1'URTEL a organise differents ateliers de formation pour leur personnel, et au Senegal, la societe des editeurs de presse ouest-africaine a ouvert un centre de formation permanente pour le personnel de la presse ecrite. On s'attaque a la formation. La legitimire et la pugnacite de ces nouvelles organisations professionnelles en font des acteurs dotes d'un pouvoir de negociation et de mobilisation avec lesquels il faut desormais compter.
L' emergence de ces nouveaux acteurs, la creation de ces nouvelles institutions, ont alors des incidences sur les strategies d'acteurs locaux plus anciens, mais aussi sur celles des institutions de cooperation internationale. Pour les acteurs locaux traditionnels, tels que l'Etat, les radiodiffuseurs de stations publiques, les centres de formation, la nouvelle donne implique sans douse une redistribution des rles. Des experiences, plutt prometteuses sont deja tentees par chacun de ces acteurs traditionnels locaux. L'Etat a commence a renoncer a la stricte monogamie qu'il entretenait avec les medias publics pour jouer d'avantage un rle de regulateur. Les radiodiffuseurs publics ont commence a tisser des alliances avec les radiodiffuseurs prives, notamment au Mali ou 1'ORTM travaille avec les membres de 1'URTEL. Les centres de formation publics s'ouvrent petit a petit au nouveau secteur radiophonique, je pense notamment au CIERRO, et adaptent leurs modules de formation a
des besoins specifiques comme les formations de course duree sur le terrain, etc....
Pour les institutions d'appui a la presse et les organisations de coopestion internationale, la nouvelle donne pluraliste implique peut-etre un reamenagement des priorites.
En termes d'acteurs, d'abord: certaines cooperations ont longtemps privilegie la cooperation avec le secteur public. De nouveaux acteurs sont maintenant pris en compte, par exemple par la cooperation canadienne ou par la cooperation danoise.
En termes de modalites d'intersontion, les priorites sont, elles aussi, a reconsiderer; c'est avec beaucoup de reticence qu'un appui est apporte aux medias en tant que tels. Aux progsrames, oui; aux medias et a leur viabilite economique, c' est beaucoup plus difficile, et je pense que le president des Groupements NAAM pourra dire quelque chose a ce sujet.
Enfin, les priorites sont sans doute a reconsiderer en ce qui concerne les domaines d'intervention. La formation, oui; mais on a beaucoup insiste sur la recherche . C'est une priorite, notamment quand on considere le domaine des stations privees, ce dont il est porteur et la maigre connaissance que l'on en a.
Enfin, ce qui merite d'tre aussi reconsidere, c'est l'echelle des interventions. Probablement une priorite plus forte doit tre donnee a l 'echelle regionale . L' apparition de nouvelles technologies de l'information (INTERNET, la radio digitale) risque d'ecarter encore davantage l'Afrique d'une scene mediatique ou elle est peu presente, a moins que des initiatives a caractere regional et mme continental soient prises pour assurer non seulement l'acces des africains aux informations internationales mais aussi assurer une place internationale aux informations produites en Afrique. L'enjou n'est pas seulement international. Il est egalement local et concerne directement les radios rurales et les radios locales. La credibilite de ces radios aupres de leur public passe par la production d'emissions maison et participatives mais elle passe aussi probablement par la diffusion de programmes de haute qualite que seuls des reseaux de producteurs africains, nationaux, regionaux,
publics ou prives sont capables d'assurer. Sans douse est-ce la un des chantiers les plus urgents ou peuvent se retrouver les radiodiffuseurs publics et prives mais aussi les institutions internationales soucieuses de promouvoir un deuxieme ordre mondial de l'information plus equitable. Merci.
RURAL RADIO WITHIN AN INTEGRATED MULTIMEDIA APPROACH
Introductory statement by Mr Michael Lapin, EDC, Washington.
Rural radio has played many roles in mobilising communities, in informing people, leading them to take actions they would not otherwise have taken. One of their roles has been in reaming, and that is what I want to focus very briefly on: the role rural radio has played, and can play, in providing people with learning opportunities.
People learn from many sources: school is actually probably a small part of where they get their information, particularly after they have left school. Most people spend the bulk of their lives not receiving any formal learning opportunities at all but simply reaming from neighbours; from extension; if they can read, from printed materials; from movies. This is a statement of the obvious: we know this. We can it "multichannel" reaming. I was asked to talk about multimedia but I prefer the word multichannel, and I want to look at rural radio as it fits into a system. How it can integrate itself into a system of multichannel reaming to provide opportunities for people to learn.
What we know about the role that radio has played in providing learning opportunities is pretty limited. It is focused on social marketing campaigns where people have looked at the role radio has played as opposed to the role that other media, other influences, have played in achieving a particular behaviour change, for example. It tends to be focused in the areas where social marketing has been used most heavily: health and population - those areas where individual behaviour change is most important.
We also know a little bit about radio and its role in formal learning. I spent the last few years preoccupied with this area, not just learning using the radio in schools but also adult learning, and we know a lithe bit about how radio interacts with other elements in the system. We know for example about the role that print materials play in different subjects: the role print materials play for example in people trying to learn mathematics is different from what they play in reaming science or language for example. So we know something about the interaction between radio and print materials, we also know about how important teachers are or, in the context of adult education, the role of facilitators. We know how important it is not to rely solely on the radio and the print materials but to provide training for facilitators or teachers.
So we know something about those processes, those systems, and how radio is integrated into them, and we have results. We have results that show that radio can be extremely influential and extremely successful. We've looked at studies that say what people can learn without the radio and we compare them with systems that add the radio. We have compared, for example, the results of adult education using radio, print materials and informal centres with facilitators with what kids learn at an equivalent level in primary schools. And when the programming is done well, radio can be enormously important, enormously influential.
And following from that I just want to raise a couple of questions for your consideration, really. Most of these examples have used radio, and used radio successfully and radio has been a willing partner in many cases. It seems to me that meal community radio is in a privileged and slightly different situation because rural radio is there every day in a way that most other influences are not Extension is not there every day, print materials aren't available every day: the radio is. And so if one thought of rural radio as part of a system but not simply as a support, but as an initiator, what could it do, and what would that look like? What is the role of a broadcast if rural radio stations have a bigger role than simply to report on what we see and to help people who come along with bright ideas, good ideas? What does that say about how we connect with people, the listeners? What does that say about how, whether, the radio responds to its own notions of supply as opposed to
responding to demand?
If I can read this very briefly. I said it is in social marketing and in education that we know most, but I don't know how many of you have seen this (a quick promotion for the FAO), "Understanding farmers communication networks" - no. 14 in the case studies. It talks in these terms: Three major lessons it says: the first one is (this is talking about farmers) mapping linkages in a knowledge system uncovers information exchange mechanisms. They are using different words from what I am calling multichannel reaming, they are talking about information exchange mechanisms. Evaluating the performances of these linkages is a first step towards systematic linkage analysis. I don't think we've done much of that, and I think that that might be a very useful thing when we come to talk about research, that might be a very useful thing to concentrate on.
The other question I want to raise is, if the rural radio does say yes, we want to play a more activist role, what does that say about the bigger system, where ruIa1 radio stations, if they're going to respond to supply, get their information from? It implies a much bigger flow of information, information on a broader range topics. Where is that information going to come from? Typically, broadcasters haven't been particularly connected to those sorts of systems unless it's through a project or something that somebody else has initiated. So what would a bigger system look like?
But the main idea is if rural radio takes up the challenge, how does it go back to individuals, rural learners, and recognize the opportunities that they are looking for, and recognize also the opportunities within any society, any small community, to link to learning (does that make sense?); the sorts of systems that are there already that rural radio can link onto, can expand, and to which it can add value. And I think that, as a final thought, the adding of value is a two way process, that by creating these greater links to multichannels, radio broadcasters can add greater value to what they do as well as their traditional role which is to add value to what others do.
LE POINT DE VUE DES ASSOCIATIONS PAYSANNES SUR LA RADIO RURALE
Expose introductif par M. Pierre Claver Tassembedo, Directeur de "La voix du paysan", Oushigonya
Monsieur le President,
Mesdames,
Messieurs,
Le President-Fondateur de la Federation des Unions des Groupements Naam, Monsieur Bemard Ledea Ouedraogo, retenu par les obligations de sa charge, m'a fait l'honneur de le representer a cet atelier intemational sur le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique. En son nom personnel et au mien propre, je voudrais vous remercier pour cette aimable invitation, Monsieur le President, et vous prier de bien vouloir transmettre aux delegations ici presentes mes sinceres salutations et mes souhaits de voir nos travaux couronnes de succes.
Par ma presence a cet atelier, Monsieur le President, je n'ai nullement la pretension de me substituer a ce grand homme de culture qu'est Monsieur Bemard Ledea Ouedraogo, je suis convaincu qu'il aurait pu faire beneficier de sa science (j'allais dire de sa grande experience du developpement et de la communication) a cette auguste assemblee, par un expose magistral sur le theme qui nous reunit aujourd'hui a Ouagadougou a savoir: "Le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique". Permettez-moi d'tre plus explicite: je suis la tout simplement pour apporter ma modeste contribution au succes des travaux de cet atelier intemational.
Ceci dit, je voudrais souligner que "La voix du paysan" de Ouahigonya (chef-lieu de la province du Yatenga) que j'ai l'insigne honneur de representer ici aujourd'hui est, comme vous le savez, la derniere-nee des radios privees du Burkina. Elle a vu le jour le 19 avril 1996. Elle existe donc depuis il y a exactement un mois et dix jours. C'est une radio communautaire qui regroupe une dizaine d'associations privees, ONG et services etatiques dont:
* l'Association des femmes du Burkina, section de Ouahigonya (AFBO);
* l'Association AMMIE (appui moral, materiel et intellectual de l'enfant);
* le Centre regional de promotion agro-pastoral (CRPA);
* l'Agence d'information du Burkina (AIB, representation provinciale);
* l'Association internationale 6"S",
* la Federation des unions des groupements Naam (FUGN).
"La voix du paysan" a une puissance de 500 watts (en voie d'extension). Elle emet sur la frequence de 97 Mhz et sa couverture geographique est de 70 kilometres . Mais l'on peut dire sans risque d'erreur que "La voix du paysan" peut atteindre 150 kilometres. Il importe de remarquer que la Province du Yatenga ayant un relief plat, ou l'arboriculture est pratiquee sur une basse echelle, "La voix du paysan" peut arroser grosso modo jusquta 250 kilometres en hivernage. Et pourquoi? Eh bien tout simplement parce que c'est une periode favorable a la propagation atmospherique.
"La voix du paysan" est dirigee par un comite de gestion qui a eu a elaborer la grille de programme tout en privilegiant les langues nationales a 90 pour-cent. il s'agit du more, du jula et du fufulde. Les dix pour-cent restant etant reserves au francais.
Public cible: hommes, femmes, jeunes, personnes agees du monde rural (notamment les paysans, agriculteurs, artisans eleveurs). Et comme je le disais tantot, la plupart de nos emissions sont diffusees en langue nationale.
Ces grandes emissions sont:
* l'agriculture (l'agro-foresterie);
* l'economie (dans son sens le plus large);
* la sante (les MST: maladies sexuellement transmissibles, le SIDA, les activites de la Croix Rouge au Burkina et dans le monde);
* la mere et l'enfant (droits et devoirs de l'enfant);
* l'environnement (la pollution);
* la culture (les traditions ou coutumes des differentes regions du nord, a travers l'emission "A la decouverte du Yatenga");
* le sport.
"La voix du paysan" organisera tres bientot des tables rondes ou antennes directes avec les paysans pour connaitre leurs preoccupations . C'est dire que nous irons vers eux pour qu'ils sachent que "La voix du paysan" est leur radio et qutil faut qu'ils s'y interessent, qu'il y prennent soin comme de la prunelle de leurs yeux.
En perspective, "La voix du paysan" synchronisera tres bientot avec la RNB Qa radiodiffusion nationale du Burkina) et avec RFI (radio France internationale). Une convention a ete signee dans ce sens, pour nous permettre d'avoir des informations fiables pour les auditeurs du nord du pays.
Le personnel comprend dix agents (animateurs-producteurs et technicians confondus) dont quatre de sexe feminin.
Comment a germe l'idee de creer une station de radio a Ouahigouya? A ce propos, permettezmoi de me referer a un extrait de l'allocution prononcee par le President-fondateur lors de notre ceremonie inaugurale, le 19 avril dernier. Je cite "Nous avons hesite entre le journal ecrit et le journal parle. Les ruraux ne savent pas tous lire, mais ils savent ecouter. D'aucuns mme savent parler mieux que nous dans la langue de leur univers culturel. Notre option privilegie donc l'outil pour tous, c'est-a-dire la radio. Car la radio est une ecole de la deuxieme chance" (fin de citation). On ne peut tre plus clair. Et le President, Bernard Ledea Ouedraogo, a vu juste dans ce choix en soulignant, je cite encore "La voix du paysan sera un outil efficace d'accompagnement de la construction de la democratic afin d'eclairer mieux le chemin de nos ambitions" (fin de citation). C'est-a-dire que pour nous, "La voix du paysan" est l'&#156;il et l'oreille du paysan. Elle est la pour appuyer
notre lutte contre le phenomene de la desertification et pour l'eradication de la faim.
Comme vous l'avez aisement constate tout au long de mon bref expose, "La voix du paysan" manque enormment de moyens pour evoluer, pour pouvoir se mettre au diapason des radios s&#156;urs. Ces moyens qui nous font cruellement defaut se resument
* En equipements de studio secondaire de production et groupe electrogene. Pour notre independence vis-a-vis de la SONABEL, ou les coupures intempestives sont legion et nous eloignent frequemment de nos auditeurs potentials (notamment les operateurs economiques).
* En appui a la formation: os agents n'ont eu qu'un stage d'initiation en matiere d'information. Une formation plus poussee (au minimum six mois s'avere necessaire).
* Enfin en logistique: "La voix du paysan" a un besoin pressant de vehicules tout terrain (voitures et cyclomoteurs) pour les reportages dans et hors de sa sphere geographique.
Dans l'espoir que nos travaux sortiront des resolutions pertinentes permettant d'extirper tous les maux qui entravent le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique, je vous remercie de votre attention.
CONCERTATION ET COORDINATION DES PARTENAIRES: VERS UN PLAN D'ACTION POUR LE DEVELOPPEMENT DE LA RADIO RURALE EN AFRIQUE
Expose introductif, par M. Dominique Hounkonnou, CTA
Mesdames et Messieurs,
Je voudrais tout d'abord remercier la FAO d'avoir invite le CTA a cet atelier. Notre centre avait lui-mme organise en septembre dernier une rencontre a laquelle la FAO avait activement participe. Certains de nos participants africains sont egalement la anjourd'hui pour faire le pont entre les deux reunions parce que, s'il est vrai que nous pouvons faire quelque chose au niveau du CTA, la FAO peut beaucoup plus. De plus, grace au present atelier, tous les partenaires nationaux et internationaux ici presents peuvent harmoniser leurs points de vue et coordonner leurs efforts dans la mme direction.
Si je devais dire l'essentiel en quelques mots, je dirais d'abord, pour ce qui est du CTA, que c'est une institution qui joue un rle de catalyseur. Nous nous situons entre les acteurs de base et les agences d'aide et de financement. S'agissant du partenariat, mon message principal pour cette audience aujourd'hui, c'est que nous devrions d'abord essayer d'analyser, chacun, le pourquoi de notre presence ici, pour en deduire les attitudes a tenir au cours de nos discussions, quitte a bousculer certaines de nos habitudes institutionnelles.
Je pense que cela est tres important car beaucoup d'entre nous connaissent des representants de bailleurs de fonds qui, en Europe ou ailleurs, se plaignent de ne pas avoir de bons projets a financer. Dans le mme temps, comme nous le savons tous, il y a malheureusement beaucoup d'acteurs du Sud qui se plaignent du manque de ressources pour la mise en couvre de leurs projets. Nous sommes la aujourd'hui, grace a la FAO et a d'autres partenaires, pour renforcer les bases du dialogue indispensable entre ces deux groupes d'acteurs.
Jusqu'a vendredi, nous essayerons de reflechir a un plan d'action concerte pour le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique, ne serait-ce que pour aboutir a une plate-forme commune, devant guider a l'avenir des activites a mettre en couvre dans un systeme de partenariat.
La question se pose maintenant de savoir si nous nous considerons reellement comme des partenaires ou si nous voyons d'un cote, des bailleurs de fonds ou des agences de cooperation et, de l'autre, des beneficiaires... C'est une question essentielle. La position que je vous suggere est basee non seulement sur mes convictions personnelles mais aussi sur les resultats d'un atelier recemment organise par le CTA dans le cadre du renforcement de son partenariat avec les institutions ACP (Afrique, Caraibes, Pacifique) en general, et celles du secteur independent en particulier: le partenariat est une option incontournable; nous sommes tous des partenaires, si nous sommes mus par le mme objectif, a savoir le developpement des populations rurales.
Mais tout partenariat comporte des devoirs et des droits. Tout d'abord on est partenaires parce que l'on a des objectifs communs, et les mmes strategies pour les atteindre. Que l'on soient des personnel physiques ou des personnel morales, donc des individus ou des institutions, on peut partager une plate-forma minimum d'objectifs ou d'intrts. C'est une premiere condition.
Deuxiemement, le partenariat implique que nous sommes prts a partager des risques et c'est pour cela que nous pouvons mettre des ressources ensemble, mme si elles ne sont pas de mme nature. Dans un systeme de partenariat reel, 1'ACCT, le CTA, la FAO, l'Union Europeenne, l'UNESCO, l'UNICEF et d'autres acteurs de la cooperation bilaterale ou multilaterale peuvent apporter des ressources financieres ou l'expertise internationale, et les partenaires du Sud, les ressources locales necessaires et disponibles.
Nous sommes donc partenaires autour d'objectifs ou d'intrts commune, et nous sommes prets a partager les risques en mettant des ressources ensemble ... et pour cela nous pouvons partager ulterieurement les benefices: c'est cela le partenariat.
Il faut cependant reconnaitre que bien que les changements socio-economiques actuellement en cours en Afrique - avec une implication de plus en plus forte de la societe civile -contribuent progressivement au renforcement des bases d'un developpement participatif et durable, il demeure difficile aujourd'hui de savoir qui est qui, ou qui fait quoi..., qui est ONG, qui ne l'est pas... Une gestion transparente et efficace constitue donc, pour toute institution, un critere important de partenariat, de mme que la durabilite: une institution, gouvernementale ou nongouvernementale, recevant l'essentiel de son financement d'une source exterieure est difficilement viable, en tout cas pas autonome...
Apres ces criteres et principes de base, je voudrais suggerer quelques axes de partenariat en me basant sur les principaux resultats du bilan du CTA apres dix annees d'activites en matiere de radio rurale. Comme l'a clairement affirme l'un des experts africains ayant pris une part tres active a notre atelier d'evaluation, Athanase Karayenga: "La radio rurale de papa est morte". Cela veut dire qu'il faut donner peau neuve a la radio en tenant compte des enjeux actuels qui sont lies, beaucoup l'ont dit, a la democratisation, a la liberalisation economique, ce qui fait que de nouveaux acteurs emergent et que d'anciens acteurs qui etaient dans l'ombre sont reconnus officiellement comme des partenaires potentials. I1 faut faire place aux jeunes et aux professionnels, il faut considerer que nous sommes desormais dans un village planetaire ou les nouvelles technologies circulent partout... Comment prendre tout cela en compte dans un nouveau systeme de partenariat pour le
developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique? Par ailleurs, doit-on encore parler de radio rurale ou de "radio du terroir"? Enfin, comme l'a egalement souligne Athanase Karayenga "dis-moi qui tu ecoutes, je te dirai qui tu es". Savons nous reellement qui nous ecoute? Connaissons-nous suffisamment les besoins des populations rurales afin de concevoir en consequence nos programmes d'activites?
Pour revenir aux interventions que nous avons eues depuis hier, nous avons evoque les etudes d'impact et d'audience necessaires; compte tenu des moyens qu'elles exigent, il est preferable de les concevoir dans un systeme de partenariat. Nous avons parle de la necessite de mettre en place des mecanismes de concertation entre les institutions gouvernementales, les ONG et le secteur associatif. Le groupe de travail sur le partenariat devrait faire des suggestions concretes dans ces domaines.
Beaucoup d'intervenants ont rappele qu'il est important d'adapter les programmes aux realites culturelles. Cela ne peut se faire de Paris, ni mme de Ouagadougou au nom de toute l'Af ique, comme quelques participants l'ont souligne.... Je pense qu'il est indispensable d'associer les partenaires a la base dont le concours est irremplacable dans ce cadre-la.
Mais avant tout cela, la condition la plus determinante, c'est la definition des politiques nationales de communication. Tres peu de pays l'ont deja fait; on n'en a cite que deux ce matin... Je crois qu'il faut que les partenaires nationaux, regionaux et internationaux ici presents prennent cette question a c&#156;ur et essaient de s'associer pour l'aborder. Des discussions sont en cours entre le CTA et la FAO pour initier une cooperation dans ce domaine, de mme que pour les etudes d'impact et d'audience. D'autres partenaires sont invites a s'y joindre.
Je me suis contente d'evoquer a ce stade les grandes lignes, etant donne que les groupes de travail nous pemmettront de disposer de suggestions detaillees pour les axes d'activites devant faire l'objet de la plate-forme commune. Je voudrais neanmoins, avant de temminer, rappeler que, comme nous l'avons dit, le trinme ACTION-RECHERCHE-FORMATION est indissociable, et que nos propositions pour le partenariat devraient en tenir compte. Nous le savons tous, les programmes de formation et de recherche, qui demandent beaucoup de ressources, se justifient davantage dans un systeme de partenariat que dans un cadre de relations institutionnelles isolees.
Enfin, j'emprunterai l'idee de ma conclusion au Secretaire de l'URTNA qui a exprime, dans son discours introductif, une preoccupation centrale: un grand probleme pour tous les acteurs, c'est la place de la communication dans les priorites nationales. Nous avons beau concevoir les programmes necessaires et susciter l'interet des partenaires internationaux, la reussite depend d'un engagement politique clair et d'un appoi concret au niveau national. Un proverbe beninois - qui doit avoir des variantes dans d'autres pays ou dans d'autres cultures - illustre bien cette preoccupation: "Quand vous allez a la source, portez vous- mme votre jarre d'eau jusqu'aux genoux avant de demander que l'on vous aide a la monter sur votre tete".
Je vous remercie.
back Contents next
<section>5</section>
back Contents
ANNEX 1- OPENING SESSION
Address by Mr Efoe Adodo Mensah, Secretary-general of URTNA
Monsieur le Ministre de la communication et de la culture
Madame la Directr.ice generale de la communication et du multimedia de 1'ACCT
Monsieur le Representant de la FAO
Honorables invites
Mesdames et Messieurs les participants,
Je voudrais tout d'abord remercier le Gouvernement du Burkina Faso et plus particulierement le Ministere de la communication et de la culture pour son constant soutien a toutes les actions menees par l'URTNA. Son assistance continue a l'URTNA temoigne de son engagement jamais dementi pour une veritable integration africaine.
Ensuite la gratitude des organismes membres de 1'URTNA a tous les partenaires ici presents qui nous ont aides a la concretisation de nos objectifs dans les domaines aussi divers que la formation, les echanges de programmes et de nouvelles, la coordination des evenements majeurs de notre continent et la matrise de la technologie de communication.
L'atelier international sur le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique que nous ouvrons aujourd'hui ne doit pas etre considere comme une rencontre de plus. Il doit etre un pari sur l'avenir et l'avenir c'est demain et demain c'est anjourd'hui.
La deregulation de l'espace audiovisual mondial avec la multiplication des canaux de diffusion et des radios transfrontieres a transforme le paysage audiovisual africain. Plus personne ne peut aujourd'hui faire la police de son espace audiovisual. Certains font de la resistance mais c'est une resistance inutile qui risque de faire tout exploser. Il faut plutot se donner les moyens de la matrise de ce phenomene nouveau qu'est la pluralise des radiodiffuseurs sur le continent. Quelle est et queue sera la place des radios rurales class ce paysage en pleine mutation et surtout mutation technologique?
Ce n'est pas a vous que j'apprendrai que nous sommes a l'ere de la communication et que toute action de developpement doit etre precedee de communication.
Le Japon n'a pas de grandes ressources naturelles mais si il est arnve a. ce stade de developpement, c'est tout simplement parce qu'il a mis la communication avant toute action de developpement. C'est si simple mais pas du tout facile, j'en conviens. La communication n'etant pas toujours la priorite des priorites pour la plupart de nos pays africains.
Mesdames et Messieurs,
Les radios rurales ont ete les pionnieres. En 30 ens d'existence, elles ont joue un role considerable dans le concept de la matrise des objectifs de developpement de nos pays. Il nous appartient aujourd'hui de faire un etat des lieux sans complaisance du chemin parcouru pour asalyser toutes les experiences vecues class ce domaine particulier de la communication pour le developpement.
L'URTNA y apportera sa modeste contribution. Depuis 1978, le CERRO, ce centre specialise de l'URTNA dont la vocation est de promouvoir les etudes et recherches en sciences de la commusication en milieu rural s'est impose au fil des ens comme un instrument indispensable au service des radios rurales et de tous les partenaires interesses par la communication pour le developpement.
Le Centre a mene avec l'appui de partenaires plusieurs ateliers de perfectionnement de recyclage dans une quinzaine de pays afncaiss. Cette decentralisation des actions de formation participe au souci du centre de prendre en compte les immenses besoins en ressources humaines engendrees par l'arrivee de nouveaux acteurs.
Plusieurs actions de formation ont ete menees avec la collaboration de la FAO qui a ete dans ce domaine un partenaire privilegie.
La cooperation entre 1'URTNA, a travers le CIERRO, et la FAO a ete intense et riche dans le domaine de la formation en contribuant a l'elevation du niveau professionnel de nos agents. Il convient d'intensifier cette cooperation et de l'etendre a d'autres domaines ou nous partageons des preoccupations communes. Ainsi, le centre technique de 1'URTNA base a Bamako au Mali dispose de structures et de competences capables d'aider a la matrise de nouvelles technologies adaptees a notre contexte.
Mesdames et Messieurs,
I1 ne faut jamais considerer les structures de radio en les dissociant des structures socioeconomiques, socio-politiques et mme socio-historiques dans lesquelles elles evoluent. I1 vous appartiendra, Mesdames et Messieurs les experts, d'en tenir compte.
Qu'elle soit radio communautaire, associative, privee, locale, regionale ou nationale, la radio, pour nous, doit repondre a deux objectifs prioritaires dans ce cas d'espece, developpement et service public. L'Afrique pour se developper a besoin d'une veritable politique de communication et les radio rurales peuvent en etre le point de depart, nous en sommes convaincus. Le monde de la communication est un monde impitoyable, ou vous le matrisez, ou il vous broie. L'URTNA mettra tout en couvre pour permettre a tous les radiodiffuseurs, je dis tous les radiodiffuseurs, de matriser ce monde de communication.
Nous voudrions aussi compter sur vous, nos partenaires de tonjours, la FAO, 1'ACCT, l'UNESCO, etc.
Je vous remercie.
Address by Ms Alimata Salembere, Director General of Culture and Multimedia of the International Francophone Cooperation Agency
Monsieur le Ministre de la communication et de la culture du Burkina Faso,
Monsieur le Secretaire general de 1'URTNA,
Monsieur le Representant de la FAO,
Mesdames et Messieurs les representants d'organisations internationales et des radiodiffusions nationales,
Mesdames et Messieurs,
Permlettez-moi d'abord de vous transmettre les salutations les plus chaleureuses du Secretaire general de l'Agence de la francophonie, Monsieur Jean-Louis Roy, de mme que ses meilleurs v&#156;ux de succes pour ces journees de reflexion sur l'avenir de la radio rurale en Afrique.
C'est pour moi un privilege et un reel plaisir de representer 1'ACCT et de participer a ces journees de travail destinees a donner un souffle nouveau au developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique. C'est pourquoi je veux remercier le Gouvernement du Burkina Faso qui accueille cet atelier intemational, et remercier la FAO qui a bien voulu organiser cette importante rencontre, en etroite collaboration avec 1'URTNA.
L'ACCT est d'autant plus heureuse de participer a ces journees que, depuis plusieurs annees, elle a consacre beaucoup d'energie a l'accompagnement des communicateurs africains dans leur recherche de nouveaux moyens de communication adaptes a l'economie generale du monde rural. Depuis six ans, 1'ACCT a entrepris un programme de developpement de la radio locale qui a permis la mise en place d'une trentaine de stations operant a la satisfaction des populations a qui elles sont destinees.
Nous savons tous que la radio rurale joue un r1e determinant en faveur du developpement des populations, et particulierement de leur implication active dans l'amelioration de leurs conditions de vie; ce qui est d'ailleurs indispensable a tout developpement durable.
En raison des progres realises ces dernieres annees par les differents partenaires, et surtout de la tache immense qu'il reste a accomplir afin que nos concitoyens accedent partout a un niveau de vie convenable, l'Agence de la francophonie est heureuse de s'associer aux differents partenaires ici presents pour rechercher les meilleurs moyens d'ameliorer la communication a destination de nos populations.
Address by Mr Ari Toubo Ibrahim, FAO Representative in Burkina Faso
Excellence Monsieur le Ministre de la communication et de la culture,
Excellences Mesdames et Messieurs les Ministres,
Excellences Mesdames et Messieurs les Ambassadeurs et Chefs de mission diplomatique,
Monsieur le Secretaire general de l'URTNA,
Madame la Directrice generale de la culture et multimedia de l'Agence de la francophonie,
Mesdames et Messieurs les Representants des Organisations internationales et interafricaines,
Chers collegues,
Mesdames et Messieurs les Directeurs et Chefs de service,
Honorables Invites,
Mesdames et Messieurs les participants a l'atelier,
Mesdames et Messieurs,
C'est pour moi un agreable devoir et un insigne honneur de prendre la parole au nom de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour l'Alimentation et l'Agriculture, a l'occasion de la ceremonie officielle d'ouverture de l'atelier international sur le developpement de la radio rurale pour temoigner de l'interet que le Directeur general de la FAO, Monsieur Jacques Diouf, porte au developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique.
La FAO se rejouit que le Burkina Faso et 1'URTNA se soient associes a elle pour l'organisation d'un atelier d'une telle importance.
Monsieur le Ministre, le choix de votre pays pour abriter une rencontre internationale sur le developpement de la radio rurale n'est pas un hasard, il revet une double signification: la longue tradition du Burkina Faso dans le domaine de la radio rurale et le fait que Ouagadougou abrite un centre d'envergure continentale, le CERRO, Institution specialisee de 1'URTNA.
C'est en effet, en 1969, precisement le 29 novembre, que le Burkina Faso s'est dote d'une radio urale, etant ainsi panni les premiers pays en Afrique a utiliser cet outil de communication sociale interactive.
L'histoire des utilisations de la radio en milieu rural burkinabe est riche en enseignements.
Elle a aussi inspire beaucoup d'autres pays de la sous-region, que ce soit aux niveaux national, regional que local, et nourri la reflexion de l'Agence de la francophonie sur la mise en &#156uvre du programme des radios locales qu'elle a lance dans plusieurs pays africains.
Peut-etre faudrait-il le rappeler, le Burkina Faso a egalement fait &#156uvre de pionnier en Afrique dans la mise en &#156uvre des radios rurales locales.
La presence du CERRO, creuset des ressources humaines qualifiees pour le bon fonctionnement des radios rurales, ici au Burkina, indique ce pays pour recevoir les eminents praticiens et partenaires de la radio rurale dans leurs efforts de reflexion et de concertation en vue d'apporter des solutions au developpement d'une institition, d'un outil qui se trouve aujourd'hui, au carrefour des chemins.
Messieurs les Ministres,
Honorables invites,
Mesdames et Messieurs,
A travers cet atelier, la FAO vise a:
* faire le point sur la situation actuelle de la radio rurale en Afrique,
* identifier les principaux obstacles rencontres pour son developpement,
* creer une reflexion et une concertation sur le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique, en definissant les grandes lignes d'un plan d'action global dans ce domaine et rechercnant les moyens necessaires pour son financement.
Notre politique dans ce domaine vise la durabilite des institutions de la radio rurale. En effet, il est essentiel pour garantir la perennite des activites de la radio rurale, d'etudier et d'adapter les dispositions juridiques, institutionnelles et administratives necessaires pour permettre aux radios rurales de beneficier de ressources propres et de les gerer de facon autonome.
D'autre part, les actions de la radio rurale devraient tre axees sur trois autres principes:
* le principe d'integration: il est essentiel que les radios rurales integrent convenablement l'ensemble des preoccupations et des themes du developpement rural. Il y avait done lieu de susciter la mise en place de structures intersectorielles de concertation et d'orientation des programmes comprenant les departements ministeriels impliques dans le developpement, les ONG, les bailleurs de fonds, les associations ou groupements representatifs du monde rural;
* le principe d'interactivite: les activites de production et d'animation de la radio rurale doivent tre basees sur les preoccupations reelles du monde rural et prendre la forme d'un dialogue permanent avec les communautes. Ainsi, une priorite est-elle donnee aux sorties sur le terrain et aux informations provenant du terrain. Les programmes doivent etre adaptes aux caracteristiques culturelles et aux circuits de communication propres au monde rural, ils doivent, par ailleurs, integrer les valeurs du patrimoine des terroirs;
* le principe d'interdisciplinarite: il est essentiel a ce point que les equipes de production et d'animation de la radio rurale soient elles-mmes interdisciplinaires.
Ces principes methodologiques, base de la strategic de notre Organisation dans le domaine de la radio rurale, ont guide les actions de la FAO dans plusieurs pays africains ou nous avons imite, developpe et soutenu des projets et des programmes de radio rurale: c'est notamment ici au Burkina Faso, au Congo, en Guinee, en Guinee-Bissau, au Mali, en Mauritanie, au Niger, en Republique centrafricaine et au Tchad.
Enfin, la FAO estime que la radio rurale doit jouer un rle central dans les politiques et strategies nationales de communication pour le developpement, politiques et strategies dont devraient se doter tous les pays ici presents. La Guinee-Bissau et le Mali ont deja pris cette initiative.
Excellence Monsieur le Ministre de la communication et de la culture,
Excellences Mesdames et Messieurs les Ministres,
Excellences Mesdames et Messieurs les Ambassadeurs et Chefs de mission diplomatique,
Monsieur le Secretaire general de 1'URTNA,
Madame la Directrice generale de la culture et multimedia de l'Agence de la francophonie,
Mesdames et Messieurs les Representants des organisations internationales et interafricaines,
Mesdames et Messieurs les Directeurs et Chefs de service,
Honorables invites,
Mesdames et Messieurs les participants a l'atelier,
Mesdames et Messieurs,
En ma qualite de Representant de la FAO, je voudrais reiterer ici nos hommages deferents au Gouvernement du Burkina Faso et plus particulierement au Ministere de la communication et de la culture pour ses constantes sollicitudes a l'endroit de notre Organisation.
Qu'il me soit permis d'adresser nos sinceres remerciements au CTA pour sa precieuse contribution dans l'organisation de cet atelier.
Je voudrais egalement saltier et remercier nos invites venus d'Afrique, d'Europe et d'Amerique, eminents praticiens et vaillants partenaires de l'Afrique, tous aptres de la communication pour le developpement, venue, dis-je, partager leurs experiences, monter ensemble un plan d'action pour le developpement de la radio en Afrique et s'assurer d'un mecanisme fiable pour des mises en &#156uvre.
Je voudrais enfin saluer et remercier les personnalites qui ont bien voulu honorer de leur presence, cette ceremonie d'inauguration.
Monsieur le Ministre, Mesdames et Messieurs, je ne saurais terminer mon propos sans reiterer la disponibilite de la FAO pour une cooperation plus accrue avec tous les partenaires de la cooperation bi et multilaterale afin qu'ensemble nous nous unissions pour un developpement de la radio rurale durable en faveur et avec les pays qui en font l'utilisation.
Aussi, est-ce avec confiance, grace a l'hospitalite genereuse du Burkina Faso et a l'engagement de cheque participant, que je souhaite de tout c&#156ur, le plein succes a l'atelier intemational sur le developpement de la radio rurale.
Vive la cooperation interafricaine, vive la cooperation internationale.
Je vous remercie de votre aimable attention.
Opening speech by Mr Claude Nurikyor Somda, Minister of Communication and Culture, Burkina Faso
Je voudrais, au nom du gouvernement burkinabe, vous sonhaiter la bienvenue au Burkina Faso. Malgre des calendriers charges, malgre la distance, vous avez decide d'etre au rendez-vous de Ouagadougou.
Originaires d'une vingtaine de pays d'Afrique australe, du Centre et de l'Ouest, anglophones, lusophones ou francophones, nous avons tous conscience que notre sort, nos destins se trousont quelque part lies. Ils se ressemblent en ce qu'ils se dessinent par des courbes dont les lignes de force convergent en plusieurs points:
* deficit chronique des reseaux de transports;
* deficit chronique des infrastructures de telecommunication;
* faiblesse et fragilite extremes des tissue agro-industriels,
* vetuste caracterisee par des equipements mediatiques compromettant nos modestes objectifs de couverture d'un public gravement handicape par un taux d'analphabetisme encore trop eleve.
Nos etats comptent done des peuples qui souffrent et se debattent pour se liberer des serres d'un sous-developpement dont l'une des principales causes demeure le desequilibre de la communication et de l'information entre Nord et Sud d'une part entre riches et pauvres de l'autre.
Aujourd'hui plus qu'hier, nous devons en avoir une claire conscience et proceder a un diagnostic sans complaisance, pour dompter les idees recues, identifier nos faiblesses, prendre la juste mesure de nos forces et atouts.
Mesdames, Messieurs, Honorables invites,
Pour la circonstance, nous avons jete notre devolu sur la radio rurale. Ce choix est raisonne par les constats suivants: Pendant plus de deux decennies au moins, la radio rurale s'est revelee un des meilleurs supports pour une diffusion rapide des informations dans nos langues. Ce qui constitue un atout majeur dans la plupart de nos etats qui comptent des dizaines de nationalises, donc de langues vehiculaires. Forte de cette predisposition, la radio rurale s'est averee tre l'un des supports les plus disponibles pour un dialogue riche entre acteurs du developpement. Tout naturellement, elle s'y est pretee et elle a ete judicieusement mise a contribution en tent que tribune privilegiee d'expression du monde rural, un instrument efficace de sensibilisation, d'education et de mobilisation sociale.
Honorables invites, chers seminaristes,
Les experiences mises en &#156uvre d'abord en Amerique latine trouveront bien vite une terre d'accueil en Afrique. S'il m'etait autorise un mot pour caracteriser le bilan, je dirais qu'il est relativement satisfaisant. En effet, nul ne peut contester que la radio rurale est le support le plus familier de nos hameaux et villages, de nos champs et chantiers. Elle est la plus integree au monde rural. Nul ne conteste sa contribution decisive a l'instruction scolaire, a la mobilisation autour des mots d'ordre de developpement, a la promotion de l'initiative participative, a l'adoption de nouvelles methodes et technologies pour accrotre la productivite, a la mobilisation de l'epargne nationale, source de financement d'un essor endogene de nos populations.
Je declare ouverts les travaux de l'atelier intemational sur le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique.
Je vous remercie.
ANNEX 2- CLOSING SESSION
Address by Mr Ari Toubo Ibrahim, FAO Representative in Burkina Faso
Excellence, Madame le Ministre de la fonction publique et de la modernisation de l'administration, Ministre de la communication et de la culture par interim,
Excellence Monsieur le Ministre des Affaires etrangeres,
Excellence Madame l'Ambassadeur du Canada,
Mesdames et Messieurs les Chefs de missions diplomatiques,
Mesdames et Messieurs le s Representants d ' organisations internationales et interafricaine s, Sa Majeste le Larlhe Naba, Ministre de la Culture du Moro Nhaba,
Honorables invites,
Mesdames et Messieurs les participants a l'atelier intemational sur le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique, j'ai grand plaisir a vous adresser les vives felicitations de la FAO pour le resultat anquel vous etes parvenus apres une semaine de discussions et reflexions fecondes.
Vous venez de nous presenter la synthese de vos travaux sous la fomme d'une declaration generale appuyee de recommendations pertinentes et surtout d'un plan d'action consensuel pour le developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique.
Au vu de ces resultats, nous considerons que vous avez atteint les objectifs de cette rencontre de reflexion et de concertation, mais il ne s'agit ici que d'une etape dans le processus qui doit des a present nous amener a envisager concretement la mise en &#156uvre de ce plan d'action. Mise en &#156uvre progressive, qui doit indiquer les actions pour l'annee a venir, pour les cinq prochaines annees et pour le long terme.
Et c'est la que la cooperation agissante entre institutions de radio rurale, agences des Nations Unies, partenaires de la cooperation bi et unilaterale doit jouer.
Madame le Mi ni stre , nous nous sommes permis en tent que co-organisateur de cet atelier de solliciter, une fois de plus, de votre Gouvernement, au nom de tous les participants, un parrainage et un soutien aupres des instances sous-regionales, regionales, continentales et internationales en vue de soumettre a l'adhesion politique ce plan d'action et de mobiliser les ressources necessaires a sa mise en &#156uvre.
Mesdames et messieurs les participants, la FAO voudrait vous assurer sa disponibilite conformement a votre recommandation de la voir jouer le role de leader avec 1'URTNA dans la coordination de la mise en &#156uvre de ce plan d'action. C'est l'occasion de vous reiterer notre foi en la radio rurale et notre engagement a maintenir la dynamique que vous avez creee ici a Ouagadougou, en faveur de radio rurale, qu'elle soit du secteur public ou du secteur prive.
Excellence, Madame le Ministre de la fonction publique et de la modernisation de l'administration, Ministre de la communication et de la culture par interim,
Excellence Monsieur le Ministre des affaires etrangeres,
Madame l'Ambassadeur du Canada,
Sa Majeste le Larlhe Naba, Ministre de la culture du Moro Naba,
Honorables invites,
Mesdames et Messieurs,
Avant de terminer mon propos, je voudrais renouveler nos sinceres remerciements au Gouvernement du Burkina Faso pour son hospitalise genereuse et pour toutes les facilites qu'il a accordees pour le bon deroulement de cet atelier. Merci a tous ceux qui ont contribue a l'organisation et au succes de cet atelier. Je voudrais particulierement saltier ici Matre Passire Titenga Frederic, son Excellence le Larlhe Naba Tigre, Ministre de la culture de l'Empereur du Mosse, pour leur accueil et l'introduction a la culture burkinabe, africaine et universelle dans le sanctuaire que sont les musees du Manega et le Palais du Larlhe. Je ne saurais oublier, au risque d'etre partiel, les hotesses, les chauffeurs et tous les membres du comite national de l'organisation, les communicateurs des medias publics et prives, les interpretes et traducteurs qui se sont tous surpasses pour remplir leur mandat afin inlassablement, progressivement d'&#156uvrer a la reussite de cet atelier.
Aux delegues des pays et a nos partenaires venus d'horizons lointains, merci pour vos precieuses contributions lors des travaux et bon retour dans vos foyers respectifs.
Vive la cooperation inter-africaine et internationale pour que vive la radio rurale!.
Je vous remercie
Closing Speech by Ms Bonkoungou, Minister of Public Affairs and Administration
Excellence Monsieur le Ministre des affaires trangeres,
Madame l'Ambassadeur du Canada,
Monsieur le Representant de l'Organisation des Nations unies pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture,
Madame le Representant adjoins du Programme des Nations Unies pour le developpement,
Partenaires au developpement,
Sa Majeste le Larlhe Naba Tigre,
Monsieur le Secretaire general du Minustere de la communication et de la culture, Mesdames et Messieurs les Delegues des pays,
Mesdames et Messieurs,
"Il me plait au nom de mon collegue charge de la communication, en mission, de prendre la parole ici, en ce moment solennel ou les lampions vont s'eteindre sur votre atelier consacre au theme "developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique".
Je voudrais commencer par vous feliciter pour tous les efforts developpes pour arriver au present resultat.
Mes felicitations particulieres vont aux organisateurs de cette rencontre de reflexion et de concertation, particulierement l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour l'Alimentation et l'agriculture (FAO) pour toutes les initiatives prises.
La mise en &#156uvre du plan d'action que vous venez d'adopter contribuera, j'en suis convaincue, a donner un souffle nouveau a la radio rurale dans sa conception, dans sa thematique et surtout dans son integration dans le paysage audiovisual marque par le pluralisme mediatique.
Les nouvelles technologies de la communication et le contexte nouveau politique africain sont autant de facteurs pour donner une seconde chance a la radio rurale. Le Burkina Faso qui a accepte d'abriter cette importante reunion reaffirme son engagement aupres des differents partenaires au developpement a soutenir lamise en &#156uvre du plan d'action de Ouagadougou.
Mesdames et Messieurs les representants des pays invites, je voudrais vous remercier pour l'interet et l'amitie fan's a mon pays en prenant part a cette rencontre de Ouagadougou.
Je vous prie de transmettre aux differents responsables du Departement de la communication, l'assurance du Ministere de la communication et de la culture du Burkina Faso a garder le contact avec eux pour poursuivre la concertation au niveau sous-regional et regional, convaincus comme nous sommes que c'est a travers la conjugaison de nos efforts que nous arriverons a mettre en &#156uvre les recommendations et le plan d' action issus de vos travaux.
Tout en vous souhaitant un bon retour dans vos foyers respectifs, je declare clos les travaux de l'atelier international sur le theme du developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique.
Je vous remercie.
ANNEX 3- PROGRAMME
Sunday, 9 June
Arrival of participants
 Informal introduction of participants
 Visit to the Museum of Bendrologia (the science of the talking drums, at Minega, 50 km from Ouagadougou)
 Picnic lunch
 Viewing of videos on rural radio
Monday, 10 June
Registration of participants
Official opening ceremony
 Address by the Secretary General of URTNA
 Address by the Director general, Culture and multimedia, ACCT
 Address by the FAO Representative
 Opening speech by the Minister for Communication and Culture of Burkina Faso
Coffee break
Discussion panel on the development of rural radio in Africa
Introductory statement: Jean-Pierre Ilboudo and Jacques Sultan, FAO
Issues for discussion:
 The role of rural radio as a public service: Bernard Feller, Intermedia, Switzerland
 What kind of radio? State-run, private, community-based, NGO-based, private and local, regional and/or rational stations: Sophie Ly, World Association of Radio Broadcasters, AMARC
 Rural radio, democracy and pluralism Diana Senghor, PANOS Institute
 Rural radio within an integrated multimedia approach Michael Laflin, Education Development Centre, Washington, USA
 The viewpoint of farmers' associations: Bernard Ledea Ouedraogo, Federation des Groupements ADAM, Burkina Faso
 International coordination: Towards a plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa Dominique Hounkonnou, Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, CTA
Moderator: Jean-Pierre Ilboudo, FAO
Rural radio in Africa today: presentation of findings: Jean Baptiste Ilboudo (CIERRO - Centre interafricain d 'etudes en radio rurale de Ouagadougou), Michael Pickstock (WREN- World Radio for Environment and Natural Resources)
Lunch
Rural radio and FAO: presentation of evaluation findings:John Madjri (CESAO- Centre d 'eludes economiques et sociales de l'Afrique de I 'guest)
Discussion
Coffee break
Discussion (continued)
Cocktail offered by the Minister of Communication and Culture, Burkina Faso
Tuesday, 11 June
Summary of previous day's work
Statements by organisations involved in rural radio activities in Africa
Coffee break
Introduction of the working groups:
 Group 1: Infrastructure, technological choices and equipment
 Group 2: Legal and institutional mechanisms
 Group3: A new agenda for research and training
Working groups
Lunch
Working groups (continued)
Coffee break
Working groups (continued)
Wednesday, 12 June
Wrap-up session of working groups
Coffee break
Plenary: Presentation of working groups' results and conclusions
Discussion
Lunch
Presentation of methodological framework for the design of a plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa: FAO
Discussion
Coffee break
Discussion (continued)
Setting-up of working groups to elaborate the plan of action:
 Group 1: Infrastructure, technological choices and equipment
 Group 2: Legal and institutional mechanisms
 Group 3: A new agenda for research and training
 Group 4: International coordination
Evening entertainment at the Larlhe Naba (Minister of Culture of the Emperor of the Mossi): artist groups and traditional dances
Thursday, 13 June
Working groups
Coffee break
Working groups (continued)
Lunch
Plenary: presentation of results of working groups
Coffee break
Drafting committee for the plan of action
Friday, 14 June
Drafting committee (continued)
Plenary: presentation of the plan of action for the development of rural radio in Africa and discussion
Lunch
 Official closing ceremony
 Cocktail offered by FAO
ANNEX 4- LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
Download in .rtf format
ANNEX 5- MOTION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Motion of thanks
The participants at the International Workshop on the Development of Rural Radio in Africa, held in Ouagadougou from 10-14 June 1996, thank the Government of Burkina Faso, FAO and URTNA for having organized this meeting, which was of crucial importance to promote rural radio in Africa and to improve the living conditions of the rural populations, and encourage them to continue their support to the rural radios of Africa which are, and will continue to be, the best means of communicate with the rural populations.
(Ouagadougou, 14 June 1996)
Recommendations
Considering the Bamako declaration of 18 September l993 on the pluralism of radio;
considering the Bamako declaration of 3 May 1991 on the development of an independent and pluralistic press in Africa;
considering rural radio as a crucial tool for rural development, which is recognised by governments, civil society organisations, non-governmental organisations and the private sector;
considering the numerous difficulties that rural radio in Africa has to face,
the Workshop:
* recommends setting up appropriate juridical tools and institutional decisions to permit the development of rural radio in its different forms;
* invites an the partners involved to support this process.
(Ouagadougou, 14 June 1996)
Special recommendation
Considering the importance of CERRO as, to date, the only rural radio training centre existing in Africa;
considering the fundamental role played by CIERRO since its establishment in research, training of rural radio producers and the welfare of rural populations in Africa;
considering the termination of the institutional financial support given to CIERRO by the Government of Germany;
the participants to the International Workshop on the Development of Rural Radio in Africa held in Ouagadougou from 10 to 14 June:
* express their concern for the future of CIERRO;
* request the member countries of URTNA to pay regularly their annual dues;
* request donors to continue to support the Centre and to provide the necessary resources to guarantee its survival;
* request member countries of URTNA and an institutions represented to support, through their diplomatic channels, the request for financing submitted to the European Union by URINA/CERRO and the governments of Senegal and Burkina Faso.
(Ouagadougou, 14 June 1996)
ANNEX 6- LIST OF PREPARATORY DOCUMENTS
National studies on current status of rural radio
Da Matha Jacques: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale au Benin
Diallo Bassirou: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale du Burkina
Evouna Gothard: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale au Cameroun
Yoro Bernard: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale de la Republique Centrafricaine
Epagna-Toua Etienne: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale Congolaise
Bojang-Sissoho Amie: Status of Rural Radio in Gambia
Quarmyne A.T.: Status of Rural Radio in Ghana
Bah Bashir: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale de Guinee
Barreto Carvalho Francisco: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale de Guinee Bissau
Mulenkei Lucy: Status of Rural Radio in Kenya
Sangare Oumar: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale au Mali
Mohamed Abdallahi Ould Ahmed Salem: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale en Mauritanie
Mahaman Adamou: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale au Niger
Arokoyo Tunji: Status of RuTa1 Radio in Nigeria
Counta Baba: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale du Senegal
Maphiri Nkopane: Status of Rural Radio in South Africa
Sango Othman Kipozi: Status of Rural Radio in Tanzania
Batoure Ahmadou: Etat des lieux de la radio rurale au Tchad
Daka Michael M.: The current status of rural radio in Zambia
Sibanda Jennifer: The current status of rural radio in Zimbabwe
Summary documents
Rural radio in Africa
Summary of national studies: Benin, Bu~ina Faso, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal
La radio rurale en Afrique: Etat des lieux
Synthese des etudes nationales: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroun, Congo, Guinee, Guinee
Bissau, Mali, Mauritanie, Niger, Republique Centrafricaine, Senegal, Tchad
FAO's Contribution to the development of rural radio in Africa
Synthesis of the evaluation mission: Burkina Faso, Central Afiican Republic, Chad, Congo, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger
Developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique: Contribution de la FAO
Synthese de la mission d'evaluation: Bu~ina Faso, Congo, Guinee, Guinee Bissau, Mali,
Mauritanie, Niger
Rural radio in Africa
Summary of national studies: Gambia, Ghana, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
La radio rurale en Afrique
Synthese des etudes nationales: Gamble, Ghana, Tanzanie, Zambie, Zimbabwe
Development of rural radio in Africa: past, present and future
Developpement de la radio rurale en Afrique: Bilan et perspectives
These documents can be obtained from:
Communication for Development
SDRE, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100, Rome,
Italy
back Contents
