<title>Bibliography on gender and agricultural engineering for small farms in developing countries</title>
<section>1</section>
2 Gender, agricultural equipment and energy
2 Gender, agricultural equipment and energy
Grellier, R.
All in good time: women's agricultural in sub-Saharan Africa. Publications Distribution Office, Natural Resources Institute (NRI); Chatham; UK; pp 68
AB: This bibliography is the first part of a study of women's participation in agricultural production in the semi-arid regions of sub-Saharan Africa. The study looks at women's agricultural strategies, especially their use of particular tools and crop production techniques. It focuses on ways in which the use of draught animals affect labour and resource use, and generate increased income differentials at the household and community level. Literature is included that presents information on women's crop production, and particularly information on how women presently address critical timing issues. The literature falls into three areas: access to and control of agricultural resources including land, labour, capital, agricultural services and information; division of labour and timeliness of task completion; technology and production relations.
Key words: participation; gender relations; time allocation; division of labour, women; agricultural production; bibliographies; rural development; Africa South of Sahara
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jackson, C.
From conjugal contracts to environmental relations: some thoughts on labour and technology.
In: IDS Bulletin vol. 26, no 1, pp 33-39; 1995. University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
Rana, M.; Grover, I.; Bansal, N.K.; Grover, D.K.
Development of light-weight, wheel hand-hoe for farm women.
In: Indian-Farming. 1994, 43: 12, pp 8-9. New Delhi: lndian Council of Agricultural Research; India
AB: A number of tasks carried out on Indian farms, such as transplanting, weeding and harvesting, are still performed without mechanization. A study into an improved, wheel mounted hoe for women was carried out. Specifications for two models, an improved version and a lightweight version, are given in comparison with existing local hoes. Field trials involving 40 women in 4 villages were undertaken. The lightweight hoe was judged the best by the women for improving the quality of life. In producing a lightweight hoe the cost was reduced.
Key words: mechanization; hoes; women; comparisons; working conditions; costs; manual operation; appropriate technology; equipment; weed control; India
Kumagai, Sonoko Matsuda
Farm Mechanization and Women's Life Pattern-Changing Time Allocation
In: International Journal of Japanese Sociology; 1994, 3, Oct. pp 99-119.
AB: Changes in the time allocation of Japanese farm families after farm mechanization are examined through comparison of 1957 8 1987 surveys of the Aural community in Okayama. A 1990 survey of Yamagata supports a regional comparison of time allocation.. Findings show that postmechanization time allocation is a function of generation 8 gender. Younger family members spend more time on private activity outside of farming, while older family members remain on the farm. Since mechanization, women's time allocation shows less seasonal fluctuation; time spent in secondary activities has decreased, & that in leisure activities increased. In 1957, time spent by women working outside of farming was negligible, while in 1987, young farm wives spent 74% of their time in off-farm jobs. Length of farm work increased, however, for middle-aged farm wives. Data for Yamagata suggest that differentiation & individuation were slower there due to underdevelopment of the nonfarm labor market. 16
Tables, 4 Figures, 18 References. Adapted from the source document. (Copyright 1995, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Rural Women; Japan; Family Farms; Time Utilization; Working Women; Agricultural Technology; Industrial Development; Modernization
Afford M.
Weeds and weed management in small-scale cropping systems in northern Zambia.
In: Crop Production Science; No. 21; pp 6, 1994
Institutionen for Vaxtodlingslara, Sveriges Lantbruksuniversitet (Department of Crop Production, Swedish University of Agricultura Sciences); Uppsala; Sweden
AB: This dissertation reports on various aspects of weeds and their management. They were studied in small-scale cropping systems in the Luapula province of northern Zambia. There were 4 major cropping systems: citemene (slash-pile-and-bum), icisebe (levelled fields, usually tilled in the dry season), ibala (fields where all crops are planted on mounds) and ifwamu (cash crops grown with mineral fertilizers). Each cropping system varied in mode of land preparation, crop sequence, vegetation management, commercialization and degree of permanence, but were all based on hoe cultivation and relatively short cropping cycles. The principle crops were cassava (Manihot esculenta), maize (Zea mays), groundnuts (Arachis hypogaea) and finger millet (Eleusine coracana). Direct weeding was usually canted out once a year. A main reason for weeding cassava was fire protection. Relay intercropping resulted in several opportunities for indirect weed control. Farmers did not aim at a total
control of weeds. Grasses, shrubs and composite herbs dominated among weeds. Zizka (Melinis repens) was the most feared species. The composition of the weed flora varied between cropping systems, crops and fields of different ages. The weed density was least in young citemene fields and greatest in old cassava fields. It suggested that farmers have limited knowledge of the biological properties of weeds. Most weeds had some traditional use, but very small quantities were utilized. Women did more weeding than men, especially in subsistence crops. Great variation in crop yield occured, both within and between farmers' fields. In annual crops, average yield losses due to weeds were about 20%. Farmers were generally aware of the magnitude of losses caused by weeds. Weeds were a concern for Luapula farmers, but not to the same extent as soil fertility or cash restraints.
Key words: female labour; crop yield; soil fertility; economics; cultural control; cropping systems; fertilizers; intercropping; seedbed preparation; weeds; cassava; maize; groundouts; physical control; hoeing; control; plant communities; population density; yields; utilization; weed control; cereals; root crops; fatty oil plants; Zambia
Appleton, H.
Technical innovation by women - implications for small enterprises.
In: Small Enterprise Development. 1994, 5: 1, pp 4-12.
Institutional Relations Unit, Intermediate Technology Development Group, Rugby, UK. 1994
AB: Women's technical skills and innovations are often ignored because they may relate to their domestic responsibilities, or because they do not have obvious income-generating potential. Those working with women need to be aware of these skills, to help women derive the maximum benefit from them. Some attention has been paid to the role of technology in small businesses and micro-enterprises and to the importance of recognizing and supporting existing technical capacity among male and female entrepreneurs. The understanding that technology comprises both hardware and software elements of production, tools and machinery and skills and knowledge is widely articulated in the literature describing technical assistance. To facilitate a more realistic identification of technical capacity, this article focuses equally on hardware and software elements of technology and considers processes of technical innovation as important as the output. For men and women, different experiences
have different impact differently on their respective capacities and priorities in relation to the use and innovation of technology, whether within enterprises or other activities. There are three ways in which agencies working with small enterprises can use information from a gender analysis of technology: to understand better the dynamics of decision making and technical activity within enterprises; to increase understanding about widening the range of options available through understanding technical capacity derived from other areas of work; in the development of equipment to improve the profitability or relieve the drudgery of the production process. Three case studies, from Peru, Zimbabwe and Sri Lanka, show women's coping strategies and roles in employment.
Key words: technology; women; small businesses; rural development; Peru; Zimbabwe; Sri Lanka; Developing countries
Bryceson, D.F.; Howe, J.
Rural household transport in Africa: reducing the burden on women?
In: World development 21(1993)11, pp 1715-1728.
Rural household travel patterns have been largely ignored in African transport studies. Donor agencies are now focusing efforts on 'appropriate' technology interventions to directly enhance rural mobility and to indirectly improve agricultural productivity
Key words: agricultural transport; households; appropriate technology; women; Africa; rural areas; development projects
Kaul, R.N.
Gender sensitivity of agricultural mechanization in developing countries.
Paper American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 1993, No. 93-8006, pp 17.
AB: Most technological innovations in the past, have been focused on men, leaving women to perform tasks which are arduous and time consuming. The sensitivity of the often neglected gender issue in agricultural mechanization and the complexities of improving women's work load are discussed. Attempts to introduce crop threshers, water carriers, milk churners, etc. to women using a participatory research-extension approach are reported. A greater international focus on developing farm tools for women in developing countries is advocated.
Key words: Women; mechanization; agriculture; ergonomics; technology transfer; rural development; Developing countries
Brun, Thierry
The Assessment of Total Energy Expenditure of Female Farmers under Field Conditions
In: Journal of Biosocial Science; 1992, 24, 3, July, 325-333.
AB: Methods of measuring the daily energy expenditure of rural women in developing countries are assessed. Many methods, eg, carbon dioxide production, heart rate recording, & doubly labeled water, are used, but with little standardization. Calibration with a reference method based on direct or indirect calorimetry is essential.. The occurrence of large intra- & interindividual variations in the energy cost of a single activity also requires the use of repeated measurements. Examples of the use 8 limitations of techniques of total energy expenditure assessment are provided from water collection & food preparation in Burkina Faso, 8 work capacity in tropical regions of the People's Republic of China 8 Gambia. 3 Tables, 19 References. Adapted from the source document. (Copyright 1993, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Burkina Faso; Energy; Rural Women; Developing Countries; Food; Water Supply
Kaul, R.N.
Gender issues in farming, part II: selected case studies in development and extension of farm and other equipment to women in northern Nigeria.
In: Journal for Farming Systems Research Extension. 1992, 3: 2, pp 25-38.
AB: It is well established that women the world over perform a wide variety of tasks. Such tasks as cooking (partly for daily sale), water fetching, milk processing, and crop threshing were chosen for closer study, and this paper reports the findings as case studies in two states in northern Nigeria. Sample surveys, including Rapid Rural Appraisals (RRA), were done to assess the scope of the technological constraints and other problems faced by women. Improved equipment development was targeted to ease drudgery and to allow more output and release time for other activities. Maximum emphasis was given to modifying existing technologies using available infrastructural facilities. Women in groups and as individuals were involved during the phase of the project devoted to development/adoption of tools. This paper discusses these approaches, illustrating successes and failures with women food sellers, milk processors, introduction of crop threshers/shellers, water-carrier
improvement, and formation of women's cooperatives. Additional tasks for income-generation (such as raw sugar preparation, use of solar driers, etc.) are being introduced to generate extra income in the time saved by use of better equipment. Care was exercised to ensure that technologies being developed enable women to retain their traditional tasks.
Key words: milk; processing; threshing; rapid rural appraisal; women; female labour; tools; appropriate technology; cows; milk processing; rural development; Nigeria
Kaul, R.N.; Ali, A.
Gender issues in African farming: I. A case for developing farm tools for women.
In: Journal for Farming Systems Research Extension. 1992, 3: 1, pp 35-46.
AB: Women in Africa contribute up to an estimated 70% of the labour involved in food production and nearly 100% in rural food processing. Their range of daily activities (food preparation, water and fuel transportation, farm weeding, crop threshing, and dairy product preparation) is far wider than men's and demands high energy input. Despite awareness of this, most technologies developed for small-scale farmers are geared to men with no concern for their appropriateness for women, who possess different physiques and energy capabilities in comparison to men. This paper examines farm tools and processes that are predominantly used by women in Africa and explains, with available research data, the inadequacies of such tools and processes when linked to women's physiques and energy levels. Specific examples of tool design-parameter selection for operations such as weeding and rural milk processing are highlighted to show the applications of the research. They also illustrate the
need to design and develop farm tools specifically for female operators in order to improve overall ease of use, safety, and effective integration of women in farming system innovations.
Key words: Hoes; Milk; Processing; women; female labour, tools; appropriate technology; rural development; Africa
IRRI
Ultralight rice transplanters can make life easier for women.
In: Indian-farming. 1991, 41: 2, p 29;
AB: Women have traditionally transplanted the rice crop but equipment designed for the process does not always suit their build. A new transplanter made of steel, aluminium, and wood and half the weight of earlier hand-operated transplanting machines is described. A worker can transplant one-fifth of a hectare in a working day with the new transplanter.
Key words: Transplanters; rice; female labour; anthropometric dimensions; Farm, machinery; Philippines; Developing Countries
Truscott, K.
Women and tillage: strategic issues posed by farmer groups
Proceedings of a workshop on "Tillage, Past and Future", Conference: Tillage, Past and Future; Harare (Zimbabwe).; 14-15 Nov 1989.
CIMMYT; Harare (Zimbabwe); pp 15;
Ministry of Lands, Agriculture and Rural Resettlement, Harare (Zimbabwe), Dept. of AGRITEX; CIMMYT, Harare (Zimbabwe); FAO, Harare (Zimbabwe)
AB: This paper argues that in order to promote any change within small scale production systems, we need to recognise the complexity of the existing household/collective farming systems in the small scale sector; understand the benefits and disbenefits to small scale farmers of their existing tillage systems; put forward the issues involved in "minimum" tillage (or any other technological change) to tampers themselves for discussion and feedback; adapt any proposed new tillage recommendations to take into account the farmers' views and capacities; consider any tillage recommendations (or other change in technology in terms of economic productivity including returns to labour and capital inputs).
Key words: Tillage; women; farming systems; Small scale farming; common lands; Zimbabwe
CIMMYT
Tillage, past and future
CIMMYT FSR Networkshop Report (CIMMYT) on Workshop on Tillage, Past and Future;
Hatcliffe, Harare (Zimbabwe) 14-15 Nov 1989. pp 62.
Key words: Zimbabwe; tillage; zero tillage; appropriate technology; economics; farm inputs; ridging; role of women; small scale farming;
Carr, M. (ed)
Women and food security: the experience of the SADCC countries.
pp 210; Intermediate Technology Publications (IT); London; UK
AB: Women in the SADCC (Southern African Development Coordinating Conference) region play a major role in the production, processing, and marketing of food. However, for the main part, they have been constrained from contributing fully to the development of this sector by the lack of availability of efficient technologies relating to their tasks, as well as lack of access to those technologies which do exist. In recognition of this fact, and in light of the vitally important role which women have to play in the enhancement of food security in the region, the Government of Tanzania hosted a regional conference in Arusha in May 1988 to identify food technology projects of benefit to women which could be channelled through the SADCC mechanism. In order to have as much information as possible on women and food technologies, each of the nine member states was asked to prepare a background country paper on women's access to and use of improved food-related technologies. These
technologies were to cover the full range of 'hardware' relevant to food security: simple tools and equipment for land preparation; seeding, weeding, harvesting, threshing, and winnowing; storage and drying devices; various types of crop-processing machines; small-scale irrigation devices; fish, fruit and vegetable processing devices; low-cost transport devices; and energy conservation technologies; as well as 'software' techniques such as village woodlots and vegetable gardening. The papers were to look in depth at the important facts which influence successful introduction and diffusion of these technologies to women, such as access to credit and training; involvement of women in technology design and adaptation; availability of raw materials, infrastructure, and markets; and the policy environment. Where possible, examples of successful projects were to be included which could serve as a basis for discussion of potential replication in other countries in the region. This
was the first attempt to undertake a review of the situation concerning women and food technology in the SADCC region as a whole, and the collection of country papers is published in this book.
Key words: Food supply; women; food production; food technology; projects; rural development; Developing Countries; Southern Africa; SADCC Countries
Kim, H.N.; Lee, H.l.; Choi, J.H.; Rhie, S.G.; Cho, N.H.
A study of the reduction in rural work effort by using supplementary tools for female farmers.
Research Reports of the Rural Development Administration Agricultural Engineering, Sericulture, Farm Products Utilization and Farm Management. 1990, 32: 3, pp 65-72. Language: Korean
AB: In 22 female farm workers with an av. basal metabolism of 1270 Kcal/day, a rest metabolism of 1724 Kcal/day, daily urinary N excretion of 9.16 9, a daily creatinine excretion of 0.887 9 and an av. age of 47, energy expenditure when removing seedlings from a seedbed or filling pots with soil was decreased by the use of a stool. The stool also decreased energy expenditure during weeding but not during lifting of sweet potatoes. Using a table did not affect the energy used in trimming green onions or sorting strawberries, but it did change the diurnal pattern of energy expenditure and reduced some measures of fatigue.
Key words: Appropriate technology; transplanting; ergonomics; women; weed control; Energy requirements; harvesting; postharvest treatment; Physical control; manual weed control; weeds; onions; sweet potatoes; strawberries; handling; sorting; Korea Republic; Developing countries
Tarfa, S.B.
Developing appropriate technology to meet the needs of the Nigerian rural women: the Kenyan experience.
In: Noma, 1990, no 8. pp 33-35.
nr 1212 in CAB printed bibl. see there for abstract
Doran, J.
A moving issue for women: is low cost transport an appropriate intervention to alleviate women's burden in southern Africa? 1990, Gender Analysis in Development Discussion Paper, no.1, Norwich, School of Development Studies, University of East Anglia.
Kurwijila, RV.
Role of appropriate technology in reducing women's workload in agricultural activities in Tanzania.
Working Papers, Women in International Development, Michigan State University. 1990, No. 208, pp 10; BIDS;
East Lansing, Michigan; USA
AB: A review of the role of women in African agricultural production in general and Tanzania in particular, is presented, highlighting the fact that African women produce food by using labour-demanding production tools such as the hand-hoe. A survey of the use of appropriate technology devices in a rural area of Tanzania reveals that women are either unaware of the technology available or consider it too expensive for their needs. The establishment of Rural Women Training Centres is suggested along with increased involvement of women professionals in the design and dissemination of appropriate technologies aimed at improving agricultural production.
Key words: Rural women; appropriate technology; female labour; agricultural production; rural development; East Africa; Developing Countries; Tanzania
Battcock, M.
A future for solar drying?
In: Appropriate-Technology. 1990, 17: 2, pp 21-24.
Intermediate Technology Development Group, Rugby, UK.
AB: Methods and problems of solar drying in developing countries are summarized. Structures for solar drying eliminate some of the problems of product quality, dust contamination, damage from sudden rainstorms, animals or birds, etc. Such structures include the Brace drier for fruit and vegetable drying, chimney driers for rice, tent drier for fish and forced convection drier for red peppers. Reasons cited for the unpopularity of solar driers are lack of capital for construction, loss of valuable ground area while they are operating, extra labour required for loading and unloading, heavy trays that cannot be lifted by women. Further arguments against solar drier use are that higher quality products do not necessarily mean higher prices, and that crop losses are often exaggerated by certain agencies. Although solar driers are successful for cashew nuts in Honduras and desiccated coconut in Bangladesh, there is little future for driers for high vol., low value crops; only
large driers processing 1 t/d are likely to be useful.
Key words: Driers; solar drying; technology transfer, Appropriate technology; Cashews; Coconuts; solar energy; rice; fruits; vegetables; Grain driers; Developing countries
Singh, G.; Pariyar, M.P.
Manufacturing and testing of AIT jab seeder in Nepal.
Paper American Society of Agricultural Engineers. 1990, No. 90-5010, pp 17.
AB: A manually operated AIT (Asian Institute of Technology) jab seeder was manufactured in Nepal using locally available materials. Farmers, both men and women, found the seeder convenient to use and less tiresome as it avoids bending or squatting, resulting in savings of about one-fourth in labour use. The cost of the seeder could be recovered by sowing 1 ha of maize and soyabeans. The seeder should be an effective substitute for manual dibbing in the hills of Nepal.
Key words: Drills; manual operation; tests; design; Equipment; maize; Nepal; Developing countries
Elliott, K.; Sobhan, S.; Scott, A.; Marshall, K.; Harper, M.; Inger, D.; Roy, S.; Norton, J.; Katz, M.; Carr, M. (ed)
Barefoot book economically appropriate services for the rural poor. pp 97; Intermediate Technology Publications; London; UK
AB: The book explores the potential of 'intermediate' services, namely how to provide the services which rural communities need to work themselves out of poverty on a sustained basis. The first chapter (K. Elliott) sets the context by examining the 'barefoot' approach in its original application. This is followed by an account (D. Hadrill) of 'barefoot vets' in Nepal and India, where traditional healers and the livestock owners themselves have been trained in improved techniques of animal health care. Chapter 3 (S. Sobhan) writes about the experience of training selected members of rural communities in Bangladesh to be paralegals who provide advice on family, land, inheritance and constitutional law. This is followed by an account (A. Scott) of attempts in Ecuador and Nepal to enable rural communities to be involved in the planning and administration of their own development. Chapter 6 (K. Marshall) on 'barefoot bankers' describes the experience of the Grameen Bank in
Bangladesh which lends to thousands of rural landless, the majority of whom are women. Chapter 7 (M. Harper) examines experiences from Kenya and elsewhere in providing management consultancy services to rural entrepreneurs; and the next (D. Inger) considers village artisans in Botswana. Chapter 9 (S. Roy) describes an example of the provision of maintenance services for village-level equipment, namely, the 'barefoot handpump mechanics' of Rajasthan State, India. Chapter 10 (J. Norton) describes programmes which have upgraded the skills of traditional builders and introduced basic knowledge of building techniques to community workers in various parts of the world. Geologists are the subject of Chapter 11 (M. Katz) which examines the 'barefoot' approach to natural resource development by which rural communities identify and conserve the resources around them. The final chapter tries to draw some general conclusions from the various case studies and provides recommendations on
how 'intermediate' services can reach even greater numbers of rural communities.
Key words: Veterinary services; Training; Law; Self help; Construction technology; Banks; Women; Appropriate technology; Services; paraprofessionals; poverty; rural development; Developing Countries; Nepal; India; Bangladesh; Ecuador, Kenya; Rajasthan; Handpumps;
United Nations, Economic Commission for Africa.
Role of technology in small farmers' productivity in Africa. pp 43. Addis Ababa; Ethiopia
AB: This study provides an overview of technologies and techniques which are already in use, and could be put to more widespread use, on small farms in Africa, in order to improve small farmer productivity. Emphasis is placed on intermediate technologies, and also on technologies which can be produced indigenously or with the least possible amount of foreign inputs. The study considers hand tools, human-powered technologies, crop storage, animal traction, motor-driven machinery, cropping and fertilizing methods, transport technologies, and fuelwood and other energy sources. It concludes that widespread adoption of sustainable technology is a vital first step towards higher productivity. As higher productivity is achieved the farmer will be able to afford more sophisticated equipment and the rural areas will become more attractive, especially for men who tend to migrate to urban areas leaving women to tend the land.
Key words: Small farms; appropriate technology; farm equipment; rural development; Developing Countries; Africa
Kaul, R.N.
Farm tools for women: a case for theirspecific design requirements on ergonomic principles.
In: Agricultural engineering, Proceedings of the 11th international congress on agricultural engineering (CIGR), Dublin, Ireland, 4-8 September 1989. Rotterdam, the Netherlands, Balkema, pp 2889-2893.
nr 1198 in CAB printed bibl. see there for abstract.
Siregar, M.; Kikuchi, M.
A note on agricultural mechanization in Indonesia: West Sumatra in comparison with West Java.
In: Quarterly Journal of Agricultural Economy. 1988, 42: 1, Indonesia
AB: In West Sumatra, post harvest mechanization has proceeded rapidly, and in West Java mechanized cultivation has had a rapid impact. Scarcity of labour has encouraged mechanization in both areas. Changes in rice farming are examined for West Sumatra; development of irrigation techniques and seed and fertilizer technology were important advances, while machine milling replaced rice pounding by women in both West Sumatra and Java. Tractor cultivation is more widespread in West Java, but threshing machines are more common in West Sumatra. The economics of mechanization and its consequences are discussed.
Key words: Mechanization; economics; farm comparisons; Farming systems; Milling; Indonesia; Sumatra; Java
Ahmed, S. (ed)
Impact of agricultural and energy technology on the rural poor,
Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP), Dhaka, Bangladesh, pp 164
AB: In 1986 the Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific (CIRDAP) launched a research project on the impact of technology transfer. It covered 2 broad issues: (1) agricultural technology transfer and its impact on the rural poor; and (2) the role of rural women vis-a-vis household energy technology. Part 1 of this report contains: abridged versions of the CIRDAP studies in Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Malaysia and Thailand; a paper on experiences in Indonesia; and a paper giving an overview of the country studies. Part 2 contains the proceedings of a workshop held in Jakarta in 1987 as part of the project, which aimed to formulate recommendations to help governments and international agencies in drawing up technological policies which will benefit the rural poor.
Key words: technology transfer, agricultural technology; energy programmes; poverty; women's role; science and technology policy; conference proceedings; Asia, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Thailand
Rivera, F.T.
Participation of rural women and children in handwatering agriculture for crop diversification
In: Filipino women in rice farming systems. Los Banos (Philippines), University of the Philippines, pp 133-182
AB: In the Philippines, many small farming families survive in the dry season by planting crops other than rice. These are often watered plant by plant from open wells. This article focuses on the position of rural women and children in hand-watered agriculture. It appears that such agriculture is practiced throughout the dry season. The main crops planted are vegetables, especially eggplants and tomatoes, and tobacco. Manually irrigated crops contribute greatly to total household income. Tobacco contributed 81% of total income in 2 communities studied in Luzon; for eggplant the figure was 7%. Women contributed 20 and 29% of the labour used in hand-watering tobacco and vegetables, respectively; children contributed 16 and 21%, respectively. The effectiveness of a foot pump introduced from Bangladesh was also studied. Eggplant farmers considered it an important innovation. Women generally viewed the pump as tailor-made for men, although they thought it had its value for
household chores such as washing clothes.
Key words: irrigation systems; hand tools; manual workers; women's role; children; crop diversification; case studies; Philippines, Luzon
Bolabola, C.
Appropriate technology for women: has it worked?
In: Environment and Pacific women: from the globe to the village.
Suva (Fiji), Fiji Association of Women Graduates, pp 13-18
AB: Economic development and the introduction of new cooking practices have resulted in the increasing domestication of women in Fiji. Women had to take over some of the traditional roles of men, such as cooking, fuelwood collecting and fishing. The harsh work environment and conditions that rural women face is stated to be directly attributable to the total absence of efficient tools or technology as labour- or time-saving devices. In this paper it is argued that appropriate technology is needed to alleviate physical labour and improve the quality of life and economic power of rural women. Technology introduced under some government development programmes has alleviated the physical work of men rather than women. Therefore, it is suggested that women should be in control of technology right from the initial decision making process of project and fund allocations. Some recommendations for establishing appropriate technology at the service of rural women are made.
Key words: appropriate technology; women; food preparation; women's role; development programmes; decision making; Fiji
Sarin, M.
Development of tools and technology for women's work in agriculture in India.
FAO, Bangkok (Thailand). Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific; pp 23
Key words: India; Women; female labour; inplements; appropriate technology;
Sokona, Y.
Food, energy and the daily chores of women in West Africa.
In: Food-energy nexus and ecosystem; Proceedings of the second international symposium on food-energy nexus in New Delhi, India, during 12-14 February 1986.
Oxford, New Delhi, India, pp 68-89.
nr 167 in CAB printed bibl. see there for abstract
Huiwen, Z.; Yebai, G.
Introduction of some techniques and equipment to improve working conditions for women in China's rural areas.
Beijing (China) pp 27
Key words: women; female labour; implements; appropriate technology; China; rural areas
Harrison, P.
A tale of two stoves: making technology appropriate for those who will use it is only half the battle: designers must find appropriate ways to bring their products to the mass market
In: The New Scientist (1987)1562 pp 40-43.
The use of wood saving stoves in Burkina Faso and Kenya.
Key words: appropriate technology; energy; Burkina Faso; Kenya
Groen, B.C.
Bibliography on women and energy technology.
In: Groen, B.C.; Huizenga, C.R., Have planners understood the poor people's energy problem?: socio-economic aspects of energy technologies: a literature review. Enschede: University of Twente, pp 386, p.305-386.
The bibliography is sorted in the alphabetical order of the names of authors.
Key words: bibliography; technology; energy; women
Groen, B.C.
Women and energy technology.
In: Groen, B.C.; Huizenga, C.R., Have planners understood the poor people's energy problem?: socio-economic aspects of energy technologies: a literature review. Enschede: University of Twente, pp 386; pp 193-303.
Key words: technology; energy; women
Adriano, M.S.
Agricultural tools and technology for women workers in the Philippines. FAO, Bangkok (Thailand). Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific pp 53
Keywords: Philippines; women; female labour, implements; appropriate technology.
Bagchi, D.
Rural Energy and the role of women.
In: Momsen, J.H. and Townsend, J. (eds), Geography of Gender in the Third World, Hutchinson London, pp 327-333.
nr 164 in CAB printed bibliography, see there for abstract
Jacob, V.
[Agricultural mechanisation: it's not going through very well] Mechanisme agricole: ça grince.
In: Inter Tropique, 1987, no 22, pp 22-24.
nr 1206 in CAB printed bibl. see there for abstract
Curtis, Y.
Women and the transport of water,
London UK, IT Publications, pp 48
nr 1208 in CAB Printed bibl. see there for abstract
Koenig, D.
Alternative Views of "The Energy Problem": Why Malian Villagers Have Other Priorities
In: Human-Organization 1986, 45, 2, summer, pp 170-176.
AB: Data from a village-level energy use field study in San, Mali, reveal that local villagers perceive energy problems differently than do development personnel. Given the problem of deforestation in the Sahel, development personnel view fuel wood availability as a major problem, while villagers do not. Since most fuel is used for cooking, it is women's perception that is crucial. Data on average work times show that fuel procurement forms a relatively small part of women's total work load, including food preparation. Women are primarily interested in time- or labor-saving technology, rather than fuel-saving technology. Therefore, energy-saving technologies must also be labor-saving if they are to be attractive to the local population in this region. 3 Tables, 8 References. Modified M (Copyright 1987, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Energy Conservation; Mali; Cultural Values; Community Development; Technological Progress; Feminization
Kaur, S.; Verma, T.
Effectiveness of different mix-media combination in imparting knowledge regarding energy saving technology among rural women.
In: Indian journal of extension education 22(1986)1/2 pp 100-104.
Key words: technology; energy; extension; farmers; women
Sandhu, R., Sandler, J. (compilers)
The tech and tools book. A guide to technologies women are using worldwide. I.T. Publications, London. International Women's Tribune Centre, pp 176
nr 1184 in CAB printed bibl. See there for abstract.
Brattle, L.V.; Iring, R.J.
Appropriate household technology: charcoal stoves.
In: Journal of consumer studies and home economics 10(1986)1 pp 3543.
Appropriate technology in the Third World and the use of charcoal stoves by women in Sudan
Key words: technology; appropriate technology; households; women; Third World, Sudan
Date-Bah, E.
Technologies for rural women of Ghana: role of socio-cultural factors. International Labour Organisation (ILO), Geneva, Switzerland
In: Technology and rural women: conceptual and empirical issues.
London (UK), George Allen and Unwin, pp 211-251
AB: This chapter has 3 main objectives: (a) to examine the women's traditional activities, the methods, tools and skills they employ in the performance of these activities as well as the institutional constraints on these activities prevailing in Ghanaian society in order to show some of the areas that could benefit from improved technologies; (b) to attempt an evaluation of the improved technologies already introduced on a pilot scale to the women in some villages to ascertain the precise factors (social, economic and technical) contributing to their acceptance or rejection, a finding that could guide the planning of future improved technologies for these women; and (c) to examine dissemination strategies adopted in the past and new ones that could also be employed. There is a need for adopting a holistic approach to the issue of improved technologies for rural women. The chapter concludes with a summary of the main findings and a list of areas for further research to form
the basis for the formulation of a comprehensive project on improved technologies for Ghanaian rural women.
Key words: technological change; women; adaptation to change; economic reform; social change; Ghana
Bustrillos, N.R.
Socio-economic dimension of sundrying technology applied to food.
Proceedings. Conference: Expert Consultation on Planning the Development of Sundrying, Techniques in Africa, Rome (Italy), 12 Dec 1983
FAO, Rome (Italy). Agricultural Services Div. pp 59-76
Keywords: natural drying; Africa; methods; social consciousness; female labour; technology transfer; costs; training
ILO
Improved village technology for women's activities: a manual for West Africa
International Labour Organisation (ILO), Geneva, Switzerland pp 301, bibliography (p. 277-282)
AB: Technologies for processing cassava, vegetable oil, maize, rice and fish that can be undertaken by rural women in West Africa are described in this manual. A quantitative comparison of performance of both traditional and improved technologies is made and information is given on the advantages and disadvantages of each. The basic design features of improved and traditional tools and equipment, materials and parts required for their fabrication are discussed. Uses of by-products of food processing activities, and problems of design, development and manufacture of improved equipment are also considered. A list of equipment suppliers is included.
Key words: food processing; women; choice of technology; equipment; by products; manual West Africa
Fricke, T.
High impact appropriate technology case studies, Washington USA; Appropriate
Technology International pp 76.
nr 1185 in CAB printed bibl. See there for abstract
Kaur, M.; Sharma, M.L.
Rural Women and Advancing Agricultural Technology: A Study of an Indian State
In: Journal of Social and Economic Studies; 1983, 11, 1-2, 22-35.
AB: The impact of advancing agricultural technology on the position of women in society is examined with structured interview data collected from 401 households in a cross-section of villages in Haryana State, India. Two aspects of agricultural technology were taken into account: improved agricultural practices & agricultural mechanization. It was found that agricultural technology has differing impacts on different socioeconomic groups, benefitting women from the higher strata 8 harming those from the lower ones. 6 Tables, 8 References. W. H. Stoddard (Copyright 1985, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Woman, Women see also Female; Social status; India, Indian, Indians; Agriculture, Agricultural; Technology, Technological, Technologically
<section>2</section>
3 Gender and animal draught power
3 Gender and animal draught power
Sylwander, L. (ed); Mpande, R. (ed)
Gender issues in animal traction: a handbook; Proceedings of the Gender in Animal Traction Workshop, Mbeya, Tanzania, 1-5 June 1992; ATNESA, AGROTEC, CIDA Zimbabwe; pp 60.
Marshall, K.; Sizya, M.
Women and animal traction in Mbeya region of Tanzania: a gender and development approach.
In: Sylwander, L. (ed); Mpande, R. (ed), Gender issues in animal traction: a handbook; Proceedings of the Gender in AnimalTraction Workshop, Mbeya, Tanzania, 1-5 June 1992; ATNESA, AGROTEC, CIDA Zimbabwe; pp 37-42.
Muma; A.K.
Involvement of women in animal traction in Kaoma District, Zambia.
In: Sylwander, L. (ed); Mpande, R. (ed), Gender issues in animal traction: a handbook; Proceedings of the Gender in AnimalTraction Workshop, Mbeya, Tanzania, 1-5 June 1992; ATNESA, AGROTEC, CIDA Zimbabwe; pp 4346.
Njiku, E.T.
Draft animal power technologies, their scope and relevance to women farmers in Tanzania.
In: Sylwander, L. (ed); Mpande, R. (ed), Gender issues in animal traction: a handbook; Proceedings of the Gender in AnimalTraction Workshop, Mbeya, Tanzania, 1-5 June 1992; ATNESA, AGROTEC, CIDA Zimbabwe; pp 47-51.
Muylwijk, J.G.
Gender ideology and differences in access to animal draught power for women farmers in Malawi and Zimbabwe.
In: Agrarian Questions: the politics of farming anno 1995: Proceedings, edited by the Agrarian Questions Organising Committee, Wageningen, Volume III, pp 1093 - 1103, Wageningen Agricultural University, the Netherlands.
Agriculture of small farmers in Southern Africa continues to be labour intensive. Many of the small holding farmers are women, either with or without a husband who is present. Women rammers spend much time in tilling the land by hoe, more often than with the help of animal draught power. Historical, political and economical processes differ in many aspects depending on the country and the region. The interaction of different ethnic gender ideologies (some matrilineal and others patrilineal) with other developments and processes is expected to result in a variety of influences on the work of women and men in agriculture.
Questions that arise are:
- What are the constraints that women farmers experience in their access to animal draught power?
- Which factors influence the differences in access to resources such as draught animals?
- How do different gender ideologies influence the room for manoeuvre of women and women's strategies to increase the efficiency of their agricultural production?
In this paper results of fieldwork in a communal area in Zimbabwe are compared with a review of literature on the same subject for Malawi. In the conceptual framework elements of an actor-oriented approach are complemented with attention for more or less manipulatable gender and other power structures, related to control over and the access to resources such as animal draught power.
In both countries women do heavy work for many hours per day and see the lack of oxen as a large problem. Whilst the position of women farmers in Malawi and in Zimbabwe is differently influenced by the political systems, the climatological fluctuations, the available infrastructure and the cultural gender ideology, the overall effect on the demands on their labour turns out to be quite similar. The extent to which the effect is different in both locations depends on the political space of manoeuvre women can win. They need control over material resources, in social and cultural changing contexts. Women with different socioeconomic power positions express diverse constraints and priorities, although for most women farmers animal draught power is a first need. Gender ideology has far-reaching consequences for the organisation of the agricultural production. In Malawi the lack of cattle is translated into a new taboo for women to use oxen, whilst in Zimbabwe the recent
starvation of a large part of the country's herd resulted in a substantial increase in work for women.
Key words: access to resources; control over resources; draught animals; animal power; women; gender relations; gender ideology; development projects; projects; rural development; East Africa; Southern Africa; Malawi; Zimbabwe
Sylwander, L.
Women and animal traction technology.
In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, Pp 260-265
The paper gives a broad introduction to the most important issues and experiences concerning women and animal traction technology in eastern and southern Africa. The commonly held belief that women cannot use animal draught power is based on traditional gender roles, but given appropriate support, women can use animal traction technology successfully.
Key words: training; credit; draught animals; animal power; women; participation; gender relations; development projects; projects; rural development; East Africa; Southern Africa
Marshall, K.; Sizya, M.
Women and animal traction in Mbeya Region of Tanzania: a gender and development approach.
In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, pp 266-271.
The experience is discussed of the Mbeya Oxenization Project in Tanzania and its attempt to involve both male and female farmers as effective participants in animal traction technology. Some lessons are identified which may assist in integrating gender issues into animal traction projects.
Key words: training; credit; draught animals; animal power; women; participation; gender relations; development projects; projects; rural development; Tanzania
Doran, J.
Transportation by women, and their access to animal-drawn carts in Zimbabwe.
In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, pp 272-275.
J. Doran presents findings on gender aspects of ownership and use of livestock and animal-drawn carts in Zimbabwe. Women are generally at a disadvantage in terms of access to carts for transport, but cart ownership is, on balance, beneficial to women.
Key words: transport; credit; draught animals; animal power, women; participation; gender relations; development projects; projects; rural development; Southern Africa; Zimbabwe
Makwanda, A.C.
Women and animal traction technology: experiences of the Tanga Draft Animal Project, Tanzania.
In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, pp 276-279.
A.C. Makwanda describes the Draft Animal Project in Tanga region, Tanzania, which is involved in several programmes designed to give women access to investment capital through unsecured loans, and hence to involve them fully in the development and use of animal draught technologies.
Key words: training; credit; draught animals; animal power; women; participation; gender relations; development projects; projects; rural development; East Africa; Tanzania
Croxton, S.
Women's access to animal traction technology: case studies from Dafur, Sudan and Turkana, Kenya.
In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, pp 280-283.
S. Croxton compares and contrasts the experiences of two projects, one in Sudan and the other in Kenya, which sought to introduce animal traction technology. In both cases there has been an explicit effort to ensure that women are provided with the necessary skills and knowledge to access the technology.
Key words: training; credit; draught animals; animal power; women; participation; gender relations; development projects; projects; rural development; East Africa; Sudan; Kenya
Lombe, M.; Sikanyika, C.; Tembo, A.N.
The importance of women's participation in animal traction in Zambia. In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, pp 284-287.
The importance of women's participation in animal traction in Zambia is discussed and suggestions are made for better integration of women in using draught animals and animal-drawn implements.
Key words: training; draught animals; animal power; women; participation; gender relations; development projects; projects; rural development; Zambia
Hocking, C.
The impact of mobile ox plowing courses for women in the Western Province of Zambia.
In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, pp 288-291.
Key words: training; credit; draught animals; animal power; women; participation; gender relations; development projects; projects; rural development; Zambia
Taha, O.
A note on women and animal traction technology in Ethiopia.
In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, p 292.
Mukuka, I.
A note on the use of animal traction by women in North Western Province, Zambia.
In: Improving Animal Traction Technology, Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA) held 18-23 January 1992, Lusaka Zambia, CTA Wageningen the Netherlands, p 293.
Rwelamira, J.K.; Lawrence, P.R. (ed); Lawrence, K. (ed); Dijkman, J.T. (ed); Starkey, P.H.
The social and economic aspects of animal traction in agricultural production among female headed households of Lesotho and Swaziland.
Research for development of animal traction in West Africa: Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop of the West Africa Animal Traction Network, Kano, Nigeria, 9-13 July 1990. pp
International Livestock Centre for Africa; Addis Ababa; Ethiopia
AB: This paper reviews research findings relevant to the social and economic conditions of female heads of households and their impact on the use or non-use of animal traction by such households in Lesotho and Swaziland. Topics considered include: ownership and utilization of draught animals, costs of owning and utilizing draught animals and implements, and the special constraints of female-headed households in the use of animal traction. The paper concludes with recommendations for further research leading to policy changes to enhance the use of animal traction by female-headed households.
Key words: animal power; women; draught animals; usage; constraints; rural development; Lesotho; Swaziland
Starkey, P.H.(ed); Mwenya, E. (ed); Stares, J.
Improving animal traction technology: Proceedings of the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa (ATNESA), Lusaka, Zambia, 18-23 January, 1992. pp 490
AB: This volume contains papers presented at the first workshop of the Animal Traction Network for Eastern and Southern Africa. The overall theme of the workshop was the improvement of animal traction technology and papers are grouped under the following headings: the profitability of animal traction; the management of draught animals; animal-powered tillage and weeding technology; the supply and distribution of implements for animal traction; women and animal traction technology; the transfer of animal traction technology; animal-powered transport; diversifying operations using animal power, and country experiences and constraints.
Key words: animal power; draught animals; weed control; tillage; women; female labour; transport; equipment; animal welfare; Africa
Oguejiofo, I.O.; Lawrence, P.R. (ed); Lawrence, K (ed); Dijkman, J.T. (ed); Starkey, P.H.
Appropriate animal traction technology for rural women in Nigeria.
Research for development of animal traction in West Africa: Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop of the West Africa Animal Traction Network, Kano, Nigeria, 9-13 July 1990. pp 244-247.
International Livestock Centre for Africa; Addis Ababa; Ethiopia
AB: This paper presents the findings of a national survey of traditional techniques and activities of rural women in Nigeria and rural infrastructural facilities available to them. It looks at the relative contribution of animal traction technologies to other technologies used by rural women and recommends the adoption of several strategies for improving their quality of life, including the implementation of appropriate animal traction technologies.
Key words: draught animals; women; animal power; appropriate technology; rural development; Nigeria
Muylwijk, J.G.
Will women farmers till the land till the cows come home?: socio-economic differentiation of women in Malawi, in relation to their access to animal traction. pp 137, Wageningen Agricultural University
Key words: animal power; agriculture; women's roles; women; draught animals; technology; gender ideology; development projects; Malawi
Kajornsin, B.; Cheva-lsarakul, B.; Bunyavejchewin, P.(ed); Sangdid, S. (ed); Hangsanet, K.
Women and animal production in Thailand.
In: Animal production and rural development. Proceedings of the Sixth MAP Animal Science Congress. Vol. 1. 1992, pp 325-334. Animal Husbandry Association of Thailand; Bangkok; Thailand
AB: Information collected from various sources indicates that women play a significant role in dairying in Thailand and examples are given of women's dairy projects and involvement in cooperatives. Some results are then presented from a 1991 survey of draught animal power (DAP) usage in two villages in Surin province. The results indicate that DAP activities were mainly dominated by men, especially in land preparation. Socioeconomic factors affecting womens' contribution to DAP activities are noted. Among the 14 divisions of the Department of Livestock Development (DLD), 3 are headed by women and there are two female provincial livestock officers in the DLD.
Key words: dairy farming; livestock farming; women; roles; dairy farms; cows; rural development; Thailand
Rwelamira, J.
Women farmers: has basic technology taken their needs into account?, CDC Magazine (UK) 1991, no.2 p 4-7
no.269 KIT printed bibl. abstract.
Liuma, L.L.
The involvement of women in animal power utilization in Malawi.
UNDP-FAO MLW/86/002 Animal Power Utilization Project, Lilongwe, pp 52
Broekhuyse, J.T.
(Agricultural production and productivity in the dry savanna: Centre-Nord Department, Upper Volta)
Original title: Productie en productiviteit van de landbouw in droge savanne: Departement Centre-Nord, Haute-Volta
Department of Social Research, Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, pp 151
AB: This study compares the production and productivity of small farms in Upper Volta with or without machine or animal power. Farms with no more than human power cultivate a smaller acreage and produce less than farms with machine or animal power, but both types of farm are unable to supply the basic family needs. There is also no surplus from which improved technology can be financed.
Key words: agricultural production; productivity; small farmers; mechanization; animal traction; crop area; women; food supply, Burkina Faso
<section>3</section>
4. Gender and postharvest processing technology
4. Gender and postharvest processing technology
UNIFEM
Drying, UNIFEM Source Books Series, pp 64
abstract op folder van ITP
UNIFEM
Storage, UNIFEM Source Books Series, pp 48
abstract op folder van ITP
Axtell, B.; Kocken, E.; Sandhu, R.
Cereal processing. Intermediate Technology Development Group, pp 54; Published in the series Food Cycle Technology Source Books, United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM); Intermediate Technology Publications Ltd.; London; UK
AB: Traditional and improved methods for harvesting, threshing, winnowing, shelling, drying, storing, milling, grinding and hulling maize, rice, sorghum and wheat are described. Secondary processing methods, such as baking or fermenting, are outlined and case studies from Africa, Asia and Latin America are included. A checklist for those planning to design or develop a small scale commercial venture is provided.
Key words: cereal grains; cereal products; food grains; maize; rice; wheat; food processing; equipment; harvesting; threshing; shelling; drying; storage; milling; hulling; small businesses; appropriate technology; grain; postharvest treatment; processing; Africa; Asia; Latin America; Developing countries
Axtell, B.; Kocken, E.; Sandhu, R
Fruit and vegetate processing.
Intermediate Technology Publications Ltd.; London; UK pp 59; Published in the series Food Cycle Technology Source Books, United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).;
AB: Methods and equipment used for preserving fruit and vegetable products in developing countries are described and the hazards to avoid when setting up a small food processing business are outlined. Successful community-based enterprises are described in a number of case studies from Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Key words: fruit products; fruits; vegetable products; vegetables; food processing; equipment; small businesses; appropriate technology; community development; horticultural crops; fruit crops; processing; Africa; Asia; Latin America; Developing countries
Bruchhaus, E.M.; Rott, R
The milling myth: through lightened work to wellbeing and freedom.
Original title: Der Muhlenmythos: durch Arbeitserleichterung zu Wohlstand und Freiheit.
In: Entwicklungsprozesse und Geschlechterverhaltnisse uber die Arbeits- und Lebensraume von Frauen in Landern der Dritten Welt. SSlP-Bulletin. 1993, No. 63, pp 175-199;
Verlag breitenbach Publishers; Saarbrucken; Germany
AB: The extent to which motorized mills actually benefit rural women in Africa is discussed as well as the reasons for the failure of many mill projects. The advantages of unfashionable simpler technologies based on animal and water power as an intermediate stage between hand milling and diesel or electric powered machines are pointed out. The use women make of the time they save when they no longer have to spend up to 4 hours a day grinding grain is considered. Finally, methods of financing and amortizing mills are reviewed. Examples are drawn from West Africa and Burkina Faso.
Key words: Mechanization; mills; appropriate technology; female labour, milling; grain; rural development; West Africa; Burkina Faso
Villavicencio, R.; Aquino, R.; Aquino, J.
Independencia women seek independence: making Andean noodles.
In: I.L.E.I.A. newsletter/Informationcentre for Low External Input Agriculture 9(1993)3 pp 24-25
Description of experiments with small-scale production of noodles using the indigenous cereal "quinoa" instead of the wheatbased noodles by village women in Bolivia
Key words: postharvest processing; quinoa; development projects; women; Bolivia
Barrett, H.; Browne, A.
The impact of labour-saving devices on the lives of rural African women: grain mills in The Gambia.
In: Momsen, J.H. and Kinnaird, V. (eds), Different places, different voices, gender and development in Africa, Asia and Latin America. Routledge, London, pp 52-62.
Boeni, B.
Women solve a pressing problem: easing the work of making palm oil.
In: I.L.E.I.A. newsletter/Information centre for Low External Input Agriculture 9(1993)3, pp 22-23
Ways of improving food processing in the rainforest zone of Cote d'lvoire were studied. The aim was to define criteria for succesful development of such technologies for rural areas
Key words: postharvest processing; oil palm; local knowledge; women; Cote d'lvoire
Greeley, M.
Postharvest technologies: implications for food policy analysis.
In: EDI Development Policy Case Series, Analytical Case Studies. 1991, No. 7, pp 81; Economic Development Institute, World Bank; Washington, D.C.; USA
AB: This study examines the proposition that substantially more food could be made available by preventing food loss at the farm level. It comprises three independent papers on appropriate threshing and milling techniques that can substantially improve farmers' productivity and the value of their farms. The first weighs the potential increase in available food made possible by efficient postharvest technologies against the effects of these technologies on the welfare of poor rural people. The potential of that increase to eradicate hunger is also discussed. The second is a case study of the adoption of pedal threshers for rice in Bangladesh. It examines the social and economic effects of using the pedal thresher, which increases labour productivity. It necessitates a choice, however, between more jobs or greater productivity with fewer jobs. Similarly, the third examines the choices for rice milling in Bangladesh and the displacement of female wage labour associated with the
introduction of mechanized milling. For the poorest rural women from landless households, the only employment option is working as wage labourers in neighbouring households processing rice into paddy. With the introduction of maleo-perated rice mills, the processing is cheaper and many fewer positions are available.
Key words: Female labour; food crops; postharvest losses; appropriate technology; rice; threshing machines; milling; mechanization; Foods; Farm machinery; rural development; South Asia; Developing Countries; Bangladesh
Hyman, E.L.
A comparison of labour saving technologies for processing shea nut butter in Mali.
World Development Oxford. 1991, 19: 9, pa 1247-1268;
AB: Shea nut butter (karite) is a major cooking fat in semi-arid parts of West Africa. Its preparation by the traditional process involves long and arduous work by women. This article evaluates several labour-saving technologies that have been developed and applied in Mali. A manual press has been developed by the Netherlands Royal Tropical Institute (KIT) with Germany's GTZ. It is suitable for small groups of women where the ability to pay for equipment is limited or shea nut supplies are uncertain and other oilseeds are available. Two more mechanized alternatives have been developed by other donors. The first, a prototype of an animal-driven grinder/kneader, was not accepted in one village in Mali since the people were familiar with a motorized altemative. The animal-driven unit also requires further technical development. The second, a motorized grinder and centrifuge system, may be well suited for a larger, artisanal-scale commercial enterprise. By itself, the motorized
grinder may be appropriate for service pressing of shea kernels as well as grain in larger villages.
Key words: plant fats; Women; Labour intensity; Shea butter; processing; appropriate technology; small businesses; mechanization; rural development; West Africa; Developing Countries; Mali
Sage, C.
Small-scale brewing and rural livelihood: the case of chicha in Bolivia. In: Whatmore, S.;
Lowe, P.; Marsden, T. (eds): Rural enterprise: shifting perspectives on small-scale production; Fulton Publ. London, pp 58-77. Critical Perspectives on rural change series, no.3, BLDSC. Wye College, University of London.
no 1591 in CAB printed bibl. abstract
Hanley, M.L.
After the harvest, World Development (UNDP) 1991, vol 4(1) p.25-27
no 216 in KIT printed bibl abstract
Lockwood, M.
Rice processing in rural Bangladesh, Haryana Agric. Univ. Hissar, Haryana. India Appropriate Technology (UK), 1991, vol 17 (4) p 20-23.
no 278 in KIT printed bibl abstract
Rauch, T.; Bachmann, L.; Braune, S.; Ehrhardt, B.; Faltermeier, G.; Speit, R; Stormer, M.
Small-scale processing at rural centres in Malawi: possibilities of development and promotion. Schriftenreihe des Fachbereichs Internationale Agrarentwicklung, Technische Univ. Berlin (Germany), 1990 no 131, pp 243
no 377 KIT printred bibl. abstract
Steenbergen, W.M.van; Renqvist, U.
[Food and food processing in the tropics] Voedsel en voedselverwerking in de tropen.
Royal Tropical Institute 1990, 103 pp
no 462 KIT printred bibl. abstract
Anand, S., and Padekar, V.S.
Introducing food processing technology in tribal areas: the challenge. In: India Appropriate Technology (UK) 1990, vol.17 (3) p 28-30
no 279 KIT printed bibl. abstract
Wentholt, W.
The acceptability of the Chorkor oven.
In: Proceedings of the FAO expert consultation on fish technology in Africa. Abidjan, Cote d'lvoire, 25-28 April 1988, FAO Fisheries Report, no.400, supplement pp 332-341.
no 1217 CAB printred bibl. abstract
Bargel, G.
[What drives the mills? An example from Africa] Was treibt die Mühlen an? Ein Fallbeispiel aus Afrika.
In: Entwicklung + Ländlicher Raum, 1990, 24(4), p 23-25
nr 1221 CAB printed bibl. see abstract
Joss, S.
To save time: how the Nepalese women's development programme has reduced rural women's labour input in everyday tasks
Rural Development in Practice (UK), 1989, vol 1 (3), p 14-16
no 366 in KIT printed bibl. abstract
UNIFEM
Women and the food cycle, UNIFEM Source Books Series, pp 86
abstract op folder van ITP
Adjebeng Asem, S.
Grating without drudgery,
In: Nigeria Appropriate Technology (UK), 1989, vol 16 (3) p.18-20
no 288 in KIT printed bibl. abstract
Gandar, M.C.; Udik, P.
Evaluation of hotboxes in rural and pert-urban areas.
Development Southern Africa, 1989, 6(2) p 216-226
no 1218 CAB printed bibl., abstract
Purushotham, P.
Promotion of an improved technology in rural industry.
National Bank News Review (Bombay), 1989, no 5(8) p 23-26.
no. 1241 in CAB printed bibl. abstract.
Ancheta, RR.
Arrowroot production and processing: a project on women in agriculture. In: Filipino women In rice farming systems. Manilla, Philippines, IRRI, pp 103-120.
nr 1248 in CAB printed bibl. abstract
Odama, J.S.; Helmuth, J.W.(ed); Johnson, S.R.(ed)
Balancing food production requirements and policies for economic growth.
1988 World Food Conference proceedings. Volume II: issue papers. pp 178-190, Iowa State University Press; Ames, Iowa; USA
AB: The main characteristics of food production in Nigeria are outlined in terms of farm production, postharvest handling, and nutrition requirements. The main issues involved in food policy formation are then discussed concentrating on the population and technology issues. A framework for a balanced food production policy is then proposed which encompasses: peasant farmers and women; cooperatives; incentives; resource allocations; food storage; productivity year-round; consistency; population control; and education. It is concluded that a more viable food policy for the Third World would be one that would emphasize the small farmers as the central motive force of both production and consumption of food. This can be effected by promoting economic growth and raising the real incomes of the peasant farmers. To realize this objective, public policies should be evolved such that substantial resources are shifted to the development of small-scale food crop farms, labour intensive
farm support activities such as small-scale cottage industries, electricity supply and repair workshops, and competitive farm prices.
Key words: Agricultural policy; Population growth; Technology; Food production; food policy; economic growth; Nigeria
Maarse, L.M.; Schoot, C.M.E.van
Rural women in livestock production and rangeland use: observations in five selected villages of the Dhamar Montane Plains
In: Project-Communication (the Netherlands), 1989, no. 34, 60 p.; Aug
AB: The purpose of this report is to identify the tasks, role, activities and position of rural women in 5 villages in the Dhamar Montane Plains, Yemen Arab Republic. The first part describes how women experience the relationship between family members, the division of tasks and a number of daily routines. The second part focuses on 2 important areas of women's work: livestock and fuel collection. The various responsibilities and tasks concerning sheep husbandry, milk processing, the utilization of manure, fuelwood collection and food production are described. It is argued that the production activities in which women play a central role, are labour intensive and traditional. Consequently, production output is low and benefits are marginal. Innovations are recommended in the fields of fodder production, feeding, and milk and manure processing, which are to be incorporated in the Range and Livestock Improvement Project in the Montane Plains.
Key words: agricultural production; livestock; fuelwood; women's role; productivity; Arabian Peninsula, Yemen Arab Republic
Thomas-Emeagwali, G.; Lasisi, R.O.
The food crisis and agro-based technology: gari processing in Nigeria. In: Review of African Political Economy, 1988, no.43, pp 95-99
no 1212 CAB printed bibl. abstract
Longe, O.G.
The role of women in food production, processing and preservation in Nigeria
In: African-Notes (Nigeria).1988, no. 3(special issue) pp 27-35
AB: Not less than 45% of the rural population in Nigeria engaged in the production of both arable crops and livestock are women. In this article food supply from traditional farm holdings and women's involvement in production are discussed. Processing of crops, livestock products, fish and game animals, improving storage and extension of shelf life are activities dominated by women. Traditional methods used on different food items and their effects on the nutrient composition of the products are explored. It is suggested that, even though processing is on a small scale and the overall output may be considered low, food supply from this sector meets to a large extent the food needs of the people. Efforts should be geared towards enhancing productivity. To this end a number of recommendations are made: (a) the introduction of innovations to improve the traditional technology; (b) women should be offered extension services on new farming methods, developed seeds, fertilizer and
herbicide applications and improved processing techniques; (c) adult literacy programmes; (d) credit facilities; and (d) encouragement to form cooperatives.
Key words: women's participation; agricultural production; food processing; food supply; production increase; traditional technology; development potential; Nigeria
Lathouwer, L.de
The introduction of handmills in the Tarime district of Tanzania
In: Vraagbaak (the Netherlands), 1986, vol 14(2) pp 5-16; Jun
AB: In view of the need to reduce the work load of rural women in the Tarime district of Tanzania, handmills for the processing of food crops were introduced in 3 phases: (a) education approval and introduction; (b) evaluation by the women after the trial period; and (c) elaboration of a more coherent handmill programme. This article reports on the general setting, the introduction of handmills and discusses the way in which this technology affects the women within the economic, social, cultural and political relations in a local community.
Key words: food processing; hand tools; technology transfer; Tanzania
Altarelli Herzog, V.
Programmes for the establishment of village mills: what are the conditions for their success in the Sahelian rural environment?
Original title: Les programmes d'installation de moulins villageois: queues conditions pour leur reussite en milieu rural sahelien?.
Rome (Italy) pp 82
Keywords: mills; villages; women; Sahel; Development projects; equipment; cost analysis; finance
Nath, K.
Labor-saving techniques in food processing: rural women and technological change in the Gambia.
Working Paper, African Studies Centre, Boston Universty, pp 26, no 108, 1985
no 1203 van CAB printed bibl. for abstract see there.
Hye, H.A.
Mechanisation in agriculture and women in Bangladesh.
Journal of Social Studies, 1985, no.27, pp 78-100.
Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development, Comilla, Bangladesh.
no.1227 in CAB printed bibl. abstract
Begum, S.
Women and technology: rice processing in Bangladesh.
In: Women in rice farming, Proceedings of a conference on Women in Rice Farming Systems, IRRI, Philippines, 26-30 September 1983. Aldershot, Hants, UK, pp 221-241.
no 1229 CAB printed library, abstract
Srivastava, J.C.
Harnessing technology for eliminating the drudgery of rural women engaged in rice production, processing and utilization.
In: Women in rice farming, Proceedings of a conference on Women in Rice Farming Systems, IRRI, Philippines, 26-30 September 1983. Aldershot, Hants, UK, pp 405-418.
no 1234 CAB printed library, abstract
Watts, S.J.
Rural women as food processors and traders: eko making in the llorin area of Nigeria.
In: The journal of developing areas, 19(1984)1 pp 71-82.
Case study of a labor intensive low-profit activity, the processing and selling of a maize meal snack, eko. key words: post harvest technology; women's roles; women; Nigeria
King-Akerele, O.
Traditional palm oil processing, women's role and the application of appropriate technology. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia; African Training and Research Centre for Women, UN Economic Commission for Africa. pp 52
nr 1202 in CAB printed bibl, see there for abstract
Mukherjee, M.
Impact of modernisation on women's occupation: a case study of the rice-husking industry of Bengal,
In: Indian Economic and Social History Review, 1983, no 20(1) pp 2745.
no 1609 in CAB printed bibl. abstract
Zimmermann, S.D.
The cheese makers of Kafr Al Bahr: the role of Egyptian women in animal husbandry and dairy production.
Cairo [etc]: University of Leiden, pp 55 (Women and development series. Egypt)
Key words: small scale farming; livestock keeping; dairy production; women's roles; women; agriculture; Egypt
Fleuret, P.; Fleuret, A.
Nutrition, Consumption, and Agricultural Change
In: Human-Organization; 1980, 39, 3, fall, pp 250-260.
AB: Problems with indirect intervention strategies designed to raise the nutritional level of the poor in developing countries are analyzed in a review of research on modernization & malnutrition. It is noted that little work has been done on how newer methods of food processing & consumption contribute to malnutrition. Studies showing the adequacies of traditional diets in developing countries are discussed, 8 the following factors involved in nutritional development plans analyzed: changes in crop inventory & diversity as a result of commercialization, depletion of human energy through market-based agriculture & altered food preparation techniques, 8 changes in market composition that can raise the cost of important nutritious foods. In view of the declining nutritional status implied in these development changes, several issues for agricultural policymakers are considered: (1) analyses of dietary intake; (2) variation in income of rural food producers; (3) penalization of
rural food producers; & (4) reduction of peasant control of food production through development strategies, especially where agricultural technology is altered. D. Dunseath (Copyright 1983, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Nutrition, Nutritional; Developing countries; Agriculture, Agricultural; Consumption, Consumptive
<section>4</section>
5 Gender and agricultural technology
5 Gender and agricultural technology
Appleton, H. (ed)
Do if herself, women and technical innovation,
Intermediate Technology Publications, London UK, 256 pp.
abstract op folder van ITP
UNIFEM
Women's roles in technical Innovation, UNIFEM Source Books Series, 88 pp
abstract op folder van ITP
Mitter, S.(ed); Rowbotham, S.(ed)
Women encounter technology, perspectives of the Third World;
UNU/INTECH Studies in new technologies and development; pp 376; Routledge, London
Schoemaker, A.
Gender issues in agricultural engineering, Paper to be presented at the International Seminar on Women in Agriculture and their Participation in Development of Agricultural Technologies, 17-20 January 1995, Beijing China. FAO, Rome 8p.
Bryceson, D.F.
Easing rural women's working day in sub-Saharan Africa.
In: Development policy review 12(1994)1. pp 59-68.
Key words: women's roles; small scale farming; households; agricultural labour; Africa
Bryceson, D.F.; MacCall, M.
Lightening the load: women's labour and appropriate rural technology in Sub-Saharan Africa. Working Paper vol 21, African Studies Centre, Leiden, the Netherlands.
Ademola, Ade
Women Farmers in Ondo State, Nigeria
In: Journal of Anthropological Research; 1994, 50, 3, fall, pp 311-326.
AB: The status of women in the agricultural labor force in Nigeria & the demographic, family structure, agricultural technology, 8 educational variables that impact their productive activities were examined through farm visitations 8 interview of 102 female farmers (FFs) in 3 communities of Ekitiland. FFs tended to be ages 30-59, illiterate, monogamously married, 8 pursuing farming as their primary occupation. FFs chose farming as their primary occupation for family sustenance, not out of economic necessity. The majority of FFs lived with their husbands 8 desired more children, primarily for old age security & not for assistance on the farm. FFs worked an average of nearly 28 hours per week on the farm. Nearly 45% of them controlled the financial yield from the farm produce. Major problems encountered by FFs were crop failure, labor shortages, & lack of credit facilities. Tables, 12 References. Adapted from the source document. (Copyright 1995, Sociological Abstracts, Inc.,
all rights reserved.)
Key words: Nigeria; Agricultural Workers; Females; Farmers; Labor Force Participation; Socioeconomic Factors; Rural Women
Mputela, M.N.; K raft, S.E.
Women farmers' role in managing cassava production in Bandundu, Zaire.
In: Journal for Farming Systems Research Extension. 1994, 4: 2, pp 57-70
AB: Women farmers in many developing countries contribute more than 60% of the effort involved in production of food crops. Consequently, in countries such as Zaire, it is important to analyse the contribution of women to food production and to relate it to national policies of food security. To enhance the productive capability of women farmers, it is necessary to provide them with information that they can use in making better allocative and technical decisions. These decisions relate to the use of land, labour, and capital. In addition, there are decisions related to credit, market access, and the use of 'improved inputs' such as fertilizer and seed. Data derived from a farm-level survey of women farmers in Bandundu are useful in assessing what women farmers are doing now, and for making recommendations for the future. In this study, a Cobb-Douglas production function is estimated, based on cross-sectional data collected from women farmers in three subregions of Bandundu
during the summer of 1990. The production of cassava is analysed using data on eight variable inputs along with information of the women's use of credit and extension training. Female labour, male labour, seed, tools, market access, credit, and training were found to have a positive impact on cassava production in Bandundu. Results are interpreted in terms of farm-level managerial decision making and macro-policy.
Key words: food crops; food production; farm inputs; productivity; women; cassava; production functions; female labour, roles; production; rural development; Zaire
Appleton, H.; Scott, A.
Gender Issues in Agricultural Technology Development, ITDG, Paper presented at the 12th Panel of Experts on Agricultural Engineering, FAO, Rome
Bryceson, D.F.
Easing rural women's working day in sub-Saharan Africa.
In: Working Paper African Studies Centre, Vol. 16; Leiden, the Netherlands. pp 26
Mwaka, V.M.
Agricultural production and women's time budgets in Uganda.
In: Momsen, J.H.; Kinnaird, V. (eds.), Different places, different voices: gender and development in Africa, Asia and Latin America. London [etc.]: Routledge, 1993. - pp 322 pp 46-51.
This chapter examines rural women's problems of time budgeting and agricultural production in eastern Uganda. It focuses on the effects of drudgery and time limitations on women's contribution to the agricultural sector and outlines possible remedies for the plight of these women
Key words: women's roles; development; agricultural work; technology; women, Uganda
Lundborg,G.
A millennial means of transport - the woman.
In: Journal of rural cooperation 21(1993)1 pp 73-81.
By using their heads, 80 percent of all women throughout the five continents are a means of transport. They are both a carter and their own cart, as shown by iconography during the last five thousand years. The article is part of a study related to iconography in the rural world
Key words: women's roles; transport; history; agricultural activities; women
Martinson, V.A.
Constraints to adoption of new technologies by women in developing countries.
Working Paper Series - FAO Research Development Centre (FAO)
Rome (Italy): 1992. pp 25, no. 12
Key words: education; training; women; constraints; social; consciousness
Gillespie, S.; McNeill, G.
Food production.
In: Food, health and survival in India and developing countries, 1992 pp 48-60; Oxford
University Press; New Delhi; India
AB: In this chapter the forces and relationships involved in food production, with the exception of labour, are examined. A description of the agro-climatic conditions that prevail in the village of Devarishikuppam, Tamil Nadu, is first given, prior to characterizing the agricultural system through a description of the following features: types of crops grown; patterns of land ownership and the quality and quantity of land owned; water supply; livestock technologies and tools used; and other agricultural inputs. Finally, in order to examine socioeconomic differences in the energy intakes, activity patterns and nutritional state of individual men and women, study households were classified into groups on the basis of the quantity and quality of land they own. Surveys were conducted at four points in the agricultural cycle to enable seasonal differences in these variables to be examined. From this, the type of timing of energy stress is characterized along with the type of
adjustments made in response.
Key words: agricultural households; water, livestock; technology; farm inputs; nutritional state; food production; nutrition; households; surveys; rural development; India; Tamil Nadu
Ikpi, A.
Household time allocation: the ultimate determinant of improved agricultural technology adoption in Nigeria: an empirical activity interphase impact model.
In: Peters, G.H.; Stanton, B.F.; Tyler, G.J.(eds), Sustainable agricultural development.
Aldershot [etc]: Dartmouth, 1992. pp 704; pp 481-501.
Key words: households; agricultural labour; agricultural mechanisation; women; gender, farmers; Nigeria
Salick, J.
Subsistence and the single woman among the Amuesha of the Upper Amazon, Peru.
In: Society and natural resources 5(1992)1 pp 37-51.
Among the Amuesha (Yanesha) indigenous people, single women practice agriculture differently and opportunistically construct subsistence strategies differently than most tribal members. Single women cross gender-defined boundaries that traditionally determined participation in subsistence. Single women cultivate small lowland fields cut from young secondary regrowth. Crop density is high while diversity is lower because crops needing heavy labor are avoided. Crop rotation is delayed, resulting in fields that are older than normal. Home gardens are important. In a broader context, creative subsistence strategies are opportunistically developed using child labor, barter, and cash. Off-farm employment may be important. These trends may represent acculturation or some creative development within the larger trend of feminization of agriculture in Latin America
Key words: small scale farming; subsistence; women; households; agriculture; women's roles; Peru
Ng, C.
Malay women and rice production in west Malaysia.
In: Afshar, H.(ed), Women, development and survival in the Third World. London [etc.]: Longman, 1991 pp 325 p. pp 188-210
The central question in this chapter is: What happens to the division of labour and gender relations when advanced mechanisation is practiced in the rice sector in rural Malaysia
Key words: agricultural mechanisation; women's roles; agricultural labour, rice; women; Malaysia
Coppock, D.L.
Haymaking by pastoral women for improved calf management in Ethiopia: labour requirements, opportunity costs, and feasibility of intervention..
In: Journal for farming systems research-extension 2(1991)3 pp 51-68.
Key words: pastoralism; livestock keeping; cattle; fodder; women's roles; women; Ethiopia
Warren, K.B.;Bourque, S.C.
Women, technology and international development ideologies: analyzing feminist voices.
In: Leonardo, M.di (ed), Gender at the crossroads of knowledge: feminist anthropology in the Postmodern Era. Berkeley [etc]: University of California Press pp 422, pp 278-311.
Comparison of several frameworks that are used for technological development in developing countries, and feminist critiques on those perspectives
Key words: technology; women's roles; women; anthropology
Herpen, D.van (ed); Ashby, J A.
The participation of women and children in Latin American and Caribbean agriculture.
In: Gender analysis in agricultural research: proceedings of an internal workshop CIAT, Palmira, Colombia 13-14 June, 1991. pp 49-90; CIAT Publication No. 204
AB: This paper reviews the literature on the participation of women and children in agricultural activities in Latin America and the Caribbean. The review focuses on participation through labour in agriculture overall and in certain agricultural activities in particular. Also reviewed are the rural family's access to and capacity for decision-making on resources. Factors influencing such participation are analysed, such as farm size, land ownership, income levels, racial origin, and destiny of production. A hypothesis proposes that agriculture within this region is becoming increasingly dominated by women. The implications this phenomenon would have for the design and transfer of agricultural technology are analysed. The significant role played by women and children in food production is demonstrated and the importance of involving them in the development of agricultural technology in order to guarantee its adoption is highlighted. It is proposed that the gender variable
should become an integral part of ClAT's research. Case studies on CIAT commodities (beans, cassava, rice, and tropical pastures) are included, together with statistical information.
Key words: Agricultural manpower; female labour; child labour, agricultural sector, rural development; Latin America; Caribbean
Okorji, E.C.; Obiechina, C.O.B.
Implications of overdependence on women's labour for food production in a traditional farming system of Anambra State, Nigeria.
In: Culture and Agriculture. 1990, No. 40, pp 7-11
AB: Education and the associated mobility of women tend to reduce the ability and willingness of subsequent generations of women to contribute significantly to farm work Focusing on traditional farming systems in Anambra State, Nigeria, the study determines the utilization of male and female labour in a representative farming community so as to: (1) identify relative labour contributions by gender, (2) recognize constraints to labour substitution; and (3) make recommendations for supplementing the expected decline of female labour in agricultural production. The study area of Abakaliki represents a large portion of the humid, yam- producing zone of Nigeria. Selected farm households were visited and family members were interviewed at intervals of 2 weeks during two 12 month periods, April 1981 to March 1982, and April 1983 to March 1984. Data were collected on farm operations, the role of men and women in decision making for farm production and home management, marketing
activities, and household domestic chores, among others. Findings showed female labour contributions to outweigh those of males. The substitution of labour by gender was restricted due to cultural proscriptions of certain crops and farm operations. School enrollment rates have been used to indicate that the next generation of women, more educated than their mothers, cannot be expected to provide the same level of labour in the traditional farming systems. Suggestions for reducing the dependence on and inflexibility of female labour in farm operations include: use of herbicides, live mulches, and crop rotation; use of improved seeds, fertilizers and semi- mechanized equipment; and rural development programmes. Unless alternatives are sought to compensate for the shortfall in female labour inputs, crop output and rural-family welfare could be adversely affected.
Key words: Education; Farm inputs; Crops; Sexual roles; Men; Agricultural production; Women; female labour, substitution; traditional farming; rural development; West Africa; Developing Countries; Nigeria
Tully, D.; Karablieh, E.K.; Salem, M.A.; Tully, D. (ed)
The impact of technology on employment in the rainfed farming areas of Irbid district, Jordan.
In: Labor, employment and agriculture/ development in west Asia and north Africa. 1990, pp 7-30; Kluwer Academic Publishers; Dordrecht; Netherlands
AB: There is said to be great potential for increasing the production of wheat and legumes in the rainfed areas of Jordan, but for the constraints to technology adoption. This chapter describes the salient features of Jordanian rainfed agriculture in terms of land tenure, demography, the labour force and technology, and evaluates the impact of technology on employment. Data were collected from 50 farmers in the villages of Nu'aima, Husun and Al-Shajara, in Irbid District, with respect to family size, land tenure, hired labour, farm machinery, institutional linkages, animal husbandry and farm income. The role of women is also focused upon as they have been known to make valuable contributions to Jordanian agriculture. Results indicate that family size, area planted in crops, number of males, village site, and age and health of the farmer are statistically significant factors that affect labour input and technology adoption. In conclusion, agricultural production in these
areas is dependent on hired labour, the details of which are summarized. Women are found to contribute as little as 20% of the total hours in this process while migrant labour is engaged in relatively unskilled activities.
Key words: Innovation adoption; Women; Employment; Technology; Wheat; production possibilities; farm workers; evaluation; Legumes; Jordan
Jiggins, J.; Altieri, M.A. (ed); Hecht, S.B. (ed)
Gender issues in agricultural technology development.
In: Agroecology and small farm development. 1990, pp 45-51 CRC Press Inc.; Boca Raton, Fla.; USA
AB: Gender issues in agricultural technology development are focused on. In spite of a general perception of the vital role of women in agricultural production, some models and concepts still undermining this reality are identified and discussed. The prevalent model of modal rural households assumes a male head who acts as the single farm decision maker and many economic models of farm enterprises assume a commonality of interest among household members. Similarly, the conceptual and modelling biases of studies of production, commodities and annual field monocrops, and the focus on single utilities are also discussed, drawing examples from several developing countries. It is suggested that irrationality and waste of research and extension inevitably result in a non-adoption of technological innovation. It is concluded that entrenched nominative and methodological problems continue to inhibit adequate data collection, conceptualization and model building in agricultural
research and extension. However, greater interest is being shown in gender issues as vital areas of agricultural research and extension.
Key words: Women; Innovation adoption; Woman's status; agricultural production; technology; models; terminology; rural development; Developing Countries
Faure, G.; Jallas, E.; Djagni, K.
Farmers' strategies and technical innovations for agriculture in difficulty. Poissongui, a village in northern Togo. II. Limited alternatives to ensure the sustainability of cropping systems.
French title: Strategies paysannes et innovations techniques pour une agriculture en difficulte. Poissongui, un village du Nord-Togo. II. Pour assurer la reproductivite des systemes de culture: des alternatives limitees.
In: Coton et Fibres Tropicales. 1990, 45: 1, pp 5-25
AB: The findings of field surveys carried out on 20 farms in Poissongui village, in the densely populated cotton production zone in northern to monitor cropping systems are discussed. The structural functions of farm operations and the sexual division of labour are also discussed. Wage labour is limited except in animal traction. The heterogeneity of the environment encouraged the evolution of 3 distinct cropping systems to meet diverse production objectives: these are the compound fields, marshland and remote field cropping systems. An attempt is made to justify the cereal-cotton mixed cropping practice. Cereal monocropping with low fertilizer use results in yield reduction, posing a serious threat to food security. Cotton, and to a lesser extent groundnuts, is fertilized and hence plays an important role in agricultural development. The surveys demonstrate the viability of continuous intensified cropping systems. Alternatives are also proposed to improve aggregate farming
systems and farmers' immediate food and cash requirements.
Key words: Groundnuts; Continuous cropping; Mixed cropping; Monoculture; Farming systems; Cotton; cereals; cropping systems; technical progress; surveys; farm surveys; rural development; fibre plants; Togo
Whalen, I.
Development of Agricultural Technology for Women: Some ILCA Experiences in the Ethiopian Highlands
In: SAGE; 1990, 7, 1, summer, pp 28-32
AB: Drawing on case studies from research in the Ethiopian highlands, the importance of & barriers for women in the adoption of agricultural technology is investigated. Social conditions 8 attitudes persist that do not support the full recognition of women as agricultural producers; eg, their limited access to land, labor, & capital continues to constrain the uptake of new technologies, perceived largely as belonging to the male domain. While the integration of social scientists into international research centers to work with technical scientists has helped to focus concerns on the sociocultural issues related to technology development & adoption, women are still perceived as beneficiaries rather than users & are often overlooked in the collection of baseline data. Additionally, women do not receive the necessary training in existing technology that can help to increase overall productivity. An increase in professional female staff in on-fame research programs, as well as
creativity, patience, realistic goals, & continuing commitment, are recommended. 1 Table. S. Millett (Copyright 1993, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Ethiopia; Agricultural Development; Agricultural Technology, Womens Roles; Working Women
Sajogyo, P.; Paris, T.
Integrating women's concerns into farming systems research.
In: Progress in irrigated rice research. Selected papers and abstracts from the International Rice Research Conference, 21-25 September 1987, Hangzhou, China. Pp 205-215.
AB: Women in Asia play important roles in farming systems. Although they are visibly integrated into various production and income-earning activities as farm managers and wage labourers, consideration of their roles has not yet been integrated into research and into technology development. Projects to increase food production and income and to promote farm household welfare do not take sufficient account of women's current and potential contributions. Studies in Indonesia, Philippines, and other Asian countries show that women provide more than 30%-50% of the total labour in agriculture. Awareness among agricultural researchers about women's roles as users and beneficiaries of technology is growing. Involving women in designing, testing, and transferring existing and emerging technologies remains a major challenge. Coordinated efforts in international national research programmes are needed to integrate women's concerns into the agricultural and extension programmes dealing
with rice farming systems. Active involvement of biological Dentists, social scientists, engineers, and trainers is essential if work in the Women in Rice Farming Systems (WIRFS) network is to lead to the desired goal: increasing women's income, and thereby the welfare of the entire family.
Key words: Women; Extension; Rice; female labour; sexual roles; technology transfer, participation; agricultural research; farming systems; Economics; labour; rural development; Indonesia; Philippines; Developing Countries; Asia
FAO
<El> impacto de la tecnologia agricola en las actividades productivas de las mueres en America Latina y El Caribe
The impact of technology on the production activities of women in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Direccion de Recursos Humanos, Instituciones y Reforma Agraria, FAO Rome, Italy Diez anos de actividades complementarias (1979-1989). Rome 1989. pp 34 Conference: Consulta Gubernamental sobre las Actividades Complementarias de la CMRADR en America Latina y El Caribe 5 (Guatemala City (Guatemala), 21-25 Aug 1989)
Key words: female labour; male labour; farm management; production
Bajaj, S.S.; Banchare, I.
Research in agricultural communication. A neglected area: farm women
In: Communication and Indian agriculture. New Delhi, Sage, 1989, pp 271-276
AB: This article argues that in spite of the fact that women in India play a vital role in farming, extension scientists have not paid much attention to them. At present, modem agricultural technology is aimed at male tasks and is used exclusively by men. It is argued that it is essential for the National Agricultural Production Programme to introduce modem technologies for the tasks done by farm women. Mass communication of new farming ideas through various channels which engage the involvement of farm women is also advocated. So far, research carried out on agricultural communication particularly for women is limited. Several strategies, including special training programmes to improve the knowledge and skills of farm women and research on their socio-economic and psychological characteristics, are suggested.
Key words: agricultural technology; farmers; women; information transfer; mass media; training programmes; India
Braun, J.von; Kesseba, A.M.(ed.)
Technology utilization in the agriculture of developing countries: elements of poverty-oriented policy and programmes.
In: Technology systems for small farmers: issues end options. 1989, pp 167-190; Westview Press; Boulder, Colorado; USA
AB: The paper presents a highlight of the rationale for and the need to rapidly expand the generation and utilization of new agricultural production technology in developing countries, addressing issues that have implications for its success. It is argued that although the growth rates of food production in developing countries have been declining, increased food production alone is not a sufficient solution for household food insecurity and malnutrition. It is important for new production techniques to raise labour productivity, increase employment and hence the demand for food in order to be of benefit to the vulnerable group. It is suggested that improved education becomes more relevant in enhancing potentials for utilization as technology generation becomes more complex. Also, the need to focus on critical issues of gender in labour productivity, risks in prices, production profitability and sustainability is also stressed. It is suggested that in order to alleviate
poverty in rural economy, the new technology must be cheap, simple and adaptable to specific rural environments.
Key words: Malnutrition; Female labour; Agricultural development; appropriate technology; poverty; Technology transfer; rural development; Developing Countries
Kesseba, A.M. (ed)
Technology systems for small farmers: issues and options.
pp 229pp Westview Press; Boulder, Colorado; USA
AB: The book is a product of a seminar on Generation and transfer of technology for poor small farmers, organized by the international Fund for Agricultural Development held in Seoul, Korea Republic in 1988. The main objective was to seek a better understanding of issues and options related to technology generation and eventual transfer to poor small farmers. The discussions recognize the importance of paying particular attention to the technology requirements of small farmers and the need for testing such improved technologies within their environment. The issues of effective transfer systems, research and extension linkage are raised; the vital role of women in agricultural production and hence the concern for household food security forms the basis for an assessment of gender issues. Time and labour-saving technologies should be designed for women while improving their access to credit. To be effective in alleviating poverty new technologies must, in general, raise labour
productivity, be labour-using and hence raise the real incomes of the vulnerable groups. Also, the need for substantial investment in rural infrastructure is stressed.
Key words: Technology transfer; small farms; appropriate technology; Farms; rural development; Developing Countries
Rahama, A.; Hoogenboom, A.
Women farmers, technological innovation and access to development projects
In: Development (Italy).1988, no. 4, pp 71-77
AB: An overview is presented of the role of women in agriculture in Sudan. Their participation in agricultural production amounts to 87% in the non-market economy and 10% in the mechanized sector. Specific attention is given to their work in Kordofan and Darfur, 2 western regions where they participate in crop farming and pastoralism. The following aspects of their working position are reviewed: ownership, use of technology and legal rights. It is concluded that most integrated development projects for small farmers in these regions lack planning and means to reach women farmers; the organization of grassroots organizations is recommended whereby women can be involved in the preparatory stages of projects and receive appropriate technological training.
Key words: women workers; rural women; small farmers; agricultural production; land ownership; legal aspects; agricultural technology; Sudan, Darfur, Kordofan
Stamp, P.
Technology power in Africa.
Technical Study, International Development Research Centre, Canada, no IDRC TS63e, pp 185
no 1197 of CAB printed bibl. abstract
Bahar, S.
Women's role in barani crop production in management activities - a research study
In: Progressive Farming (Pakistan); 1988; vol 8(3) pp 31-35
Key words: Pakistan, role of women; rain fed farming; cultivation; harvesting; storage
Muzaffar, N.
Appropriate technologies for improving economic condition of rural women
In: Progressive Farming (Pakistan); 1988; vol 8(1) pp 28-33;
Key words: Pakistan; Rural population, appropriate technology; women; apiculture; poultry; fish culture; sericulture; edible fungi; cultivation;
Bolabola, C.
Appropriate technology for women: has it worked?
In: Environment and Pacific women: from the globe to the village. Suva (Fiji), Fiji Association of Women graduates, pp 13-18
no 320 in KIT printed bibl abstract
Indian Farming
Women in agriculture
Indian Farming (India) 1988, vol 38(8), special issue, 80 p.; Nov
AB: Throughout India women are involved in all kinds of agricultural operations: sowing, transplanting, weeding, manuring, harvesting. These operations are discussed in this special issue which is the result of an ICAR project to study the participation of women in agriculture and the impact of the modernization of agriculture on them. The majority of the 22 articles describe activities of women in various parts of India: hill women in Uttar Pradesh, women from me modernized wheat fields in Haryana, fisherwomen in Bengal and Orissa, and tribal and low-caste women. The final articles analyse ways to improve the position of rural women. It is argued that there is a large gap in research and extension efforts for men and for women. Technology. to upgrade the skills and tools of farm women and to reduce the household chores is required. For landless women, special policies are considered necessary. These should be directed towards correcting market developments which displace
women from agriculture and towards improving their wage position. Finally, a number of ICAR special programmes for women in the field of education and training, research and the transfer of technology are mentioned.
Key words: agricultural production; women's participation; modernization; agricultural extension; appropriate technology; agricultural policy; India
Denoon, D. (ed);Snowden, C. (ed)
A history of agriculture in Papua New Guinea. A time to plant and a time to uproot
Boroko (Papua New Guinea), Institute of Papua New Guinea Studies, 198?, pp 356; bibliography (p. 313-342)
AB: A study was made of the history of agriculture in Papua New Guinea. Chapters were devoted to: agricultural systems; agricultural technology; agricultural production on the eve of colonialism; Papuan village agriculture 1884-1960; coffee on the Eastern Highlands; agriculture, land tenure and land law to 1971; copra co-operatives; agricultural marketing organizations; plantations; women in highlands agricultural production; rural policies 1945-1977, and subsidy cycles in consumer/producer societies.
Key words: agricultural history; farming systems; choice of technology; agrarian structure; marketing; plantation; government policy; women; Papua New Guinea
Escalada, M.M.; Binongo, S.G.
Women in root crop technology.
In: Filipino women in rice farming systems, Manilla, Philippines. IRRI, pp 121-131.
nr 1249 CAB printed bibl. abstract
Moore, H.; Vaughan, M.
Cutting down trees: women, nutrition and agricultural change in the northern province of Zambia, 1920-1986
In: African-Affairs (UK) 1987 vol 86(345) pp 523-540; Oct
AB: This article describes how the problems of food shortages and poor nutrition have been viewed by government and development planners within a long-term historical perspective (1920-1986) in Zambia. It discusses how their perception of food problems, and the proposed solution to these problems, were and are still governed by their attitudes to the agricultural production system. In particular some of the myths of the slash and bum agricultural system in Northern Zambia are deconstructed by focusing on women's labour. It is suggested that the intensification of women's labour in make cash cropping families, has contributed to the apparent increase in the incidence of child malnutrition in the more commercialized households.
Key words: agricultural production; farming systems; women; labour; food shortage; malnutrition; Zambia
Osuala, J.D,C.
Extending appropriate technology to rural African women.
In: Women's studies international forum 10(1987)5 pp 481-487
Key words: technology; appropriate technology; women, Africa
Due, J.M.
Women and technology in African smallholder agriculture.
Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois, 1987. pp 25 Illinois Agricultural Economics Staff paper. Series E, Agricultural economics; 87E-381
Key words: small scale agriculture; women; technology
Carr, M.; Sandhu, R.
Women, technology and rural productivity; An analysis of the impact of time and energy saving technologies on women.
UNIFEM Occasional paper no.6, New York; pp 77
FAO
Women, food production, and home and farm technologies in Asia.
FAO Human Resources, Institutions and Agrarian Reform Division, Rome (Italy Conference: international Seminar on Women in Agriculture and Rural Development in Asia, China, Feb 1986. and May 1986. pp 29
Key words: Asia; role of women; food production; appropriate technology; female labour; technology transfer
Jiggins, J.
Gender-related impacts and the work of the international agricultural research centers
Study Paper Consultative Group on international Agricultural Research (USA). no 17, 103 p., bibliography (p. 87-95);
AB: The goals of international agricultural research centres cannot be achieved if women's roles in production and food systems are not taken into account. In that context this report discusses: (1) gender relations in agricultural development programmes and projects; (2) seed technology and gender issues; (3) methodology; (4) research-extension linkages; (5) the effects of neglecting women as mediated through the household and wider society; and (6) the impact of technical change in agriculture on women in Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean and Sub-Saharan Africa. Implications for agricultural research and technology development are presented, emphasizing the need for. (1) study of the intrinsic links between varietal characteristics and domestic food processing, preservation and preparation technologies; (2) research on intra-household allocation of resources and obligations; (3) research which shifts the balance of decision making closer to the collaborative model of
commercial and industrial technology development; (4) consideration with other agencies of coordinated action to sustain rural livelihood potential; and (5) recognition of women as social and economic actors in their own right.
Key words: agricultural research; women's role; women's participation; research policy; agricultural production; agricultural extension; technological change; research needs; Africa, Sub Saharan Africa
Stephens, A.
Yes, technology is gender-neutral, but... women in Asia might not agree.
In: Ceres 18(1985)6 pp. 32-35
Key words: female labour; technology transfer; role of women; employment;
Stevens, Y.
Improved technologies for rural women: problems and prospects in Sierra Leone.
In: Ahmed, I.(ed), Technology and rural women: conceptual and empirical issues, London,
George Allen and Unwin, pp 284-326.
no.1216 in CAB printed bibl. see abstract.
Scott, G.L.; Carr, M.
The impact of technology choice on rural women in Bangladesh: problems and opportunities.
Washington: World Bank, 1985. pp 107 World Bank staff working papers no. 731
Key words: women's work; agriculture; processing technology of agricultural products; Bangladesh
ISNAR
The users' perspective in international and national agricultural research
A background document prepared for a CGIAR inter - center seminar on women and agricultural technology March 25 - 29, 1985, Bellagio, Italy.
The Hague: international Service for National Agricultural Research pp 264 the Netherlands
Key words: women; mechanisation in agriculture; third world
<section>5</section>
6 Gender division of labour in agriculture
6 Gender division of labour in agriculture
Smetsers, M.
Gender and agrarian change in Senegal: cooperation and conflict.
In: Agrarian Questions: the politics of farming anno 1995: Proceedings, edited by the Agrarian Questions Organising Committee, Wageningen, Volume IV, pp 1559-1574, Wageningen Agricultural University, the Netherlands.
Bryceson, D.F.
African women hoe cultivators: speculative origins and current enigmas.
In: Bryceson, D.F.(ed), Women wielding the hoe; lessons from rural Africa for feminist theory and development practice; pp 282; Berg Oxford UK; pp 3-22
Sperling, L.; Berkowitz, P.
Partners in selection: bean breeders and women bean experts in Rwanda.
Consultative Group on international Agricultural Research (CGIAR); Washington USA, pp
AB: This study is based on collaborative work carried out by the Centro Internacional de Agricultural Tropical (CIAT) and the Institut des Sciences Agronomiques du Rwanda. It is the first of two cases illustrating the impact of and approaches to including women's knowledge and interests in agricultural research. In this case, the farmer experts are women who are responsible for most of the bean production in Rwanda. The case illustrates that locally sensitive approaches, respect and careful listening have high payoffs in the delivery and adoption of a set of high performing varieties flitting location-specific microniches and meeting the needs of smallholder bean producers in Rwanda. Despite the war in Rwanda, years of collaborating with the farmers has taught researchers the principles which make the seed relief efforts possible. Germplasm needs to be targeted to specific agriculture zones; multiple varieties encourage stable and reliable production; and skilled farmers
need options with which to shape a productive future. Given the correct tools, and appropriate genetic material, skilled Rwandan farmers will start to rebuild their agricultural economy.
Key words: beans; plant breeding; research; participation; women; gender relations; indigenous knowledge; plant genetic resources; Rwanda
Tisch, Sol.; Paris, T.R
Labor Substitution in Philippine Rice Farming Systems: An Analysis of Gender Work Roles
In: Rural Sociology; 1994, 59, 3, fall, pp 497-514
AB: Technology use is likely to be less labor-constrained K the work roles of men 8 women are flexible. Labor substitution between farming husbands 8 wives then occurs in response to economic pressures rather than being restricted by predetermined gender roles. Here, survey data from 79 households in 4 villages are drawn on to explore the effect of rice technology adoption on gendered work roles of husbands & wives in 2 rice ecosystems in the Philippines. Results indicate that work roles are more fluid than suspected, & labor substitution occurs between husbands & wives in response to economic opportunities. The adoption of the labor-saving direct-seeded rice technique releases wives' labor on partially-irrigated rice farms more than on rainfed rice farms. 3 Tables, 25 References. Adapted from the source document. (Copyright 1995, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Philippines; Spouses; Agricultural Technology; Sexual Division of Labor;
Lund, R.; Panda, S.M.
The role of gender in the quest for sustainable agricultural development.
In: Norsk Geografisk Tidsskrift; 48; 3; pp 113-122;
AB: This paper sets an agenda for creating both sustainable livelihoods and sustainable agricultural systems which benefit both genders. The contribution women make to agriculture in the Third World is discussed, and two case studies concerning gender roles in subsistence and rainfed agriculture are presented to highlight the impact of natural resource use on gender. The two studies, one on the role of women in shifting cultivation in the Koraput district of India, and the other in permanent paddy cultivation in the dry zone of Sri Lanka, provide an insight into the ways in which traditional farming communities have responded to changing economic, social, and physical structures, and how this has affected their sustainable livelihoods. It concludes that the political economy of sustainable agriculture must entail a gender perspective, gender sensitive policies and practices. This, it is suggested, is because biologically women have a closer affinity with the natural
environment than do men. The case studies indicate how, under changed conditions, (such as the introduction of a market economy, population growth) there is a renegotiation of gender roles and gender based divisions of labour.
Key words: dry farming subsistence farming; shifting cultivation; case studies; natural resources; female labour; farming systems; environment; sustainability; rural development; Sri Lanka; India
Varma, S.K.; Sinha, B.P.
Inter - gender sharing of drudgery in cultivation of major crops.
In: Indian journal of extension education 27(1991)1/2 pp 18-23
Key words: influence of technological development; agricultural labour; agriculture; wheat, rice; women; India
Kaur, M.; Sharma, M.L.; Darque, M.B. (ed); Gasson, R.(ed)
Role of women in rural development.
In: Women in agriculture. A selection of papers presented at a workshop at the World Congress for Rural Sociology held in Bologna, Italy, in July 1988. Journal of Rural Studies. 1991, 7: 1-2, 11-16; Part l: Women's work and transformations in agricultural production, BLDSC.
AB: Indian women, and rural women in particular, play many social and economic roles inside as well as outside the home, but their contribution does not receive due recognition. They have been excluded from the various training and rural development programmes which usually involve the menfolk, being offered only programmes related to child health, nutrition, etc. This can be attributed to the planners' neglect of the contributions and potential of women. The paper examines the participation of rural women in home and farm activities in the state of Haryana, India. It indicates the invisibility of the majority of women, who act as unpaid workers on the family farm Care of livestock is a female domain but as dairy work is becoming modernized, women are losing control of both management and economic returns. Training of women in animal husbandry is found to be totally neglected. The level of improved household technology, too, is very unsatisfactory, especially in backward
regions where the majority of women are still working with age-old tools. Over half the respondents had no leisure time. The paper suggests a number of measures to help rural women, whose working day is often considerably longer than that of men.
Key words: Rural women; Women; female labour; family farms; rural development; Developing Countries; South Asia; India; Haryana
Jacoby, H.G.
Productivity of men and women and the sexual division of labor in peasant agriculture of the Peruvian Sierra.
In: Journal of Development Economics. 1991, 37: 1-2, pp 265-287
AB: Both men and women represent important sources of labour in Peru's rural economy but each have distinct and separate roles. This paper estimates the productivity of men and women in the peasant agriculture of the Peruvian Sierra, using recent household survey data. A sexual division of labour on the farm implies that male and female labour are not perfectly substitutable. Evidence is found for female specialization in livestock production. A translog production function reveals that the use of animal traction and land affect the marginal productivity of male and female labour differently, suggesting that the two types of labour cannot be aggregated. Overall, adult male labour is found to contribute more to farm output at the margin than adult female labour, though the extent of the difference is sensitive to how farm output and the labour inputs are measured.
Key words: Female labour, Men; Livestock farming; Peasant farming labour productivity; division of labour; sexual roles; productivity; rural development; Latin America; Developing Countries; South America; Peru
Harry, I.S.; Thorpe, T.A.
Agriculture in Trinidad: A Comparison of Male and Female Participants
In: Social and Economic Studies; 1990, 39, 2, June, pp 79-103
AB: Gender differences in labor contributions to agriculture in Trinidad are investigated, based on questionnaires administered to 130 Trinidad households measuring 184 agriculture 8 work-related variables. Most farmers originated from the East Indies. Though both husbands & wives had similar social & economic backgrounds men tended to be older & have more education. Farm land was owned by both spouses 8 both shared the responsibility for major & minor crops; however, overall responsibility for the family farm 8 crop selection tended to be the task of the husband. Men 8 women worked similar hours during the day 8 similar numbers of days in both slow 8 busy times, but women spent more time caring for animals, while men dominated sugar cane production. In households in which husbands had off-farm employment, women assumed the responsibility for daily care 8 maintenance of plants & animals. 6 Tables, 3 Figures, 16 References. D. Generoli (Copyright 1991, Sociological Abstracts,
Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Trinidad And Tobago; Sex Differences; Agricultural Production; Farmers; Working Women; Womens Roles
Hakangard, A.
Women in shifting cultivation, Luang Prabang Province, Lao PDR
Report Development Study Unit, Department of Social Anthropology, University of Stockholm; No. 18; pp 29
AB: The report presents the findings of a consultancy in Luang Prabang Province, Lao, concerning women's roles and the significance of gender in farming systems based on had, shifting cultivation. Data were collected from 8 villages in May/June 1990 on living conditions, employment and productive activities of women; on women's uses of the forest and forest products; and on the role of the forest in women's contribution to family, economic and social life. Women are the primary collectors of fuel and food for home consumption. Because of their traditional reliance on forestry resources, women are often major repositories of essential knowledge concerning the range of forest products available in their area, the seasonality of product availability and the uses of such products. Their food base has become less varied as the habitat for many game and plant species has been destroyed by increased forest clearing. Women's general health status is low. They go through many
childbirths and they know nothing about birth control. Child mortality is unacceptably high (33%) and women and children do not get the medical attention they need. Women's working tasks are manifold and their working-days are long. Most women do not think about the future and have difficulty in seeing what to do to change their living conditions. The women have very few choices. Their activities revolve only around the subsistence needs of the household, most particularly food production.
Key words: Female labour; shifting cultivation; women; roles; forest products; subsistence; rural development; South East Asia; Developing Countries; Lao
Diokno, G.R.
Participation of upland women: a determinant in the success of forestry programs
In: Vergara, N.P.; Fernandez, R.A. (eds), Social forestry in Asia: factors that influence program implementation; SEARCA; College, Laguna (Philippines); pp 135-153
Key words: Philippines; forestry development; role of women; clearing; planting; weeding; harvesting;
Storm-Furru, I.; Vandsemb, B.H.
Agricultural intensification in the dry zone of Sri Lanka. Impacts on farming practices, welfare and women's work
In: Norsk Geografisk Tidsshrift (Norway); Norwegian Journal of Geography (Norway); 1989; vol 43(2) pp 55-65; Trondheim Universitet, Dragvoll (Norway). Geografisk Inst.
Key words: Sri Lanka; land use; intensification; small scale farming; farming systems; shifting cultivation; role of women; households; monsoon climate; labour, social welfare
Fernandez, M.E.; Fernandez, M. (eds)
The technical role of women in livestock farming.
Original title: El dominio technologico de la muter en la ganaderia.
In: El trabajo familiar y el rol de la mujer en la ganaderia en comunidades alto-andinas de produccion mixta. Serie Comunidades Reporte Tecnico, Instituto Nacional de Investigacion y Promocion Agropecuario. 1989, No. 101, pp 11-21, Lima; Peru
AB: It is generally recognized that, in rural communities, there exists a definite division of labour between the sexes which implies that men and women must possess the necessary technical know-how and ability to manage their area of responsibility. In the Andes region of Peru women are responsible for cattle and other stockbreeding. The article offers a study of the organization of rural communities in the Upper Andes, using Aramachay as an example, and examines the responsibilities faced by women there. Amongst the conclusions reached it is suggested that extension agents should recognize the division of labour that exists so as to ensure that, when making contact with a rural community, they speak to the right group rather than automatically addressing the male members.
Key words: Mountain areas; Women; Division of labour; sexual roles; livestock farming; rural development; Peru
Von Braun, J.; Webb, P.J.R.
The Impact of New Crop Technology on the Agricultural Division of Labor in a West African Setting
In: Economic Development and Cultural Change; 1989, 37, 3, Apr. pp 513-534.
AB: The introduction of centralized pump irrigation technology in rice production in the Gambia is examined, especially with regard to its impact on gender roles in farming, as part of a larger study in which villagers (N = 1,414 women & 1,395 men) were interviewed. One effect was that rice changed from a "woman's crop" grown on individual farms to a male-controlled crop produced communally. The whole organization of household, or "compound, production, as well as patterns of consumption, were transformed in the process. The relative contributions of men 8 women to domestically consumed & marketed crops are traced over this period of changing technology. As the proportion of communal agriculture increased, the woman's burden of work increased. The adaptability of Gambian farmers to new technology 8 production arrangements is noted. 9 Tables, 1 Figure. A. Waters (Copyright 1989, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Gambia; Agricultural Production; Womens Roles; Sexual Division of Labor; Agricultural Technology; Irrigation
Tembo, M.N.; Phiri, E.C.
The impact of modem changes in the chitemene farming system in the Northern Province of Zambia
In: Poats, S.; Schmink, M.; Spring, A. (eds.), Gender issues in farming systems research and extension; Westview Press; Boulder (USA); pp 361-372.
Key words: Zambia; farming systems; shifting cultivation; division of labour; female labour; diet; food consumption;
Kaur, S.; Punia, R.K.
Work participation of women in rural households: an empirical study.
In: Guru Nanak Journal of Sociology. 1988, 9: 2, pp 51-77
AB: The participation of women in home dairy and farm activities was examined using data from three districts in Haryana, one highly developed (Karnal), one moderately developed (Hisar), and one least developed (Mohindergarh). From each district, one block and from each block, two villages were selected as representative of the level of rural development of that district. Households were selected using stratified random sampling, selecting 10% households of each caste. Wife of the functional head of the household was interviewed personally on a pre-tested structured interview schedule. All the respondents (380) were found to be engaged in household chores, spending on average 8-10 hours, with most time devoted to cooking. Level of rural development, caste, per capita income, socioeconomic status and level of household technology were found to be positively and significantly related with the time spent in household chores. Women were the mayor performers of tasks related to
the dairy sector and the time spent in these activities was negatively and significantly related with level of development, age of the respondent and size of land holding. About 60% of the respondents were involved in activities related to agriculture and maximum time was spent in harvesting. Paddy transplanting, winnowing and weeding emerged as female dominated activities, while women were equal partners in harvesting and threshing. Level of rural development, age, caste, size of land holding, per capita income, socioeconomic status and level of farm mechanization were found to be related negatively and significantly with participation and time spent in agriculture.
Key words: Women; Dairy farming; Female labour; agricultural manpower; family labour; Economics; labour; Cows; Dairy farms; rural development; India; Haryana
Holcombe, S.
Profiles of women agricultural producers: a tool for development planners. A Sudan example
UNlFEM-Occasional-Paper (UNIFEM).no. 7, pp 35
AB: This study, part of a series documenting women's economic role in various countries, focuses on the Darfur and Kordofan regions of western Sudan. It has 3 main sections. In the first, a concise and schematic profile is made of rural women's activities in the region. The second section opens with a series of activity profiles, describing the customary division of tasks between men and women in various rural activities: millet and sorghum cultivation, household gardens, cash crop production, irrigated horticultural production, the production of gum arable, livestock maintenance, household maintenance and reproduction, various forms of home industry, and wage income. Subsequently, access to and control over resources and benefits in the agricultural systems of western Sudan are documented and the factors influencing male and female activities and the control over resources and benefits are analysed. Finally, a number of needs of female producers in the region are described.
The third section includes a bibliography on women in western Sudan.
Key words: women's role; agricultural production; division of labour, resources utilization; Sudan; Darfur; Kordofan
Banzon-Bautisb, C.; Dunga, N.G.
The differential impact of farm technology on men and women: a case-study of two Philippine villages.
In: Heyzer, N. (ed), Women farmers and rural change in Asia: towards equal access and participation. Kuala Lumpur: APDC, pp418; p.257-312
This paper starts from the statement that there are very few researches on the impact of agrarian reform on farm households which mention the areas of work were women are displaced (for example transplanting and threshing). The agenda of this research is to explore the differential impact of new rice technology on men and women in two agrarian villages in theprovince of Bulacan. It focuses on technical changes in rice production, the impact of these changes ondemand of female labour and on the impact of technical changes in rice production on the social and economic conditions of farm households and on the roles of men and women in these households
Key words: agriculture; agricultural technology; crops, rice, women, Philippines
Dak, T.M.; Sharma, M.L.; Jain, R.
Social and Institutional Framework of Female Participation in Agriculture
In: Indian Journal of Social Work; 1986, 47, 3, Oct. pp 285-291.
AB: Structured interview data obtained from women in 160 farm households in 4 Haryana, India, districts are used to ascertain the contribution of women in farm production activities, 8 to examine the effects of social & institutional framework on the same. The analysis shows that widespread participation of women in core as well as preparatory & supportive agriculturaI activities.. In nearly 50% of the activities considered, particularly labor participation, most women play a monopolizing or dominating role; in others, particularly decision making, they assume supportive roles. Social 8 institutional factors, particularly caste, landholding status, family education, & mechanization, exert more adverse influence on F labor participation than on their decision-making role. Interestingly, two modernizing forces-farm mechanization, & adoption of improved farm practices-affect F labor participation in the opposite direction. The findings point toward steps for promoting the
dignity of manual work. 3 Tables, 4 References. Modified HA (Copyright 1988, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: India; Decision Making; Agricultural Production; Working Women; Haryana; India;
Saunders, L. Wood; Mehenna, S.
Unseen Hands: Women's Farm Work in an Egyptian Village
In: Anthropological Quarterly; 1986, 59, 3, July, 105-114. New York
AB: The ways that women's work in agriculture reflected changes in local economic conditions from the early 1960s to the late 1970s in an Egyptian Delta village are examined, based on qualitative field research data, a questionnaire survey of a random sample of village households (N not provided), & village censuses. During these years, women's participation decreased in agricultural labor 8 increased in animal husbandry, as the village economy expanded. Also at issue is the extent of rural women's participation in production, which seems to be undercounted in national statistics.. Factors suggested for women's underreporting of agricultural activity include the seasonality & occasional character of women's work in agriculture, the low prestige of women's work in cultivation, & the inclusion of cultivation as an aspect of womens' roles as wives & daughters. 2 Tables, 12 References. Modified HA (Copyright 1987, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Egypt; Rural Women; Working Women; Agricultural Workers; Agricultural Production
Odie-Ali, S.
Women in Agriculture: The Case of Guyana
In: Social and Economic Studies; 1986, 35, 2, June, pp 241-289.
AB: An examination of women's role in farming in Guyana, based on interviews with 62 women & 10 men who worked on farms in 4 areas of Guyana. All of the women claim to contribute income toward their households, 66+% claim to have sole control over how it is spent, & all exercise great influence on short-term & middle-term management decisions. However, ownership of land 8 buildings remains with men rather than women. Women feel compelled to perform domestic tasks for their husbands, to be responsible for child care, & to pull F children out of school to help out, thus perpetuating the role of women in agriculture. These women face problems including availability of supplies, tools & equipment, support services, management, training, 8 credit. A need is seen for government policy to be developed to meet these women's needs. 5 Tables, 1 Figure, 41 References. W. H. Stoddard (Copyright 1987, Sociological Abstracts, Inc., all rights reserved.)
Key words: Guyana; Working Women; Rural Women; Agricultural Workers; Sexual Division of Labor
Whitehead, A.
The Green Revolution and women's work in the Third World.
In: Faulkner, W.; Arnold, E., Smothered by invention: technology in women's lives. London [etc.] Pluto Press, (276 p) pp 182-199
Introduction of new technologies often bring changes in the work of men whilst the work of women increases.
Key words: women's work; technology; women; Third World
Fortmann, L.
Economic status and women's participation in agriculture: a Botswana case study
In: Rural sociology 1984 vol 49 (3), pp 452464
Lexington, Ky The University of Kentucky
AB: Extract: Data from 358 households in 12 sites representative of climatic, geographical, and agricultural variations in the eastern communal areas of Botswana show that differences in the agricultural practices and extension contact of male- and female-headed households largely disappear when economic stratum is controlled. Female-headed households are shown not to be a homogeneous group. There appear to be greater similarities between farmers within the same economic stratum regardless of gender than between farmers of the same gender in different strata.
Key words: rural women; economic situation; economic development; heads of families; status; agricultural manpower; agricultural households; agricultural production; land ownership; labor; ploughing in lands; Botswana
Riss, M.D.
The woman's place in African rural economy: an example in Senegal, [Questions on rural development. Landscapes, rural areas, farming systems. Maghreb, Black Africa, Melanesia]
La place de la femme dans les mutations internes de l'economie curate a partir d'un example senegalais; Le developpement rural en questions. Paysages, espaces ruraux, systemes agraires. Maghreb, Afrique noire, Melanesie
In: Memoires ORSTOM; ORSTOM; Paris (France); no. 106, pp 417-431
Key words: Senegal; role of women; social change; agricultural development; farm management; cultivation; rural population
Himchmann, D.; Vaughan, M.
Women farmers of Malawi: food production in the Zomba District
Research Series Institute of international Studies, University of California (USA). no. 58, 154 p
AB: A study was undertaken of the economic role of women in Zomba, Malawi, showing that they have assumed increasing responsibility for agricultural production thereby becoming more dependent on cash flow and increasingly so on men and marriage, a considerably risky situation in an area with a traditionally high divorce rate. Most households investigated were primarily involved in production of food for domestic consumption. In the study almost 50% of the women took primary responsibility for all agricultural tasks so a necessary consideration for those concerned with extension and training policies should be to take particular care to direct extension services towards women. The study includes 12 case studies.
Key words: women; food production; economic aspects; agricultural products; cash flow; household; domestic consumption; agricultural extension; Malawi, Zomba
Rive Box - Lasocki, B. de la
Female participation in rice production and cassava processing in the Dominican Republic
Santiago, CENDA, pp 23
Key words: farming sytems; women's work; crops; postharvest technology; agriculture; women; Dominican Republic.
<section>e</section>
1. Introduction
1. Introduction
This bibliography is a publication of the Joint Research Project which was executed under the Academic Exchange Programme between the Agricultural Engineering Service of FAO and the Department of Gender Studies in Agriculture of the Wageningen Agricultural University.
Whilst the flow of publications on women and agriculture is substantial, the attention for the gender aspects of agricultural equipment, tools, animal draught power and engineering technology has been scanty. The need to search existing databases on such literature was felt, both by FAO and WAU. For technicians who are aware of gender relations in their discipline it is often not easy to choose a strategy in research or design which is beneficial for women farmers. On the other hand social gender scientists regularly have little insight in technical and ergonomic demands on agricultural equipment. For both groups this bibliography may be of use.
The following literature databases were searched systematically: AGRALIN, Agrarian Literature Information System of the Netherlands, the information system of the Jan Kopshuis Labrary of the Wageningen Agricultural University and PUDOC/DLO in the Netherlands. The system is connected to about eighty libraries and documentation services in the Netherlands. Five AGRALIN databases were searched:
1. CLC, the Central Agricultural Catalogue, which contains books, reports and theses.
2. Database Gender Studies in Agriculture, the database which contains titles of articles from scientific journals and chapters of books which are available in one of the WAU and PUBOC/DLO libraries. About 240 agricultural and social science journals are used when selecting titles for the database.
3. Database for Home Economics and Consumers Sciences, articles from relevant journals.
4. Database of LBW (Land, Soil and Water) which contains articles of the Staring Building Library.
5. FAO database, which contains books and reports which have been published by FAO.
For the last database english keywords and words from the title have been used for the selection of relevant literature, whilst the other four databases were searched with UDC numbers, Agralin classification terms and clutch title words. All AGRALIN databases are kept up to date.
On Line literature search was conducted from the following databases:
- C.A.B. International Information Services (Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux International), the internationally leading agricultural database. Records were included from 1991 onwards.
- AGRIS/FAO, International information system for the agricultural sciences and technology, with records from 1985 onwards.
- AGRICOLA, Bibliography of agriculture I National Agricultural Library, the national depot of the USA was also searched from 1985 till present.
For all three databases keywords from the titles were used as entrance.
The following databases on CD-ROM were searched:
- SOCIOFILE, Sociological Abstracts Inc. from 1985 till present.
- C.A.B. Intemational Information Services from 1988 till 1995
- TROPAG/RURAL, abstracts on tropical agriculture and on rural development in the tropics, from the Royal Tropical Institute (KIT) in Amsterdam. The CD-ROM contained abstracts from articles until September 1995.
All CD-Roms were searched with keywords from the titles.
In addition to computerized databases a number of printed bibliographies and other sources were used:
- C.A.B.lnternational, Rural Women, annotated bibliography no. RDA6 by Krystyna Kubisz, comprising about 1900 abstracts of documents relating to women and rural development in the Third World. The years 1984 -1991 are covered.
- Women and Development, an annotated bibliography, 1990 -1992, Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam.
- Gender and Development 1995 Intermediate Technology, a list of new and recent books from Intermediate Technology Publications.
- Proceedings of conferences on Animal Traction.
The records which are selected for this bibliography have been divided into five themes: the first one is gender, agricultural equipment and energy. This is the subject about which we would like to see much literature, because it is the most practical, nevertheless the total yield of records was disappointing. A separate chapter lists articles on animal draught power which pay attention to gender aspects. Post harvest technology is covered in chapter 4. Some of the entrees could have been included in the chapters 2 or 5, still it was preferred to give the subject a clearly defined space. The following theme deals with gender and agricultural technology. Some of the entrees are related to agricultural engineering; others more to agronomy and some have a clear holistic or system approach. Articles of the last type could be included in either chapter. The literature in this chapter is of a different level than that of the previous three chapters, which means that the material
aspects of agricultural practices don't always get attention. The last theme (chapter 6) is more general and describes the division of labour in agriculture. Of that subject many more records could have been included, but those with most practical relevance on the lowest level and localized case studies had our priority.
Within the chapters the records have been entered in a chronological order, to begin with the most recent literature.
Articles on irrigation have not been included, because gender bibliographies have been published recently^1. Also pest control and crop protection is left out of this bibliography. Most articles on the subject don't deal directly with implements for spraying etc. Recently a reader on the subject has been published, in which a list of literature in included^2. Even though in both fields of study, irrigation and crop protection, the engineering factors are substantial, and the gender aspects are important, inclusion in this bibliography would mean a loss of focus, which would make it less functional.
^1 E.g. Verkruijsse, B.; Jordans, E.H.; Webbink, J.F.; Zwarteveen, M.Z.; Koppen, B.C.M.van; Annotated Bibliography: gender and irrigation ans soil and water conservation, Department of Irrigation-and Soil and Water Conservation; Department of Gender Studies in Agriculture; Wageningen Agricultural University, 1992
^2 Gender and crop protection; Reader prepared for the workshop "Gender Issues and Crop Protection", held at: XIII International Plant Protection Congress, The Hague, the Netherlands, July 2-7, 1995.
The used english key words are included in this bibliography (chapter 7). They don't always comply with the keywords found in the entrees, because all databases use their own systems and different key words. In the end an alphabetic list of authors is included for reference.
This bibliography can be used in combination with the paper on the corresponding subject, including case studies on Senegal and Zimbabwe by Maria Smetsers and Joke Muylwijk, written for the same academic exchange programme.
