<title>Estimating Biomass and Biomass Change of Tropical Forests: a Primer. (FAO Forestry Paper - 134). Estimating biomass and biomass change in tropical forests</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Climate change is one of the truly global issues of our time, and forests play an important role in it. Changes in the cover, use, and management of forests produce sources and sinks of carbon dioxide which are exchanged with the biosphere. Estimation of the magnitude of these sources and sinks requires reliable estimates of the biomass density of forests. This is the background to the "primer" for estimating biomass and biomass change of tropical forests. It focuses on tropical forests whose high potential biomass gives any changes taking place in them a particular significance and it is concerned with one important component of the total biomass, namely above-ground woody biomass in trees with a diameter of at least 10 cm at breastheight.
Describing the state and change with regard to biomass requires observations of the state and change of area and of biomass per unit of area (biomass density in the terminology of this report). As reliable observations of biomass per unit of area are generally scarce, this "primer" endeavours to...
 outline methods that are available for estimating biomass per hectare of tropical forests using mainly existing data,
 describe primary data and measurement requirements for assessment of biomass per hectare and
 presents biomass per hectare estimates for many tropical countries using the methodologies given. It is meant to be useful to planners of forest inventories and in training for forest inventory.
The idea of a "biomass primer" to be used by planners of forest inventories and in training for forest inventory was first launched at a UNEP/FAO Expert Consultation on Environmental Parameters held in Nairobi, Kenya, in December 1992. This Forestry Paper could be realized thanks to cooperation from Dr. Sandra Brown of the University of Illinois, currently on temporary assignment to the US Environmental Protection Agency.
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Director
Forest Resources Division
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This "Biomass Primer" has been prepared under a contract with FAO by Dr. Sandra Brown of the University of Illinois, Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences; presently on assignment with the US Environmental Protection Agency, National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Western Ecology Division, Corvallis, Oregon. FAO is greatly indebted to Dr. Brown who has generously offered her experience and her time far beyond her contractual obligations.
FAO is also grateful to the following people for input to various phases of the report: Alberto Del Lungo and Aji Perera for estimating biomass from forest inventories for many tropical African and American countries, Andy Gillespie for development of the moist and wet biomass regression equations, and Ariel E. Lugo, Jack Winjum, Micheal Cairns and Reed I. White for helpful comments on this report.
<section>3</section>
ABBREVIATIONS
BEF
Biomass expansion factor, ratio of aboveground oven-dry biomass of trees to oven-dry biomass of inventoried volume
BV
Biomass of inventoried volume in t/ha
C
Carbon, estimated as 50% of oven-dry biomass
DR
Degradation ratio
EFZ
Ecofloristic zone
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FORIS
Forest Resources Information System (of FAO)
FRA
Forest Resources Assessment
GIS
Geographic Information System
PBI
Potential biomass index
R/S
ratio of root biomass to shoot biomass, or ratio of belowground to aboveground biomass
VOB
inventoried volume over bark of free bole, i.e. from stump or buttress to crown point or first main branch
WD
wood density as oven-dry mass per unit of green volume (either tons/m^3 or grams/cm^3)
<section>4</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 PREVIOUS ESTIMATES OF FOREST BIOMASS
Forests have traditionally been used for many products, including timber, fuel, and fodder. Determining the biomass of forests is a useful way of providing estimates of the quantity of these components. Typically, the quantity of sawtimber has been assessed by making volume estimations, but this ignores the other useful components such as smaller size wood for fuel use. Furthermore, very few to no assessments have been made of the quantity of wood present in forests that appear to have no potential for sawtimber production. Assessing the total aboveground biomass of forests, defined as biomass density when expressed as dry weight per unit area (see Section 2.2 for expanded definitions), is a useful way of quantifying the amount of resource available for all traditional uses. It either gives the quantity of total biomass directly or the quantity by each component (e.g., leaves, branches, and bole) because their biomass tends to vary systematically with the total biomass.
However, the way the biomass of each forest component varies with total biomass varies by forest type, such as natural or planted forests and closed or open forests. For example, leaves for fodder are about 3-5% and merchantable bole is about 60% of the total aboveground biomass of closed forests.
The quantity of biomass in a forest is a result of the difference between production through photosynthesis and consumption by respiration and harvest processes. Thus it is a useful measure for assessing changes in forest structure. Changes in forest biomass density are brought about by natural succession; human activities such as silviculture, harvesting, and degradation; and natural impacts by wildfire and climate change. Biomass density is also a useful variable for comparing structural and functional attributes of forest ecosystems across a wide range of environmental conditions.
Biomass of forests is also very relevant for issues related to global change. For example, the role of tropical forests in global biogeochemical cycles, especially the carbon cycle and its relation to the greenhouse effect, has heightened interest in estimating the biomass density of tropical forests. The biomass of forests provides estimates of the carbon pools in forest vegetation because about 50% of it is carbon. Consequently, biomass represents the potential amount of carbon, that can be added to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide when the forest is cleared and/or burned. Attempts to estimate the biomass density of tropical forests have been made by the scientific community for use in models that assess the contribution of tropical deforestation and biomass burning to the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide and other trace gases (Brown et al. 1989, Crutzen et al. 1991, Hall and Uhlig 1991, Houghton et al. 1983).
Global interest in climate change led to the establishment of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UN FCCC) at the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). Over 130 nations have ratified this convention which means that these nations need to make national greenhouse gas emission inventories. Changes in the cover, use, and management of forests produce sources and sinks of carbon dioxide to and from the biosphere. To estimate the magnitude of these sources and sinks requires reliable estimates of the biomass density of the forests undergoing change.
Biomass density estimates also provide the means for calculating the amount of carbon dioxide that can be removed from the atmosphere by regrowing forests or by plantations because they establish the rates of biomass production and the upper bounds for carbon sequestering. This issue is receiving more attention of late as countries look to forests as a means of mitigating greenhouse gas emissions, particularly carbon dioxide, a major greenhouse gas and the one fixed during photosynthesis. Practices such as sustainable forest management, slowing deforestation, and low-impact-logging decrease emissions or conserve carbon dioxide. Other practices such as plantation establishment or other tree planting programs on previously non-forested land sequester carbon dioxide (Brown et al. 1996). Furthermore, biomass density estimates of forests are extremely relevant for studying other global biogeochemical cycles, such as nitrogen, because the amount of other nutrient elements in
forests is also related to the quantity of biomass present.
Another issue related to forest biomass has emerged since the 1980s. In addition to loss of forest area, forest degradation, resulting in biomass density loss, is known to be occurring (Brown et al. 1994, FAO 1993, 1995). Much of this biomass degradation appears to be unrecorded, thus it is in addition to that accounted for by sanctioned harvesting. An example is the illegal logging practices occurring in many forests of tropical Asia (Callister 1992). Clearly, this process of biomass density reduction has implications for the global carbon cycle, other biogeochemical cycles, and biodiversity. Biomass degradation is due to many factors mostly related to social, economic, and political factors.
1.1 PREVIOUS ESTIMATES OF FOREST BIOMASS
Estimates of the biomass density for many of the world's forests have been made. For example, under the International Biological Program (IBP) biomass density estimates were made for many intensive study sites covering most of the major forest regions of the world (summarized in Reichle et al. 1981). A detailed summary of biomass density studies in tropical forests, from lowland to montane and from wet to very dry zones, was made by Brown and Lugo (1982). A later study by Olson et al. (1983) produced a global map of the biomass density of all ecosystem types, including disturbed and undisturbed forests, at a 0.50 x 0.50 grid-scale of resolution.
All of the above summaries of biomass density were based on ecological studies creating several problems with their use for global-scale analyses. Ecological studies are generally designed to characterize local forest structure and the study sites are usually not truly randomly located nor represent the population of interest (Brown and Lugo 1992). These types of studies are suitable for studying local forests but not for making inferences about larger populations (Brown et al. 1989). Furthermore, the total area covered by these studies is a very small fraction of the total forest area (e.g., less than 0.00001% for tropical forests; Brown and Lugo 1984).
A further problem with using biomass data from ecological studies for national to global analyses is the inherent bias of ecologists to adjust placement of plots based on the notion of what a mature forest should look like, i.e., one with many large diameter trees (Brown and Lugo 1992). The effect of adjusting plot placement to include large diameter trees is to overestimate biomass density of the forests because biomass per tree increases geometrically with increasing diameter. The result of this bias is to yield high biomass density estimates for forests (Brown et al. 1989). Thus data from ecological studies must be used with caution as they may not represent the biomass density of the forest over large areas.
Biomass density estimates for tropical forests have been made by the FAO (1993) based on the FAO FORIS (Forest Resources Information System), a computerized data base. Biomass estimates were computed from estimates of volume over bark (VOB, inventoried volume to a minimum tree diameter of 10 cm) often measured in forest inventories. On the positive side, VOB data from forest inventories are based on a large number of plots, generally collected from large sample areas using a planned sampling design from the population of interest. On the negative side, very few national or subnational inventories that report VOB have been done in the tropics. The compilation of the VOB data base by the FAO required much educated guesswork to produce estimates on a tropic-wide basis. This approach is, therefore, of unknown reliability and any errors in VOB estimates were compounded during the conversion of these data to biomass density values. Clearly, new efforts to estimate biomass density
more directly from forest inventory data will provide more reliable data for national to global assessments of the quantity of forest resources.
<section>5</section>
2. PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF PRIMER ON ESTIMATING BIOMASS
2.1 WHAT TREE FORMATIONS ARE INCLUDED?
2.2 WHAT IS BIOMASS?
Decisions by policy-makers regarding the management and use of forest and trees require accurate and precise information on the state and patterns and rates of change of the resource. To attain these needs, reliable estimates on the state and change of forest biomass for all countries over the long term must be made. Biomass estimates for forests of tropical countries, in particular, are needed because globally they are undergoing the greatest rates of change and reliable biomass estimates are few. Their biomass and C content is generally high, which influences their role in the global C cycle. Further, tropical forests have the greatest potential for mitigation of CO[2] through conservation and management (Brown et al. 1996).
The main goals of this primer are to (1) present methods that are available for estimating biomass density of tropical forests or tree formations using primarily existing data, (2) give examples of calculations on how the different methodologies are used, (3) describe primary data and measurement requirements to make biomass density estimates, and (4) present biomass density estimates for many tropical countries using the methodologies given. Additional new techniques will be presented that have been shown to be useful for mapping biomass density at regional scales, and that address the change in biomass. It concludes with a discussion on the directions and future studies that are needed to make more reliable estimates of the state and change in forest biomass.
This primer is not intended to be an exhaustive compilation of available information on biomass estimation methodology nor on biomass density estimates for tropical forests. Rather, it is intended to present approaches that have been shown to be useful for application to existing data and to situations where detailed data are lacking, and to emphasize what types of new field data are needed to make improved biomass estimates. Although examples of biomass density estimates for forests in many tropical countries are provided in this primer, they should be used with care when making national biomass inventories because many of the inventories are old (pre-1980s in many cases) and are subject to several of the problems outlined below (see Section 3). Improvements will only occur when estimating biomass density becomes one of the goals of a forest inventory. At this point, collection of the required data for making reliable estimates of biomass will be part of the inventory
design. It is expected that the extra data needed should only incur marginal costs. Many inventories already collect most of the required data. Because of the general interest in forest biomass for the reasons given above, many local to national studies on this topic are already being done. The information given in this primer is not meant to replace these efforts, but rather to complement them, and to ensure that basic standards are used (e.g., all biomass density estimates should be based on oven-dry weight).
2.1 WHAT TREE FORMATIONS ARE INCLUDED?
The methods for biomass estimation presented in this primer are not restricted to just forests but to most formations where trees dominate. This includes closed forests, open forests, woodlands, woody savannas, woodlots, line tree plantings, home gardens, living fences, etc. However, there is a greater choice of available methods for biomass estimation of forest formations than for non-forested lands that contain trees. Forests are defined as land under natural or planted stands of trees with tree crown cover of more than 10 percent and area of more than 0.5 ha, whose primary use is forestry. The trees should be able to reach a minimum height of 5 m at maturity in situ (FAO unpublished report of expert consultation "Kotka III"). A tree is defined generally as a woody perennial with a single main stem, or in the case of coppice with several stems, having a more or less definite crown and a height greater than breast height (1.3 m).
2.2 WHAT IS BIOMASS?
To address many of the issues raised above related to forest biomass requires that the biomass of all forest components be estimated, including the aboveground and belowground living mass of trees, shrubs, palms, saplings, other understorey components, vines, epiphytes, etc., and dead plant mass such as fine litter and wood. How the mass of these components changes with time and with natural and human disturbances is also important. However, for practical reasons, this primer is restricted to the following component of biomass density: the total amount of live aboveground organic matter present in trees including leaves, twigs, branches, main bole, and bark. The biomass of these components generally accounts for the greatest fraction of total living biomass in a forest and does not pose too many logistical problems in its estimation. Consequently, biomass is defined as the total amount of aboveground living organic matter in trees expressed as oven-dry tons per unit area
(tree, hectare, region, or country). It is referred to as biomass density when expressed as mass per unit area, e.g., tons per hectare. The total biomass for a region or country is obtained from the product of biomass density and the corresponding area of forests.
BIOMASS is defined as the total amount of aboveground living organic matter in trees expressed as oven-dry tons per unit area
For most forests or tree formations, biomass density estimates will be based only on the biomass in trees with diameters greater than or equal to 10 cm, which is the usual minimum diameter measured in most inventories of closed forests. However, for forests or trees of smaller stature, such as those in the arid or montane zones, degraded forests, or secondary forests, lower minimum diameters should be chosen.
Woody biomass for many traditional uses does not all originate from forests; significant quantities are obtained from non-forest lands such as small woodlots, wind-breaks, other tree-line formations, home gardens, etc. A methodology for biomass estimation of individual trees, if the primary data are at this level, is presented here as well.
<section>6</section>
3. METHODS FOR ESTIMATING BIOMASS DENSITY FROM EXISTING DATA
3.1 APPROACH 1: BIOMASS DENSITY BASED ON EXISTING VOLUME DATA
3.2 APPROACH 2: BIOMASS DENSITY BASED ON STAND TABLES
3.3 BIOMASS ESTIMATES OF INDIVIDUAL
3.4 BIOMASS ESTIMATES FOR PLANTATIONS
3.5 BIOMASS OF OTHER FOREST COMPONENTS
This primer discusses two approaches for estimating the biomass density of woody formations based on existing forest inventory data. The first approach is based on the use of existing measured volume estimates (VOB per ha) converted to biomass density (t/ha) using a variety of "tools" (Brown et al. 1989, Brown and Iverson 1992, Brown and Lugo 1992, Gillespie et al. 1992). The second approach directly estimates biomass density using biomass regression equations. These regression equations are mathematical functions that relate oven-dry biomass per tree as a function of a single or a combination of tree dimensions. They are applied to stand tables or measurements of individual trees in stands or in lines (e.g., windbreaks, live fence posts, home gardens). The advantage of this second method is that it produces biomass estimates without having to make volume estimates, followed by application of expansion factors to account for non-inventoried tree components. The disadvantage
is that a smaller number of inventories report stand tables to small diameter classes for all species. Thus, not all countries in the tropics are covered by these estimates. To use either of these methods, the inventory must include all tree species. There is no way to extrapolate from inventories that do not measure all species.
Use of forest inventory data overcomes many of the problems present in ecological studies. Data from forest inventories are generally more abundant and are collected from large sample areas (subnational to national level) using a planned sampling method designed to represent the population of interest. However, inventories are not without their problems. Typical problems include:
 Inventories tend to be conducted in forests that are viewed as having commercial value, i.e., closed forests, with little regard to the open, drier forests or woodlands upon which so many people depend for non-industrial timber.
 The minimum diameter of trees included in inventories is often greater than 10 cm and sometimes as large as 50 cm; this excludes smaller trees which can account for more than 30% of the biomass.
 The maximum diameter class in stand tables is generally open-ended with trees greater than 80 cm in diameter often lumped into one class. The actual diameter distribution of these large trees significantly affects aboveground biomass density.
 Not all tree species are included, only those perceived to have commercial value at the time of the inventory.
 Inventory reports often leave out critical data, and in most cases, field measurements are not archived and are therefore lost.
 The definition of inventoried volume is not always consistent.
 Very little descriptive information is given about the actual condition of the forests, they are often described as primary, but diameter distributions and volumes suggest otherwise (e.g., Brown et al. 1991, 1994).
 Many of the inventories are old, 1970s or earlier, and the forests may have disappeared or changed.
Despite the above problems, many inventories are very useful for estimating biomass density of forests. In the next two sections, details of the methods for using existing forest inventory data for biomass density estimation are presented.
3.1 APPROACH 1: BIOMASS DENSITY BASED ON EXISTING VOLUME DATA
3.1.1 GENERAL EQUATION
3.1.2 VOLUME-WEIGHTED AVERAGE WOOD DENSITY (WD)
3.1.3 BIOMASS EXPANSION FACTOR (BEF)
3.1.4 EXAMPLES OF CALCULATIONS OF BIOMASS DENSITY
3.1.5 ADJUSTMENTS TO APPROACH USING VOLUME EXPANSION FACTORS (VEF)
3.1.6 USE OF INVENTORIES OF OPEN FORESTS AND WOODLANDS
The method presented here is based on existing volume per ha data and is best used for secondary to mature closed forests only, growing in moist to dry climates. It should be used for closed forest only because the original data base used for developing this approach was based on closed forests. The primary data needed for this approach is VOB/ha, that is inventoried volume over bark of free bole, i.e. from stump or buttress to crown point or first main branch. Inventoried volume must include all trees, whether presently commercial or not, with a minimum diameter of 10 cm at breast height or above buttress if this is higher. If the minimum diameter is somewhat larger, the VOB/ha information can be used with some adjustments as shown below. However, such adjustments to the primary data introduce larger errors in the estimate.
3.1.1 GENERAL EQUATION
Biomass density can be calculated from VOB/ha by first estimating the biomass of the inventoried volume and then "expanding" this value to take into account the biomass of the other aboveground components as follows (Brown and Lugo 1992):
(Eq. 3.1.1)
Aboveground biomass density (t/ha) = VOB * WD * BEF
where:
WD = volume-weighted average wood density (1 of oven-dry biomass per m^3 green volume)
BEF = biomass expansion factor (ratio of aboveground oven-dry biomass of trees to oven-dry biomass of inventoried volume)
3.1.2 VOLUME-WEIGHTED AVERAGE WOOD DENSITY (WD)
Wood density here is defined as the oven-dry mass per unit of green volume (either tons/m^3 or grams/cm^3). Wood densities for trees of tropical American forests tend to be reported in these units. In contrast, few data on wood density for trees in tropical Africa and Asia are expressed in these units (Reyes et al. 1992). Rather, wood density is expressed in units of mass of wood at 12% moisture content per unit of volume at 12% moisture content. A regression equation was developed by Reyes et al. (1992) to convert wood density based on 12% moisture content to wood density based on oven-dry mass and green volume (Eq. 3.1.2).
(Eq. 3.1.2)
Y = 0.0134 + 0.800 X
(r^2= 0.99; number of data points n = 379)
where:
Y = wood density based on oven-dry mass/green volume
X = wood density based on 12% moisture content
Ideally, a weighted average (based on dominance of each species as measured by volume) wood density value is best used here, calculated as follows.
(Eq. 3.1.3)
WD = {(V[1]/V[t] *WD[1] + (V[2]/V[t]) *WD[2 ]+........... (V[n]/V[t])* Wd[n]
where:
V[1], V[2],.... Vn = volume of species 1, 2,.. to the nth species
V[t] = total volume WD[1] WD[2],..... Wd[n] = wood density of species 1, 2,...... to the nth species
However, sufficient wood density data of forest species to do such calculations are not always available. In these situations it is best to estimate a weighted mean wood density based on known species, using an arithmetic mean from the table below for unknown species. Wood density data for 1180 tropical tree species are given in Appendix 1.
The arithmetic mean and most common wood density values (t/m^3 or g/cm^3) for tropical tree species by region
Tropical region
No. of species
Mean
Common range
Africa
America
Asia
(from Reyes et al. 1992)
3.1.3 BIOMASS EXPANSION FACTOR (BEF)
Broadleaf forests: Biomass expansion factor is defined as: the ratio of total aboveground oven-dry biomass density of trees with a minimum dbh of 10 cm or more to the oven-dry biomass density of the inventoried volume. Such ratios have been calculated from inventory sources for many broadleaf forest types (young secondary to mature) growing in moist to seasonally dry climates throughout the tropics. Sufficient data were included in these inventory sources to independently calculate aboveground biomass density and biomass of the inventoried volume (Brown et al. 1989). The reported inventoried volume in the studies was based on the definition given above. Analysis of these data show that BEFs are significantly related to the corresponding biomass of the inventoried volume according to the following equations (Brown and Lugo 1992):
(Eq. 3.1.4)
BEF = Exp{3.213 - 0.506*Ln(BV)} for BV < 190 t/ha
1.74 for BV>=190t/ha
(sample size = 56, adjusted r^2 = 0.76)
where:
BV = biomass of inventoried volume in t/ha, calculated as the product of VOB/ha (m^3/ha) and wood density (t/m^3)
Conifer forests: No model for calculating biomass expansion factors for native conifer forests is available at present because of the general lack of sufficient data for the type of analysis performed for the broadleaf forests. However, one would expect that BEFs for tropical pine forests would vary less than for broadleaf forests because of the generally similar branching pattern exhibited by different species of pine trees. Biomass expansion factors have been calculated based on a limited data base of 12 stands of Pinus oocarpa growing in Guatemala (Peters 1977) and the methodology given in Brown et al. (1989). The inventoried volume in this case was defined as volume over bark/ha from the stump to the tip of the tree; i.e. main stem based on total height. Volumes of these stands ranged from 64 to 331 m^3/ha. The BEFs based on biomass of the main stem ranged from 1.05 to 1.58, with a mean of 1.3 (standard error of 0.06). No significant relationship between BEF and main
stem biomass was obtained. Until additional data become available, a BEF of 1.3 can be used, with caution, for biomass estimation of pine forests.
3.1.4 EXAMPLES OF CALCULATIONS OF BIOMASS DENSITY
To demonstrate the application of this methodology, aboveground biomass density is calculated for the following examples:
Example 1.
Broadleaf forest with a VOB = 300 m^3/ha and weighted average wood density; WD = 0.65 t/m^3
Step 1 Calculate biomass of VOB: = 300 m^3/ha x 0.65 t/m^3 = 194 t/ha
Step 2 Calculate the BEF (Eq. 3.1.4): BV > 190 t/ha, therefore BEF = 1.74
Step 3 Calculate aboveground biomass density (Eq. 3.1.1): = 1.74 x 300 x 0.65
= 338 t/ha
Example 2.
Broadleaf forest with a VOB = 150 m^3/ha and weighted average wood density, WD = 0.55 t/m^3
Step 1 Calculate biomass of VOB: = 150 m^3/ha x 0.55 t/m^3 = 82.5 t/ha
Step 2 Calculate the BEF (Eq. 3.1.4): BV < 190 t/ha, therefore BEF = 2.66
Step 3 Calculate aboveground biomass density (Eq. 3.1.1): = 2.66 x 150 x 0.55
= 220 t/ha
As can be seen from these two examples, although there is a two-fold difference in VOB/ha, there is only a 1.5-fold difference in aboveground biomass density.
3.1.5 ADJUSTMENTS TO APPROACH USING VOLUME EXPANSION FACTORS (VEF)
Forest inventories often report volumes to different standards, e.g., to minimum diameters greater than 10 cm. These inventories maybe the only ones available, and thus it is important that a means to unify the volume data to some kind of standard be developed so that these inventories can be used to estimate biomass density.
In an attempt to unify data on inventoried volume measured to a minimum diameter greater than 10 cm, volume expansion factors (VEF) were developed (Brown 1990). After 10 cm, a common minimum diameter for inventoried volumes ranges between 25-30 cm. Data from inventories that reported volumes to minimum diameters in this range were combined into one data set to obtain sufficient number of studies for analysis. The VEF is defined here as the ratio of inventoried volume for all trees with a minimum diameter of 10 cm and above (VOB[10]) to inventoried volume for all trees with a minimum diameter of 25-30 cm and above (VOB[30]). The uncertainty in extrapolating inventoried volume based on a minimum diameter of larger than 30 cm to inventoried volume to a minimum diameter of 10 cm is likely to be large and is not suggested. Estimates of the VEFs were based on a few inventories from tropical Asia and America which provided sufficient detail for this analysis (see Brown 1990).
Volume expansion factors based on these inventories ranged from about 1.1 to 2.5, and they were related to the VOB[30] as follows:
(Eq. 3.1.5),
VEF = Exp{1.300 - 0.209*Ln(VOB[30])} for VOB[30] < 250 m^3/ha = 1.13 for VOB[30] > 250 m^3/ha
(sample size = 66, adjusted r^2 = 0.65)
To demonstrate the use of this correction factor to estimating biomass density, consider the following example:
Broadleaf forest with a VOB[30] = 100 m^3/ha and weighted average wood density; WD = 0.60 t/m^3
Step 1 Calculate the VEF from Eq. 3.1.5: = 1.40
Step 2 Calculate VOB[10]: = 100 m^3/ha x 1.40 = 140 m^3/ha
Step 3 Calculate biomass of VOB[10]: = 140 m^3/ha x 0.60 t/m^3 = 84 t/ha
Step 4 Calculate the BEF from Eq. 3.1.4: BV < 190 t/ha, therefore BEF = 2.64
Step 5 Calculate aboveground biomass density (Eq. 3.1.1): = 2.64 x 140 x 0.60
= 222 t/ha
3.1.6 USE OF INVENTORIES OF OPEN FORESTS AND WOODLANDS
No general approach for estimating aboveground biomass density of open forests and woodlands based on inventoried volume has been developed because of the general lack of suitable data. The method described above for closed forests is not generally applicable because trees have different branching patterns (often multi-stemmed) and inventoried volume of open forests and woodlands is usually measured to different standards than for closed forests. For example, inventories done in open forests and woodlands generally report inventoried volume per ha to minimum diameters less than 10 cm, and also often include branch volume. Earlier work suggested that total aboveground biomass density of open forests could be up to three times the inventoried volume (Brown and Lugo 1984), however further field testing would be needed to confirm this. It is recommended that the approach described in section 3.2 (next) for estimating aboveground biomass density be used for open forests and
woodlands.
3.2 APPROACH 2: BIOMASS DENSITY BASED ON STAND TABLES
3.2.1 BIOMASS REGRESSION EQUATIONS
3.2.3 PROBLEMS WITH REGRESSION APPROACH
Another estimate of biomass density is derived from the application of biomass regression equations to stand tables. The method basically involves estimating the biomass per average tree of each diameter (diameter at breast height, dbh) class of the stand table, multiplying by the number of trees in the class, and summing across all classes. A key issue is the choice of the average diameter to represent the dbh class. For small dbh classes (10 cm or less), the mid-point of the class has been used (e.g., Brown et al. 1989). The quadratic-mean-diameter of a dbh class would be a better choice, particularly for wider diameter classes. If basal area for each dbh class is known, the quadratic-mean-diameter (QSD) of trees in the class, or the dbh of a tree of average basal area in the class, should be used instead. To calculate the QSD, first divide the basal area of the diameter class by the number of trees in the class to find the basal area of the average tree. Then the dbh = 2
x {square root (basal area/3.142)}. For example, the dbh of a tree of basal area of 707 cm^2 = 2 x {square root (707/3.142)} = 30 cm.
3.2.1 BIOMASS REGRESSION EQUATIONS
The biomass regression equations for broadleaf forests were developed from a data base that includes trees of many species harvested from forests from all three tropical regions (a total of 371 trees with a dbh ranging from 5 to 148 cm from ten different sources; see Appendix 2; equation 3.2.2 in the table below was developed by Martinez-Yrizar et al. (1992)). The biomass regression equations can provide estimates of biomass per tree. The data base was stratified into three main climatic zones, regardless of species: dry or where rainfall is considerably less than potential evapotranspiration (e.g. <1500 mm rain/year and a dry season of several months), moist or where rainfall approximately balances potential evapotranspiration (e.g. 1500-4000 mm rain/year and a short dry season to no dry season), and wet or where rainfall is in excess of potential evapotranspiration (e.g. >4000 mm rain/year and no dry season). These rainfall regimes are just guides, and generally apply to
lowland conditions only. As elevation increases, as in mountainous areas, temperature decreases as does potential evapotranspiration and the climate zone becomes wetter at a given rainfall. For instance, an annual rainfall of 1200 mm in the lowlands would be the dry zone, but at about 2500 m it would be the wet zone. Therefore, judgement should be used in selecting the appropriate equation.
Figure 1 - Relationship between oven-dry biomass of tropical trees and dbh for (a) biomass regression equations by all climatic zones and trees with dbh between 5 to 40 cm, and (b) equations for moist and wet zones for trees in the full range of dbh. The equations are given in Section 3.2.1.
(a) All zones
(b) Moist and wet zones
Biomass regression equations for estimating biomass of tropical trees. Y= biomass per tree in kg, D = dbh in cm, and BA = basal area in cm^2
Equation Number
Climatic zone
Equation
Range in dbh (cm)
Number of trees
Adjusted r^2
DRY^ a
Y = exp{-1.996+2.32*ln(D)}
Y =10^{-0.535+log[10] (BA)}
MOIST^ b
Y = 42.69-12.800(D)+1.242(D^2)
Y = exp{-2.134+2.530*ln(D)}
WET^ c
Y = 21.297-6.953(D)+0.740(D^2)
None of the regression equations should be used for estimating the biomass of trees whose diameter greatly exceeds the range of the original data.
^a Eq. 3.2.1 revised from Brown et al. (1989) for dry forest in India, and Eq. 3.2.2 from Martinez-Yrizar et al. 1992 for dry forest in Mexico (original equation based on BA). For dry zones with rainfall less than 900 mm/year use equation 3.2.2 and for dry zones with rainfall > 900 mm/year use equation 3.2.1. "exp" means "e to the power of".
^b Both equations are based on the same data base; A. J. R. Gillespie, pers. comm. based on a revision of equation in Brown et al. (1989).
^c From Brown and Iverson (1992)
Analysis of the data bases implied that the trees within the dry and wet zones could be grouped together within a zone (Brown et al. 1989). Within the moist zone, the analysis indicated that different data bases were not statistically homogeneous and theoretically could not be grouped. For practical purposes, however, the moist zone was considered to be the population of interest and the different data bases were considered to be subsamples from this population. Thus a combined regression for the pooled data sets was developed (Brown et al. 1989).
Biomass regression equations for several species of pines combined into one data base was also developed. A simple method for estimating the biomass of palms was also developed (Frangi and Lugo 1985).
Broadleaf forests: Details of the: (1) evaluation of several linear, nonlinear, and transformed nonlinear regression equations, (2) the testing of the behavior of the equations, and (3) selection of the final equations are given in Brown et al. (1989). A listing of the original data are given in Appendix 2.
The behaviour of all these regression equations as a function of dbh is illustrated in Figure 1. Application of all five regression equations for smaller diameter classes shows that for a given dbh biomass is highest for trees in the moist zone (Fig. 1a; Eq. 3.2.3 and 3.2.4), followed by trees in the wet zone (Eq. 3.2.5), and trees in the dry zone (Eq. 3.2.1 and 3.2.2).
The regression equation for dry zone trees given by Eq. 3.2.1 gives higher biomass per tree for a given diameter than the regression developed for the Mexican dry zone (Eq. 3.2.2; see Fig. la). As tree diameters increase, the difference becomes larger so that by diameter 40 cm (the upper limit for the data bases) the biomass per tree based on Eq. 3.2.1 is about 1.7 times higher than that based on Eq. 3.2.2. The main reason for this trend is that the trees used for developing Eq. 3.2.1 grow in a dry deciduous forest zone of India that receives about 1200 mm/year of rainfall in contrast to the dry deciduous forests in Mexico where rainfall averaged about 700 mm/year. The result of this difference in rainfall regime is that the Mexican trees are shorter than those in India, and thus biomass for a given diameter is less. For example, height for the Mexican trees commonly ranged between 4 to 9 m, with an average height of about 7 m (Martinez-Yrizar et al. 1994), whereas those in
India had heights up to about 15m (Bandhu 1973).
The tropical dry forest zone describes areas where rainfall is less than 1500 mm/year or so. For a dry zone where rainfall is similar to that for the dry deciduous zone of Mexico (about 700 to 900 mm/year or less), Eq. 3.2.2 could be used. For dry zone 'forests at the wetter end of the zone, i.e., rainfall greater than 900 mm/year, Eq. 3.2.1 should be used. However, because of the high variability of tree biomass with rainfall in the dry zone, it is recommended that local biomass regression equations be developed, or at least a few trees harvested to test how well the two equations presented here fit the local conditions.
The moist zone equations (Eq. 3.2.3 and 3.2.4) give essentially the same biomass estimates for trees with dbhs up to about 80 cm (Fig. 1b). After this diameter limit, estimates of the biomass per tree diverge markedly. However, the estimates from Eq. 3.2.4 are closer to the original data (cf. Appendix 2) and the r^2 of the regression equation is higher than for Eq. 3.2.3 (0.97 versus 0.84). It is not recommended that any of the regression equations be used for estimating the biomass of trees whose dbh greatly exceeds the range of the original data. However, if trees with dbh greater than 160 cm or so are encountered in an inventory, it is recommended that Eq. 3.2.3 be used for these trees as the function behaves better in these larger classes. Equation 3.2.4 is an exponential function and biomass per tree increases rapidly at large diameters. In the ideal situation where many trees with dbhs larger than 150 cm are encountered, some new field measurement of their biomass
should be made (see section 4.).
It is important that the biomass of trees with large dbh be estimated as accurately as possible because their contribution to the biomass of a forest stand is much more than their number suggests. For example, in mature moist tropical forests, the biomass in trees of dbh greater than 70 cm can account for as much as 40% of the stand's biomass density, although the number of these trees corresponds to less than 5% of all trees (Brown and Lugo 1992, Brown 1996).
The regression equation for trees in the wet zone (Eq. 3.2.5) matches the original data well and behaves well at larger diameters. As with the moist equation however, caution should be taken in using the equation much beyond the original data.
Palm trees: In many tropical moist and wet forests, palms are sometimes common. Estimating their biomass is difficult as few studies have been made on this topic. Furthermore, many different species exist with different forms, different proportions of their mass in leaves, and different stem densities. To estimate the biomass of palms, height measurements as well as diameter measurements will be needed. A simple way to estimate their biomass is to compute the volume of the stem as a cylinder (basal area x stem height) and then multiply this by an estimate of the density. Wood density of palms varies considerably by species and within the stem of the same species, and it can range from about 0.25 to almost 1.0 t/m^3 (Rich 1987). The biomass of the leaves also has to be added, which in total may range from 10 to 65% of the stem biomass (Frangi and Lugo 1985, Rich 1986). An alternative approach is to use a regression equation developed for the palm Prestoea montana, a common
species in the moist forests of Puerto Rico. Two regression equations were developed, based on either total height or stem height as follows (from Frangi and Lugo 1985):
(Eq. 3.1.6)
Y (biomass, kg) = 10.0 + 6.4 * total height (m); n=25, r^2=0.96
(Eq. 3.1.7)
Y (biomass, kg) = 4.5 + 7.7 * stem height (m); n=25, r^2=0.90
An example is given here to demonstrate the variation in the estimates from the three different methods. For a palm of 15 cm diameter, 15 m total height, and 12 m stem height, the biomass estimates are:
Method 1
Based on volume: stem volume = 0.21 m^3, wood density = 0.25 t/m^3; stem mass = 53.0 kg; assume leaves are 65% of stem, total biomass = 87 kg
Method 2
Based on Eq. 3.2.6: total biomass = 86 kg
Method 3
Based on Eq. 3.2.7: total biomass = 97 kg
The three methods give similar values. Unless the forest is composed mostly of palms, any of these methods would be suitable for estimating biomass of palms scattered throughout moist or wet forests. However, the variation in wood density by species must be taken into consideration; higher wood density estimates need to be used for denser species. In the case of forest stands where palms are dominant, local biomass regression equations would need to be developed, or at least measurements of wood density of dominant palm species would need to be measured (see section 4.).
Conifer forests: Few data on the biomass of conifer trees for tropical zones exist. To develop a preliminary biomass regression equation, data on the biomass of harvested pine trees from eight literature sources, including pine forests from the southeastern USA, India, and Puerto Rico were compiled. Several species of pine included in these sources were combined into one data base and analyzed as was done for the broadleaf forests. The resulting equation is:
(Eq. 3.1.8)
Y(kg) = exp{-1.170+2.119*ln(D)}
D = dbh, cm; range in dbh = 2-52 cm; number of trees =63; adjusted r^2=0.98
For most situations where an estimate of the biomass density of pine forests is needed, Eq. 3.2.8 can be used. However, if time and resources are available, a local biomass regression equation should be developed.
Below is an example of how to use the biomass regression equations with stand tables. The stand table example is for a moist forest in Ghana. Biomass density of this forest was estimated using the moist equation, Eq. 3.2.3. Maximum diameters are at about the upper limit for this equation (about 150 cm).
Use if the biomass regression equation, an example
Diameter class (cm)
1. Number trees/ha
2. Mid-point of class, cm ^a
155 ^b
3. Biomass of tree at mid-point of class using Eq. 3.2.3; kg
4. Biomass of all trees, t/ha = (product of rows 1 and 3)/1000
Total aboveground biomass = sum of row 4 = 391 t/ha
^a As no additional information was available the mid-point of the diameter class was assumed to represent the class; as the classes are wide this could overestimate the biomass density estimate.
^b Assumed to be diameter of largest class; choice of this upper limit when no additional data are present is problematic (see section 3.2.4).
^c To convert kg to t
Although the approach presented here has emphasized the use of regression equations with stand tables, the regression equations can also be used with individual tree measurements from stands. Using individual tree measurements overcomes the problem of choosing the diameter of the class.
3.2.3 PROBLEMS WITH REGRESSION APPROACH
Several problems exist with this method, namely: (1) the small number of large diameter trees used in the regression equations (e.g., for the moist equation, the largest dbh was 148 cm, with only five trees >100 cm diameter), (2) the open-ended nature of the large diameter classes of the stand tables, (3) wide and often uneven-width diameter classes, (4) selection of the appropriate average diameter to represent a diameter class, and (5) missing smaller diameter classes (i.e., incomplete stand tables to minimum diameter of 10 cm). To overcome the potential problem of the lack of large trees (problem 1), equations were selected that were expected to behave reasonably up to 150 cm or so or upon extrapolation somewhat beyond this limit (Brown et al. 1989). Rarely are stand tables encountered that contain trees much larger than the maximum dbh used in the regression.
The problem with open-ended large diameter classes is knowing what diameter to assign to that class. Sometimes additional information is included that educated estimates can be made, but this is often not the case. Clearly, further improvements in reporting the distribution of the largest diameter trees in stand tables would improve the reliability of the biomass density estimates as it is often these large trees that account for significant proportions of the total biomass density (Brown and Lugo 1992, Brown 1995). In the above example, the approximately 1.3 trees greater than 120 cm constitute about 70% of the biomass represented by the 794 trees in the smallest class.
Many inventories often report stand tables with wide and/or uneven-width classes. The most unbiased biomass density estimate is obtained when diameter classes are small, about 10 cm wide or smaller, and are even-width for the whole stand table. This problem is illustrated by the following example for a moist forest where in Example A the classes are 10 cm wide and in Example B two classes are combined to make them 20 cm wide.
Example A
Diameter class (cm)
Number of stems/ha
Biomass/tree (kg) at mid-point of class(Eq. 3.2.3)
Biomass of trees (product of rows 1 and 2), t/ha
Total biomass density =178 t/ha
Example B
Diameter class (cm)
1. Number of stems/ha
2. Biomass/tree (kg) at mid-point of class(Eq. 3.2.3)
3. Biomass of trees (product of rows 1 and 2), t/ha
Total biomass density =196 t/ha
The biomass density in Example B, based on the 20 cm wide classes, is about 10% higher than that in Example A, based on the 10 cm wide class. In general, wider classes will overestimate the biomass density. However, regular estimation of biomass density as part of inventory analysis or accessibility to the field data should not encounter these problems because original inventory data generally includes details down to individual trees. Estimating the biomass of individual trees in inventory plots directly would overcome problems (2) to (4) given above. Foresters have wide experience in these type of calculations as they are basically no different from estimating volumes from volume equations.
To overcome the problem of incomplete stand tables, an approach has been developed for estimating the number of trees in smaller diameter classes based on number of trees in larger classes (Gillespie et al. 1992). It is recommended that the method described here be used for estimating the number of trees in one to two small classes only to complete a stand table to a minimum diameter of 10 cm. It is also emphasized that this method should only be used when no other data for biomass estimation are available.
The method is based on the concept that uneven-aged forest stands have a characteristic exponential or "inverse J-shaped" diameter distribution. These distribution have a large number of trees in the small classes and gradually decreasing numbers in medium to large classes. Pull details of the theory behind the approach and of the different methods tested are given in Gillespie et al. (1992). The best method was the one that estimated the number of trees in the missing smallest class as the ratio of the number of trees in dbh class 1 (the smallest reported class) to the number in dbh class 2 (the next smallest class) times the number in dbh class 1. This method is demonstrated in the following example:
1 Assume that: the minimum diameter class is 20-30 cm and we wish to estimate the number of trees in the 10-20 cm class.
2 The number of trees in the 20-30 cm class equals 80, and the number in the 30-40 cm class equals 35.
3 The estimated number of trees in the 10-20 cm class is the number in the 20-30 cm class x (number in 20-30/number in 30-40); this equals 80 x (80/35) =183.
To use this approach, diameter classes must be of uniform width, preferably no wider than 10-15 cm, and should not be used for estimating numbers of trees in more than two "missing' classes.
3.3 BIOMASS ESTIMATES OF INDIVIDUAL
The regression equations reported above can be applied to inventories of individual trees planted in lines, as living fence posts, for dune stabilization, for fuelwood, etc. Biomass estimates for individual trees are particularly useful in drier regions where the trees are grown for all the aforementioned products and services. However, as discussed above, the regression equations for dry zone trees are based on a small data base. Furthermore, trees grown in lines or in more open conditions generally display different branching patterns and are likely to have more biomass for a given diameter than a similar diameter tree grown in a stand. Although the above regression equations could be used where no other data exist for rough approximations, new regression equations need to be developed for trees growing in open conditions.
3.4 BIOMASS ESTIMATES FOR PLANTATIONS
Estimating the biomass density of plantations can be done using techniques similar to those for native forests as described above. Inventoried volume can be converted to aboveground biomass density using Eq. 3.1.1 outlined in Section 3.1. However, the equation for BEFs (Eq. 3.1.4) would not necessarily work in the case of plantations of broadleaf species because tree form is likely to be different in managed forests and definitions of inventoried volumes are also likely to be different. It is recommended that BEFs be locally derived. The biomass regression equations for broadleaf species (Eq. 3.2.1-3.2.5) could also be used for plantations, but once again caution should be taken with their use. Direct biomass measurements of representative plantation trees should be made to check the validity of the regression equations, or even better local biomass regression equations should be developed. See Section 4 for further details on methods.
For plantations of conifer species, the average BEF of 1.3 given for pine forests in Section 3.1.3 could be used if measured volume was based on the total stem. In the case where diameters of individual plantation trees or diameter distributions are given, Eq. 3.2.8 could be used, taking the same precautions as for broadleaf species. Kadeba (1989) developed biomass regression equations for plantations of Pinus caribaea trees growing in the savanna zone of Nigeria with annual rainfall ranging from 1250 to 1800 mm/year. However, the data base spanned a small diameter range, about 15-25 cm, and each equation was based on 12 trees only. For situations that mimic the conditions of Kadeba's study, the reader is referred to his work.
In situations where lack of resources prevent the development of local biomass regression equations for plantations, use of any or the above approaches would give a reasonably good estimate of the aboveground biomass density.
3.5 BIOMASS OF OTHER FOREST COMPONENTS
This primer does not include methods or approaches for making biomass density estimates for (1) understorey (including e.g., bamboo or rattan), (2) belowground woody biomass such as fine and coarse roots, (3) forest floor fine litter (e.g., dead leaves, twigs, fruits, etc.), nor (4) lying and standing dead wood. Most efforts on biomass estimation to date have generally focused on the aboveground tree component because it accounts for the greatest fraction of total biomass density and the methods are straightforward and generally do not pose too many logistical problems. Commonly reported ranges of biomass density estimates for these other components are given below, although they must be used with caution as the data base on which they are built is limited.
Summary of estimates of biomass density of other forest components, expressed as a percent of aboveground biomass in trees
Component
Percent of aboveground! biomass of mature forest!
Understorey
Belowground (roots)
Fine litter (dead plant material)
Dead wood
(sources of these data are given in the text)
The amount of biomass in understorey shrubs, vines, and herbaceous plants can be variable but is generally about 3 percent or less of the aboveground biomass of more mature forests (Jordan and Uhl 1978, Tanner 1980, Hegarty 1989, Lugo 1992). However, in secondary forests or disturbed forest, this fraction could be higher (e.g., up to 30%; Brown and Lugo 1990, Lugo 1992) depending on age of the secondary forest and openness of canopy. Palms are common in many tropical moist forests and they are also often ignored in forest inventories. Their contribution to total biomass density can be very variable, from nearly 100 percent to less than a few percent (see section 3.2.1 above for more details on estimating the biomass of this component).
These estimates of R/S are based on only a few studies (about 30) and not all of them are consistent with respect to depth of sampling and nor whether coarse roots were included. It seems clear from this discussion that more studies of root biomass and their relationship with other factors such as aboveground biomass, climate and soil, are needed.
The amount of dead plant material in a forest, or detritus, is composed of fine litter on the forest floor, (leaves, fruits, flowers, twigs, bark fragments, branches less than 10 cm diameter, etc.), standing dead trees and snags, and lying dead wood greater than 10 cm diameter. The biomass density of fine litter ranges from about 2 to 16 t/ha (average of 6 t/ha or less than 5% of aboveground biomass), with higher values generally in moist environments although no clear trend is apparent in the data base (Brown and Lugo 1982). The amount of fine litter on the forest floor represents the balance between inputs from litterfall and outputs from decomposition, both of which vary widely across the tropics.
The amount of dead wood in tropical forests is poorly quantified but extremely variable. It is potentially a large pool of organic matter, perhaps accounting for an amount equivalent to less than 10 percent to more than 40 percent of the aboveground biomass of a forest depending upon forest age and climatic regime (Saldarriaga et al. 1986, Uhl et al. 1988, Uhl and Kauffman 1990; Delaney et al. 1997). Lack of data on this significant forest component obviously can lead to underestimates of the total amount of biomass in a forest.
It is clear from the above discussion that ignoring these other forest components can seriously underestimate the total biomass of a forest by an amount equivalent to about 50 percent or more of aboveground biomass. Although beyond the scope of this primer, it is apparent that logistically and economically feasible methods and approaches must be developed to estimate this significant quantity of biomass and its range of uncertainty, especially for improving estimates of terrestrial sources and sinks of carbon and biogeochemical cycles of other elements.
Forest type
Range of R/S
Average R/S
Moist forest growing on spodosols
Lowland moist forest
Montane moist forests
Deciduous forests
(e.g., tropical dry and seasonal forests)
<section>7</section>
4. PRIMARY DATA AD FIELD MEASUREMENT FOR BIOMASS ESTIMATION
4.1 IMPROVEMENTS IN FOREST INVENTORIES
4.2 FIELD MEASUREMENTS FOR DEVELOPING BIOMASS REGRESSION EQUATIONS
4.1 IMPROVEMENTS IN FOREST INVENTORIES
The data requirements for estimating aboveground biomass density are basically no different from those for estimating volumes from forest inventories. Careful measurement and reporting of all tree diameters and volume in inventory plots as part of a statistically sound sampling design are the basic primary data needs, data that foresters have been collecting for decades. To improve the data for biomass estimation, all inventories should be conducted according to some agreed-upon standard. The effort and resources involved in conducting forest inventories is difficult to match by other field data collection programs, thus it is important that as new inventories are planned the need for new types of data be considered, such as change in biomass for use in making greenhouse gas emission inventories. By including a few extra measurements or analyses at marginal costs, so much more information useful for biomass estimation can be obtained. This section will focus on what
additional measurements need to be taken to improve the utility of forest inventories for biomass estimation. As with all inventories, the forested area under study will need to be stratified into distinct strata, and the corresponding areas estimated. The product of biomass per ha for a given strata and the corresponding area will result in an estimate of the total biomass for the region.
 As a minimum, all trees of all species, whether presently commercial or not, to a minimum diameter of 10 cm or lower should be measured. Palm trees should also be inventoried where they occur. In drier forest formations or secondary forests, a larger proportion of the biomass will be in smaller diameter trees. Therefore, all trees to smaller diameters should be measured, e.g., to at least 5 cm minimum diameter.
 Stand tables should be reported with diameter classes of even width and no larger than 10 cm wide. All field measurements need to be archived so that follow-up studies or questions could be addressed.
 Stand tables must not group large diameter trees into one diameter class. Because of the importance of large trees to biomass density, serious errors could be introduced when assumptions about the number of large trees/ha are made.
 Estimation of volume should be standard for all inventories. However, standards are likely to vary among closed forests, open woodlands, and secondary forests, and the definition of measured volume must be clearly stated in inventory reports.
 For open forests/woodlands, young secondary forests, plantations, and individual trees plantings, it is preferable to use stand tables using small diameter classes or individual tree measurements.
 All inventory plots need to be located exactly on a map; this would allow for follow-up studies to measure biomass change for example.
 Information about inventoried areas and plots should be recorded, such as average height of stand, climatic zone, presence of natural disturbances (e.g., wildfires, tropical storms), average soil type (e.g., standard soil classification system and soil texture), elevation, and general topography (lowland, hilly, mountainous, steep slopes, etc.).
 Information on the degree of human disturbance, either past or present, in the inventory area is needed because it can affect aboveground biomass estimates and aid in explaining the estimates. Evidence of human disturbance includes presence of tree stumps, harvesting activity, logging roads or trails (old or new), other roads or tracks, cleared or young secondary forest patches (e.g., resulting from slash-and-burn agriculture), charcoal pits, and identification of tree species favored by humans.
 Other information such as distance to human settlements and fragmentation of forest area are also useful for assessing likely human impacts. A useful index for assessing fragmentation of forest is the ratio of the length of the perimeter of the forest to the area of the forest (perimeter-area ratio). This can be measured from aerial photos (often used in forest inventories) or remote sensing imagery if available.
4.2 FIELD MEASUREMENTS FOR DEVELOPING BIOMASS REGRESSION EQUATIONS
The aboveground oven-dry-weight of trees can be measured directly by felling them, oven-drying all components and then weighing them. However, it is not realistic to do this for all inventories. Instead, a practical solution is to develop regression equations based on data from felled trees where this is possible. Such functions should use some easily measurable dimension such as diameter (and sometimes height) as presented in Section 3.2.1. As discussed above, the equations presented in this primer are based on a relatively limited data base, especially for dry forest and conifer forest formations, and improvements in biomass estimation can be made with additional tree data.
During many forest inventories, a number of trees are felled to generate local volume equations. These same felled trees can be used for developing local biomass equations using the methods given below. In other situations, trees need to be selected for felling. The selection of these trees in multi-species forests poses a challenging sampling design, and it is recommended that the assistance of a forest biometrician be sought. However, as a guide, the selected trees must come from the population of interest, represent the major species in the forest, and represent all size classes. It is particularly important that trees in the larger diameter classes be well represented even though estimating their biomass is very time consuming because of their large size. If resources are limited, it is recommended that a couple of trees representing small, medium, and large diameters be selected and their biomass measured as described below. These could then be compared to the estimates
derived from the appropriate regression equation, and if they are within acceptable limits no further sampling is needed. If, however, they are not within acceptable limits further sampling and biomass measurements would be needed to develop local biomass equations.
1 As for volume equations, dbh, or diameter above the buttress, must be measured. In the case of multi-stemmed trees, common in dry or open forests and woodlands, the diameter at 0.3 m above the ground is often used instead of dbh, and height measurements are also recommended (for further details see Stewart et al. 1992).
2 After the trees are felled as close to the ground as possible, they should be divided into their components, including main stem, branches of different size classes, leaves and twigs, and fruits.
3 Small branches (<10 cm basal diameter), leaves and twigs, and fruits should be weighed fresh in the field. Several sub-samples (at least five) of each component must be collected and their fresh weight determined. Then they must be oven dried to constant weight at 105캜. Weighing of dried sub-samples should be done as soon as possible after removing them from the oven because they soon absorb moisture and gain weight. For each sub-sample, a ratio of oven-dry-to-fresh weight can be calculated and an average ratio calculated. Multiplication of the total fresh weight of each component by the corresponding oven-dry-to-fresh-weight ratio will result in an estimate of the dry weight of the component.
4 For the larger branches and main stem (>10 cm diameter), it is generally not practical to weigh these fresh in the field. Instead, they should be cut into sections and the volume of each section calculated. The oven-dry-weight of these sections is determined as the product of volume and density (oven-dry-weight per unit of green volume). To estimate density, a disk of wood from each section should be removed. The volume of the disk can be calculated as the cross-sectional area of the disk times the thickness (measured at four points, 90 to each other) or by the water-displacement method. The water-displacement method is based on the principle that an immersed object displaces its own volume of water. The disk is carefully immersed in a container of water (pushing it down with a sharp pointed object), and the increase in water level when the disk is fully immersed is used to measure the increase in volume. To improve accuracy the container of water can be made
absolutely full and as the disk is immersed all the water displaced by the disk is collected in a previously weighed container. The weight of the water displaced is weighed in grams and equals the volume of the disk in cm^3, because 1 g of water has a volume of 1 cm^3. Thus if the weight of the water displaced is 20 g, then the volume of the disk is 20 cm^3. After volume measurement the disk is oven dried to constant weight at 105캜; this weight divided by its volume gives density. The weight of the stem and branches is then calculated, making sure all the measurements are in the same units (volume in cm^3 and density in g/cm^3).
5 The sum of weights of all the components results in the total oven-dried weight of the tree, generally expressed in kg.
Once the biomass of all selected trees has been determined, a regression equation similar to those given in the table in Section 3.2.1 can be developed using an available statistical package. Once again, it is recommended that the assistance of a forest biometrician or statistician be sought at this stage. For trees from the dry zone it is recommended that the oven-dry weight of the tree be correlated to the height (H) as well as diameter (D). Such an equation could take the form:
mass of tree = a + b * HD^2, where a and b are regression coefficients
To develop local regression equations for palm trees, height is a better measure of biomass than diameter (see Section 3.2.1). At least three individuals from several height classes should be felled. For each palm tree, the height of the main stem should first be measured. Then the stem should be cut into three to four approximately equal length sections, depending upon the height, and their volume estimated. A disk from each section should be removed and its density (oven dry weight per green volume) measured as described above in step 4. The weight of the stem is then the sum of the product of the volume of each section and its density. The weight of the leaves then has to be determined. This can be determined by first counting the total number of leaves. Then about three to four leaves should be selected and the average of their oven-dry weight (at 105캜) determined. The total oven-dry weight of all leaves is calculated as the number of leaves multiplied by the dry weight
per leaf. The oven-dry weight of the inflorescence (flower or fruit) should also be measured and added to obtain the total weight. A simple linear regression equation of total oven-dry biomass of the palm versus its height should be developed as given above in Section 3.2.1.
<section>8</section>
5. BIOMASS DENSITY ESTIMATES FOR DEVELOPING COUNTIES BASED ON EXISTING INVENTORIES
5.1 TROPICAL AFRICAN COUNTRIES
5.2 TROPICAL AMERICAN COUNTRIES
5.3 TROPICAL ASIAN COUNTRIES
The following tables for the three main tropical regions include examples of biomass estimates for different forest types estimated from forest inventories and the methods described above. All biomass estimates are based on trees to a minimum dbh of 10 cm and represent average values over the inventory area, which in some countries is the total forest area (indicated by the word "National" in parenthesis in the following tables).
5.1 TROPICAL AFRICAN COUNTRIES
Country
Forest type
General climate
Aboveground biomass (t/ha)
Benin
Closed forest
Dry
Tree savanna
Dry
Burkina Faso (National)
Degraded tree savanna
Dry - long dry season
Cameroon
Primary
Moist
Gambia (National)
Gallery forest
Moist - dry season
Closed woodland
Dry
Open woodland
Dry
Tree savanna
Dry
Ghana
Closed forest
Moist-short dry season
Guinea (National)
Mixed: closed, open, secondary
Moist
Mozambique
Dense forest
Moist - short dry season
Dense forest
Moist - dry season
Dense forest
Dry - long dry season
Inventory sources in order by country are: Marsch 1976, FAO 1983, Centre Technique Forestier Tropical 1969, Forster 1983, Alder 1982, ATLANTA Consult, n.d., FAO 1981.
5.2 TROPICAL AMERICAN COUNTRIES
Country
Forest type
General climate
Aboveground biomass (t/ha);
Bolivia
Closed forest
Moist
Brazil
Closed forest
Moist
Ecuador
Closed forest
Moist
French Guyana
Closed forest
Moist
Riparian forest
Moist
Savanna forest
Moist
Guatemala (Peten area)
Closed forest
Moist
Guyana (1)
Closed forest
Moist
Logged forest
Moist
Wallaba forest
Dry
Guyana (2)
Mixed forest
Moist
Low mixed forest
Moist
Liana forest
Moist
Wallaba forest
Moist
Wallaba forest on white sands
Moist
Nicaragua (1)
Orifino forest
Moist
Lowland mixed
Moist
Nicaragua (2)
Mature forest
Moist
Secondary
Moist
Panama
High density-mixed
Moist
Low density-mixed
Moist
Campnosperma forest high density
Moist
Campnosperma forest low density
Moist
High density-mixed
Wet
Low density-mixed
Wet
High density-mixed
Pre- & Lower montane rain
Low density-mixed
Pre- & Lower montane rain
Peru
Primary
Moist
Lightly logged
Moist
Heavily logged
Moist
Late secondary
Moist
Young secondary
Moist
Flooded secondary
Moist
Low forest
Moist
Surinam
Upland forest
Moist
Small crown-upland
Moist
Savanna forest
Moist
Riparian forest
Moist
Liana forest
Moist
Wallaba forest
Moist
Venezuela
Semi-deciduous
Dry
Inventory sources In order by country are: Sachtler 1979, FAO 1978, FAO 1971 a, Centre Technique Forestier Tropical 1975, FAO 1970a, Rees, 1963, FAO 1970b, FAO 1969, FAO/UNDP 1972, FAO 1972, Jankovic 1969, de Milde and Inglis 1974a,b, FAO 1971b
5.3 TROPICAL ASIAN COUNTRIES
Country
Forest type
General climate
Aboveground biomass (t/ha)
Bangladesh (1)
Closed - large crowns
Moist
Closed - small crowns
Moist
Disturbed closed
Moist
Disturbed open
Moist
Bangladesh (2)
Closed - large crowns
Moist
Closed - small crowns
Moist
Cambodia (1)
Dense
Moist
Semi-dense
Moist
Secondary
Moist
Open
Moist
Open
Dry
Cambodia (2)
Well to poorly stocked evergreen
Moist
Deciduous
Moist
India
High to low volume closed
Dry
Forest fallow
Dry
Malaysia-Peninsular (National)
Superior to moderate hill
Moist
Poor hill
Moist
Upper hill
Moist
Disturbed hill
Moist
Logged hill
Moist
Forest fallow
Moist
Freshwater swamp
Moist
Disturbed freshwater swamp
Moist
Logged freshwater swamp
Moist
Malaysia - Sarawak
Mixed dipterocarps-dense stocking, flat to undulating
Moist
terrain
Mixed dipterocarps-dense stocking, mountainous
Moist
Mixed dipterocarps-medium stocking, flat to mountainous
Moist
Myanmar
Evergreen
Mixed deciduous
Indaing forest
Philippines
Old-growth dipterocarp
Moist
Logged dipterocarp
Moist
Sri Lanka
Evergreen-high yield
Moist
Evergreen-medium yield
Moist
Evergreen-low yield
Moist
Evergreen-logged
Moist
Secondary
Moist
Inventory sources in order by country are: de Milde et al. 1985, Drigo et al. 1988, Rollet 1962, FAO 1971c, Government of India 1972, Government of Malaysia 1987, FAO 1973, FAO 1984-1985, Philippine-German Forest Resources Inventory Project, 1986-1988, FAO/UNDP 1969, Royal Forest Department of Thailand 1980.
<section>9</section>
6. BIOMASS ESTIMATES FROM GIS MODELING
6.1 GENERAL APPROACH
6.2 EXAMPLES OF RESULTS
A new approach for estimating biomass density will be presented in this section that is based on a modelling method with GIS (geographic information systems) technology. It uses various existing digital data bases and maps of reliable inventories, population density, climate, vegetation, ecofloristic zones, soils, and topography. This method was developed as a means to extrapolate reliable inventory data that is generally limited in area coverage to biomass density estimates at larger scales, such as continents.
6.1 GENERAL APPROACH
Forest biomass density has been modelled in a multi-stage approach using GIS software packages and a variety of spatial and statistical data bases. For estimating forest biomass density using a GIS, the present distribution of forest biomass density was assumed to be based on the potential amount that the landscape can support under prevailing environmental conditions, and the cumulative impact of human activities on forests that reduce its biomass density. Many spatial data layers have been developed from existing data bases or were prepared by specialists (e.g., for the FRA 1990 Project; FAO 1993). These data layers were entered into a GIS (in this case ARC/INFO-GRID) and processed according to specifications of the model. The following GIS data layers, or digital maps, and statistical data bases were used as inputs to the modelling effort (further details are given in Brown et al. 1993, Iverson et al. 1994):
 Climatic index map based on FAO meteorological station data
 Precipitation map
 FAO soils map, recoded into depth, textural, and slope classes
 Topography map
 FRA 1990 Ecofloristic Zone maps
 FRA 1990 vegetation maps
 National and subnational boundary map
 Subnational population data (1970, 1980, and 1990) from FAO
 Biomass density estimates from reliable forest inventory data using the above methods
The first step in this analysis was to estimate a potential biomass density (PBD) for forests. This was accomplished by first developing an index of potential biomass density based on climatic, edaphic, and topographic factors. The potential biomass density map was masked with a forest map, produced by reclassifying all the forest classes of the FRA 1990 vegetation maps into one forest class. The potential biomass density index (PBI) was calculated according to a simple model, based on overlaying the following GIS data layers:
PBI = climatic index + precipitation + soil (texture, depth, slope) + topography
Each of these factors was spatially represented by a numerical scale whose values were ranked according to how the particular factor affected forest biomass (details of the scaling are given in Iverson et al. 1994). The digital maps were overlain according to the above model and the results calibrated and validated using existing forest inventories for mature forests, literature sources for small scale ecological studies, and the FRA 1990 ecofloristic zone (EFZ) map (Figure 2).
Figure 2 - Map of estimates of potential biomass density classes for forests of tropical African countries. The units are in Mg/ha which is the same as t/ha (1 Mg = 106 g = 1 ton).
The final step was to add the influence of all human activities that result in a reduction of biomass of forests. This step was accomplished by using the biomass estimates from the reliable forest inventory data. The first step was to calculate degradation ratios, defined here as biomass density estimates from the inventories (representing all forests of a subnational unit) divided by the potential biomass density for all forests in the same subnational unit. Several models were tried, but the best results (highest r^2) were obtained from linear models of degradation ratios versus the natural logarithm of population density of the subnational unit, stratified into main ecoregions or forest types (e.g. closed forests and woodlands). A similar relationship was found for forest cover and population density stratified by ecological and geographic zones (FAO 1993). The significant relationships between degradation ratio or forest cover and population density are not meant to
imply that the relationships are causal; many other socio-economic factors are involved. However, the empirical relationships are useful because data on population density are generally readily available, but reliable data on other socio-economic factors are often not so available.
Figure 3 - Relationship between degradation ratios (biomass density estimates from the inventories divided by the potential biomass density for all forests in the same subnational unit) and the natural logarithm (Ln) of the population density (number of persons/km^2) for (a) closed forests and (b) open forests and woodlands. The second row of numbers on the x-axis of (a) are the actual population densities corresponding to the natural logarithm values.
(a) Closed forest
(b) Woodland
The data and regression equations used for the map of Africa are shown in Figure 3. The data base for these regression equations is a combination of data from inventories in tropical Asia and Africa. The estimates of degradation ratios for a given population density for these two regions overlap well perhaps implying a similar pattern of forest use. These regression equations were used with the potential biomass density map and population data to produce a map of degradation ratios by subnational regions for each tropical African country as shown in Figure 4. The degradation ratio map was then used with the potential biomass density map to produce a map of actual forest biomass density. As with all regression equations, the ones shown in Figure 3 should not be extrapolated too much beyond the data. Degradation of forest biomass density is not expected to continue according to the trends shown in Figure 3 at high population densities. For example, in the more industrialized
countries, deforestation and degradation have been reversed irrespective of population development as other socioeconomic factors exert more influence.
6.2 EXAMPLES OF RESULTS
To date, this method has been completely applied to the tropical Asian and Africa regions only. An example of the map of actual biomass density for tropical Africa is shown in Figure 5. Verification of this approach with inventory data not used in the model suggests that it is sound. However, the results are presently limited by the quality of the input data such as the small number and coverage of reliable forest inventories, FAO soils map, and the current vegetation maps. Improvements in reliability of estimates will be brought about with improvements in these input data.
The results of the GIS modelling can be by region, subregion, or country. They will usually consist of area-weighted biomass density estimates (t/ha) summarized by various vegetation and ecofloristic zones (see below). Because of the low resolution in the input data bases, reporting below the national scale will result in decreasing reliability of results. It is therefore justified only in large countries such as India or Zaire.
Estimates of potential and actual biomass (density and total), as determined by modelling in a GIS, for most of the tropical countries in tropical Asia and Africa are shown in Table 6.1. Many of these values can be compared to the biomass density estimates given in Section 5 as a means of validating the modelling results.
Figure 4 - Map of degradation ratios, grouped into five classes, for subnational units of tropical African countries which contain forests.
Figure 5 - Map of estimates of actual biomass density classes for forests of tropical African countries. The units are in Mg/ha which is the same as t/ha (1 Mg = 106 g = 1 ton).
As of about 1980, the actual biomass densities of forests in tropical Asia were about 50% of their potential densities. Forests of Brunei, Cambodia, and Sarawak/Sabah have the highest actual biomass densities, >300 t/ha, representing about 58-72% of their potential amount. At the other end of the scale are the forests of Bangladesh and India that have actual biomass densities of<170 t/ha, or about 37% of their potential. Forests in these two countries appear to have been subject to high human pressure that has reduced the forest stock to very low values on average.
Of the 37 African countries with tropical forests, about half contained forests that appear to contain less than 60% of their potential biomass density. On average, forests in Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Liberia have the highest actual biomass densities at > 300 t/ha which represents about 65-92% of their potential biomass density. All these countries are dominated by lowland moist forests. Countries dominated by very dry climates such as Botswana, Somalia, Zimbabwe, and countries of the Sahel have the lowest actual biomass densities, <50 t/ha.
Table 6.1
Area-weighted average potential (without human impacts) and actual (with human impacts as of about 1980) biomass density estimates (t/ha) and degradation ratios (DR = inventory biomass density divided by potential biomass density) for tropical Asian and African countries.
Country/Region
Potential (t/ha)
Actual (t/ha)
DR
ASIA
Bangladesh
Brunei
Cambodia
India
Indonesia
Laos
Myanmar
Malaysia
Peninsular
Sarawak/Sabah
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Vietnam
Average (area weighted)
AFRICA
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
CAR
Chad
Congo
Cote d'Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea Bissau
Kenya
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mozambique
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
The biomass data were also summarized by ecoregions (reclassified ecofloristic zone map) as shown in Table 6.2. The general trends in biomass density by ecoregion for tropical Asia and Africa are consistent with expected patterns of biomass distribution: decreasing biomass density with decreasing moisture and increasing elevation. Most of the total biomass in continental Asia is in the lowland seasonal forests (52%) and only a small fraction is in the lowland dry forests (2%). However, in insular Asia, 89% of the total biomass is in the lowland moist ecoregion with only a trace in the seasonal zone. Forests in the continental dry zone and the insular seasonal zone appear to be the most degraded with actual biomass densities that are about 30-40% of their potential.
In general, forests in a given ecoregion of Africa have degradation ratios closer to 1.00, i.e., forest are less degraded than those of Asia (Table 6.2), presumably because of the lower population densities in the forested regions of Africa at present. The degradation ratios indicate that degradation increases with increasing aridity in both lowland and montane ecoregions of Africa, and that montane zones are more seriously degraded than lowland zones. The more advanced degradation of the montane zones of Africa probably reflect the more favorable climate that is generally preferred for human habitation and agriculture.
Table 6.2
Area-weighted average potential (without human impacts) and actual (with human impacts as of about 1980) biomass density (t/ha), and degradation ratios (DR = inventory biomass density divided by potential biomass density) for forests of tropical Asia and Africa by ecoregion.
Ecoregion
Potential
Actual (t/ha)
DR
CONTINENTAL TROPICAL ASIA:
Lowland moist
Lowland seasonal
Lowland dry
Montane moist
Montane seasonal
INSULAR TROPICAL ASIA
Lowland moist
Lowland seasonal
Montane moist
TROPICAL AFRICA
Lowland moist
Lowland seasonal
Lowland dry
Lowland very dry
Montane moist
Montane seasonal
<section>a</section>
7. FUTURE DIRECTIONS TO ESTIMATE BIOMASS CHANGE
7.1 BIOMASS CHANGE WITH FIELD STUDIES
7.2 BIOMASS CHANGE WITH REMOTE SENSING/FIELD STUDIES AND GIS MODELLING
A goal of any forest resource monitoring program must be to address change in biomass as well as its state. Estimating national emissions of CO[2] on a regular basis or monitoring CO[2] mitigation projects also require information on change in biomass, both losses or gains. Because no real attempts have been made in the past to estimate the state of biomass in most tropical countries, estimating its change becomes a very difficult task. To substantially reduce errors in estimates of the state of biomass and its change, a new approach is needed that will incorporate in its design methodology for monitoring biomass density and its change more directly.
One way to estimate changes in biomass density and total biomass is to combine data on forest area change, by vegetation type, with biomass density values for the same vegetation types. Vegetation-cover transition matrices produced from the interpretation of remote sensing imagery, such as were produced by the FRA 1990 Project (FAO 1995) can provide data on forest-area change. This approach will only provide an "educated estimate" of biomass change because although the area change will have a high degree of statistical reliability at the regional and global levels, there will have been little to no improvement in the forest biomass density values.
7.1 BIOMASS CHANGE WITH FIELD STUDIES
A more comprehensive and reliable approach for estimating biomass change is to combine new field studies with analysis of high resolution remote sensing imagery. The remote sensing efforts would be used to delineate forests into various distinct biomass strata. Then, using a statistical design, permanent plots in these forest strata could be established, for example, by using the methods described in Lund (1992). For estimating biomass density directly, stand tables are sufficient with use of the generic biomass regression equations given in Section 3.2, or locally derived ones where resources allow (see Section 4.). At least two measurements on permanent plots are needed to estimate biomass change. These measurements should preferably be a minimum of 5 year apart, particularly in forests vulnerable to change. However, results from a one-time survey combined with change in area data could provide a more reliable pan-tropical estimate of biomass change than any one available
at present.
The established permanent plots must be remeasured regularly and be integrated into a framework of continuous forest monitoring. This approach will provide the most accurate and precise estimates of total biomass and biomass density change for policy makers.
7.2 BIOMASS CHANGE WITH REMOTE SENSING/FIELD STUDIES AND GIS MODELLING
A key component of any resource monitoring program is to try and understand the processes affecting change. A better understanding of the processes involved will lead to improved planning and control of forest biomass degradation and ultimately economic savings. Furthermore, understanding the mechanisms involved in forest biomass change will enable predictions about future trends in forest resources to be made which will be directly applicable to the local demands, timber trade, and global issues of concern such as global change and biodiversity.
The basic approach would be to develop a model that relates loss in biomass density, e.g., the degradation ratios, to readily measurable indices of human activity and bio-physical parameters. A similar model could be developed for forest area loss, so that a combination of the two models would give total biomass change. The availability of modem technology of remote sensing and GIS makes this task feasible. The models should include the spatial component of the landscape and human activities.
The approach would be to use the GIS data layers such as those identified above in Section 6.1 and new ones as they become available. New data layers will likely result from remote sensing and field studies. These new GIS data layers could be combined in models to obtain various indices that most likely influence or are influenced by human use of the land such as: (1) bio-physical and climatic factors, (2) fragmentation indices (e.g., perimeter/area ratios of forest area), (3) transportation networks (e.g., roads, rivers, railways), (4) population density and it rate of growth, and (5) socio-economic and political factors (e.g., land tenure, market availability, GNP/capita). How bio-physical and climatic factors regulate potential forest biomass is reasonably well understood. What is not well understood is what measure of human activity should be used in the models. To date, percent forest cover and degradation of forest biomass density have been shown to be highly
correlated with population density at subnational levels when stratified into ecological zones. But, as stated above, the high correlation does not imply causal relationships. We know that deforestation and degradation cannot continue indefinitely; eventually a limit is reached, beyond which forest cover and biomass density levels. Moreover, other socioeconomic factors will eventually become active and reverse the trends as has been the case in industrialized countries.
To bring about these new directions in estimating state and change in biomass will require a concerted effort and expenditure of resources. A first step is to increase training in GIS analysis, biomass estimation, field-inventory operations, and remote sensing analysis, in all countries. This could be accomplished by developing networks between forestry personnel in tropical countries and institutions performing these kinds of activities. A sharing of data bases among countries is needed also so that the issues of forest cover and biomass change can continue to be monitored with improved understanding of the mechanisms and processes that influence the changes.
<section>b</section>
8. REFERENCES
Alder, D., 1982. The development of forest energy resources Ghana. Forest inventory report for Subri River, Bonsa River, Neung and Pra Suhien forest reserves. GHA/74/013, Field document, Project Report No. 2, FAO, Takoradi, Ghana.
ATLANTA Consult, n.d. Inventaire forestier de la Guinee forestiere. Rapport de Synthese, Hamburg, Germany.
Bandhu, D., 1973. Chakia project tropical deciduous forest ecosystems. Pages 39-61 m L. Kern (ed.), Modeling forest ecosystems. EDFB-IBP-737, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Tennessee, USA.
Brown, S., 1990. Volume expansion factors for tropical forests. Unpublished Paper, Prepared for the Forest resource Assessment-1990 Project (available from author).
Brown, S., 1996. Tropical forests and the global carbon cycle: estimating state and change in biomass density. Pages 135-144 in M. Apps and D. Price (eds.), The role of forest ecosystems and forest management in the global carbon cycle. NATO Series. Springer Verlag. NY.
Brown, S. and G. Gaston, 1995. Use of forest inventories and geographic information systems to estimate biomass density of tropical forests: application to tropical Africa. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, in press.
Brown, S., A. J. R. Gillespie, and A. E. Lugo, 1989. Biomass estimation methods for tropical forests with applications to forest inventory data. Forest Science 35:881-902.
Brown, S., A. J. R. Gillespie, and A. E. Lugo, 1991. Biomass of tropical forests of South and Southeast Asia. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 21:111-117.
Brown, S. and L. R. Iverson, 1992. Biomass estimates for tropical forests. World Resources Review 4:366-384.
Brown, S., L. R. Iverson, A. Prasad, and D. Liu, 1993. Geographic distribution of carbon in biomass and soils of tropical Asian forests. Geocarto International 8(4):45-59.
Brown, S. L., Iverson, and A. E. Lugo, 1994. Land use and biomass changes of forests in Peninsular Malaysia during 1972-82: use of GIS analysis. Chapter 4 in V. H. Dale (ed.), Effects of land use change on atmospheric CO[2] concentrations: Southeast Asia as a case study. Springer Verlag, NY.
Brown, S. and A. E. Lugo, 1982. The storage and production of organic matter in tropical forests and their role in the global carbon cycle. Biotropica 14: 161-187.
Brown, S. and A. E. Lugo, 1984. Biomass of tropical forests: A new estimate based on forest volumes. Science 223:1290-1293.
Brown, S. and A. E. Lugo, 1990. Tropical secondary forests. Journal of Tropical Ecology 6:1-32.
Brown, S. and A. E. Lugo, 1992. Above ground biomass estimates for tropical moist forests of the Brazilian Amazon. Interciencia 17:8-18.
Brown, S., J. Sathaye, M. Cannell, and P. Kauppi, 1996. Mitigation of carbon emissions to the atmosphere by forest management. Commonwealth Forestry Re view 75:80-91.
Callister, D. J., 1992, Illegal tropical timber trade: Asia-Pacific. TRAFFIC International, Cambridge, UK. 83 pp.
Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, 1975. Inventaire papetier en Guyane Francaise. Fascicule I, II, and III. Republique Francaise de la Guyane, Office National des Forets.
Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, 1969. Republic Federal du Cameroon. Inventaire de 100.000 hectares de foret dense dans la region d'Edea. Fascicule I and II, Nogent-sur-Marne, France.
Delaney, M., S. Brown, A.E. Lugo, A. Torres-Lezama and N. Bello-Qunitero, 1997. The quantity and turnover of dead wood in permanent forest plots in six life zones of Venezuela, Biotropica, in press.
de Milde, R. and C. J. Inglis, 1974a. Forestry development in Surinam. Inventory of the Kabalebo area. Project Working Document No. 9, FO:/SF/SUR/71/506, FAO, Rome, Italy.
de Milde, R. and C. J. Inglis, 1974b. Forestry development in Surinam. Inventory of the Fallawatra area. Project Working Document No. 7, FO:/SF/SUR/71/506, FAO, Rome, Italy.
de Milde, R., Md. Shaheduzzaman, and R. Drigo, 1985. The high forest in the Chittagong District. Volumes 1 and 2, FAO/UNDP Project BGD/79/017, Field Document No. 11, Rome, Italy.
Drigo, R., Md. Shaheduzzaman, and J. A. Chowdhury, 1988. Inventory of forest resources of southern Sylhet Forest Division. Assistance to the Forestry Section-Phase ii. FAO/UNDP Project BGD/85/085, Field Document No. 3, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1969. Estudio de los recursos agricolas y forestales del norteste, Nicaragua. Informe Final, Tomo iii. El desarrollo Forestal, Appendecies al Tomo iii. FAO/SF: 49/NIC-2, Rome, Italy.
FAO/UNDP, 1969. Pre-investment study on forest industries development. Ceylon, Final Report, Vol. II. Forest resources and management. FAO/SF: 60/CEY-5, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1970a. Estudio de preinversion sobre desarrollo forestal. Guatemala. Informe Final Volumen ii, FAO/SF: 81/GUA 6, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1970b. Forest industries development survey: Guyana. Inventory of the Ebini-Itaki area. Technical Report 9, FO: SF/GUY 9, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1971a. Estudio de preinversion para del desarrollo forestal del Noroccidente, Ecuador. Informe Final, Tomo ii, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1971b. Estudio de preinversion para del desarrollo forestal de la Guyana Venezolana, Venezuela. Informe Final, Tomo iv, Los recursos forestales y sus posibilidades para uso industrial. FAO/SF: 82/VEN 5, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1971c. Forest survey of the lowlands west of the Cardamomes Mountains, Cambodia. Final Report. FAO/SF: 9 I/CAM 6, Rome, Italy.
FAO/UNDP, 1972. Investigacion sobre el fomento de la produccion de los bosques del noreste de Nicaragua. Inventario forestal de bosques latifoliados. FO: SF/NIC 9, Informe Tecnico 2, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1972. Inventariacion y demonstraciones forestales. Panama. Reconocimiento general de los bosques y inventario detallado de Azuero. Vol 1. Methodo y realizacion de inventarios; Vol III. Resultados y comentaries. FO: SF/PAN 6, Informe Tecnico No. 12, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1973. The timber species of the mixed dipterocarp forests of Sarawak and their distribution. A study prepared jointly by the Forest Department of Sarawak and the Forest Industries Development Project of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. FO: DP/MAL/72/009, Working Paper 21, Kuala Lumpur.
FAO, 1978. Metodologia e procedimentos operacionais para o inventario de pre-investimento na floresta nacional do Tapajos. Projecto de desenvolvimento e pesquisa florestal. PNUP/FAO/IBDF/BRA/76/027, Ministerio da Agricultura, Brasilia.
FAO, 1981. Evaluacion de los recursos forestales de la Republic Popolar de Mozambique. Rome, Italy
FAO, 1983. Developpement des ressources forestieres et renforcement du service forestier. Haute-Volta. Inventaire Forestier National. FO: DP/UPV/78/004, Rapport Technique 3, Rome, Italy.
FAO - Forest Department of Burma, 1984-1985. National forest survey and inventory of Burma. FO:BUR/79/011 Working Papers Nos. 5, 7-12, Forest Department of Burma, Rangoon.
FAO, 1993. Forest resources assessment 1990 tropical countries. FAO Forestry Paper 112, Rome Italy.
FAO, 1995. Forest resources assessment 1990 global synthesis. FAO Forestry Paper 124, Rome Italy.
Forster, H., 1983. Evaluation of the national forest inventory of The Gambia. Gambian-German Forestry Project, PN 79.2145.5, Report No. 10, DFS GTZ.
Frangi, J. L. and A. E. Lugo, 1985. Ecosystem dynamics of a subtropical floodplain forest. Ecological Monographs 55:351-369.
Gillespie, A. J. R, S. Brown, and A. E. Lugo, 1992. Tropical forest biomass estimation from truncated stand tables. Forest Ecology and Management 48:69-88.
Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture, 1972. Preinvestment survey of forest resources in East Godavari (A.P.): inventory results. technical Report 3(2), New Delhi.
Government of Malaysia, 1987. Inventori hutan nasional II semenanjung Malaysia 1981-1982, Unit Pengurusan Hutan, Ibu Pejabat Perhutan, Semanenanjung Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur.
Hegarty, E. E., 1989. The climbers - lianas and vines. pages 339-354 in H. Lieth and M. J. A. Werger (eds.), Tropical rainforest ecosystems. Ecosystems of the World 14B. Elsevier, The Netherlands.
Iverson, L. R., S. Brown, A. Prasad, H. Mitasova, A. J. R. Gillespie, and A. E. Lugo, 1994. Use of GIS for estimating potential and actual forest biomass for continental South and Southeast Asia. Chapter 3 m V. H. Dale (ed.). Effects of land use change on atmospheric CO^2 concentrations: Southeast Asia as a case study. Springer Verlag, NY.
Jankovic, C. S., 1969. The Huallaga project. Forestry inventory of the project area. Parts 1 and IV. Forest types, description, and inventory tables. UNDP 119, FAO, Rome, Italy
Jordan, C. F. and C. Uhl, 1978. Biomass of a "tierra firme" forest of the Amazon basin. Oecologia Plantarum 13:387-400
Kadeba, O., 1989. Biomass equations for evenaged stands of Caribbean pine (Pinus caribaea) planted as an exotic in Nigeria. Journal of Tropical Forest Science 1:346-355.
Lugo, A. E., 1992. Comparison of tropical tree plantations with secondary forests of similar age. Ecological Monographs 62:1-41.
Lund, H. G., 1992: A primer on permanent plots for monitoring natural resources. Pages 1-10 in H. G. Lund, R. Paivinen. S. Thammincha (eds), IUFRO S 4.02.05 Proceedings, Remote sensing and permanent sample plot techniques for World forest monitoring, January 13-17, 1992, Pattaya, Thailand. Asorn Siam, Bangkok, Thailand.
Marsch, H. E., 1976. Evaluation des ressources forestieres en Republique Populaire du Benin. Inventaire d'amenagement de la foret de Lama. FO: DP/BEN 73/014, Rapport Technique 1, Cotonou.
Martinez-Yrizar, A. J. Sarukhan, A. Perez-Jimenez, E. Rincon, J. M. Maass, A. Solis-Magallanes, and L. Cervantes, 1992. Above-ground phytomass of a tropical deciduous forest on the coast of Jalisco, Mexico. Journal of Tropical Ecology 8:87-96.
Olson, J. S., J. A. Watts, and L. J. Allison, 1983. Carbon in live vegetation of major world ecosystems. DOE/NBB-0037, National Technical Information Service, US Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA 22161, USA. 152 pp.
Peters, R., 1977. Fortalecimiento al sector forestal Guatemala inventarios y estudios dendrometricos en bosque de coniferas. FO:DP/GUA/72/006, Informe Tecnico 2, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Philippine-German Forest Resources Inventory project, 1986-1988. National forest inventory.
Rees, T. I., 1963. Report to the government of British Guyana on forest inventory. Extended programme of technical assistance. FAO No. 1962, Rome, Italy.
Reichle, D. E. (Editor), 1981. Dynamic properties of forest ecosystems. International Biological Programme 23. Cambridge University Press, UK.
Reyes, G., S. Brown, J. Chapman, and A. E. Lugo, 1992. Wood densities of tropical tree species. USDA Forest Service, General Technical Report SO-88, Southern Forest Experiment Station, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
Rich, P. M. 1986. Mechanical architecture of arborescent rain forest palms. Principes 30:117-131.
Rich, P. M. 1987. Mechanical structure of the stem of arborescent palms. Botanical Gazette 148:42-50.
Rollet, B., 1962. Inventaire forestier de l'Est Mekong. Rapport au Governement du Cambodge. rapport No. 1500, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Royal Forest Department of Thailand, 1980. Report on forest inventory of pilot project area for development of reforestation in Northeast Thailand. Bangkok.
Sachtler, M., 1979. Proyecto forestal FAO/CDF inventaricion y manejo de recursos forestales. Trabajas de proyecto en el estudio de prefactibilidad del bosque "Los Chimanes". FO: BOL/74/031, Documento de Trabajo No. 3, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Saldarriaga, J. G., D. C. West, and M. L. Thorp, 1986. Forest succession in the Upper Rio Negro of Colombia and Venezuela. Environmental Sciences Division Publication No. 2694 (ORNL/TM9712), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, USA.
Sanford, R. L. and E. Cuevas, 1996. Root growth and rhizosphere interactions in tropical forests. In S. S. Mulkey, R. L. Chazdon, and A. P. Smith (eds.). Tropical forest plant physiology. Chapman Hall, New York, in press.
Stewart, J. L., A. J. Dunsdon, J. J. Hellin, and C. E. Hughes. 1992. Wood biomass estimation of Central American dry zone species. Tropical Forestry Papers No. 26, Oxford Forestry Institute, University of Oxford, UK.
Tanner, E. V., 1980. Studies on the biomass and productivity in a series of montane rain forests in Jamaica. Journal of Ecology 68:573-588.
Uhl, C., R. Buschbacher, and E. A. S. Serrao, 1988. Abandoned pastures in eastern Amazonia. I. Pattern of plant succession. Journal of Ecology 76:663-681.
Uhl, C. and J. B. Kauffman, 1990. Deforestation, fire susceptibility, and potential tree responses to fire in eastern Amazon. Ecology 71:437-449.
<section>c</section>
Appendix 1 - List of wood densities for tree species from tropical America, Africa, and Asia.
WOOD DENSITIES (G/CM^3 OR T/M^3) OF TREE SPECIES FOR TROPICAL REGIONS OF THREE CONTINENTS
Species
Wood density
Tropical Asia
Acacia arabica
Acacia catechu
Acacia confusa
Acacia leucophloea
Acacia richii
Adina cordifolia
Aegle marmelo
Agathis dammara
Agathis spp.
Agathis vitiensis
Aglaia diffusa
Aglaia iloilo
Aglaia llanosiana
Alangium longiflorum
Alangium meyeri
Albizzia amara
Albizzia falcataria
Albizzia lebbek
Albizzia odoratissima
Albizzia procera
Aleurites moluccana
Aleurites trisperma
Alnus japonica
Alphitonia philippinensis
Alphitonia zizyphoides
Alphonsea arborea
Alseodaphne longipes
Alstonia macrophylla
Alstonia scholaris
Alstonia spp.
Amoora aherniana
Amoora macrocarpa
Amoora spp.
Anisophyllea zeylanica
Anisoptera aurea
Anisoptera spp.
Anisoptera thurifera
Anogeissus latifolia
Anthocephalus chinensis
Antidesma pleuricum
Aphanamixis cumingiana
Aphanamixis perrottetiana
Araucaria bidwillii
Artocarpus blancoi
Artocarpus heterophylla
Artocarpus lakoocha
Artocarpus ovata
Artocarpus spp.
Azadirachta indica
Azadirachta spp.
Balanocarpus spp.
Barringtonia edulis
Bauhinia spp.
Beilschmiedia tawa
Berrya cordifolia
Bischofia javanica
Bleasdalea vitiensis
Bombax ceiba
Bombycidendron vidalianum
Boswellia serrata
Bridelia retusa
Bridelia squamosa
Buchanania lanzan
Buchanania latifolia
Bursera serrata
Butea monosperma
Calophyllum blancoi
Calophyllum inophyllum
Calophyllum neo-ebudicum
Calophyllum obliquinervium
Calophyllum spp.
Calophyllum vitiense
Calycarpa arborea
Cananga odorata
Canarium asperum var. asperum
Canarium hirsutum forma scabrum
Canarium luzonicum
Canarium spp.
Canarium vanikoroense
Canarium vitiense
Canarium vrieseanum forma stenophyllum
Canthium monstrosum
Carallia calycina
Cassia fistula
Cassia javanica
Cassia spectabilis
Castanopsis philippensis
Casuarina equisetifolia
Casuarina nodiflora
Cedrela odorata
Cedrela spp.
Cedrela toona
Ceiba pentandra
Celtis luzonica
Chisocheton cumingianus
Chisocheton pentandrus
Chloroxylon swietenia
Chukrassia tabularis
Cinnamomum mercadoi
Cinnamomum spp.
Citrus grandis
Cleidion speciflorum
Cleistanthus collinus
Cleistocalyx operculatus
Cleistocalyx spp.
Cochlospermum gossypium + religiosum
Cocos nucifera
Colona serratifolia
Combretodendron quadrialatum
Cordia spp.
Cotylelobium spp.
Crataeva religiosa
Cratoxylon arborescens
Cryptocarya spp.
Cubilia cubili
Cullenia excelsa
Cynometra insularis
Cynometra ramiflora
Cynometra spp.
Dacrycarpus imbricatus
Dacrydium elatum
Dacrydium nausoriensis
Dacrydium nidulum
Dacrydium spp.
Dacryodes spp.
Dalbergia latifolia
Dalbergia paniculata
Decussocarpus philippinensis
Decussocarpus vitiensis
Degeneria vitiensis
Dehaasia triandra
Dialium spp.
Dillenia luzoniensis
Dillenia megalantha
Dillenia pentagyna
Dillenia philippinensis
Dillenia spp.
Diospyros embryopteris
Diospyros inclusa
Diospyros melanoxylon
Diospyros mindanaensis
Diospyros nitida
Diospyros philippensis
Diospyros pilosanthera
Diospyros poncei
Diospyros pyrrhocarpa
Diospyros spp.
Diplodiscus paniculatus
Dipterocarpus caudatus
Dipterocarpus eurynchus
Dipterocarpus gracilis
Dipterocarpus grandiflorus
Dipterocarpus kerrii
Dipterocarpus kunstlerii
Dipterocarpus spp.
Dipterocarpus warburgii
Dracontomelon dao
Dracontomelon edule
Dracontomelon spp.
Dryobalanops spp.
Drypetes bordenii
Durio spp.
Durio zibethinus
Dyera costulata
Dysoxylum altissimum
Dysoxylum decandrum
Dysoxylum euphlebium
Dysoxylum quercifolium
Dysoxylum richii
Elaeocarpus serratus
Emblica officinalis
Endiandra laxiflora
Endospermum macrophyllum
Endospermum peltatum
Endospermum spp.
Enterolobium cyclocarpum
Epicharis cumingiana
Erythrina fusca
Erythrina suberosa
Erythrina subumbrans
Erythrophloeum densiflorum
Eucalyptus citriodora
Eucalyptus deglupta
Eugenia spp.
Fagraea gracilipes
Fagraea spp.
Ficus benjamina
Ficus botryocarpa
Ficus minahassae
Ficus spp.
Ficus variegata
Ganua obovatifolia
Garcinia myrtifolia
Garcinia spp.
Gardenia latifolia
Gardenia turgida
Garuga pinnata
Gluta spp.
Gmelina arborea
Gmelina vitiensis
Gonocaryum calleryanum
Gonystylus bancanus
Gonystylus macrophyllus
Gonystylus punctatus
Grewia multiflora
Grewia tiliaefolia
Hardwickia binata
Harpullia arborea
Heritiera ornithocephala
Heritiera spp.
Heritiera sylvatica
Hevea brasiliensis
Hibiscus tiliaceus
Homalanthus populneus
Homalium spp.
Hopea acuminata
Hopea foxworthyi
Hopea plagata
Hopea spp.
Intsia bijuga
Intsia palembanica
Kayea garciae
Kingiodendron alternifolium
Kleinhovia hospita
Knema spp.
Koompassia excelsa
Koompassia malaccensis
Koordersiodendron pinnatum
Kydia calycina
Lagerstroemia parviflora
Lagerstroemia piriformis
Lagerstroemia speciosa
Lagerstroemia spp.
Lannea coromandelica
Lannea grandis
Leucaena leucocephala
Litchi chinensis var. philippinensis
Lithocarpus celebica
Lithocarpus llanosii
Lithocarpus soleriana
Litsea garciae
Litsea leytensis
Litsea perrottetii
Litsea spp.
Lophopetalum spp.
Macaranga bicolor
Macaranga denticulata
Madhuca fulva
Madhuca longifolia var. latifolia
Madhuca oblongifolia
Mallotus multiglandulosus
Mallotus philippensis
Mangifera altissima
Mangifera indica
Mangifera merrillii
Mangifera spp.
Maniltoa grandiflora
Maniltoa minor
Mastixia philippinensis
Melanorrhea spp.
Melia dubia
Melicope triphylla
Meliosma macrophylla
Melochia umbellata
Mesua ferrea
Metrosideros collina
Michelia platyphylla
Michelia spp.
Microcos stylocarpa
Micromelum compressum
Milliusa velutina
Mimusops elengi
Mitragyna parviflora
Myristica castaneifolia
Myristica chartacea
Myristica gillespieana
Myristica spp.
Neesia spp.
Neonauclea bernardoi
Neotrewia cumingii
Ochna foxworthyi
Ochroma pyramidale
Octomeles sumatrana
Oroxylon indicum
Ougenia dalbergiodes
Palaquium fidjiense
Palaquium hornei
Palaquium lanceolatum
Palaquium luzoniense
Palaquium philippense
Palaquium spp.
Palaquium tenuipetiolatum
Palaquium vitilevuense
Pangium edule
Parashorea malaanonan
Parashorea spp.
Parashorea stellata
Paratrophis glabra
Parinari corymbosa
Parinari insularum
Parinari spp.
Parkia roxburghii
Payena spp.
Peltophorum pterocarpum
Pentace spp.
Phaeanthus ebracteolatus
Phyllocladus hypophyllus
Pinus caribaea
Pinus insularis
Pinus merkusii
Pisonia umbellifera
Pittosporum pentandrum
Planchonella vitiensis
Planchonia spectabilis
Planchonia spp.
Podocarpus neriifolius
Podocarpus spp.
Polyalthia flava
Polyscias nodosa
Pometia pinnata forma pinnata
Pometia spp.
Pouteria villamilii
Premna tomentosa
Pterocarpus indicus
Pterocarpus marsupium
Pterocymbium macrorater
Pterocymbium tinctorium
Pygeum vulgare
Quercus spp.
Radermachera pinnata
Salmalia malabarica
Samanea saman
Sandoricum koetjape
Sandoricum vidalii
Sapindus saponaria
Sapium luzonicum
Schleichera oleosa
Schrebera swietenoides
Semicarpus anacardium
Serialbizia acle
Serianthes melanesica
Sesbania grandiflora
Shorea agsaboensis
Shorea almon
Shorea assamica forma philippinensis
Shorea astylosa
Shorea ciliata
Shorea contorta
Shorea gisok
Shorea guiso
Shorea hopeifolia
Shorea malibato
Shorea negrosensis
Shorea palosapis
Shorea plagata
Shorea polita
Shorea polysperma
Shorea robusta
Shorea spp. balau group
Shorea spp. dark red meranti
Shorea spp. light red meranti
Shorea spp. white meranti
Shorea spp. yellow meranti
Shorea virescens
Sloanea javanica
Soymida febrifuga
Spathodea campanulata
Stemonurus luzoniensis
Sterculia ceramica
Sterculia foetida
Sterculia urens
Sterculia vitiensis
Stereospermum suaveolens
Strombosia philippinensis
Strychnos potatorum
Swietenia macrophylla
Swintonia foxworthyi
Swintonia spp.
Sycopsis dunni
Syzygium cumini
Syzygium luzoniense
Syzygium nitidum
Syzygium simile
Syzygium spp.
Tamarindus indica
Tectona grandis
Teijsmanniodendron ahernianum
Terminalia arjuna
Terminalia belerica
Terminalia catappa
Terminalia chebula
Terminalia citrina
Terminalia copelandii
Terminalia foetidissima
Terminalia microcarpa
Terminalia nitens
Terminalia pterocarpa
Terminalia tomentosa
Ternstroemia megacarpa
Tetrameles nudiflora
Tetramerista glabra
Thespesia populnea
Toona calantas
Trema orientalis
Trichospermum richii
Tristania decorticata
Tristania micrantha
Tristania spp.
Turpinia ovalifolia
Vateria indica
Vatica mangachapoi
Vatica obscura
Vatica pachyphylla
Vatica spp.
Vitex parviflora
Vitex peduncularis
Vitex spp.
Vitex turczaninowii
Wallaceodendron celebicum
Weinmannia luzoniensis
Wrightia tinctorea
Xanthophyllum excelsum
Xanthostemon verdugonianus
Xylia xylocarpa
Zanthoxylum rhetsa
Zizyphus spp.
Zizyphus talanai
Zizyphus xylopyra
Tropical America
Albizzia caribaea
Albizzia spp
Alcornea latifolia
Alcornea spp
Alexa grandiflora
Alexa imperatricis
Alnus ferruginea
Alnus jorullensis
Anacardium excelsum
Anacardium spruceanum
Anadenanthera macrocarpa
Anadenanthera rigida
Andira inermis
Andira retusa
Aniba perutilis
Aniba riparia/duckei
Aniba spp.
Antiaris africana
Apeiba aspera
Apeiba echinata
Apeiba spp.
Apeiba tibourbon
Artocarpus comunis
Aspidosperma album
Aspidosperma cruentum
Aspidosperma dugandii
Aspidosperma marchravianum
Aspidosperma megalocarpum
Aspidosperma spp. (araracanga group)
Aspidosperma spp. (peroba group)
Astronium graveolens
Astronium lecointei
Bagassa guianensis
Banara guianensis
Basiloxylon exelsum
Beilschmiedia pendula
Beilschmiedia sp.
Berthollettia excelsa
Bixa arborea
Bombacopsis quinatum
Bombacopsis sepium
Borojoa patinoi
Bowdichia nitida
Bowdichia spp.
Brosimum acutifolium
Brosimum parinarioides
Brosimum potabile
Brosimum rubescens
Brosimum sp.
Brosimum spp. (alicastrum group)
Brosimum spp. (utile group)
Brosimum utile
Brysenia adenophylla
Buchenavia capitata
Buchenavia huberi
Bucida buceras
Bulnesia arborea
Bursera simaruba
Byrsonima aerugo
Byrsonima coriacea
Byrsonima coriacea var. spicata
Byrsonima spp.
Cabralea cangerana
Caesalpinia spp.
Calophyllum brasiliense
Calophyllum mariae
Calophyllum sp.
Calycophyllum candidisimum
Campnosperma panamensis
Carapa guianensis
Carapa sp.
Caryocar nr. barbinerve
Caryocar spp.
Caryocar villosum
Casearia arborea
Casearia guianensis
Casearia praecox
Casearia sp.
Cassia moschata
Cassia multijuga
Casuarina equisetifolia
Catostemma commune
Catostemma spp.
Cecropia peltata
Cecropia spp.
Cedrela angustifolia
Cedrela huberi
Cedrela odorata
Cedrela spp.
Cedrelinga catenaeformis
Ceiba pentandra
Centrolobium paraense var. orinocensis
Centrolobium spp.
Cespedesia macrophylla
Chaetocarpus schomburgkianus
Chlorophora tinctoria
Clarisia racemosa
Clathrotropis brunnea
Clathrotropis spp.
Clusia rosea
Cochlospermum orinocensis
Copaifera duckei/reticulata
Copaifera officinalis
Copaifera spp.
Cordia alliodora
Cordia apurensis
Cordia bicolor
Cordia borinquensis
Cordia collococca
Cordia exaltata
Cordia fallax
Cordia goeldiana
Cordia sagotii
Cordia spp. (gerascanthus group)
Cordia spp. (alliodora group)
Cordia sulcata
Couepia sp.
Couma macrocarpa
Couratari pulchra
Couratari spp.
Couratari stellata
Croton xanthochloros
Cupressus lusitanica
Cyrilla racemiflora
Dacryodes colombiana
Dacryodes excelsa
Dalbergia nigra
Dalbergia retusa
Dalbergia stevensonii
Declinanona calycina
Dialium guianensis
Dialyanthera spp.
Dicorynia guianensis
Dicorynia paraensis
Didymopanax morototoni
Didymopanax pittieri
Didymopanax sp.
Dimorphandra mora
Diplotropis purpurea
Dipterix odorata
Drypetes variabilis
Dussia lehmannii
Ecclinusa guianensis
Endlicheria cocvirey
Enterolobium cyclocarpum
Enterolobium schomburgkii
Eperua spp.
Eriotheca longipedicellatum
Eriotheca sp.
Erisma uncinatum
Erythrina sp.
Eschweilera amara
Eschweilera corrugata
Eschweilera grata
Eschweilera hologyne
Eschweilera odora
Eschweilera sagotiana
Eschweilera spp.
Eschweilera subglandulosa
Eschweilera tenax
Eschweilera trinitensis
Eucalyptus robusta
Eugenia compta
Eugenia pseudosidium
Eugenia stahlii
Euxylophora paraensis
Fagara aff. F. martinicense
Fagara sp.
Fagara spp.
Ficus citrifolia
Ficus sp.
Genipa americana
Genipa spp.
Goupia glabra
Guarea chalde
Guarea spp.
Guarea trichiloides
Guatteria spp.
Guazuma ulmifolia
Guettarda scabra
Guillielma gasipae
Gustavia sp.
Helicostylis tomentosa
Hernandia sonora
Hevea brasiliense
Himatanthus articulata
Hirtella davisii
Humiria balsamifera
Humiriastrum melanocarpum
Humiriastrum procera
Hura crepitans
Hyeronima alchorneoides
Hyeronima laxiflora
Hymenaea courbaril
Hymenaea davisii
Hymenolobium excelsum
Hymenolobium sp.
Inga alba
Inga capitata
Inga coruscans
Inga floribunda
Inga ingoides
Inga laurina
Inga marginata
Inga sp.
Inga splendens
Inga vera
Iryanthera grandis
Iryanthera hostmanii
Iryanthera spp.
Jacaranda copaia
Jacaranda hesperia
Jacaranda sp.
Joannesia heveoides
Lachmellea speciosa
Laetia procera
Lecythis davisii
Lecythis ollaria
Lecythis paraensis
Lecythis sp.
Lecythis spp.
Licania aff. micrantha
Licania alba
Licania apetala
Licania densiflora
Licania hypoleuca
Licania macrophylla
Licania parviflora
Licania sp.
Licania spp.
Licania cayennensis
Licania spp.
Lindackeria sp.
Linociera domingensis
Lonchocarpus sericens
Lonchocarpus spp.
Lonchocarpus straminens
Loxopterygium sagotii
Lucuma spp.
Luehea cymulosa
Luehea spp.
Lueheopsis duckeana
Mabea piriri
Machaerium spp.
Macoubea guianensis
Magnolia sororum
Magnolia splendens
Magnolia spp.
Maguira sclerophylla
Mammea americana
Mangifera indica
Manilkara bidentata
Manilkara sp.
Marila sp.
Marmaroxylon racemosum
Matayba domingensis
Matisia hirta
Maytenus ficiformis
Maytenus spp.
Mezilaurus itauba
Mezilaurus lindaviana
Michropholis garciniaefolia
Michropholis spp.
Minquartia guianensis
Mora excelsa
Mora gonggrijpi
Mora magistosperma
Mora sp.
Mouriria guianensis
Mouriria huberi
Mouriria pseudo-germinata
Mouriria sideroxylon
Myrcia paivae
Myrcia splendens
Myrciaria floribunda
Myristica spp.
Myroxylon balsamum
Nectandra antillana
Nectandra concinna
Nectandra coriacea
Nectandra rigida
Nectandra rodioei
Nectandra rubra
Nectandra sp.
Nectandra spp.
Ocotea glandulosa
Ocotea leucoxylon
Ocotea moschata
Ocotea rodioei
Ocotea rubra
Ocotea spathulata
Ocotea spp.
Onychopetalum amazonicum
Ormosia krugii
Ormosia lignivalvis
Ormosia spp.
Ouratea sp.
Pachira acuatica
Paratecoma peroba
Parinari campestris
Parinari excelsa
Parinari rodolfi
Parinari spp.
Parkia belutina
Parkia multijuga
Parkia oppositifolia
Parkia pendula
Parkia spp.
Peltogyne porphyrocardia
Peltogyne spp.
Pentaclethra macroloba
Pera glabrata
Pera schomburgkiana
Persea spp.
Petitia domingensis
Pinus caribaea
Pinus oocarpa
Pinus patula
Piptadenia communis
Piptadenia macrocarpa
Piptadenia pittieri
Piptadenia psilostachya
Piptadenia rigida
Piptadenia sp.
Piptadenia suaveolens
Piranhea longepedunculata
Piratinera guianensis
Pithecellobium guachapele (syn. Pseudosamea)
Pithecellobium saman
Platonia insignis
Platymiscium pinnatum
Platymiscium polystachium
Platymiscium spp.
Podocarpus oleifolius
Podocarpus rospigliossi
Podocarpus spp.
Pourouma aff. apiculata
Pourouma aspera
Pourouma aff. guianensis
Pourouma aff. melinonii
Pouteria carabobensis
Pouteria egregia
Pouteria eugeniifolia
Pouteria gonggrijpii
Pouteria melinonii
Pouteria multiflora
Pouteria pomifera
Pouteria sp.
Pouteria spp.
Prioria copaifera
Protium crenatum
Protium decandrum
Protium heptaphyllum
Protium neglectum
Protium sp.
Protium spp.
Protium tenuifolium
Pseudolmedia laevigata
Pterocarpus officinalis
Pterocarpus rohrii
Pterocarpus sp.
Pterocarpus spp.
Pterocarpus vernalis
Pterogyne nitens
Pterygota excelsa
Qualea albiflora
Qualea cf. lancifolia
Qualea dinizii
Qualea spp.
Quararibaea guianensis
Quercus alata
Quercus costaricensis
Quercus eugeniaefolia
Quercus spp.
Raputia sp.
Rheedia spp.
Rollinia exsucca
Rollinia sp.
Rollinia spp.
Saccoglottis cydonioides
Sapium biglandulosum
Sapium cf. jenmanni
Sapium laurocerasus
Sapium sp.
Sapium spp.
Schinopsis spp.
Sclerolobium aff. chrysophyllum
Sclerolobium guianensis
Sclerolobium paniculatum
Sclerolobium spp.
Sickingia spp.
Simaba multiflora
Simarouba amara
Sloanea berteriana
Sloanea grandiflora
Sloanea guianensis
Spondias lutea
Spondias mombin
Sterculia apetala
Sterculia pilosa/speciosa
Sterculia pruriens
Sterculia spp.
Stryphnodendron polystachum
Stylogyne spp.
Swartzia spp.
Swietenia macrophylla
Symphonia globulifera
Tabebuia guayacan
Tabebuia heterophylla
Tabebuia heterotricha
Tabebuia pentaphylla
Tabebuia rosea
Tabebuia serratifolia
Tabebuia spectabilis
Tabebuia spp. (lapacho group)
Tabebuia spp. (roble)
Tabebuia spp. (white cedar)
Tabebuia stenocalyx
Tachigalia myrmecophylla
Talisia sp.
Tapirira guianensis
Terminalia amazonia
Terminalia catappa
Terminalia guianensis
Terminalia lucida
Terminalia sp.
Tetragastris altisima
Tetragastris balsamifera
Tetragastris panamensis
Tetragastris spp.
Toluifera balsamum
Torrubia cuspidata
Torrubia sp.
Toulicia pulvinata
Tovomita guianensis
Trattinickia burserifolia
Trattinickia rhoifolia
Trattinickia sp.
Trichilia propingua
Trichosperma mexicanum
Triplaris sp.
Triplaris spp.
Triplaris surinamensis
Trophis sp.
Vatairea lundellii
Vatairea spp.
Virola sebifera
Virola spp.
Virola surinamensis
Vismia spp.
Vitex divaricata
Vitex gaumeri
Vitex orinocensis
Vitex spp.
Vitex stahelii
Vochysia ferruginea
Vochysia guianensis
Vochysia hondurensis
Vochysia lehmannii
Vochysia maxima
Vochysia spp.
Vochysia tetraphylla
Vochysia tomentosa
Vouacapoua americana
Warszewicsia coccinea
Xanthoxylum martinicensis
Xanthoxylum spp.
Xylopia columbiana
Xylopia emarginata
Xylopia frutescens
Tropical Africa
Afzelia bipindensis
Afzelia pachyloba
Afzelia spp.
Aidia ochroleuca
Albizia ferruginea
Albizia glaberrima
Albizia gummifera
Albizia spp.
Albizia zygia
Allanblackia floribunda
Allophyllus africanus f. acuminatus
Alstonia congensis
Amphimas ferrugineus
Amphimas pterocarpoides
Anisophyllea obtusifolia
Annonidium mannii
Anopyxis klaineana
Anthocleista keniensis
Anthonotha macrophylla
Anthostemma aubryanum
Antiaris africana
Antiaris spp.
Antrocaryon klaineanum
Aucoumea klaineana
Autranella congolensis
Baillonella toxisperma
Balanites aegyptiaca
Baphia kirkii
Beilschmiedia corbisieri
Beilschmiedia diversiflora
Beilschmiedia kweo
Beilschmiedia louisii
Beilschmiedia membranifolia
Beilschmiedia nitida
Berlinia bracteosa
Berlinia confusa
Berlinia spp.
Blighia welwitschii
Bombax buonopozense
Bombax chevalieri
Bombax rhodognaphalon
Bombax spp.
Brachystegia cynometroides
Brachystegia laurentii
Brachystegia mildbraedii
Brachystegia spp.
Bridelia grandis
Bridelia micrantha
Calpocalyx heitzii
Calpocalyx klainei
Canarium schweinfurthii
Canthium rubrocostratum
Carapa procera
Casearia battiscombei
Cassipourea euryoides
Cassipourea malosana
Ceiba pentandra
Celtis brieyi
Celtis mildbraedii
Celtis spp.
Celtis zenkeri
Chlorophora excelsa
Chrysophyllum albidum
Cleistanthus mildbraedii
Cleistopholis patens
Coelocaryon preussii
Cola cordifolia
Cola gigantea
Cola gigantea var. glabrescens
Cola natalensis
Cola sp.
Combretodendron macrocarpum
Conopharyngia holstii
Copaifera mildbraedii
Copaifera religiosa
Cordia africana
Cordia millenii
Cordia platythyrsa
Corynanthe gabonensis
Corynanthe pachyceras
Coula edulis
Croton macrostachyus
Croton megalocarpus
Cryptosepalum staudtii
Ctenolophon englerianus
Cylicodiscus gabonensis
Cynometra alexandri
Dacryodes buettneri
Dacryodes edulis
Dacryodes igaganga
Dacryodes klaineana
Dacryodes le-testui
Dacryodes normandii
Dacryodes spp.
Daniellia klainei
Daniellia ogea
Daniellia soyauxii
Desbordesia pierreana
Detarium senegalensis
Dialium bipindense
Dialium dinklagei
Dialium excelsum
Didelotia africana
Didelotia brevipaniculata
Didelotia letouzeyi
Diospyros kamerunensis
Diospyros spp.
Discoglypremna caloneura
Distemonanthus benthamianus
Drypetes gossweilleri
Drypetes sp.
Ehretia acuminata
Enantia chlorantha
Endodesmia calophylloides
Entandrophragma angolensis
Entandrophragma candollei
Entandrophragma cylindricum
Entandrophragma utile
Eribroma oblongum
Eriocoelum microspermum
Erismadelphus exsul
Erythrina vogelii
Erythrophleum ivorense
Erythroxylum mannii
Fagara heitzii
Fagara macrophylla
Ficus iteophylla
Ficus mucuso
Funtumia africana
Fumtumia latifolia
Gambeya africana
Gambeya lacourtiana
Gambeya madagascariensis
Gambeya spp.
Garcinia gerardii
Garcinia mannii
Garcinia punctata
Gilbertiodendron dewevrei
Gilbertiodendron grandiflorum
Gilbertiodendron mayombense
Gilletiodendron mildbraedii
Gossweilerodendron balsamiferum
Guarea cedrata
Guarea laurentii
Guarea thompsonii
Guibourtia arnoldiana
Guibourtia demeusei
Guibourtia ehie
Guibourtia pellegriniana
Guibourtia spp.
Guibourtia tessmannii
Hannoa klaineana
Harungana madagascariensis
Hexalobus crispiflorus
Holoptelea grandis
Homalium letestui
Homalium spp.
Hylodendron gabonense
Hymenostegia afzelii
Hymenostegia pellegrini
Irvingia gabonensis
Irvingia grandifolia
Julbernardia globiflora
Khaya grandifoliola
Khaya ivorensis
Khaya senegalensis
Klainedoxa gabonensis
Lannea welwitschii
Lecomtedoxa klaineana
Letestua durissima
Lophira alata
Lovoa trichilioides
Macaranga conglomerata
Macaranga kilimandscharica
Maesopsis eminii
Malacantha sp. aff. alnifolia
Mammea africana
Manilkara cuneifolia
Manilkara lacera
Markhamia hildebrandtii
Markhamia platycalyx
Memecylon capitellatum
Microberlinia bisulcata
Microberlinia brazzavillensis
Microcos coriaceus
Milletia laurentii
Milletia spp.
Mitragyna ciliata
Mitragyna stipulosa
Monopetalanthus coriaceus
Monopetalanthus durandii
Monopetalanthus heitzii
Monopetalanthus letestui
Monopetalanthus pellegrinii
Musanga cecropioides
Nauclea diderrichii
Neopoutonia macrocalyx
Nesogordonia fouassieri
Nesogordonia papaverifera
Newtonia buchananii
Newtonia glandulifera
Ochtocosmus africanus
Odyendea gabonensis
Odyendea spp.
Oldfieldia africana
Ongokea gore
Oxystigma oxyphyllum
Pachyelasma tessmannii
Pachypodanthium confine
Pachypodanthium staudtii
Paraberlinia bifoliolata
Parinari excelsa
Parinari glabra
Parinari goetzeniana
Parkia bicolor
Pausinystalia brachythyrsa
Pausinystalia cf. talbotii
Pentaclethra eetveldeana
Pentaclethra macrophylla
Pentadesma butyracea
Phyllanthus discoideus
Pierreodendron africanum
Piptadenia gabunensis
Piptadeniastrum africanum
Plagiostyles africana
Poga oleosa
Polyalthia suaveolens
Premna angolensis
Pteleopsis hylodendron
Pterocarpus angolensis
Pterocarpus soyauxii
Pterygota bequaertii
Pterygota spp.
Pycnanthus angolensis
Randia cladantha
Rauwolfia macrophylla
Ricinodendron heudelotii
Saccoglottis gabonensis
Santiria trimera
Sapium ellipticum
Schrebera arborea
Sclorodophloeus zenkeri
Scottellia chevalieri
Scottellia coriacea
Scyphocephalium ochocoa
Scytopetalum tieghemii
Sindoropsis letestui
Staudtia stipitata
Stemonocoleus micranthus
Sterculia oblonga
Sterculia rhinopetala
Strephonema pseudocola
Strombosia glaucescens
Strombosia grandifolia
Strombosiopsis tetrandra
Swartzia fistuloides
Symphonia globulifera
Syzygium cordatum
Tarrietia densiflora
Tarrietia utilis
Terminalia superba
Tessmania africana
Testulea gabonensis
Tetraberlinia bifoliolata
Tetraberlinia tubmaniana
Tetrapleura tetraptera
Tieghemella africana
Tieghemella heckelii
Trema guineensis
Trema sp.
Trichilia heudelotii
Trichilia prieureana
Trichoscypha arborea
Triplochiton scleroxylon
Uapaca spp.
Vepris undulata
Vitex doniana
Xylopia aethiopica
Xylopia chrysophylla
Xylopia hypolambra
Xylopia quintasii
Xylopia staudtii
+ The wood densities specified pertain to more than one bibliographic source
* Wood density is derived from the regression equation in section 3.1.2
<section>d</section>
Appendix 2 - Original biomass data used to develop the biomass regressions equations for broadleaf forests.
BIOMASS DATA FOR REGRESSION EQUATION FOR THE DRY ZONE (EQ. 3.2.1)
Sources:
1. Mann, H. S. and S.K. Saxena, 1982. Improvement of energy resources in Indian arid zone. Pages 283-292 in P. K. Khoska (ed.). Improvement of forest biomass, symposium proceedings, Indian Society of Tree Science, Solan, India.
2. Bandhu, D., 1973. Chakia project tropical deciduous forest ecosystems. Pages 39-61 in L. Kerr (ed.), Modeling forest ecosystems. EDFB-IBP-737, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Tennessee, USA.
dbh (cm)
Biomass (Kg)
Source
BIOMASS DATA FOR REGRESSION EQUATIONS FOR MOIST ZONE (EQ. 3.2.3 AND 3.2.4)
Sources:
1. C. Jordan and C. Uhl, 1986, provided unpublished tree data.
2. Russell, C., 1983. Nutrient cycling and productivity of native and plantation forests at Jari Florestal, Para, Brazil. PhD dissertation. University of Georgia, Athens, USA.
3. Yamakura, T., et al., 1986. Tree size in a mature dipterocarp forest stand in Sebula, East Kalimantan, Indonesia. Southeast Asian Studies 23:451-478.
4. Hozumi, K., et al., 1969. Production ecology of rain forests in Cambodia. I. Plant biomass. Nature and Life in Southeast Asia 6:1-51.
5. R. A. Houghton, 1994, provided unpublished tree data.
dbh (cm)
Biomass (Kg)
Source:
BIOMASS DATA FOR REGRESSION EQUATIONS FOR THE WET ZONE (EQ. 3.2.5)
Sources:
1. Ovington, J. D. and J. S. Olson, 1970. Biomass and chemical content of El Verde lower montane rain forest plants. Ch. H-2 in H. T. Odum and R. F. Pigeon (eds.), A tropical rain forest. Division of Technical Information TID 24270, National Technical Information Service, Springfield, Va.
2. Edwards, P. J. and P. J. Grubb, 1977. Studies of mineral cycling in a montane rainforest in New Guinea. Journal of Ecology 65:943-969.
3. A. Joyce, 1989, provided unpublished tree data for Costa Rica.
dbh (cm)
Biomass (Kg)
Source
<section>e</section>
FAO TECHNICAL PAPERS
FAO FORESTRY PAPERS
Forest utilization contracts on public land, 1977 (E F S)
Planning forest roads and harvesting systems, 1977 (E F S)
World list of forestry schools, 1977 (E/F/S)
3 Rev. 1
World list of forestry schools, 1981 (E/F/S)
3 Rev. 2
World list of forestry schools, 1986 (E/F/S)
World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade 1 - Vol. 1, 1977 (E F S)
World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade - Vol. 2, 1977 (E F S)
The marketing of tropical wood in South America, 1976 (E S)
National parks planning, 1976 (E F S**)
Forestry for local community development, 1978 (Ar E F S)
Establishment techniques for forest plantations, 1978 (Ar C E* F S)
Wood chips - production, handling, transport, 1976 (C E S)
Assessment of logging costs from forest inventories in the tropics - 1. Principles and methodology, 1978 (E F S)
Assessment of logging costs from forest inventories in the tropics - 2. Data collection and calculations, 1978 (E F S)
Savanna afforestation in Africa, 1977 (E F)
China: forestry support for agriculture, 1978 (E)
Forest products prices 1960-1977, 1979 (E/F/S)
Mountain forest roads and harvesting, 1979 (E)
14 Rev. 1
Logging and transport in steep terrain, 1985 (E)
AGRIS forestry - world catalogue of information and documentation services, 1979 (E/F/S)
China: integrated wood processing industries, 1979 (E F S)
Economic analysis of forestry projects, 1979 (E F S)
17 Sup. 1
Economic analysis of forestry projects: case studies, 1979 (E S)
17 Sup. 2
Economic analysis of forestry projects: readings, 1980 (C E)
Forest products prices 1960-1978, 1980 (E/F/S)
Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species - Vol. 1, 1980 (E)
Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species - Vol. 2, 1980 (E)
Forest tree improvement, 1985 (C E F S)
A guide to forest seed handling, 1985 (E S)
Impact on soils of fast-growing species in lowland humid tropics, 1980 (E F S)
Forest volume estimation and yield prediction - Vol. 1. Volume estimation, 1980 (C E F S)
Forest volume estimation and yield prediction - Vol. 2. Yield prediction, 1980 (C E F S)
Forest products prices 1961-1980, 1981 (E/F/S)
Cable logging systems, 1981 (C E)
Public forestry administrations in Latin America, 1981 (E)
Forestry and rural development, 1981 (E F S)
Manual of forest inventory, 1981 (E F)
Small and medium sawmills in developing countries, 1981 (E S)
World forest products, demand and supply 1990 and 2000, 1982 (E F S)
Tropical forest resources, 1982 (E F S)
Appropriate technology in forestry, 1982 (E)
Classification and definitions of forest products, 1982 (Ar/E/F/S)
Logging of mountain forests, 1982 (E F S)
Fruit-bearing forest trees, 1982 (E F S)
Forestry in China, 1982 (C E)
Basic technology in forest operations, 1982 (E F S)
Conservation and development of tropical forest resources, 1982 (E F S)
Forest products prices 1962-1981, 1982 (E/F/S)
Frame saw manual, 1982 (E)
Circular saw manual, 1983 (E)
Simple technologies for charcoal making, 1983 (E F S)
Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries, 1983 (Ar E F S)
Forest revenue systems in developing countries, 1983 (E F S)
Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 1. Examples from eastern Africa, 1983 (E F S)
Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 2. Examples from southeastern Asia, 1984 (E F S)
Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 3. Examples from Latin America, 1986 (E S)
Establishing pulp and paper mills, 1983 (E)
Forest products prices 1963-1982, 1983 (E/F/S)
Technical forestry education - design and implementation, 1984 (E F S)
Land evaluation for forestry, 1984 (C E F S)
Wood extraction with oxen and agricultural tractors, 1986 (E F S)
Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa, 1984 (E F)
Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa - seven case-studies, 1985 (E)
Studies on the volume and yield of tropical forest stands - 1. Dry forest formations, 1989 (E F)
Cost estimating in sawmilling industries: guidelines, 1984 (E)
Field manual on cost estimation in sawmilling industries, 1985 (E)
Intensive multiple-use forest management in Kerala, 1984 (E F S)
Planificacin del desarrollo forestal, 1984 (S)
Intensive multiple-use forest management in the tropics, 1985 (E F S)
Breeding poplars for disease resistance, 1985 (E)
Coconut wood - Processing and use, 1985 (E S)
Sawdoctoring manual, 1985 (E S)
The ecological effects of eucalyptus, 1985 (C E F S)
Monitoring and evaluation of participatory forestry projects, 1985 (E F S)
Forest products prices 1965-1984, 1985 (E/F/S)
World list of institutions engaged in forestry and forest products research, 1985 (E/F/S)
Industrial charcoal making, 1985 (E)
Tree growing by rural people, 1985 (Ar E F S)
Forest legislation in selected African countries, 1986 (E F)
Forestry extension organization, 1986 (C E S)
Some medicinal forest plants of Africa and Latin America, 1986 (E)
Appropriate forest industries, 1986 (E)
Management of forest industries, 1986 (E)
Wildland fire management terminology, 1986 (E/F/S)
World compendium of forestry and forest products research institutions, 1986 (E/F/S)
Wood gas as engine fuel, 1986 (E S)
Forest products: world outlook projections 1985-2000, 1986 (E/F/S)
Guidelines for forestry information processing, 1986 (E)
Monitoring and evaluation of social forestry in India - an operational guide, 1986 (E)
Wood preservation manual, 1986 (E)
Databook on endangered tree and shrub species and provenances, 1986 (E)
Appropriate wood harvesting in plantation forests, 1987 (E)
Small-scale forest-based processing enterprises, 1987 (E F S)
Forestry extension methods, 1987 (E)
Guidelines for forest policy formulation, 1987 (C E)
Forest products prices 1967-1986, 1988 (E/F/S)
Trade in forest products: a study of the barriers faced by the developing countries, 1988 (E)
Forest products: World outlook projections - Product and country tables 1987-2000, 1988 (E/F/S)
Forestry extension curricula, 1988 (E/F/S)
Forestry policies in Europe, 1988 (E)
Small-scale harvesting operations of wood and non-wood forest products involving rural people, 1988 (E F S)
Management of tropical moist forests in Africa, 1989 (E F P).
Review of forest management systems of tropical Asia, 1989 (E)
Forestry and food security, 1989 (Ar E S)
Design manual on basic wood harvesting technology, 1989 (E F S)
(Published only as FAO Training Series, No. 18)
Forestry policies in Europe - An analysis, 1989 (E)
Energy conservation in the mechanical forest industries, 1990 (E S)
Manual on sawmill operational maintenance, 1990 (E)
Forest products prices 1969-1988, 1990 (E/F/S)
Planning and managing forestry research: guidelines for managers, 1990 (E)
Non-wood forest products: the way ahead, 1991 (E S)
Timber plantations in the humid tropics of Africa, 1993 (E F)
Cost control in forest harvesting and road construction, 1992 (E)
Introduction to ergonomics in forestry in developing countries, 1992 (E F I)
Management and conservation of closed forests in tropical America, 1993 (E F P S)
Research management in forestry, 1992 (E F S)
Mixed and pure forest plantations in the tropics and subtropics, 1992 (E F S)
Forest products prices 1971-1990, 1992 (E/F/S)
Compendium of pulp and paper training and research institutions, 1992 (E)
Economic assessment of forestry project impacts, 1992 (E/F)
Conservation of genetic resources in tropical forest management - Principles and concepts, 1993 (E/F/S)
A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi Programme of Action, 1993 (E)
Directory of forestry research organizations, 1993 (E)
Proceedings of the Meeting of Experts on Forestry Research, 1993 (E/F/S)
Forestry policies in the Near East region - Analysis and synthesis, 1993 (E)
Forest resources assessment 1990 - Tropical countries, 1993 (E)
Ex situ storage of seeds, pollen and in vitro cultures of perennial woody plant species, 1993 (E)
Assessing forestry project impacts: issues and strategies, 1993 (E F S)
Forestry policies of selected countries in Asia and the Pacific, 1993 (E)
Les panneaux a base de bois, 1993 (F)
Mangrove forest management guidelines, 1994 (E)
Biotechnology in forest tree improvement, 1994 (E)
Number not assigned
Decline and dieback of trees and forests - A global overview, 1994 (E)
Ecology and rural education - Manual for rural teachers, 1995 (E S)
Readings in sustainable forest management, 1994 (E S)
Forestry education - New trends and prospects, 1994 (E F S)
Forest resources assessment 1990 - Global synthesis, 1995 (E F S)
Forest products prices 1973-1992, 1995 (E F S)
Climate change, forests and forest management - An overview, 1995 (E)
Valuing forests: context, issues and guidelines, 1995 (E)
Forest resources assessment 1990 - Tropical forest plantation resources, 1995 (E)
Environmental impact assessment and environmental auditing in the pulp and paper
industry, 1996 (E)
Forest resources assessment 1990 - Survey of tropical forest cover and study of change processes, 1996 (E)
Ecologa y enseanza rural - Nociones ambientales bsicas para profesores rurales y extensionistas, 1996 (S)
Forestry policies of selected countries in Africa, 1996 (E/F)
Forest codes of practice - Contributing to environmentally sound forest operations, 1996 (E)
Estimating biomass and biomass change of tropical forests - A primer, 1997 (E)
Availability: January 1997
Ar
Arabic
C
Chinese
E
English
I
Italian
F
French
P
Portuguese
S
Spanish
Multil
Multilingual
Out of print
In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Sales and Marketing Group, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
This publication is a practical guide for those who designed forest inventories in which biomass estimation is a component. It describes primary data and measurement requirement for assessment of biomass per hectare. As supporting material it provides wood density data for a large number of tropical species. The primer also presents methods that are available for estimating biomass per hectare of tropical forest using mainly existing data. To this end equation and default values are given for a variety of cases. Finally, biomass per hectare estimates are presented estimates are presented for many tropical countries using the methodologies given.
