<title>State of the World's Forests, 1997. State of the World's Forests (SOFO) </title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Forestry is a sector undergoing dynamic evolution in a rapidly-changing world. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, provided impetus and commitment to international activity focused on the world's forests. This has intensified over the past two years. Never before has there been so much attention paid to global forest issues in the popular press, such a large number of regional and international initiatives on various aspects of forest conservation and management, and so many demands on forests to address a multitude of needs and concerns of diverse interest groups. The context and the expectations facing forestry today are complex and challenging.
Under these circumstances, it is especially important that accurate, up-to-date information on the world's forests and on developments in the forestry sector is easily accessible. Such information will improve the formulation of informed opinion about forestry today and the understanding of factors which may affect forests tomorrow. In 1994, FAO committed to publish the State of the World's Forests (SOFO) report every two years as a means of providing just such an overview of the status of the world's forests. It is written for a wide audience, including people working in governmental and non-governmental organizations concerned with forestry policy and/or programmes, forestry enterprises and trade associations, research and educational institutions, and regional and international financial or development organizations.
SOFO endeavours to present information which is policy-relevant. Rather than attempting to provide a comprehensive and detailed account of all facets of forestry, it aims to present information on the status and trends of forests and forest products and services, new developments and emerging issues of significance for forests, and the external forces influencing forestry. SOFO draws upon the best information available, both that generated by FAO itself as well as by the many other organizations and individuals working in the sector.
The first edition of SOFO was published in 1995. This second edition is a somewhat expanded version, having three additional features. The first is the inclusion of information on past trends over the last 20-25 years and on future trends to the year 2010, thus allowing the reader to put today's situation into a longer time perspective. The second feature is a section giving information 'highlights' for all six regions of the world. This gives more geographically-specific information than the main sections, which focus at the global level. The third feature is the inclusion of a 'special issue' section, which in this edition of SOFO is on criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management. We welcome readers' views on this edition as well as on the direction of future editions.
In preparing SOFO, both the strengths and the weaknesses of the information base have become apparent. The need to fill the gaps in forestry knowledge presents FAO with a challenge and with opportunities for partnership with those who are doing related work. FAO invites others to join in this effort. We expect that through such initiative, information on the world's forests and its relevance to policies will continue to improve, a fact that will be reflected in future editions of SOFO. Most important, we hope that SOFO can make a significant contribution to international discussions on forests, to improved forest conservation and development, and to closer linkages with other sectors.
David A. Harcharik
Assistant Director-General
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
<section>2</section>
Introduction
The world's forests and forestry sector are shaped as much by external economic, political, demographic and social trends as they are by forces working within the sector itself. Both the present and the future situation of forests must be considered within the wider context of development, which has, as its ultimate goal, the improved well-being of present and future generations.
Major trends during the period covered by SOFO 1997 (1995-1997) which have an effect upon forests include: continued population growth and urbanization; higher rates of global economic growth after the sluggish first three years of the decade; continued progress of many previously centrally-planned economies in their transition towards a market economy; and trade liberalization. Over the last two years, the structure and functions of public institutions, including forestry and related departments, have continued to undergo significant changes. Trends in decentralization, privatization of functions previously assigned to the public sector, and a movement towards a more pluralistic, or multi-partner, institutional environment have become more apparent. Reductions in budgets have affected forestry departments in developed and developing countries alike. Environmental concerns increasingly are influencing natural resource policies and practices and even, to some extent,
international trade. Finally, the 'internationalization' of issues continues; attention at the highest policy-making levels has been drawn to the interactions between development and environmental and social issues through four international summits held within the last two years: the World Summit for Social Development (Copenhagen, March 1995); the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, September 1995); Habitat II - the Second United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Istanbul, June 1996); and the World Food Summit (Rome, November 1996). The importance accorded internationally to forestry is reflected in the establishment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF) in April 1995 by the UN Commission on Sustainable Development to encourage international consensus on key issues related to forests.
The effect of population and economic growth on demand for food and forest products is clearly illustrated by past consumption trends. Between 1960 and 1995, world population almost doubled in size and the world economy (as measured in GDP in real terms) increased three and a half times. Over the same period, world production of grains more than doubled, of fuelwood doubled and of paper more than tripled. Looking ahead, today's population of 5 716 million is expected to grow to 7 032 million by the year 2010. Nearly all of this increase will occur in the developing world, where constraints to agricultural and forestry production are particularly challenging and where national economic imperatives and disparities in income distribution are already putting intense pressure on natural resources. These factors will certainly affect the ability of countries to attain long-term food security and to maintain the productivity of their natural resource base, including forest
resources.
The impact of population growth on forest cover and condition is clearly demonstrated by the information on recent changes in forest cover. Deforestation in tropical regions has continued over the period 1990-95. Recently released information on the causes of deforestation over the 1980-90 decade clearly shows rural population growth coupled with agricultural expansion (especially in Africa and Asia) and economic development programmes (in Latin America and Asia) as major causes of changes in forest cover. The demand for food to feed the world's increasing populations will continue to put pressure on forest lands. FAO estimates that the increase in world food production necessary to meet rising demand, mainly in developing countries, is likely to be in the region of 1.8 percent per year from now until the year 2010. In some countries, supplies will be increased by importing food or through intensifying production on existing agricultural land. For countries where neither
option is feasible and where opportunities for land expansion exist (i.e., mainly sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America), food supplies will be increased by putting more land into agriculture. FAD has estimated that an additional 90 million hectares may be brought into agriculture in the developing countries by 2010, a large proportion of which is now in forests. The need for increased production and improved access to food in developing countries is also drawing greater attention to the ways in which forests and trees can contribute to household and national food security, in particular their role in protecting the natural resource base upon which agriculture depends.
The opposite scenario is taking place in some developed countries in situations of high agricultural production and the levelling off of demand; the release of marginal agricultural lands from production is providing new opportunities for afforestation.
The world economy, after its sharp decline between 1988 and 1991 and slow recovery between 1991 and 1993, has continued to expand over the last two years. It grew by 3.5 percent in 1995, with growth in developing countries at nearly 6 percent and in developed countries at about 2 percent, but with the countries in transition still showing a negative growth rate of 1 percent.^1 Continued global economic growth is predicted for 1996 and 1997, with slight increases in developed and developing countries, and a positive turnaround in the countries in transition whose recovery is expected to be sustained. Economic growth has been most impressive in the emerging market economies of the developing world, in many cases through strong structural reforms and macroeconomic measures. Two features of the present economic situation are that the growth of economic activity has become more geographically widespread (a greater proportion of countries are showing increases in per caput GDP)
and that this growth seems to have the potential to be sustained in many countries.^2 Although accurate predictions of economic growth over the medium term are difficult to make, it seems likely that the current trend of proportionally higher economic growth in the developing world will continue.
^1 International Monetary Fund (1996). World Economic Outlook. October 1996. IMF, Washington, D.C,
^2 United Nations (1996), World Economic and Social Survey 1996 UN, New York.
Despite overall economic growth, poverty, hunger and malnutrition persist in parts of the world and among various sectors of the population due to uneven distribution of wealth and access to resources. Many of the world's poor live near forests and are dependent on forest lands and resources for their livelihoods. Forests do and will continue to play a particularly important role in providing products and income for these people. Competing demands for forests to continue to provide for local needs and to meet the increasing national demand for industrial forest products, which will be stimulated by rising overall income levels, may well intensify.
The combined impact of economic growth and increasing population size on demand for forest products is likely to be significant, particularly so since per capita consumption of industrial forest products is especially responsive to income change at low levels of income.
Increased demand for forest products is likely to reinforce current efforts in forest plantation development and, in some countries, may lead to increased production of industrial wood products from farm woodlots and agroforestry systems. The area of plantations in developing regions has doubled over the period from 1980 to 1995, and industrial wood production from farm forestry and from agroforestry systems is becoming increasingly important in several countries. This trend is likely to be encouraged by decreased levels of timber harvesting in natural forests due to environmental concerns.
The dissolution of the former USSR and subsequent efforts of newly independent countries to move from a centrally-planned to a market economy are having major impacts on forestry. First, there have been serious disruptions in forest management and production systems, and forest products processing and trade in these countries. Particularly significant are the changes in the Russian Federation, which accounts for more than one-fifth of the world's forests and is a major producer of industrial roundwood. The sharp decrease in industrial roundwood removals in the former USSR (recorded removals in 1994 were only about half of those in 1990) contributed to the decline in world industrial roundwood production of about 15 percent over the same period. Second, major reorganizations are taking place in the forestry sector of the countries in transition, including the privatization of forest operations and state-owned forest enterprises, the restitution of nationalized forest land to
former owners or to their heirs, and the reorientation of forestry policies and institutions.
The impact of rapid infrastructure development and of urbanization on land use, land cover, and environmental conditions in urban and peri-urban areas is evident in many areas of the world, but especially in Africa and Asia where the rates of urbanization are highest. The effect of urbanization on overall demand for forest products and on rural land use, however, has not been the subject of detailed study, and is less well understood than the relationships between forest resources and population or economic growth; it is unclear whether the patterns evident in developed countries as they became urbanized will hold true for developing countries which are urbanizing at a much faster rate and with populations at much lower income levels. What is apparent, however, is that there is considerable scope for forestry to improve the environmental conditions and livelihoods of urban dwellers, and for peri-urban plantations to provide urban populations with wood products where demand
is exceeding supply. While rapid urbanization is no longer an issue in most developed countries, increased awareness in recent years of the potential environmental and social benefits of forests and trees in urban areas has led to the development of strong urban forestry programmes in many countries, such as in the United States and in Europe.
Environmental awareness and public pressure have continued to have an impact upon all aspects of the forestry sector: on forest management, harvesting and post-harvest activities, markets and trade in forest products. Concern that forests be managed in such a way as to ensure that their productive functions, environmental services and social benefits are sustained over the long term has led to efforts to develop criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. There is a trend towards management of forests as ecological systems with multiple economic benefits and environmental values, and environmental protection and conservation of biological diversity are given increased weight in management objectives. More attention has been drawn to the potential environmental and social benefits which might result from the development of non-wood forest products. Reduced-impact logging systems are being advocated to minimize harmful effects of timber harvesting; advances have
been made in forest industries leading to more environmentally-friendly processing of forest products; and there has been an increase in recovery and recycling of paper products. Restrictions have been placed on harvesting in national forests in North America and some tropical Asian and South Pacific countries. Some initiatives, such as certification schemes and the listing of timber species on appendices of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, are being implemented in an attempt to link trade to environmental concerns related to forestry.
Both the socio-cultural benefits of forests and the social implications of the distribution of forest benefits continue to be issues of international attention and national action. The concern ranges from how to meet the needs and respect the rights of indigenous groups, forest-dwelling and forest-dependent people, which is mainly, but not exclusively, a developing country issue, to the more universal question of how to take into consideration the range of demands for forest goods and services by a wide variety of interest groups. These concerns have resulted in the further development and institutionalization of various participatory forest management systems, in the devolution of ownership of forest resources, and in the recognition of access rights of local communities and user groups. In many developing countries in particular, local communities are playing an increasingly important role in day-to-day management and protection of forest resources, and, in the case of
indigenous peoples, efforts are being made to minimize outside interference with traditional resource management practices. Efforts are increasingly being made, in developed and developing countries alike, to develop means in which the opinions of a wide range of interest groups can be considered in decision making over forest policy and forest management practices.
Clearly, global forestry faces increasingly difficult challenges as we near the next millennium. Population growth, changes in population distribution, economic pressures, and efforts to alleviate poverty and ensure food security will lead to more intense scrutiny of forests' actual and potential contribution to development, and of the relative benefits of retaining land in forests versus converting it to other land uses. The most obvious challenge within the sector is that of how to meet the growing demand for forest products while at the same time safeguarding the ability of forests to provide a range of environmental services including, among others, the conservation of biological diversity, mitigation of global climate change, protection against desertification and protection of soil and water resources. Conflicting demands and differences in opinion about the relative importance of the goods and various services provided by forests will increasingly have to be
reconciled. Demands for achieving more equitable distribution of the benefits from forests, for safeguarding the rights of forest dwellers and indigenous peoples, and for ensuring widespread participation in decision making related to forests will add to the complexity and challenge of forest management and policy making in the coming years.
SOFO provides information on the state of the world's forests today and on recent developments in the sector. It also provides a look into the future for some aspects of forestry. This edition of SOFO is divided into four major parts: situation and prospects for forest conservation and development; policy, planning and institutional arrangements; a special issue chapter; and, finally, six regional highlights which together cover all the countries of the world.
Part 1 examines the status of forest resources, aspects related to forest management, and the goods and services that forests provide. It presents new information on the status of forest cover as of 1995, on the current rate and recent causes of change in forest cover, and on forest condition. This is followed by a discussion of trends in forest management and in harvesting, processing and marketing of forest products. Next, the role of forests in the economy is examined, looking at both the products and the services offered by forests. The difficulties of valuation of these goods and services are also discussed. Among the many environmental services offered by forests and trees, the following are highlighted: environmental protection in ecologically-fragile areas (drylands and uplands); mitigation of global climate change; conservation of biological diversity; contribution to food security; and improvement of environmental conditions in urban and peri-urban areas and of the
livelihoods of urban dwellers. SOFO outlines global trends in consumption and production and international trade in forest products over the period 1970-94, and potential consumption and trade patterns for forest products between 1994 and 2010. A part of the section on global trends in consumption and production is devoted to a discussion of non-wood forest products.
Part 2 discusses recent changes in policies, planning and institutional arrangements in the forestry sector. This is followed by information on international initiatives in forestry, and by a section on the status of funding in the forestry sector.
The special issue covered in this edition of SOFO is the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. Part 3 reviews the efforts, particularly those made over the last four years, to develop common criteria at national, regional and eco-regional levels by which sustainable forest management can be defined, and to specify indicators which can be used to monitor it.
Six regional highlights are provided in Part 4. These provide more geographically-specific information on the range of issues related to forests than is done in the preceding three parts of SOFO which focus on the global situation. In addition, information on the place of forestry in various economic or political regional groups is provided in a subsection to Part 4 on pages 162 to 170.
<section>3</section>
Recent trends and current status of forest resources
World forest areas in 1995
Changes in forest cover and condition
World forest areas in 1995
Since its inception, FAO, in cooperation with other international partners, particularly the UN-Economic Commission for Europe (UN-ECE) and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), has endeavoured to provide an overall picture of the state of the world's forest resources at five to ten year intervals. The information is largely based on an analysis of existing country data (see Box 1). The last such review, 'Forest Resources Assessment 1990' (FRA 1990) was carried out with 1990 as the reference year. The next full assessment will be FRA 2000. This edition of the State of the World's Forests provides information on forest cover as of 1995, and a revised estimate of forest cover in 1990.^1 More detailed information on data collection and analysis is provided in Annex 4 of this volume.
^1 A revised figure of forest cover in 1990 is based on updated population figures for 1990 and some new inventory reports which were available in 1996. Based on this Information, the new estimates of forest areas in 1990 are somewhat higher than those given by FRA 1990, and those of deforestation rates during the 1980s are slightly lower.
Forests are estimated to have covered 3 454 million hectares (ha), or 26.6 percent of the total land area of the world (Greenland and Antarctic excepted) in 1995. Figure 1 shows the distribution of forests (natural forests plus plantations) in 1995 by region (see Table 1 of Annex 3 for a list of countries by region). Developing countries, which for the most part are tropical, account for 58.9 percent of the total land area of the world and 56.8 percent of its forests.
Estimates of forest areas in 1995 by country are shown in Data Table 2 of Annex 3. More than 60 percent of the world's forests are located in seven countries: the Russian Federation, Brazil, Canada, United States, China, Indonesia and Zaire (see Figure 2). Twenty-nine countries have more than half of their land covered by forest. Of these, 21 are in the tropical belt. Forty-nine countries, in addition to the many non-forested small island states and territories, have less than 10 percent of their land covered by forests. Five entire subregions are in this category: North Africa (1.2 percent), Near East (1.9 percent), Temperate Oceania (6.2 percent), Non-tropical Southern Africa (6.8 percent) and West Sahelian Africa (7.5 percent).
Figure 1 - Forest areas by main regions in 1995
The distribution of forest and of forest cover change into ecological zones was not assessed for this report. The latest information of this kind was provided by FRA 1990.^2
^2 FAO. 1993. Forest Resources Assessment 1990 - Tropical Countries. FAO Forestry Paper 112, FAO, Rome.
At that time, temperate and boreal forests occupied 1.64 billion ha and tropical forests occupied 1.76 billion ha. A breakdown by ecological zone was available only for tropical forests (see Table 1). These data show that the large majority (88 percent) of tropical forests are in lowlands. Of these, tropical rainforests are the most abundant (accounting for 47 percent of all lowland tropical forests), followed by moist deciduous forest and finally by dry forests.
Natural forests
The estimates of forest area given above include undisturbed forests, forests modified by humans through use and management (or 'semi-natural' forests) and human-made forests (i.e., forest plantations) created artificially by afforestation or reforestation.^3 In most developed countries, forests are often regenerated by a combination of natural and artificial means on the same management unit, making it difficult to isolate figures for natural forest and plantations. The distinction can more easily be made for developing countries.
^3 See definition of these terms in Annex 2.
Box 1
Two essential components of global assessments of forest resources: national forest inventory systems and a common classification system for forests
National forest inventory systems
The quantity and quality of information provided by global and regional assessments are dependent to a large extent on the capacity of national forest inventory systems to collect and analyse data at national and sub-national levels, and to adjust the information so that it is compatible with global and regional reporting parameters. Of the 143 developing countries covered by FRA 1990, all but seven carried out one reliable nationwide estimate of forest cover at some time between 1970 and 1990. However, only 25 had more than one national forest cover assessment, and very few of these had carried out more than one comprehensive national forest inventory. The database for developed countries is far more complete; practically all developed countries were able to provide detailed information not only on areas, but also on biomass, volume and other forest parameters. UNCED recognized that assessment and systematic observations were 'often neglected aspects of forest resources
management, conservation and development...' and that 'in many developing countries there was a lack of structures and mechanisms to carry out these functions'. Consequently, it devoted one of the four programme areas of the forest chapter of Agenda 21 to the 'strengthening and establishment of systems for the assessment and systematic observation of forests and forest lands' and the 'provision of sound and adequate updated information on forest and forest land resources to economists, planners, decision-makers and local communities'. FAO, with the support of several donor countries, is pursuing an active programme of country capacity building in forest assessment which, ultimately, will contribute to improving the quality of global forest resources assessments.
A common classification system for forests
In order to make a global assessment of forest resources, data from national forest inventories must be amalgamated, adjusting them to a common classification system. A common set of concepts and classifications for all wooded lands of the world is, therefore, essential for securing consistency between regional and global forest resources assessments. The FAO and UN-ECE Secretariats have worked over the years to build consensus on a minimum core set of definitions and classifications within and between developed countries (all of which lie in the temperate and boreal zones) and developing countries (most of which fall within the tropical belt). In June 1996, FAO, in cooperation with UN-ECE and UNEP, and with the support of the Government of Finland, organized an expert meeting in the Finnish town of Kotka in which agreement was reached on a common core set of parameters to be assessed within the framework of the next global forest resources assessment for the year 2000 and
on some of the concepts and classifications to be used to that end.
Figure 2 - Countries with the largest percentage of the world's forests
Interest in natural forests, particularly in their role in biological diversity conservation, has led to efforts to compare forests today with what is thought to be their original character and to provide protection for areas of forests which have had little or no human interference. Although there are difficulties in identifying the extent of natural forest, compounded by problems of definition (see Box 2), some information exists which can be used as an indication of broad patterns of natural forests in various regions.
An attempt has been made by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) to quantify the amount of forests in western Europe^4 which have been relatively undisturbed by man or which have retained much of their natural character.^5 It found that only a small proportion (less than 1 percent) of the total forest land in northern and western Europe can be considered as virgin forest. Almost all of it is located in Sweden, Finland and Norway, with small areas in Greece, Austria and Switzerland and (according to another author) in France. In eastern Europe, Slovakia and
^4 World Wide Fund for Nature. 1994. The status of old growth and semi-natural forests in Western Europe. WWF, Gland, Switzerland.
^5 This report distinguishes between 'virgin forest', defined as 'forest ecosystems whose characteristics are determined exclusively by natural location and environmental factors... without human influences present or visible any more', and 'natural and ancient semi-natural forests', which 'have not been planted or sown by man for the past two centuries' and 'which continue to have a large number of the natural elements'.
Table 1
Forest cover area and rate of deforestation in the tropics by main ecological zone as estimated by FRA 1990
ecological zone
land area
population density (1990)
annual population growth (1981 -90)^a
forest cover (1990)
annual deforestation (1981-90)^a
million ha
inhabitants/km^2
percent p.a.
million ha
percentage land area
(million ha)
(percent p.a.)
FOREST ZONE
lowland formations
rainforest
moist deciduous
dry and very dry
upland formations
(hilt and mountain forest)
NON-FOREST ZONE
(alpine areas, deserts)
TOTAL TROPICS^b
^a Compound formulae were used for population growth and deforestation rate calculations.
^b Totals may not tally due to rounding.
Box 2
'Naturalness' of forests
A concept of 'naturalness' is being used as an indicator of biological diversity in some international processes which are defining criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management (see Part 3). Naturalness is characterized by such elements as a complex spatial structure, a composition and distribution of species natural to the site, a wide range of ages in tree species and the presence of dead and decaying trees. This has also led to the use of often loosely-defined terms such as 'virgin forests', 'primary forests', 'old growth forests', 'natural forests' and (ancient) 'semi-natural forests', making a consistent review of the state of naturalness difficult.
Belarus have considerable areas of virgin forest, and Poland and Croatia have small areas. The estimate given is that there are no more than a half a million hectares of virgin forest in Europe. An additional 21 percent of forest land in northern and western Europe is considered to be in 'natural and ancient semi-natural forests'. There are an additional 3 million ha in the region in national parks and other protected areas, and another 50 000 ha in small forest reserves (mostly for nature conservation and scientific research) whose use is tightly restricted. In all, therefore, less than 6 million ha or 5 percent of the forest land of Europe is considered to be relatively undisturbed (i.e., retaining much of its natural character).
The situation in temperate and boreal North America is quite different from that of densely populated Europe (and Japan), where use and management of forests for many centuries have left very little forest area untouched. 'Old growth forests', as they are called in North America, still cover extensive areas. 'On the lands managed by the US National Park Service alone, old-growth forests covered 1.97 million ha in 1988. Although not a direct measure of the extent of old growth forest, it is useful to note that the area of forest included in national parks and other protected areas in the United States and Canada together was reported to be close to 49 million ha in 1990.
FRA 1990 did not distinguish between undisturbed and disturbed natural forests in developing countries. FRA 1980, however, made estimates of the areas of undisturbed closed forests (primary forests and old secondary forests where there had been no logging for the last 60 to 80 years) and of closed forests included in national parks and other protected areas (thus relatively undisturbed, at least in theory). At that time, these two categories together represented 60 percent of the total closed forest area in the tropics, a proportion ranging from 39 percent in tropical Asia, to 59 percent in tropical Africa and 69 percent in tropical America. The different proportions by region reflected slower development of large-scale harvesting in tropical America compared to tropical Africa and Asia, and also the fact that, in tropical America, spontaneous colonization did not follow in the wake of timber harvesting as systematically as in the two other regions. While the sum of these
two categories does not match the concept of virgin forests of Europe or of old growth forests in North America, it nevertheless gives an indication of the amount of forest disturbance which existed around 1980 in the humid tropics. Although corresponding estimates for 1990 and 1995 are not available, the share of undisturbed forests is certainly higher in the three tropical regions than in Europe and probably also than in North America.
Forest plantations
Forest plantations are tree crops which are in many ways analogous to agricultural crops. They have a simple structure and are usually restricted to one or a few species chosen for their fast growth, yield of commercial products and ease of management, which results in higher productivity than for natural forests (see Table 2). For example, while plantations in Argentina represent only 2 percent of the forest area, they account for 60 percent of the country's industrial wood production.
Table 2
Plantation area and share of total wood production from plantations in countries with important forest plantation estates
countries
share of forest plantations (percent)
in area
in industrial wood production
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
New Zealand
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Although most plantations are intended for the production of industrial roundwood and/or fuelwood, many are established for environmental protection or other services (e.g., mainly for soil and water conservation, enhancement of agricultural production in agroforestry systems, carbon sequestration) and many also provide non-wood forest products (e.g., fodder, various foodstuffs, medicines, etc.).
Although it is difficult to separate plantations: from natural forests in most developed countries, a rough estimate of the total forest plantation in these countries is 80-100 million ha in 1995, up from: 45-60 million ha in 1980.
In almost all developing countries, on the other hand, the distinction between natural and plantation forests is more clearly drawn. In the developing world in 1995, the total 'net' forest plantation area (i.e., reported totals of annually planted areas adjusted by a survival coefficient) is estimated at some 81 million ha out of a total forest area of 1961 million ha, i.e., 4.1 percent. In 1980, it was assessed at about 40 million ha.
More than 80 percent of the forest plantations of the developing world are in the Asia-Oceania region (see Figure 3). Five of the seven countries with a forest plantation estate greater than 1 million ha in 1990 (China, India, Indonesia, Republic of Korea and Viet Nam) are from that region, the others being Brazil and Chile (see Table 3). China, with its substantial planting programmes, accounts for over 40 percent of the total plantation area of the developing world.
In the tropics as a whole, the proportion of industrial plantations established in large blocks fell from 40 percent in 1980 to 35 percent in 1990; community woodlots, farm forestry and agroforestry plantations have grown in importance during the period, particularly in the Asia-Oceania region. Some of the farm forestry and agroforestry plantations supply industrial wood markets. In India, for example, an estimated 26 000 ha of poplar (Populus deltoides) were established by farmers in Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Haryana States in the early 1990s, the produce from which was to be sold to factories for the manufacture of matches, plywood, and other wood products (see Box 3).
Unfortunately, area figures for small private or community plantations are frequently unreliable, often being derived from the number of seedlings leaving the forest nursery, converted to area at a fixed rate that varies by country. Some countries do not record such plantings in their plantation data. Even less complete are country-level data on trees outside the forest, including those in very small woodlots and in agroforestry systems. In many countries, particularly those with limited forest area, these trees often provide the bulk of fuelwood, poles, construction wood, utility wood, as well as fodder and other non-wood forest products for household use.
Figure 3 - Forest plantations in the developing regions, 1980
Figure 3 - Forest plantations in the developing regions, 1995
Table 3
Area of plantations in developing countries with the largest forest plantation estate
countries
net estimated area^a
(thousand ha)
China
India
Indonesia
Brazil
Viet Nam
Republic of Korea
Chile
Argentina
Thailand
Morocco
Bangladesh
Myanmar
Venezuela
Cuba
Philippines
^a These figures represent the latest reported plantation areas as of 1995, adjusted by an estimated survival rate of 70 percent. There are few large-scale inventories of forest plantations which allow for a comprehensive assessment of their condition and the level of damage caused by diseases, pests, animals and fire. A reliable assessment of plantation survival is therefore difficult, if not impossible, in most cases. FRA 1990 identified and analysed 56 plantation inventories in 18 developing countries, from which a global estimate of survival rate of 70 percent was determined,
In the FRA 1990 assessment of forest plantations in tropical countries, eucalypts (Eucalyptus spp.) accounted for 23 percent of the area, followed by pines (Pinus spp.) (10.5 percent), acacias (Acacia spp.) (7.7 percent), teak (Tectona grandis) (5.0 percent) and others (see also Box 3). Eucalypts and pines dominate in tropical America, occupying more than 80 percent of the total plantation area. Tropical African plantations are more diverse, with eucalypts and pines (mainly Pinus patula) making up about 50 percent of the forest plantation areas, with the balance composed of Acacia mearnsii (for tannin) or A. Senegal (gum arabic) and, in West Africa, Gmelina arborea and the indigenous Terminalia spp. and mahoganies (Khaya spp.). Forest plantations in the Asia-Oceania region are more diversified than either tropical Africa or America, with eucalypts and pines comprising 20 percent of the total area and teak (Tectona grandis), Acacia spp., Dalbergia sissoo, Paraserianthes
falcataria, Casuarina spp., Gmelina arborea and Swietenia spp. occupying much of the rest.
The figures for forest plantations do not include those areas planted with tree species but which are generally considered in the agriculture sector. In tropical developing countries, such plantations are mainly in the Asia-Oceania region, (principally in Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand). Of their total area of 14.1 million ha in 1990, 7.2 million ha were occupied by rubber and the remainder by coconut (4.2 million ha) and oil palm (2.7 million ha). Supply shortages and recent advances in conversion technology have made rubber wood and coconut wood important new sources of woody raw material for forest industries.
Forest plantations are expected to play an increasingly important role in national forest programmes in the future. Many developing countries, provided updated information on their present and future plantation programmes to FAO in 1996. Most of the countries with large plantation estates indicated that they intended to double their plantation areas between 1995 and 2010.
The expansion of forest plantations in all developing regions is expected to be accompanied by qualitative changes in the programmes, including:
· increasing sensitivity on the part of planners to the need for consultation and involvement of all concerned parties in planning plantation programmes;
· more integration of trees into agricultural systems to supply domestic needs and, where the price is attractive, industrial roundwood; and
· enhanced development of tree breeding programmes, some using advanced techniques but frequently incorporating ex-situ and in-situ genetic conservation of important populations.
Changes in forest cover and condition
A meaningful analysis of changes in the world's forests requires a differentiation between:
(i) the increase (by natural colonization of non-forest land with trees or by new plantings) or decrease (by deforestation) of forest area; and
(ii) the changes in forest condition, which may be positive (recovery of degraded stands, stand improvement treatments) or negative (defoliation/dieback, forest fires, unsustainable exploitation for wood, overgrazing, pests and diseases).
Changes in forest cover from 1980 to 1995 Between 1980 and 1995, the extent of the world's forests decreased by some 180 million ha, an area about the size of Indonesia or Mexico. This represents an annual loss of 12 million ha. During the 15-year period, the developing world lost nearly 200 million ha of natural forests, mostly through clearing for agriculture (shifting cultivation, other subsistence agriculture, cash crops, ranching). This was only partially compensated for by new forest plantations. Over the same period, forests in the developed world expanded slowly (by some 20 million ha) through afforestation and reforestation, including natural regrowth on land abandoned by agriculture. This increase more than compensated for the loss of forests in developed countries due mainly to urbanization and infrastructure development. The change in forest area by region over this period is shown in Figure 4.
Box 3
Planting eucalypts and poplars
Eucalypts and poplars illustrate the opportunities offered by fast-growing tree species when grown in plantations. Eucalypts are mainly, but not exclusively, grown in the tropical zones; poplars are best known in the temperate zones but have an increasingly important role in the subtropics.
In 1990 an estimated 10 million ha, or approximately one-quarter of tropical forest plantations, were planted with eucalypts. More than half of these plantations were located in tropical Asia and Oceania, mainly in India (4.8 million ha). It is more difficult to estimate the area of poplar plantations. It is known that in 1995 there were more than 1 million ha of poplar plantations in Europe and 1.3 million ha in China.
Both eucalypts and poplars provide woody material with a wide range of end uses such as sawn timber, plywood, paper and poles, animal fodder (poplars) and medicinal products (eucalypts). There is growing interest in their cultivation for biomass energy crops. Both can, under the right circumstances, be grown successfully in agroforestry systems.
These species are characterized by fast growth (when correctly matched to the site), and can be cross-bred for more rapid growth, good form, or favourable wood properties. Intensive selection for a few important economic characteristics may, however, lead to increased susceptibility to insect or disease attack and, although resistance to pests must be included in the breeding strategy, such resistance may be relatively short-lived. Breeding programmes for industrial roundwood species rely increasingly on the development of new hybrids, and on the ability to return to native or large ex-situ populations to introduce new genetic combinations. Plantations, therefore, are dependent on the conservation of a wide range of native populations.
In some countries, there has been strong local opposition to eucalypts and poplar. For eucalypts, this has been due to a failure to appreciate that their high demand for soil moisture makes them unsuitable for some agroforestry systems in dry (unirrigated) areas. The alienation of villagers' land or failure to consult and involve people when creating eucalypt plantations in Southeast Asia has led to criticism and even condemnation of the genus rather than of shortfalls in the planning process. In Thailand, many farmers have planted eucalyptus on their own land for income, but have opposed its planting in forest reserves instead of native species on which they rely for a wide range of goods (e.g., fodder or non-wood forest products) that eucalyptus would not provide. Some European countries have prohibited the planting of poplars on floodplains to prevent the loss of natural vegetation and wildlife habitat and to maintain a natural appearance.
Figure 4 - Comparison of 1980 and 1995 forest areas (change shown as percentage of 1980 forest areas by region, except former USSR)
Changes in forest cover in the 1990-95 period, and comparison with 1980-90. The estimates of forest cover change in the 1990-95 period indicate a net loss of 56.3 million ha of forests (natural forests plus plantations) worldwide, representing a decrease of 65.1 million ha in developing countries which was partly offset by an increase of 8.8 million ha in developed countries (see Table 4 for developed country estimates, Table 5 for developing country estimates, and Table 3 of Annex 3 for forest cover change estimates by country). The estimated amount of forest lost annually in the developing world - 13.03 million ha - was equivalent to an annual rate of loss of 0.65 percent. Deforestation was highest in the tropical zone of the developing world. The highest annual rate of loss over this period was in tropical Asia-Oceania (0.98 percent) and the lowest (0.14 percent) was in non-tropical Asia-Oceania (see Table 3 of Annex 3).
Looking only at cover trends in natural forests in developing countries, one sees that the estimated annual loss over the 1990-95 period was 13.7 million ha, which was considerably lower than over the 1980-90 period (15.5 million ha).^6 In other words, although the rate of loss of natural forests in developing countries is still high, it appears to have slowed somewhat since the last decade.
^6 It should be noted that this estimate for annual loss of natural forests in developing countries during the 1980-90 period is based on new estimates for forest cover in 1980 and 1990 (see footnote 1) which are different from those made previously by FRA 1990. The hew estimate of annual loss of natural forests in developing countries - 15.5 million ha - is lower than the estimate of 16,3 million ha made by FRA 1990. In other words, although deforestation in natural forests of developing countries over the 1980s was high, it was slightly lower than previously thought.
Table 4
Forest area change in developed countries, 1990-95
regions
1990-95 (million ha)
forest area change
annual (million ha)
(percent)
Europe
Former USSR without the Russian Federation ^a
Temperate/boreal North America
Developed Asia-Oceania
All developed countries (without the Russian Federation)
All developed countries (without former USSR)
^a The Russian Federation is not included in this table since no reliable estimate for change in forest area between 1990 and 1995 could be made for this country.
Table 5
Annual forest area changes in the developing regions, estimated for 1990-95 and 1980-90
regions
annual forest area change
1980-90^c
natural forests
total forests^b
natural forests^a
total forests^b
(million ha)
(percentage of 1990 area)
(million ha)
(percentage of 1990 area)
(million ha)
(million ha)
Africa
tropical
non-tropical
Asia-Oceania (developing)
tropical
non-tropical
Latin America and Caribbean
tropical
non-tropical
developing world
tropical
non-tropical
^a The negative figures denote deforestation.
^b The difference between an increase in area due to plantation establishment and a decrease in area due to deforestation
^c Note that the estimates for 1980-90 are based on new information and differ slightly from those produced by FRA 1990. See footnote 1 of this section.
Conversion of forests to other land cover FRA 1990 carried out a study of forest land cover change in the tropics between 1980 and 1990 which gives some indication of the relative importance of various deforestation factors. The results have recently been published.^7 Among the most significant outputs of the study are the so-called 'area transition matrices' of the type shown in Table 6, which indicate transfers from one land cover class to another between 1980 and 1990 over the 3 068 million ha of the tropical zone. The first row, for example, shows how much of the 1368 million ha of closed forest in 1980 remained as closed forest up to 1990 (i.e., 1 275.9 million ha), and what happened to the 92.1 million ha which were converted to other land cover classes (i.e., open forest; long fallow; fragmented forest; shrubs and short fallow; other, i.e., non-wooded land cover; and forest plantations or agricultural tree plantations). Figure 5 provides these results graphically,
showing the area lost or gained by each class, while Figure 6 indicates the various types of change in forest cover and condition which occurred in each of the three tropical regions. All these transfers involve changes of woody biomass, which Figure 7 attempts to capture by assigning to each land cover class an average biomass per hectare. This study will be repeated in the next global assessment (FRA 2000) in order to analyse trends over the 1990s.
^7 FAO, 1996, FRA 1990: Survey of Tropical Forest Cover and Study of Change Processes Forestry Paper 130. FAO, Rome,
Figure 5 - Pan-tropical summary of net changes during 1980-90 by land cover class
Table 6
Area transition matrix for the tropical zone, 1980-90
land cover classes in 1980
land cover classes in 1990 (million ha)
closed forest
open forest
long fallow
fragmented forest
shrubs and short fallow
other land cover
plantation (agricultural and forest)
total 1980 (million ha)
closed forest
open forest
long fallow
n.s.
fragmented forest
shrubs and short fallow
other land cover
plantation
n.s.
n.s
total 1990
The figures indicate that, during the decade, and at pan-tropical level, the closed forest underwent the greatest change of all land cover classes. Of the 92.1 million ha of closed forest that underwent a change in land cover class:
· 40 percent (36.6 million ha) went to 'other land cover' which includes, among other things, permanent agriculture, cattle ranching, water reservoirs, etc., representing a complete loss of the cover and woody biomass;
· 26 percent (24.1 million ha) went into shrubs and short fallow agriculture which represents deforestation, but some woody biomass remains on the site;
· 10 percent (9.2 million ha) went to fragmented forest, which represents partial deforestation, with a loss of approximately two-thirds of the original forest cover;
· 20 percent (18.2 million ha) went into open forest or long fallow shifting cultivation, representing degradation involving the loss of biomass (approximately half);
· 4 percent (4 million ha) went to agricultural or forestry plantations.
Figure 6 - Main categories of forest cover change by geographic regions, 1980-90 (changes as percentages of 1980 regional forest area; closed and open forest)
Figure 7 - Pan-tropical area and change in forest area and above-ground woody biomass
The other land cover classes that underwent significant changes are open forest, shrubs, and fragmented forest. Almost all (90 percent) of the changes to the four land cover classes resulted in a decrease in biomass.
The nature of the changes detected by the study provides some useful indications of major ultimate causes of change. Distinct patterns are evident in the different regions, namely:
· Changes in forests in Africa are dominated by transition from closed forest, through intermediary stages of depletion, to shrub and short fallow. This would indicate an extension of subsistence farming under the pressure of rural population growth.
· Changes in forests in Latin America are dominated by a more abrupt change involving deforestation from closed forest to other land cover, seemingly due to the effect of centrally-planned operations such as government resettlement schemes, large-scale cattle ranching and hydroelectric reservoirs.
· Forests in Asia are undergoing two types of changes of nearly equal measure: gradual changes as a result of rural population pressure (i.e., intensification and expansion of shifting cultivation practices); and abrupt changes due to centrally-planned operations including government resettlement schemes and large plantation programmes.
The above-mentioned study provides valuable information on the nature of vegetation change in tropical forests that can be detected through remote sensing imagery. Certain information on the processes and effects of forest cover change, however, cannot be obtained through a global study, and, therefore, should be complemented by other types of studies carried out at the national level. National and sub-national studies are needed to increase the understanding of the underlying causes of change and change processes, the factors contributing to forest cover degradation, and the effects of vegetation change on other forest resources.
Changes in forest condition
Developed countries
Although total forest area is slowly increasing in all parts of the developed world, there has been no significant improvement in some aspects of forest condition. Even though the widespread death of European forests due to air pollution which was predicted by many in the 1980s did not occur, deteriorating forest condition remains a serious concern in Europe and North America. A 1995 study carried out by UN-ECE and EU suggests that the direct causes of the decline of forest condition in Europe are drought, heat, pests, game and grazing, and human action, whereas pollution is an indirect cause, predisposing forests to decline (see the 'Regional highlights' for Europe and the former USSR in Part 4). Forest damage, which may appear moderate on a continental scale, is severe in some parts of central and eastern Europe where at least 100 000 ha of forests have died in the last 20 years. Most of these forests have subsequently been reforested with species or provenances better
adapted to the site. Air pollution is said to play a role in the decline of various forest species in other industrialized countries, for example: sugar maple (Acer saccharum) in eastern Canada; the high elevation forests of red spruce (Picea rubens) in the eastern USA; and Cryptomeria japonica stands in Japan.
Forest fires have become smaller but more frequent in the industrialized countries over the last decade. There has been a slight reduction in total area burned per year in the developed world as a result of improved prevention, detection and control systems (although there has been an increase of 15 percent in the former USSR). The average area of forest and other wooded land affected per year by fires in Europe, North America and the former USSR together was about 4.26 million ha, or 0.22 percent of their total area of forest and other wooded land in 1990.
Pests and diseases are often the main agents of forest decline, and remain constant threats to forests. Until recently, plantation growing stock was based on relatively limited genetic variability which increased the vulnerability of the plantations to pests and diseases. Recent problems include the decline of various species of oaks in many parts of Europe and central Russia, the recurrent infestation of forests in Poland by the nun moth, the attack on beech by the beech scale in western and central Europe, birch and ash diebacks in the north-eastern USA, the 'little-leaf disease of short-leaf pine in the southern USA, and the 'x-disease' of pines in southern California.
Developing countries
Because reduction in forest area is the most striking aspect of forest change in developing countries, less attention is paid to forest condition. Although the extent and degree of overharvesting of fuelwood and overgrazing are difficult to quantify, they are recognized as major causes of forest degradation in some developing countries, particularly in arid and semi-arid zones. Fires, pests and diseases are also critical factors in forest health in these countries.
Every year, very large areas of savannah-type, mixed forest/grassland formations are affected by fires, particularly in the dry zones of Africa and South America, but no reliable data are available on their extent. Although less prone to fire, forest areas in the humid tropics are also affected by large fires, the most serious in recent history being in East Kalimantan (Indonesia) in 1993 which burned 3.6 million ha. Coniferous forests in the humid tropics are often affected by fires; in the 1980s the area of pine forest in Honduras and Nicaragua burned annually amounted to some 3.5 percent of the countries' total pine forest area, and important fires have burned natural and human-made tropical pine forests in Mexico and Indonesia (Northern Sumatra). Fire is also a permanent threat to forests in the sub-temperate and temperate zones of North Africa and South America (including Southern Brazil). From 1950 to 1990, fires in China are reported to have affected annually an
average of 890 000 ha, the most damaging having been the 'May 6' fire which burned some 1.85 million ha in the north-eastern province of Heilongjiang in 1987. In the absence of a global statistical fire database, it is difficult to provide an overall estimate of the annual extent of fires in forests and other wooded lands. A crude estimate for the temperate/sub-temperate and humid tropical zones of the developing world - leaving aside the significant dry tropical zone for which little reliable information exists - would be of the order of 2 million ha of forest and other wooded land per year during the 1980s. Given the lack of adequate fire prevention and control capacity in most developing countries, no significant reduction of wooded areas burned is likely to occur in the near future.
Pest and disease outbreaks in developing countries are surveyed and reported mostly for plantations and planted trees. Examples include: the Leucaena psyllid, Heteropsylla cubana, which has spread into Asia and the Pacific islands and is now spreading across Africa; the cypress aphid, Cinara cupressi, which is established in eight eastern and southern African countries and is causing heavy mortality among a number of exotic and indigenous species, especially the important plantation species Cupressus lusitanica; and the European woodwasp, Sirex noctilio, which has spread into Argentina, Uruguay and southern Brazil, affecting principally Pinus taeda, but which may become a threat to the large Chilean plantation estate of Pinus radiata.
There is evidence of forest decline associated with air pollution also in the developing world. This is likely to be increasingly important as the industrial and transportation infrastructure develops. Examples include the decline of neem (Azadirachta indica) in the Sahel, of framiré (Terminalia ivorensis) in Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana, of forests near large cities and industrial areas in China (e.g., Pinus massoniana stands near Nanshan), and of Eucalyptus globulus plantations in Colombia and Peru. Despite the overall significance of the corresponding damage and losses, surveys of forest declines and diebacks in developing countries are relatively rare.
Effects of timber harvesting on forest condition
An issue of intense discussion and considerable polarization of opinion in both developed and developing countries is the effect of timber harvesting on the condition of natural and semi-natural forests. In the words of one recent publication: 'The most urgent, and certainly the most emotive, environmental issue relating to the timber trade concerns the logging of natural or semi-natural forests.... Here is the real front line in the forest debate. On one side are the conservation activists, blocking logging roads, hugging trees, lobbying governments and organizing petitions, often backed up by sympathetic media and significant sections of public opinion. On the other side are timber traders, logging companies and often the forest workers themselves, arguing that forest management is essential for jobs, economic security and resources, and that modern logging techniques allow a sustainable yield of timber and cause little long-term environmental damage'.^8
^8 Dudley, N., Jeanrenaud J-P and Sullivan F. 1995, Bad Harvest? The Timber Trade and the Degradation of the World's Forests. Earthscan Publications Limited, London, UK
The concerns revolve around, among other things: the effects of overharvesting and poor harvesting practices on the future productive capacity of the forest through changes in the tree species composition and damage to the soil (see the discussion of forest harvesting in the section 'Trends in forest management and utilization'); the impact on forest plants and animals through habitat disruption caused by harvesting, other forest management operations, and by forest roads; the effect on water quality and aquatic organisms due to siltation of waterbodies and harvesting debris; and, in some cases, the increased risk of windblow, forest pests and diseases. While it is difficult to quantify the extent and degree of such degradation on a global scale, the forestry literature cites many examples of poor harvesting methods and of overharvesting leading to negative environmental impacts in many parts of the world.^9
^9 ibid (see citations within)
<section>4</section>
Trends in forest management and utilization
Status and trends in forest management
Evolving patterns of harvesting, processing and marketing
Status and trends in forest management
Forest management encompasses the administrative, economic, legal, social and technical measures involved in the conservation and use of natural forests and forest plantations. It involves various degrees of human intervention to safeguard the forest ecosystem, its functions and its resources for the sustained production of goods and the provision of environmental services.
While the objectives of management vary widely and include the protection of resources in protected forests and nature reserves, the primary objective has often been the production of wood products. A basic tenet of forest management with emphasis on wood production is 'sustained yield', or harvesting the wood increment without drawing down on the forest capital.
Although sustained yield forestry continues to be widely practised, there is an increasing trend towards the management of forests as ecological systems with multiple economic benefits and environmental values, and with broad public participation in the decision-making process. This concept is generally termed 'sustainable forest management'. It aims to ensure that the benefits - both material and intangible - derived from the forest meet present needs, while at the same time ensuring their continued availability and contribution to long-term social and economic development. General acceptance of, and political commitment to, the principles of sustainable forest management have continued to grow, reinforced by the increased focus on forestry since UNCED. Chapter 11 ('Combating Deforestation') of UNCED's Agenda 21 and the 'Forest Principles' emphasized strongly the need to reconcile the productive functions of forests with their protective, environmental and social functions.
Substantial effort has been made over the last two years to develop common criteria at national, regional and eco-regional levels by which sustainable forest management can be defined, and to specify indicators that can be used to monitor and evaluate it. These activities are described more fully in Part 3. The trend towards sustainable forest management is bringing considerable change in how forests are perceived and used. Forest management for production of non-wood forest products (NWFPs) is receiving more attention. Protective functions of forests are being given more emphasis, resulting in modified management practices. The needs of local, forest-dependent people are being given greater weight. The strict distinctions formerly drawn between production forests, protection forests and (nature) conservation areas have become more blurred today. For example: many rural development and conservation projects are focusing on increasing production of wood and non-wood forest
products in 'buffer zones' as a means of taking pressure off conservation areas; the maintenance of protective functions is being given greater attention in production forests; and the role of forests outside protected areas in the conservation of biological diversity is being studied more intently.
Trends in forest management for productive purposes Not only is the long-standing basic principle of sustained yield not uniformly practised throughout the world (in some places it is notably lacking), but the means of applying the newer, broader concept of sustainability in forest management are still being developed in most countries.
The Forest Resources Assessment 1980 attempted to estimate the proportion of tropical forests under intensive forest management, defined as 'strict and controlled harvesting regulations, coupled with silvicultural treatments and protection against fires and diseases' and applying the concept of the 'annual allowable cut' (i.e., sustained yield) in harvesting. At that time it was estimated that less than five percent of tropical forests met this traditional definition of sustainable forest management. No attempt was made to quantify areas of managed forests in the temperate and boreal forests of developed countries and, although most were reported to be under management plans, the scope and intensity of management varied widely between countries. The Global Synthesis for the 1990 Forest Resources Assessment found that there had been an all-round improvement in forest management in developed countries, but that the total area under management in developing countries had
declined, for although working plans existed for the forests, the prescriptions were often not implemented.
Several technical and policy issues related to management of production forests have been the subject of considerable scrutiny and, in some cases, heated public debate in many countries. The list includes: granting of harvesting concessions and concession terms; timber sales on public lands; clear-cutting and harvesting methods; salvage harvesting; and use of exotic vs. indigenous species. Development of sustainable management systems for production of many economically-promising non-wood forest products is still in its infancy (see 'Non-wood forest products' on page 58). While coverage of all these issues is not possible here, some technical and institutional issues and trends in forest management for production and conservation purposes are presented in Boxes 1, 2 and 3 below.
New institutional arrangements and issues for forest management
Trends in forest policies and institutional arrangements are having direct impacts on forest management. (See Part 2 for a discussion of these policy, planning and institutional changes.) Following the general trend towards decentralization, government forestry administrations in many countries, developed and developing, are making efforts to decentralize control over forest resource management. This involves the gradual devolution of responsibility within the line agencies, from the central to the provincial or district level. Local officers are being given greater decision-making authority on local management issues. This implies changes in management practices to those which have a closer relation to local conditions. A second significant trend is in privatization, either of land or of forestry operations. This trend has obvious implications for forest management in terms of an increased profit motive driving management decisions and, in the case of leases and
concessions, the need for government to monitor operations to ensure that agreed conditions related to management are met. A third trend is that of ensuring greater participation by a wide range of interest groups in the planning process. This requires that forest departments develop the institutional capacity and the capability to work with various groups (implying far more effort than in the past in communication, extension and mediation) and are able to modify management plans and practices effectively to meet the agreed objectives. Finally, there is a trend towards encouraging greater involvement of local communities in the management of forest resources. It is on this last point, and in particular the changes occurring in developing countries, that the following discussion focuses.
Box 1
Forest concessions: an emerging issue in Latin America
An increasing number of Latin American countries are considering the granting of extensive areas of forest concessions. Suriname considered granting 4.5 million ha in 1994, while in Guyana, one company has been granted a concession equivalent in size to half of Switzerland. Venezuela has granted nearly 3 million ha in forest concessions in the State of Bolivar, and is considering increasing the area to 12 million ha, and perhaps also opening up some Amazonian areas to forest harvesting. International companies interested in expanding their operations are actively seeking harvesting rights in Bolivia and Peru. Since 1995,
Belize has granted 17 long-term concessions covering 224 600 ha. Concessions have been a subject of controversy over recent years between governments and conservation groups. The increase in the number of concessions granted is a result of pressure for economic growth and of the economic globalization of companies with capital and know-how in forestry. Increasingly, some environmental groups and local organizations are concerned that the granting of forest concessions over large areas may result in forest degradation or deforestation and serious negative impacts on indigenous people.
Box 2
Reduced-impact logging in tropical moist forests: new impetus for adoption of known techniques
Harvesting is one of the most important of all management interventions, not only in meeting production objectives but also in shaping the composition of the future forest. Some harvesting techniques and operations (e.g., skidding, loading and reading) have, however, been destructive to the vegetation, to soil and, through erosion, to water bodies. Harvesting to extract even a small number of trees per hectare, if done carelessly, can damage not only the trees harvested, but a large proportion of the remaining trees. Given that the production of high-value veneer timbers is increasingly becoming a major production objective of managed tropical moist forest, improved logging to reduce damage to harvested trees and trees to be harvested at a later stage is important economically. The essential components of reduced-impact logging (RIL) to minimize these harmful effects have been known for many years. They include cutting of climbers well in advance of felling, stock mapping to
plan road networks, limiting gradients for roads, directional felling, the establishment of stream buffer zones, careful skidding and reduced areas of log landings (see 'Evolving patterns of harvesting, processing and marketing' on page 28). The benefits include a reduction in damage to the logs in felling and to remaining trees, a shorter period before the next felling, better recovery of logged trees through easier location, and reduced soil erosion. The costs include a much greater need for supervision, provision of a substantial training programme for staff and operators at all levels, more pre-felling activities and reduced outturn (both in terms of lower volume per unit of time and per unit of forest area). The costs and the benefits are not easily quantified, even in financial terms. Preliminary estimates suggest that the direct additional costs compared with traditional logging are relatively low, but that the needs for capital investment in equipment and training to
implement RIL may still be a disincentive to adoption.^1 Increased environmental pressures and rising prices for tropical hardwoods over the long term could well provide impetus for increased adoption.
^1 Moura-Costa, P, and Tay, J. 1996. Reduced-impact logging project in Sabah, Malaysia. Paper to the International Workshop on Integrated Application of Sustainable Forest Management Practices. Kochi, Japan, 22-25 November 1996.
Participatory management of forest resources is not only seen as a means to encourage sustainable forest management, but is also a pragmatic response to the constraints imposed on forest departments by their shrinking financial and human resources. The development of participatory management systems, in which local communities play an important role in the day-to-day management and protection of forest resources, has been rapid in many developing countries, resulting in a wide variety of management arrangements fashioned as appropriate to local conditions. These include: joint forest management; community forestry programmes; integrated conservation and development programmes used mainly in conjunction with nature conservation efforts; and village land management (referred to as 'amenagement des terroirs' in French), which is developing rapidly in West Africa (see the Africa regional highlights in Part 4).
Joint forest management (JFM), a collaborative management approach that has been adopted in a number of states in India and in some Southeast Asian countries, has had some major successes. It is based on the principle that local communities become directly involved in the management of public forests and, in doing so, benefit directly from the use of the forests. In Nepal, the approach of the National Community Forestry Programme has been to negotiate a forest management agreement between the forest department and user groups (groups of people with a direct interest in the use of a particular forest and which claim user rights). The user groups are involved in the development of the operational plan and there is a high level of local control, although the ultimate authority remains with the District Forestry Officer. In both cases, there is a trend towards ever-increasing local control.
Box 3
Clear-cutting: a continuing controversy
Clear-cutting, or the felling of all trees over a considerable area at one time, is done for various reasons related to the economics of harvesting and features of forest regeneration. Clear-cuts, particularly those carried out over very large areas, have aroused strong opposition from environmental groups, notably in relation to harvesting in the northwest USA and British Columbia but also in the Nordic countries, not only because of their environmental effects - including impacts on the soil, increased soil erosion and effects on wildlife habitat - but also for their visual and amenity impact which may last for a considerable length of time after regeneration. Continued public attention and pressure have encouraged major policy shifts and changes in management prescriptions over the last few years. In some countries, e.g., Canada, there has been a move away from large felling areas towards smaller areas that are adapted more sensitively to the land form. Within these
smaller areas, there is a greater attempt to retain advance growth, understorey species and even dead and dying trees. In the United States, it is the policy of the Forest Service to phase out clear-cutting as a standard practice on US national forests, and to use it only in exceptional circumstances. The debate on clear-cutting has outlined the complexities of the issues, not only of the difficulties and dangers of making comparisons where the size of area defining a clear-cut differs between countries, but also of the impossibility of giving a clear positive or negative answer to a generalized question of whether clear-cuts should be permitted; the answer will depend on local silvicultural, ecological, economic and aesthetic considerations.
Other arrangements being tried include: long-term leasing of forest land to communities and individuals, who gain full right to the products of the lands in exchange for applying sound management practices; participatory management of some specific part of a resource, such as game for eco-tourism in the case of some East and southern African countries; and the handing over of full rights to forest areas considered to belong, both historically and traditionally, to a particular indigenous or aboriginal population.
Recently, with the increase of free market economics and the move towards privatization, some attempts are being made to test the 'western' model, present in much of Europe, of small-scale private ownership of forest plots which are managed cooperatively, usually under government agency supervision of some sort. This appears to be the likely direction for the development of locally-based forest and tree management in the medium-term future, as more tenure regimes adopt legal structures based on the recognition of individual private property.
A number of issues have been identified in the course of implementing these programmes. Many are technical, but the most challenging by far are of a legal, administrative or socio-economic nature. These include the need to resolve contradictions between customary (i.e., traditional) and statutory laws and regulations governing land ownership and usufruct practices; to ensure sustainable management of what was previously considered common property in the face of increasing market demand; to resolve competing claims between different ministries; to develop conflict management mechanisms to address competing claims on resources; to adapt existing institutional mechanisms or develop new ones appropriate to the new conditions. In addition, gender continues to be a major issue in forest management. There is growing sensitivity to the need to involve women in decisions related to forest and resource management, and to address their specific needs relative to forests, as they are
often those most negatively affected by reduced access to forest resources.
Trends in management for the conservation of forest ecosystems
In 1993, the total coverage of protected areas included in Categories I-V of the IUCN's classification system (see Annex 2 for definitions) was estimated at 306 million ha in developed countries and at 486 million ha in developing countries.^2 This constituted some 6 percent of the world's total land area. Available global data do not, however, allow an estimate of the amount of forest land included in these protected areas in most regions of the world. This is available only for Europe, where it was estimated that the area of forests and other wooded lands included in the protected areas and nature reserves of 15 countries constituted some three percent of the total forest area. In the developing countries, almost half of the area under protection was found in Latin America (48 percent), some 29 percent and some 23 percent being located in Africa and Asia, respectively.
^2 FAO, 1995, FRA 1990. Global synthesis. FAO, Rome. Reference is to a study carried out for FAO by the World Conservation Monitoring Centre.
Information on protected areas by geographical region should be viewed in parallel with data on losses of forests by ecological zone. In this regard, mean annual deforestation during the period 1980 to 1990 amounted to 1.1 percent in tropical upland formations, 1 percent in moist deciduous forests, 0.9 percent in dry and very dry zone forests, and 0.6 percent in tropical rainforests. Furthermore, there were significant differences in the losses of various forest types and forest formations. Among those under greatest threat were the tropical coniferous forests (of which three-quarters were found in tropical America) and mangrove ecosystems (found in all tropical regions).
Criteria for selection of parks and protected areas vary widely. Many have been established primarily for recreation and tourism and have limited significance in terms of conservation of biological diversity. In addition, pressure on land for other purposes has forced the selection of conservation areas to be made on pragmatic rather than scientific grounds. Many important forest ecosystems are either unrepresented or under-represented and management of many protected areas is weak, reinforcing the need to complement conservation in parks and protected areas with increased effort to address conservation outside protected areas.
Increased public awareness and revision of policies favouring conservation have resulted in the expansion of the size of protected area systems in many countries. At the same time, countries have undertaken to reform legislation related to parks and protected areas. There have also been continued efforts to strengthen the capacity of protected area managers through education and training programmes. Far more, however, is needed to be done in all of these areas.
One of the areas receiving considerable attention is the relationship between development needs and conservation objectives. New management modalities have been developed to ensure that conservation in protected areas is effective, particularly in developing countries where basic survival needs of the rural poor are putting intense pressure on forest lands and could undermine conservation efforts. A similar approach to that governing participatory forest management is used in many current conservation programmes; greater emphasis is being placed on taking local people's needs into consideration and, in many places, involving them in planning and management itself. This has given rise to a number of management arrangements, including buffer zone management and integrated conservation development projects (ICDPs). The ICDP approach encourages sustainable resource management by providing incentives to local people to manage their resources effectively. While the rights for
timber production are often not given to the community members, the utilization of other resources, especially for subsistence, is usually allowed.
Many international NGOs, such as the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN - also known as the World Conservation Union) and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), have been actively involved in developing the ICDP concept and supporting activities on the ground. The foundation for this approach is based upon the principle that local involvement in management decisions will lead to improved natural resource management. The Asian Development Bank and the World Bank are also adopting the ICDP approach for protected area projects. Although implementation of these projects is not problem-free, this approach is expected to continue to gain momentum.
Evolving patterns of harvesting, processing and marketing
Just as forest management is evolving in response to changes both within and outside the forestry sector, harvesting and post-harvest activities are adapting to new conditions. These activities are responding to: The impacts and demands of environmental concerns; changing quantity, quality and sources of raw materials; economic pressures; technological developments; and changing market conditions which have both caused, and been caused by, changes in marketing approaches and marketing structures.
Changing patterns of forest harvesting The major worldwide trend in forest harvesting over the past 30 years has been increased mechanization. While maximizing economic efficiency continues to drive changes in forest harvesting, more recently it has been linked with efforts to minimize negative environmental impacts. Many improvements in tree-felling operations, extraction systems and forest road construction have come about as a result of efforts to minimize the negative environmental impacts. Evidence from studies done in various countries suggests that environmentally-sound forest harvesting practices may be only marginally more expensive than traditional methods. There are, however, clear economic and ecological benefits arising from the reduced damage of both felled and residual trees, smaller areas needed for roads, skidtrails, and loading areas, and reduced wood waste.
Box 4
FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice
The FAO Model Code, published in 1996, is intended primarily to serve as a reference for countries considering adoption or revision of their own codes of practice. Its overall purpose is to promote harvesting practices which will improve standards of utilization, reduce negative environmental impact, and help ensure that forests are sustained for future generations. The Code is to assist those dealing with forest operations involving road engineering, felling, extraction, landing and transport operations.
The Model Code identifies four ingredients of forest harvesting operations essential to sustainable forest management. These are:
· comprehensive harvest planning;
· effective implementation and control of harvesting operations;
· thorough post-harvest assessment and communication of results to the planning team and to the harvesting personnel; and
· a competent and properly-motivated workforce.
The Model Code can serve to draw attention to policy-makers that forest utilization techniques and systems do exist to manage forests sustainably. It can also be used as a source of information to apply environmentally-sound forest practices supporting sustainable forest management, as well as providing guidance in training, education and extension.
There has already been wide interest in the Code, from forest companies, forest administrations and non-governmental organizations. For example:
· in June 1996, a draft code of practice for forest operations was prepared in Guyana based on the FAO Model Code;
· the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission recommended that FAO establish an ad hoc working group to strengthen the Commission's work in developing environmentally-sound harvesting techniques, possibly leading to the development of a regional code; and
· case studies sponsored by private enterprises have been undertaken in Brazil, Congo, Indonesia and Peru to test some of the applications suggested in the Code.
Environmentally-acceptable harvesting and forest engineering operations are gradually being adopted by forest owners and contractors particularly, but not only, in the developed world. Various 'Codes of Practice' for forestry harvesting have been developed for use at the international, regional and national levels to improve harvesting practices following concepts of low-impact harvesting. Examples include: the recently-developed FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practices which provides general guidelines for adoption by countries worldwide (see Box 4); a regional code of practice for the Asia-Pacific region which is currently being developed; and a code for the South Pacific which has provided a basis for national codes which have been developed in the subregion (e.g., Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu).
Areas where progress has been made in reducing the negative impacts of forest harvesting operations and engineering include the following: reduction in the waste of wood residues; improvements in tree felling operations; low impact wood extraction systems; and improved forest road construction.
Reduction in the waste of wood residues
A recent study suggests that, of all the wood felled annually for timber in tropical forests, about half remains in the forest as unused wood residues.^3 While leaving a certain amount of residues in the forest is environmentally beneficial, improved utilization would result in less timber felled for the same volume of industrial roundwood produced, thus allowing for harvesting on a smaller forest area.
^3 Dykstra, D.R 1992. Wood residues from timber harvesting and primary processing: A global assessment for tropical forests. Manuscript to be published as an FAO Forestry Paper. FAO, Rome.
Improvements in tree-felling operations
Properly conducted cutting operations can help minimize damage to residual trees and maximize volume and value of logs harvested. Cutting of climbers and vines before tree felling, and directional felling, are now used in some tropical forests to reduce damage to trees. Recent studies indicate that improved felling operations can result in increases in wood volume recuperated of up to 30 percent, and that damage to the residual forest stand can be reduced by more than 20 percent.
Low impact wood extraction systems There has been considerable development of wood extraction systems and machines. Transport of timber from the felling site to the landing or road may be done with ground-based systems (i.e., manual, animal, ground skidding), harvester/forwarder systems, cable harvesting systems or aerial systems (i.e., helicopters and lighter-than-air balloons).
Although manual and animal wood extraction systems are less common than in the past, they are still used in some countries (e.g., oxen logging in Costa Rica, Malawi and Tanzania; and elephant logging in India, Myanmar, Sri Lanka and Thailand), and fill an important niche in environmentally-sensitive harvesting. Ground skidding, the most commonly used extraction system, can cause major soil disturbance and compaction if not properly planned and executed. Recent developments include: the use of improved ground-based machinery, such as low ground-pressure skidders and tractors; portable bridges; and improvements in planning and designing skid trails to minimize soil disturbance.
The use of harvester/forwarder systems has increased rapidly in recent years in industrialized countries, particularly in northern and central Europe, due to their economic, ergonomic and ecological advantages over motor/manual (i.e., saw/skidding) harvesting. Their use is expected to continue to increase, as they are suited for medium- and smaller-sized timber which will become proportionally more important in forest production in the future.
Cable harvesting systems are most commonly used in mountainous regions of industrialized countries. Although not widely used in developing countries, efforts have recently been made to introduce them into tropical forests. They can significantly reduce environmental damage and be an ideal complement to a low density road network.
Helicopters are used in special circumstances for harvesting in forests which, due to environmental constraints or the remoteness of the area, do not have forest roads and skid trails. They have also been used effectively in salvage operations after typhoons or hurricanes. A few lighter-than-air balloon systems have been tested and research continues, but they have not yet proven to be viable. They have, however, the potential of being both very environmentally-friendly and much more cost-effective than helicopters.
Forest roads
Continued improvements have been made in methods for planning, construction and maintenance of forest roads. It has been found that good road and skid trail planning can reduce considerably the area disturbed by construction and also lower costs for timber extraction and transportation. Recent improvements in forest road construction technology include the use of excavators, proper drainage facilities and modern blasting methods in hilly and steep terrain. Although the know-how exists to carry out appropriate forest road development, adoption continues to be slow, particularly in many developing countries, due to the costs involved in implementing many of them.
The building of forest roads may have environmental impacts well beyond those caused by the construction process itself; in some areas of developing countries, it has acted as a precursor of deforestation. Constructing roads in remote forest areas, which are otherwise poorly accessible, may facilitate spontaneous colonisation by land-poor farmers and lead to the conversion of forests to agricultural land. This phenomenon has been well documented, particularly in parts of the Amazon basin and Oceania. The influx of colonizers into previously isolated areas may also have significant socio-economic impacts, such as negative effects on forest dwellers, who in many places are indigenous peoples.
Changing processing technology and product development
The primary forest products industry is a dynamic sector which has responded to a range of changing conditions involving environmental, economic and market concerns, and changes in technology as well as the location and changing characteristics of its raw material. The industry has made significant advances in the past few years in developing more environmentally-friendly processing technologies, achieving higher recovery rates, improving product quality and diversifying the use of raw materials.
Changes in the quality, quantity and source of raw materials are having major impacts on forest products processing and product development. The industry is adjusting to changes in the supply of industrial roundwood (different species, smaller size wood, often poorer quality wood) and sources of supply (less from natural forests and more from plantations, woodlots and, in some countries, agroforestry systems). Localized shortages of wood are also a driving force behind greater efficiency of raw material use. Technological advances have been made in plywood and particle board manufacture and various reconstituted products in order to accommodate smaller-size wood. An increase in the use of mobile sawmills has occurred over the last decade, making wood from plantations, woodlots and agroforestry systems more accessible. Needs to make more efficient use of the raw material have also contributed to the growth of recycled paper production. Changes in the supply, characteristics
and sources of raw materials, and in the processed products themselves, have created new markets and resulted in new marketing strategies.
Adoption of major advances in forest product processing and development by the leading industries has contributed to a widening gap between the modern and the less-developed industry within countries, and between developed and developing countries.
Pulp and paper manufacturing
Changing market demand and environmental concerns have been the driving forces behind the development of new technologies in pulp and paper manufacturing. This, the largest forest industry, has achieved remarkable progress in reducing negative environmental impacts from processing. Pulping and bleaching technologies have developed rapidly over the last few years, and recovery of bleach-plant effluent, although not yet achieved, is a realistic goal. Modern technologies for pulp bleaching and the treatment of effluents have resulted in reduced volume and toxicity of effluents. Increasing use of the elemental chlorine-free (ECF) bleaching technology and, more recently, the totally chlorine free (TCF) bleaching process in paper-making, is contributing to efforts to achieve closed-cycle mill operations in which no toxic pollutants are released to the environment. By the end of 1996, ECF production was expected to account for almost 50 percent of the world's bleached chemical pulp
market. An additional environmental benefit of the ECF process is that, in yielding more pulp per unit of raw material, the pressure on forest resources has been reduced, at least temporarily, in some countries.
Box 5
Gains in efficiency and diversification of raw materials
In North America and Europe - both dominant industrial roundwood regions - an increasing share of raw materials for both panel products and pulp comes from residues rather than virgin roundwood or chips. The more complete use of roundwood yields more output for less input, thus reducing demand for forest raw material. According to the recent North America Timber Trends Study (NATTS),^4 in Canada the amount of roundwood required to produce 1 m^3 of sawnwood or plywood fell from an average of 2.67 m^3 in 1970 to 2.14 m^3 in 1984 and to only 1.98 m^3 now. The same study reports that, as early as 1983 in Canada, consumption of wood residues surpassed consumption of roundwood in pulp manufacture. Reduced use of forest raw materials in all regions is also influenced by environmental pressures which are forcing an increasing share of fibre for paper-making to come from recycling of recovered (i.e., waste) paper.
^4 Boulter D and Darr. D. 1996. North America Timber Trends Study. Geneva Timber and Forest Study Paper No. 9. UN-ECE/FAO Timber Section, Geneva. Doc. No ECE/TIM/SP/9. United Nations.
Increased adoption of fibre recycling, which reduces the need for pulpwood, is reflected in the fibre supply mix for the manufacture of paper and paperboards. Wood pulp (i.e., fibre made from pulpwood logs or chips) used to account for more than three-quarters of raw material in 1970 but, by 1994, was only 56 percent, although in absolute terms the quantity had grown by more than one-half. Recovered paper input (i.e., used paper collected as waste for recycling) had more than trebled to nearly 100 million tonnes by 1994. The NATTS report gives the following recycling rates: Japan: near 50 percent; European Economic Community: 51 percent; United States: 33 percent (up from 25 percent in 1988). The high rates of recycling are reducing further the demand for virgin fibre from pulpwood or wood chips.
In Asia, a shortage of wood fibre in some key countries is said to explain the heavy use of non-wood fibre, mostly straw and bamboo pulp. Approximately 6 million tonnes of this was consumed in 1970, representing about 4 percent of world total furnish; by 1994 it had grown to 21 million tonnes or 8 percent of a much expanded furnish volume.
The above trends are effectively making the paper manufacturing industry less directly dependent on forests. They have reduced demand for small-dimension timber (such as silvicultural thinnings), and may in some regions be worsening forest management problems by reducing revenues from thinnings, which are often already unprofitable.
Closely allied to the above have been efforts to extend the useful life of wood-based materials. Regulations are increasingly being introduced which specify the type of material packaging can be made of, re-use and recycling targets, and systems of recovery or return that must be followed. Legislation related to the recovery and recycling of packaging waste has been introduced by national, regional and municipal governments in many western European countries, such as Germany, Austria, Belgium, France and the UK, while the European Commission is involved in efforts to harmonize national Acts in the European Union.
Japan promotes the recycling of logging residues and residues of dismantled houses, material which would otherwise be wasted. Efforts are also being made in Japan to increase the number of times sheets of plywood are used for concrete-forming before being discarded, and used concrete-forming material is being re-used in the manufacture of particle board.
Other changes have come about in response to shifts in the supply of raw material, including both the availability of new supplies and the reduction of traditional supplies. The development of new technologies to pulp mixed tropical hardwoods provides new opportunities. A reduction in supplies, and rising costs of raw materials for paper production, together with problems with solid waste disposal, have stimulated and maintained a worldwide increase in the use of recovered paper for the production of recycled paper (see Box 5).
Wood-based panels
An increase in the production of panels in recent years has been due primarily to product development and a sound marketing strategy. Improved technologies in the manufacture of OSB (oriented strand board) and MDF (medium density fibreboard) have boosted productivity and stimulated the opening of new production facilities. The world's capacity of MDF has increased from 4 million m^3 in 1986 to more than 14 million m^3 in 1995. OSB, traditionally a North American product, has experienced tremendous growth over the last decade. In 1981 there were 12 OSB plants producing a total of 710 000 m^3 in the United States and Canada; but by 1994, the number of mills had increased to 45 and total production had jumped to 9.6 million m^3. Production of OSB recently began in Europe, where it is recording rapid production volume increases. Production may also soon begin in Asia.
Some developments have come about as a result of a decrease in the quality of raw materials - especially those used for plywood production - in some cases actually resulting in improved board quality. For example, improvements in particles-spreading equipment have increased OSB's tensile strength, making it even more competitive with plywood.
The particle board and MDF industry has undergone a number of technical and technological changes in product manufacturing. The most salient innovation started more than a decade ago with the introduction of the continuous pressing process, replacing the traditional multi-daylight pressing system. This new technique has reduced processing time significantly. A number of high throughput-capacity plants have been set up in industrialized countries, leading to the closure of many small- to medium-sized particle board mills. In less industrialized countries, continuous pressing has rapidly become the standard for new plants, helping to stimulate the fast growth of this industrial sector, especially in Southeast Asian countries. This is not yet the case for OSB production which, due to certain technological limitations, is still commonly produced in multi-daylight pressing systems.
The panel industry has responded both to demands for higher quality products and to environmental pressure. For example, the industry has been able to reduce emissions generated during the drying process by installing secondary filtering equipment in the dryers. Another improvement is in the use of more environmentally-friendly binding chemicals, which have reduced emissions and, at the same time, improved product quality.
The plywood industry, although the largest wood-based panel sector in the world, has been the least dynamic. The plywood industry has, in the past, imposed strict requirements on the quality and size of the raw material it would accept, but shortages in wood supply have since forced it also to accept lower quality and smaller size logs. These changes have been successfully accompanied by technical improvements in the different manufacturing processes. For example, the so-called XY-Charger - sophisticated electronic equipment used in the peeling process for accurate centring of small-diameter logs - has been successfully introduced into large plywood mills, contributing to a higher throughput volume for veneer production and to a significant increase in the recovery rate.
Another example is the range of electronically-controlled rotary clippers, installed immediately after the lathe, which were developed to remove defects in wood efficiently and to speed processing. The first clippers of this kind were introduced in the mid 1980s. Today, they are key pieces of equipment, especially in the manufacture of softwood plywood.
Sawnwood
The sawmilling industry is the oldest wood processing sector worldwide. It is highly diversified, ranging from mills operating with relatively simple tools and unskilled personnel, to processing plants using highly-sophisticated processing equipment. Technical developments in hardwood sawing machines over the last few years have been limited mainly to new electronic devices, such as those for scanning to determine size, quantity and quality in the different processing steps, and automatic stress grading machines.
Softwood sawing experienced an expansion almost two decades ago with the introduction of 'chippers' as the main sawing unit. Today, this technology is utilized in most countries that have large softwood resources and high processing volumes. The trend in integration of product lines into a sawing operation and in product diversification continues, following the example of mills in Scandinavian countries.
Small-scale sawmilling is an increasingly important element in industrial forest products development. An increase in the use of mobile sawmills, especially for operations in remote areas, has been evident in the last decade. Mobile operations play an important role in the utilization of wood from plantations and from trees grown outside of forest land, such as in small community and private woodlots, or in agroforestry systems.
Conclusion
The forest products industrial sector in most countries continues to adapt to current trends and to anticipate future developments. Recent advances in achieving higher recovery rates have, in some cases, led to a significant reduction in the amount of wood harvested from the forests. Increased consumption of forest products, demand for higher quality products, changes in the availability of raw materials, and public pressure vis-a-vis environmental aspects of forest management, production and processing, will continue to be major factors affecting technology and product development.
Changing needs and approaches to marketing
Major trends in both supply and demand of forest products are having a significant impact on marketing and marketing structures at both the industrial and community enterprise levels. Industrialized and developing countries, and countries in transition, are facing different challenges related to marketing of forest products. Industrialized countries are responding to the emergence of a range of new products (including those filling a small market niche for products from sustainably-managed forests and for speciality non-wood 'natural' forest products, and those resulting from new processing technologies), and an increasing number of products made from residues, recycled materials and plantation-grown timber. Decreasing availability of well-known, quality tropical hardwoods is directing them to high-value end uses. Marketing such wood products requires specialized information and capabilities in order to compete effectively with other materials.
Changes in the developing countries are due to more fundamental trends, both within and outside of the forestry sector, including: banning of exports of logs and a rapid move to manufacturing of value-added products in an increasing number of tropical and non-tropical countries; reduced availability of industrial wood from virgin forests with an increased supply of wood coming from plantations, woodlots and agroforestry systems; and a rapid rate of urbanization in many countries, which is changing, quite dramatically, the demand for forest products and the ways in which the products are provided to customers.
Countries in transition are facing a dramatically different marketing environment than in the past. Captive domestic markets are being replaced by competitive domestic and export markets. Parastatal organizations, previously responsible for marketing products in centrally-planned countries, have been replaced by privatized industries and their emerging marketing organizations.
All these changes have focused more attention on marketing issues, and various actions are being taken in many parts of the world to enable marketing to function more efficiently:
· marketing information systems are being invigorated or set up (e.g., the SIMSTRAT of the Fundación Chile);
· forest products marketing education and training programmes are being initiated and strengthened in many universities and training schools throughout the world (e.g., the College of Forestry at the University of the Philippines in Los Baños); and
· a number of international and regional workshops on marketing have been organized to facilitate exchange of information (e.g., sawnwood marketing in countries in transition).
As community forestry, agroforestry and local production systems for non-wood forest products have gained in importance, increased attention has been paid to marketing as an essential component of these activities. The emergence of these new sources of wood and other forest-derived products is resulting in the development of new, locally-based marketing structures. This trend is also reflected in increased attention being paid to marketing in community forestry and agroforestry education and training programmes (e.g., the Regional Community Forestry Training Centre, RECOFTC, at Kasetsart University, Thailand), and in efforts to build local capacities in marketing.
<section>5</section>
Trends and status of forest products and services
Forests in the economy
Contribution of forests to environmental stability
Global trends in consumption and production of forest products, 1970-94
International trade in forest products
Forests in the economy
Forests offer a wide range of both material and intangible benefits, all of which have a value but only some of which are currently expressed in monetary terms. Benefits which are difficult to quantify include goods which pass through the informal sector, non-marketed goods, and services. In addition, there are cultural or spiritual values often attached to forests. For some of these benefits, methods are being developed to estimate their economic contribution or proxy values.
Areas of contribution
Major industries and smaller enterprises based on forest products are the source of considerable income and employment. Less recognized, but also significant, are the employment and incomes associated with management of natural or plantation forests. Exports of primary and, increasingly, value-added forest products (wood and non-wood) generate significant foreign exchange for some countries. Tourism based on wildlife resources or scenic forest areas is important in many countries; for example, in Africa: Kenya, Zimbabwe, Botswana and Namibia.
Furthermore, forest products can provide critical inputs into major industries in other sectors, such as: charcoal in the Brazilian steel industry; fuelwood in the tea, ceramics, lime and tobacco industries of many tropical countries; pitprops and sleepers for mining; and packaging for manufactured goods.
Forest products produced or collected for family use or sale may be very important to the household economy. At local community level, the economic importance of forest products is most evident when they are scarce and the poor are faced with high prices. For example, in some urban areas of developing countries, families may spend a significant proportion of their income on fuelwood and charcoal.
Forestry employment, collection and sale of forest products, and small, forest-based enterprises provide income important for meeting household needs and for rural investment.
Forests tend to offer possibilities for income generation in rural areas where few other opportunities may be available. By providing nearly unique focus for development in such areas, their importance may often be greater than the financial value of their output may imply. Forestry enterprises also generate opportunities further afield due to their multiplier effects derived from their forward and backward linkages.
Indicative estimates of income and international trade contributions
No good global estimates of forestry's economic contribution are available, but a partial indication is provided by its share in gross domestic product (GDP) and international trade. At a global level, forestry is estimated to contribute some 2 percent of world GDP and 3 percent of international merchandise trade^1 (see Table 1).
^1 State of World's Forests. FAO, Rome 1995. The 'industry' component included only processed products; the 'forestry' component Included roundwood as a proxy for all resource goods. The figures are derived by multiplying output by unit value of exports. They are indicative figures only; on the one hand, they are conservative since they do not include non-wood values but, on the other, processed products use roundwood inputs that were separately valued.
Table 1 shows significant differences between regions and countries in the relative importance of forestry to their economies. In particular, forestry appears to provide a relatively high contribution to GDP in many countries where the forest industry is not particularly strong - especially resource-poor developing countries. This may, in part, reflect the low level of development of the rest of the economy, or the fact that it is only modestly monetized or has few other export products.
Table 1
Countries in which forestry's share of GDP and international merchandise trade is 10 percent or higher^2
^2 State of the World's Forests, FAO, Rome, 1995,
where forestry's share of GDP is 10 percent or higher
where forestry's share of trade is 10 percent or higher
country
percentage of GDP
percentage of trade
country
percentage of trade
percentage of GDP
Uganda
Cambodia
Bhutan
Solomon Islands
Zaire
Equatorial Guinea
Swaziland
Finland
Kenya
Myanmar
Zambia
Liberia
Nigeria
Laos
Solomon Islands
Central African Rep.
Burundi
Sweden
Chad
Congo
Laos
Cameroon
Malawi
Canada
Sierra Leone
Swaziland
Madagascar
Fiji
Rwanda
Gabon
Sudan
Indonesia
Central African Republic
Bhutan
Gambia
Cote d'Ivoire
Ghana
New Zealand
Benin
Burkina Faso
Papua New Guinea
Indonesia
Malaysia
Africa
South America
Asia
North/Central America
Europe
Oceania
Former USSR
Developing countries
Developed countries,
World
As economies grow, value-added production and commerce tend to increase faster in secondary and tertiary sectors where productivity is greater than in a primary sector like forestry. Hence in developed countries, the forestry sector's share may be relatively small, even where the sector is internationally prominent, as in Canada or Finland. A similar pattern will emerge in rapidly developing Third World countries.
Table 1 shows that in terms of share of total GDP at regional level, forests appear to be most important in Africa (6 percent), followed by South America. The world average is 2 percent of GDP, but the average in developed countries is only 1 percent. The forestry sector contributes more than 10 percent of GDP for 18 countries in Africa, four countries in Asia and two in Oceania, but is less significant in other regions. Although developed countries produce more than 80 percent of the world's industrial forest products, the average contribution to GDP for these countries is only 1 percent, compared with 4 percent for developing countries.
The contribution of forests to GDP is not necessarily highest in what are often considered 'forest countries' in the sense of industrial forestry. In Africa, for example, the contribution of forestry to GDP appears to be fairly limited in the highly-forested countries of Cameroon and Congo, whereas it is more substantial in Uganda and Kenya where forest resources are more limited. In many developing countries, the less commercialized contributions of forests to the economy can dominate; fuelwood, for example, may be economically more significant than industrial wood.
The contribution of forest products to world merchandise trade is highest in North and Central America (5 percent), followed by the former USSR (4 percent) with South America, Europe and Oceania at 3 percent each. In Africa and Asia, the forestry proportion of trade is 2 percent. These averages belie the importance of forest products trade in the smaller economies. In Africa, trade in forest products accounts for more than 10 percent of the value of total trade in eight countries. The share of forest products in total trade exceeds 10 percent in five countries in Asia (all of which have less developed economies), and in only three countries in North America and Europe (Finland, Sweden, and Canada).
Improving valuation of forests and integrating them into national accounts
The above estimates of forestry in GDP have focused on wood products only, to the neglect of the many other forest contributions. The exclusion of valuable but non-marketed and intangible functions results in an under-estimation of the contribution of the forestry sector to national economies.
The need to increase people's perception of the value of forests, and to improve methodologies which incorporate social, economic and ecological values of trees, forests and forest lands into national economic accounting systems, has been highlighted in UNCED and many other fora. Work is under way to improve methodologies for valuation of forests (see Box 1).
Improving forestry profile in national accounts
Improved valuation would, once adequately reflected in a country's national accounts, provide a basis for a better appreciation of forestry's contribution. In a book on economic accounts for agriculture, FAO mentions the diversity of goods and services of forests and also of the interest groups which want access to them.^3 It highlights the need for effective decision making in situations of actual or potential conflict, and stresses the importance of providing policy-makers with 'information that gives them a complete picture of the net benefits derived from forests... i.e., on wood and non-wood products; services or functions; and benefits from marketed and non-marketed aspects.' The publication highlights the need to ensure that production from forest-based industries and artisanal manufacturing is not inadvertently left out of national accounts altogether because it falls between the forestry, agriculture and industry sectors and thus may be overlooked by all of them.
^3 FAO. 1996. A System of economic accounts for food and agriculture. FAO Statistical Development Series No, 8, FAO, Rome.
Given the importance of fuller valuation, some countries are attempting to improve the quality of estimates for forestry in their national accounts, despite the unresolved weaknesses of valuation methodologies. Noteworthy progress has been made in developed countries such as Canada and Finland, and in developing countries such as Costa Rica, Indonesia and the Philippines. Many proposals exist for resource accounting, focusing on capturing environmental or sustainability values. At international level, the International Institute for Environment and Development developed a set of guidelines for ITTO in 1993, and a number of other NGOs have also been active in this respect.
Two approaches, both potentially useful, have been adopted: to improve the estimates of forestry's contribution in countries' core national accounts under the System of National Accounts (SNAs), and to develop satellite accounts for forestry which can, in greater detail, provide a kind of forest 'green' version of the sector's contribution. These satellite 'green accounts' can reflect environmental values better than the modified core SNAs, and thus are more likely to satisfy the environmental concerns that often motivate calls for better forestry accounts.
One concern that receives attention in improved accounts is the question of capital depreciation of the forest resource base due to deforestation and to degradation. An approach proposed at the World Bank gives considerable attention to sustainability by accounting for natural capital and for the depletion of resources.^5 A monetary value is placed on environmental impacts. The results of applying the methodology would be to revise completely the estimated wealth levels and the ranking of some countries.
^5 Serageldin. 1995, Sustainability and the wealth of nations: first step in an ongoing journey. Third Annual World Bank Conference on Environmentally Sustainable Development. Preliminary draft. 30 September 1995.
Box 1:
The valuation of forests
There is currently a high level of activity to develop valuation methodologies and to test them; and a number of countries have taken steps to improve their approach to the valuation of forests. Methodology development has focused on improving the valuation of non-marketed and less tangible benefits which are not normally reflected in national accounts. The theoretical basis has been agreed upon and the categorization of values is generally accepted as being direct or indirect, use or non-use, capable of being captured or intangible at all times.
The aim is to develop methods which are objective, so that values can be quantified and compared, both within and between countries. The current situation has recently been exhaustively reviewed^4 and the main features are as follows:
^4 Kengen, S. 1996, Forestry valuation - purpose, context and process (provisional title). André Mayer Research Fellowship Draft Report. FAO, Rome.
· Valuation studies and methodologies exist, but many are academic and are not yet widely applied in mainstream planning.
· While the basic valuation methods exist, difficulties include the inability to take into account:
(a) the probability of securing a given benefit (particularly important when dealing with values of such things as medicinal plants and biological resources whose discovery may involve a high degree of chance); and
(b) the cost of securing the forest value - many valuation studies appear to assume that the full value is also the net value, i.e., they ignore the costs of development with the result that estimates are exaggerated.
· Basic information on production, i.e., function potentials (e.g., yields of particular goods or services in relation to given management interventions), is missing or weak. Valuation attempts made with different coefficients may thus result in highly divergent results for any given situation.
· The most prominent studies have been done by funding agencies and have demanded time, skill and funding resources that are beyond the means of many of those who need this information, especially in developing countries. There is need for rapid appraisal techniques.
· The usefulness of the valuation results may depend on who ascribes the values and who uses the results. Values allocated to functions such as carbon sequestration, often dwarf those of productive forest functions such as wood production. High values are being claimed for forests but they are not matched by any tangible returns which policy-makers can use to help secure support for forestry. High values for functions such as carbon capture mean relatively little to those who are often the de facto decision-makers as to how forest land and resources are used, namely forest dwellers or local people who may have pressing survival needs for land for agriculture or for forest products to use or sell. These groups rarely get an opportunity to give their views in attaching values to various forest functions.
· For tropical forest valuation, the views of pressure groups in industrial countries or in urban centres inside the country are often given more weight than local ones; the views of officials and academics within countries are being used as proxies for general societal preferences.
· Presently, there is inadequate information to say whether forestry is receiving any stronger policy support in countries where more comprehensive forest valuation has been undertaken
There is great potential benefit in adopting approaches which are applicable to other natural resources. For example, fossil-based natural resources are credited with major contributions to national economies, but the fact that the product itself represents irreplaceable capital is often ignored. Accounting, as a discipline, rests on following tradition and being predictable. It is important that national accounting approaches adopted for forestry and other sectors are based on neutral professional analysis and broad-based consultation; they must not be seen as merely a tool for advocacy by individual interest groups.
Contribution of forests to environmental stability
Although the environmental services provided by forests are seldom fully valued or adequately reflected in forest planning and management decisions, they are nevertheless accorded increasing importance in national and global debates on sustainable forestry. Environmental services include: Protection of soil and water resources; the conservation of biological diversity; support to agricultural productivity and sustainability; carbon sequestration and the mitigation of global warming; the combating of desertification and resource degradation in arid and semi-arid zones; provision of shade, amenity and recreation; and protection of coastal areas and coastal fisheries. The importance of many of these are highlighted in UNCED's Agenda 21 as well as in international conventions on biological diversity, desertification, and climate change (see 'The international dialogue and initiatives with relevance to forests' in Part 2). Some developments related to the environmental services
provided by forests are discussed below.
Environmental protection in fragile ecosystems: drylands and upland areas
Combating desertification
Drylands, defined as arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, are among the world's most fragile ecosystems, and are made more so by periodic droughts and the risk of desertification. Drylands cover around 30 percent of the world's land area and are inhabited by about 900 million people, a large proportion of whom are among the poorest of the world. Over time, people living in dryland areas have evolved complex production systems to minimize the risks posed by extreme climatic conditions. These include mixed cropping systems, agroforestry systems, and nomadic and transhumant livestock herding.
Various forces, however, are contributing to the degradation of resources in these areas, including increasing population density, economic pressures, climatic trends, changes in resource management practices, and patterns of land and resource tenure. An estimated 70 percent of the world's drylands are affected by desertification, defined by the international Convention to Combat Desertification (see page 105) as 'land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas resulting from various factors including climatic variations and human activities'.
Deforestation (mainly for conversion to agricultural use) and overexploitation of forests and woodlands (through fuelwood collection and overgrazing) are major causes of soil degradation in dryland areas in Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, Oceania, and Africa. FAO's Forest Resources Assessment data from 1980-90 indicate that the deforestation rate in the dry and very dry tropics is high (0.9 percent per year). Programmes to combat desertification focus on improved management and protection of existing forest and woodland resources, on increased vegetative cover outside forests (e.g., through agroforestry, maintenance of trees and shrubs in critical watersheds and degraded areas), and on range improvement and development. Action programmes, which are being proposed under the Convention to Combat Desertification, are expected to supplement work which has been carried out through national initiatives, regional bodies (e.g., the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought
Control in the Sahel - CILSS) and international programmes (e.g., the UN Sudano-Sahelian Office).
Watershed management and mountain forests
Forests and other woody vegetative cover in uplands and on sloping lands serve important environmental functions in land stabilization, erosion control and regulation of hydrologic flow. Maintenance of adequate forest cover through vegetation management and reforestation has long been considered a primary objective of watershed management programmes. Ensuring that soil conservation measures are taken where vegetation on sloping lands is disturbed, e.g., by forestry and agricultural activities, is also an issue of worldwide concern. This is particularly essential in many developing countries, where population pressures and lack of alternative lands are resulting in expansion of agriculture onto steeper and more marginal lands by poor farmers. According to Forest Resources Assessment data collected by FAO for the decade of the 1980s, the hill and mountain forests were undergoing the highest rate of deforestation in the tropics (1.1 percent per year). While not all due to
clearing for agriculture, this is a major cause.
Over the past two years, Chapter 13 of UNCED's Agenda 21, 'Managing fragile ecosystems: sustainable mountain development', has served to highlight the importance of mountain areas and the ecological and economic role that forests play in them. The issues include: the expansion of agriculture onto these lands, and associated problems of soil erosion and hydrological disruption (a problem most critical in developing countries); the economically-depressed nature of these areas (a universal problem); and social and land-use changes due to net out-migration from these areas (an issue mainly in developed countries).
The objectives of sustainable mountain development are two-fold: to improve the natural resource base and quality of life of upland populations, and to protect vital downstream interests. Watershed management programmes have, in the past, had a strong tendency to focus on the latter and on technical solutions, with less regard to the immediate needs of the local populations or to ways in which they might be involved. The current approach balances the two objectives, an approach which has arisen from the realization that any long-term solution to watershed management must consider the development needs and the role of the local population in watershed management. In terms of forest management and protection in mountain watersheds, this has meant greater involvement of local populations in planning and implementing management strategies and programmes, often with more direct benefits to mountain populations.
Chapter 13 has drawn the attention of decision-makers and planners, both at global and national levels, to these issues over the last few years. It stresses the need to adopt an integrated and participatory approach to watershed conservation and upland development. As part of the UNCED follow-up process, regional intergovernmental and NGO consultations have been held, beginning in late 1994 in Asia, Latin America, Africa and Europe, aimed at focusing attention on the special concerns of mountain areas, including the important role of mountain forests, and to define the types of action which are both necessary and appropriate for each region.
While the trends in balancing resource conservation with socio-economic development, and in adopting more participatory approaches to mountain development are often associated with developing countries, similar approaches are being called for in some developed countries. For example, in September 1996, a workshop was held in France to launch an initiative to establish a European Observatory of Mountain Forests, aimed at supporting sustainable resource management and socio-economic development in the mountain regions of Europe. This effort is spearheaded by the European Federation of Local Forest Authorities, which includes forest communities and local authorities in Europe in its membership.
Forests and global climate change
The role that human activities play in influencing global climate has been vigorously debated since warming of the Earth's surface temperature was detected several years ago. However, the authoritative Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) only recently concluded in its summary of the 'Second Assessment Report' that 'the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate'.^6 This statement has potentially enormous implications for policy making, for the energy industry and for the global economy. It may also have a direct effect on the forestry sector.
^6 IPCC. (1996). Climate Change 1995. (Second Assessment Report). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK (3 Volumes).
The global mean temperature of the Earth's surface has increased by 0.3-0.6 °C over the past 100 years.^7 This rapid increase in global temperatures is expected to lead to regional and global changes in climate that could have significant impacts on human and natural systems. Much of the observed warming of the Earth's surface is believed to be due to increased concentrations of 'greenhouse gases' in the Earth's atmosphere, which have altered the Earth's radiative balance, i.e., the 'greenhouse effect'. The main greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide (CO[2]), methane (CH[4]), and nitrous oxide (N[2]O), of which CO[2] is by far the most important (accounting for 65 percent of the greenhouse effect). Human activities, including those involving the use of fossil fuels, land use changes and agricultural production, have resulted in increased concentrations of these gases in the atmosphere since the onset of the industrial revolution. Most of the CO[2] emissions derived from human
activity are the result of fossil fuel combustion (76 percent of the total). Tropical deforestation and forest degradation account for an estimated 23 percent, and the remaining 1 percent comes from cement manufacture. The greatest gains in reducing CO[2] emissions, therefore, can come from controlling the burning of fossil fuels. However, because forests, as both sources and sinks of CO[2], can both contribute to and mitigate climate change, they figure prominently in strategies to address this problem. Various forestry-based strategies are being proposed for mitigation, and some reforestation schemes have been carried out with the purpose of offsetting CO[2] emissions (see Box 2).
^7 The sources of information In this paragraph and Box 2 are: Kirschbaum M., et. al. Climate change impacts on forests; and Brown, S. Management of forests for mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions, chapters 1 and 24 respectively, of the IPCC Second Assessment Report.
Conservation of biological diversity
Forests play an important role in the conservation of the world's biological diversity, defined as the variability among living organisms and the complexes of which they are a part, including diversity within species, between species and of ecosystems. Forests are believed to provide habitat to about two-thirds of all species on Earth. Tropical rainforests, which cover only 7 percent of the Earth's land area, harbour perhaps one-half of all known plant and animal species. Other forest types, such as dryland forests or temperate forests, although less rich in terms of numbers of species, have plants and animals of actual or potential economic significance and which make important contributions to the functioning of these ecosystems.
The unprecedented scale and rate of human-induced changes to forests are threatening forest-based biological diversity. The deterioration or loss of forest ecosystems has led to the extinction of some species and the reduction of genetic variation within other species through the loss or reduction in size of certain populations in an area. While the magnitude of such losses or the extent of degradation of biological diversity is unknown, evidence suggests that the rate of extinctions, at least among vertebrates and plants, has accelerated significantly under the impact of humans.^8
^8 Barbault, R. and Sastrapradja S, 1996. Generation, Maintenance and Loss of Biodiversity, In Global Biodiversity Assessment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
While nature reserves and protected area systems (i.e., in-situ conservation) are the most efficient and often most effective means of conserving biological diversity, few national protected area systems are sufficiently comprehensive, even in terms of coverage of the ecosystems in a country, no less in terms of species or variation within species. In addition, only a limited number of forest plant species are conserved satisfactorily ex-situ, such as in gene banks, plantations, or live collections (botanic gardens, arboreta). Ex-situ conservation of wildlife (e.g., in zoos) is also far from adequate. Managing forests and trees in protection and production forests and in agricultural lands, in such a way as to contribute to the conservation of biological diversity, is increasingly seen as an essential complement to conservation within parks and protected areas.
Box 2
Forests and climate change
The vegetation and soils of the world's forests contain a vast quantity of carbon - more than one and a quarter times the amount stored in the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide (CO[2]) is released when forests are cleared or degraded, and vegetation is burned or decays. Burning forest vegetation also releases other greenhouse gases, including methane (CH[4]), nitrous oxide (N[2]O), carbon monoxide (CO), and oxides of nitrogen (NO). When forests grow, CO[2] is withdrawn from the atmosphere through photosynthesis and stored as carbon in the vegetation. Levels of carbon in the soil may be increased by reforestation and other forest management practices.
Currently, the world's forests are estimated to be net sources of CO[2], primarily due to deforestation and forest degradation in the tropics. Temperate and boreal forests which, globally, are slightly increasing in area and in some places in biomass per unit area, are net carbon sinks. Temperate forests may also be absorbing additional amounts of CO[2] through enhanced forest growth caused by human-induced CO[2] fertilization and nitrogen deposition.
The following three forest-related strategies have been proposed as means to influence CO[2] emissions:
1. maintaining existing carbon stocks through forest management and conservation;
2. increasing storage of carbon in forests (by increasing forest area or biomass per unit area) and in forest products; and
3. substituting fossil fuels with fuelwood from sustainably managed forests, and substituting energy-expensive products (e.g., steel, aluminum or concrete) with industrial wood products. The forestry sector has the ability to influence the first two, whereas the implementation of the third strategy will depend upon policy measures, and product development and marketing efforts by governments and industry.
Improved forest and land management resulting in lowered rates of deforestation and forest degradation in the tropics would reduce the current rate of CO[2] emissions substantially, and would also reduce the release of other greenhouse gases associated with the burning of forest vegetation. Expanding the amount of forest under protection (e.g., conservation areas, forest reserves) and improving harvesting practices to reduce waste and prevent damage to residual trees and to soils, would also help maintain existing carbon stocks. Practices to increase the amount of carbon stored in forests include: expanding the area of forest plantations on non-forested lands; increasing tree cover on croplands, pasture lands or elsewhere in the landscape; and promoting recovery of degraded forests through natural regeneration or enrichment planting. Increased carbon storage in forest products could be achieved if the demand for wood products rose faster than their rate of decay, or if the
lifetime of wood products were extended by making them more durable, or by recycling them.
The third strategy, termed 'substitution management', has the greatest long-term potential for greenhouse gas mitigation. Unlike the first two, which can produce only finite increases in terrestrial carbon storage, this third group of activities can reduce net CO[2] emissions indefinitely. Emissions from fossil fuels are avoided, and emissions from wood are balanced by subsequent regrowth.
The IPCC estimates that about 12-15 percent of the projected CO[2] emissions from fossil fuel consumption from now until 2050 could be offset by slowing deforestation, promoting forest regeneration, and increasing the area in plantations and agroforestry systems. Tropical forests have the greatest potential for sequestering carbon; they could provide 80 percent of increased storage of carbon in the world's forests, mainly through forest regeneration and reduced deforestation. Tropical America has the greatest potential for increasing carbon storage, followed by Asia and then tropical Africa. It is difficult to predict the magnitude of emission mitigation that can actually be achieved through these various forest management practices, however, because they involve complex institutional, economic, demographic, and cultural factors that influence land-use practices.
A number of projects to avoid, sequester, or reduce greenhouse gas emissions through forest management practices are now being jointly implemented by developed and developing countries. These projects, often referred to as carbon offset projects, include efforts in forest conservation and sustainable forest management, reforestation and plantation establishment. Under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, a pilot phase for 'activities implemented jointly' (AIJ) has been established to test and evaluate the feasibility of achieving the objectives of the Convention through such projects. As of June 1996, thirty-two AIJ projects had been reported to the FCCC Secretariat, nine of which are forestry related.
The need for such a multi-faceted approach was highlighted in the United Nations Environment Programme's global assessment of biological diversity, which was released in late 1995.^9 This comprehensive work reviews current knowledge of the subject; discusses many issues involved in assessing, conserving, valuing and using biological diversity; and mentions recent international initiatives in biological diversity conservation including developments related to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) which was enacted in 1993. The Conference of the Parties of the CBD will work in a complementary way with the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests, and other forest-related fora, to address the conservation of forest-based biological diversity.
^9 UNER 1995, Global Biodiversity Assessment, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
Forests and food security
An estimated 840 million people do not have sufficient food to fulfil their basic nutritional needs, despite worldwide increases in food supplies. The problems of world hunger and food insecurity stem from limited physical access to food, the continuing inability of household and national incomes to meet the cost of food purchases, the instability of supply and demand, and natural and human-made disasters. International attention was focused on the issue of food security at the World Food Summit, convened by FAO in Rome in November 1996 and resulting in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food Summit Plan of Action. The Summit stressed the importance of ensuring that increases in world food production are achieved through sustainable management of natural resources, and that they are accompanied by measures to ensure universal access to food.
Efforts to achieve worldwide food security will have an impact on forests, and will draw increasing attention to the supportive role that forests play in attaining food security. Increased production of food in developing countries is likely to be achieved through both intensifying food production on existing agricultural lands, and increasing the area of land available for agriculture. FAO estimates that the increase in world food production is likely to be in the region of 1.8 percent per year from now until the year 2010.^10 In order to achieve this, an estimated 90 million ha of new land may be brought into agriculture in the developing countries, mainly in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. About half of this is likely to come from forests. The questions are not whether forest land will be converted to agricultural land, but rather, what forest land will be converted and will such land provide greater benefit being managed for agricultural production than for forest
goods and services?
^10 Alexandratos, N. (1995), 'World Agriculture: Towards 2010. FAO, Rome,
Apart from the provision of land for agriculture, forests and trees outside forests play important roles in food security. For example, they offer a direct contribution to food supply and to nutritional well-being; provide a source of income necessary to purchase food; give protection to the resource base upon which food production depends; and provide a source of fuelwood to cook food.^11
^11 Hoskins, M, 1990, The contribution of forestry to food security. In Unasylva vol 41; no, 160,
A wide range of trees and forest products regularly provide food for people, or fodder for their livestock. While forests and trees are not the major suppliers of foods in most farming systems, they often provide important supplements and may be critical in places where there are strong seasonal cycles of food availability and scarcity and where risk of crop failure is high. In addition, they often provide 'fallback' foods in times of emergency. Tree and forest plant products and bushmeat generally make the greatest contribution to the diets of the rural poor who have limited physical and economic access to other foods.
Forests contribute to household food security by providing employment and products for sale. Forest products are major sources of income for many rural poor in developing countries. Forest industries and exports of forest products generate income and foreign exchange for some countries, making it possible for them to import needed foodstuffs.
Certainly the most important contribution of forests to food security worldwide is their role in the protection of the resource base needed for agricultural production. Maintaining good forest cover on critical watersheds is essential for safeguarding a reliable and clean water supply for downstream irrigation systems. Trees used as windbreaks offer essential protection for agricultural fields; windbreaks are used the world over where risk of wind erosion and wind damage to crops is high. Apart from the above, trees are found in intimate association with farming systems throughout the world in a vast array of agroforestry systems, attesting to their economic importance and, ultimately, to their supportive role towards the provision of food security.
Box 3
The role of tree components in farming systems^12
^12 Adapted from Arnold, M. 1990. Tree components in farming systems Unasylva vol 41, no 160.
Tree-growing practices contribute to a wide variety of existing farming systems. Trees tend to be prominent parts of systems where capital and physical resources are limited. In such conditions a tree component within the farming system can play one or more of the following five overlapping roles:
1. Productivity of land in situations of scarce capital can be maintained through the substitution of trees for purchased inputs of fertilizer and herbicide, and investments in soil, crop protection and/or irrigation water.
AF systems: contour hedgerows, alley-cropping, improved fallows, intercropping with trees
2. Growing trees can contribute to the productive use of land in situations of scarce capital and labour where trees, as low-input, low-management crops, constitute the most effective use of these resources.
AF systems: shifting cultivation, improved fallows, woodlots
3. A tree component can maximize returns to the land in situations where land and capital are limited, and tree/crop/livestock combinations permit fuller use of available labour than alternative uses of the land.
AF systems: homegardens, multi-storey tree gardens
4. Income-earning opportunities are enhanced when the total value (per unit labour and capital) of on-farm production can be increased by the inclusion of trees.
AF systems: boundary planting, intercropping with trees, woodlots
5. Trees can help to strengthen risk management through diversification of outputs, wider seasonal spread of inputs and outputs, reduction of the likelihood of crop failure through drought, and build-up of tree stocks to provide capital.
AF systems: applies to most agroforestry system
The support provided by trees to agriculture, or to the welfare of the farm household including to food security, is most critical in subsistence farming or low-income households. The actual role that trees play depends to a large extent on the balance of availability of land, labour and capital to the farmer. This is illustrated in Box 3 which indicates both the circumstances under which farmers grow or maintain trees in their farming systems, together with some of the agroforestry systems which meet these conditions.
As indicated above, the contribution of forests and trees to food security is often relatively more important to the rural poor and to countries with low per caput GNP than to higher income groups and wealthier countries. The essential role of forests and trees to food security is clearly seen in the countries most vulnerable to food security problems: namely the 32 low-income food-deficit countries with the lowest capacity to finance food imports.^13 Trees are a critical component of the food production systems in most of these countries: through agroforestry systems which dominate subsistence level agriculture; through provision of fodder in livestock-based agricultural systems; through provision of important forest foods to the populations; or through watershed management (see Box 4).
^13 FAO. 1995, The State of Food and Agriculture 1995 FAO, Rome.
Box 4
The role of forests/trees in food security in certain low-income food-deficit countries
· Agroforestry systems
Rwanda, Burkina Faso, Mali, Senegal, Gambia, Haiti, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka
· Forest foods/products
Gambia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau, Nepal, Sudan (gum arabic)
· Grazing (rangeland) systems
Burkina Faso, Mauritania, Mali, Senegal, Djibouti, Somalia, Afghanistan, Sudan
· Watershed management
Ethiopia, Nepal
Urban and peri-urban forestry The role of forests and trees in urban and peri-urban areas has attracted international attention only within the past few years. It is, however, likely to become an issue of increasing importance given that more than half of the world's population is expected to be urban by the turn of the century. Urbanization is occurring at a rapid rate; the percentage of people living in urban areas has increased from 29 percent in 1950 to 45 percent in 1995. It is expected to reach 61 percent by the year 2025. There has been a doubling of the number of urban dwellers between 1950 and 1995. Most of this increase is taking place in developing countries. While nearly three-quarters of the population of Latin America and the Caribbean is already urbanized (as a result of migration over the past 20-30 years), Asia, Africa and the Near East have only recently reached their peak urbanization rates. Rapid urbanization in these regions is expected to continue for
several decades. This is creating, and will continue to create, a host of problems, not the least of which are environmental. The challenges of ensuring an adequate quality of life in urban areas, in developed and developing countries alike, were highlighted by the UN Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), held in Istanbul in June 1996.
The roles that forests and trees can play in improving the urban environment and the well-being of urban dwellers are considerable and varied, including: protection of watersheds to prevent erosion and to ensure a clean water supply for the city; protection against sands and winds in arid and semi-arid areas; provision of shade and a cooling effect in hot climates; mitigation of air pollution; buffering of noise; provision of habitat for urban wildlife; and even disposal sites for liquid or solid waste. In addition, the amenity and recreation value of forests, trees and green spaces in cities is widely recognized; greenspace zoning is a standard component of city planning. Provision and maintenance of adequate urban greenspace and trees, however, is more often successfully achieved in developed countries, where city planning can stay ahead of urban growth and funds are available for such a purpose, than in many rapidly urbanizing developing countries. Nonetheless, the
psychological benefits conferred by urban forests and parks, and the demand for greenspace, is certainly universal. In some countries (e.g., in the USA and the UK), community tree-planting activities are being used as an effective mechanism for raising environmental awareness, uniting neighbourhoods around a common activity.
Urban forestry can play an important productive role in urban and peri-urban areas. For example, many developing countries, particularly in parts of Africa and Asia, have been active in establishing plantations and managing natural forests in peri-urban areas for fuelwood production to supply urban markets. Agroforestry practised in homegardens in urban household compounds plays an important role in family nutrition in some cities.
While urban forestry and arboriculture are well-established disciplines in many developed countries, this is much less true in most developing countries. In addition, the needs are much broader in developing countries. Far more still needs to be understood about the dynamics between urban growth and forest and tree resources in urban and peri-urban areas, and about the particular roles of urban forestry under the special conditions posed by rapid urbanization of a high proportion of poor people. In addition, more action is needed with respect to monitoring urban forest resources, developing technical aspects of tropical arboriculture, and defining the respective roles and responsibilities of forestry, city parks and other departments and of the urban dwellers themselves in urban forestry.
Global trends in consumption and production of forest products, 1970-94
Factors affecting changes in consumption World consumption and production^14 of forest products is dominated by: fuelwood and charcoal; industrial roundwood; sawnwood; wood-based panels; fibre furnish for paper and paperboard manufacture^15; and paper and paperboard. Box 5 outlines the relationships between these products. Consumption and production of the major products are driven by many factors, of which population and income are the most important.^16
^14 At world level, consumption is equal to production, after adjusting for storage losses and stocks.
^15 Includes all pulp used for paper-making - mainly made from wood but a proportion is made from non-wood fibre sources (such as straw or bamboo, nationally important in China and India respectively), 'Recovered paper' formerly called 'waste paper' for recycling is also included in this commodity group.
^16 Note: the trends presented here are based on international statistics covering both fuelwood, a relatively non-commercialized commodity, and industrial products which are relatively easy to monitor as they are included in most official statistics. Fuelwood is consumed mainly In the informal sector and is rarely recorded; therefore, the information given about it carries less certainty than for industrial forest products.
Both population and income have increased considerably during recent decades. Between 1970 and 1994, world population grew by more than 50 percent. In South America and Africa, it grew by more than 60 percent and 90 percent respectively. World income, measured as GDP, has increased by an estimated 109 percent in real terms during the same period - by 97 percent in developed countries and 160 percent in developing. Except for fuelwood, consumption usually rises with an increase in both population and income: in the case of fuelwood, however, an increase in income tends to lower consumption.
Box 5
Forest products and their inter-linkages
All wood forest products originate to a large degree from 'total roundwood' which is subdivided into 'fuelwood and charcoal' and 'industrial roundwood'. The latter is in turn composed of 'sawlogs and veneer logs', 'pulpwood and particles' and 'other industrial roundwood'. Any of these categories of roundwood can either go directly into domestic processing or into international trade.
From 'sawlogs and veneer logs' are derived veneers, sawnwood and plywood. From 'pulpwood and particles' (which can include wood chips) is made wood pulp which, in turn, can be traded as market pulp or go directly into making paper and paperboard. The 'wastes' or residues in converting roundwood into sawnwood or veneer and plywood can be chipped and manufactured into other types of panels or into pulp for paper and paperboard. Once used, paper and paperboard can be collected (i.e., 'recovered') and recycled into pulp again, so providing a raw material that supplements fresh wood for paper and paperboard manufacture.
Figure 1 shows the proportional changes for population, income and consumption of the main forest products. Figures 2 and 3 (on pages 48 and 49) summarize key changes in terms of quantities produced, while Table 2 shows changes in per thousand capita apparent consumption.
Figure 1 - Percentage changes over the period 1970-94^17
^17 Commodity data: FAO; Population: UN Statistical Office; GDP: World Bank
Table 2
Approximate apparent consumption per thousand people
product and units
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
world
developed
developing
industrial roundwood (m^3)
world
developed
developing
sawnwood (m^3)
world
developed
developing
wood-based panels (m^3)
world
developed
developing
paper and paperboard (tonnes)
world
developed
developing
Figure 2 - World production of roundwood by economic category^18 (million m^3)
^18 FAO Yearbook of Forest Products, 1979, 1994.
World production of roundwood by economic category^18 (million m^3), 1970
World production of roundwood by economic category^18 (million m^3), 1990
World production of roundwood by economic category^18 (million m^3), 1994
Figure 3 - World production of processed forest products by economic category^19 (sawnwood and wood-based panels: million m^3; fibre products: million tonnes)
^19 FAO Yearbook of Forest Products. 1979, 1994.
World production of processed forest products by economic category^19 (sawnwood and wood-based panels: million m^3; fibre products: million tonnes), 1970
World production of processed forest products by economic category^19 (sawnwood and wood-based panels: million m^3; fibre products: million tonnes), 1990
World production of processed forest products by economic category^19 (sawnwood and wood-based panels: million m^3; fibre products: million tonnes), 1994
Major changes
Global consumption of wood has expanded by some 36 percent (around 900 million m^3) over the past two and a half decades, reaching almost 3 400 million m^3 in 1994.^20 Broad estimates suggest the value of this consumption in 1994 to be in excess of US$ 400 000 million, with industrial usage accounting for 75 percent of this. Slightly more than half of the wood volume was used as fuelwood, and the rest was used for a variety of industrial purposes. Fuelwood consumption expanded more rapidly than industrial roundwood consumption, growing by 60 percent to 1 890 million m^3 in 1994, while industrial roundwood consumption grew by 15 percent to almost 1 500 million m^3, although actually declining from a high of 1 720 million m^3 in 1990.
^20 The developments reported are based mostly on the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products, the most complete and historically continuous statistical series on these products, with a database that starts in 1961. A full summary of world and regional production and consumption with subtotals for developing and developed categories is in Table 4 of Annex 3.
The decline in consumption from the 1990 level reflects both supply and demand conditions. A major factor was the continued dislocation of output in the Russian Federation where reported industrial roundwood removals were down substantially (around 50 percent from the 1990 level). The decline also reflected weak demand in the industrialized countries. Further, the supply of logs continued to be affected by restrictions on harvesting in North America and the main tropical Asian countries, increasingly due to environmental concerns. Some African countries also increased their restrictions on logging and export, both for forest management reasons and to encourage greater domestic processing.
World production of most individual forest products (Figures 2 and 3) rose substantially in volume terms over the period 1970-94. Only sawnwood had a lower production in 1994 than in 1970. Output ranged from a minor fall in the production of sawnwood, to a 113 percent increase in paper and paperboard products. The slow growth for industrial roundwood masked the fact that coniferous roundwood production only increased by 1 percent, while that of non-coniferous roundwood grew by 48 percent. The main impact was post-1990, as production of both coniferous and non-coniferous roundwood had increased up to that point. Industrial roundwood and sawnwood both reached a peak in 1990 and then declined, mostly due to dislocation of output in the former USSR; recent levels have approached the 1990 high.
Growth rates for consumption of many commodities (see Table 3) during 1980-94 have been slower than for the 1970-80 period in many regions. Of particular note are the following:
· The growth rates of fuelwood and charcoal consumption and of population are nearly equal in developing countries.
· Consumption and production of fuelwood, industrial roundwood and sawnwood grew less than GDP in both developed and developing country categories.
· For wood-based panels, and for pulp and paper commodities, developing country consumption grew much faster than both GDP and population. The developing countries' share of total roundwood production has increased steadily from 49 percent in 1970 to 61 percent by 1994 (see Table 4 and Figure 2). They have increased their share of industrial roundwood from 17 percent to 33 percent.
Changes at a world level, and a breakdown for developed and developing countries, are shown in Figures 2 and 3 and in more detail in Table 4. Regional figures for production and consumption are given in Table 5 of Annex 3. For industrial roundwood, the most impressive changes have occurred, not for the leading consuming regions, but for the others: Africa's consumption nearly doubled to about 60 million m^3 between 1970 and 1994 with its share rising from less than 3 percent to 4 percent. South American consumption also rose from 3 percent to more than 7 percent. However, it was the growth of consumption in Asia that transformed the global balance: from consuming 15 percent of world industrial roundwood in 1970, Asia came to account for 21 percent (compared to about 20 percent for Europe) in 1994. Similar shifts have occurred for other commodities. For paper and paperboard the main developments have been the sharp declines in share of consumption by North/Central America and
by Europe, mostly in favour of Asia which raised its share from 15 to 30 percent.
Table 3
Consumption growth rates for selected forest products (percent per annum)
region
fuelwood and charcoal
industrial roundwood
wood-based panels
total fibre furnish
recovered waste paper
paper and paperboard
world
developed
developing
Africa
North/Central America
South America
Asia
Europe
Oceania
former USSR
Table 4
Summary breakdown of world production of roundwood by economic category, 1970-94 (million m^3)^21
^21 Calculated from FAO Yearbook of Forest Products. 1979, 1994 editions. 'Other industrial roundwood' adjusted from published data for wood residues and shares of developed and developing countries pro-rated.
volume
percent
volume
percent
volume
percent
total roundwood
world
developed
developing
fuelwood and charcoal
world
developed
developing
industrial roundwood
world
developed
developing
of which: saw and veneer logs
world
developed
developing
pulpwood and particles
world
developed
developing
other industrial roundwood
world
developed
developing
Fuelwood and charcoal consumption increased by about 60 percent to reach an estimated 1 890 million m^3 in 1994, of which about 1 percent was charcoal. Over the 1970-94 period, Asia accounted for half of the world's fuelwood use; Africa's share increased from one-fifth to more than one-quarter due to that continent's high population growth and relatively low incomes. Rapid economic growth in some large Asian countries (notably China, India, Indonesia) may slow down that region's fuelwood dependency. Up to now, however, rather than reducing their share as their economies have grown, the developing countries have expanded their share of global consumption of fuelwood and charcoal from 84 percent two decades ago to 90 percent in 1994 (see Box 6).
The energy role of wood is not, however, confined to fuelwood and charcoal, and the data should not be confused with 'total wood energy'. Box 7 shows the many other ways in which wood has retained importance in energy even in the developed region of Europe.
On a per caput basis, consumption of all commodities from sawnwood to newsprint and packaging boards continued to grow since 1970. For developed countries, consumption per caput increased for most products, with that of panels and paper rising by more than 40 percent.
Developing countries, which had per caput consumption rates between 2 percent and 6 percent of the developed country levels in 1970 for the above commodities were, by 1994, consuming around10 percent or more. Most of this consumption increase was due to the rapidly growing economies of Asia. For wood-based panels and for paper and paperboard, developing country per caput consumption tripled between 1970 and 1994. As their purchasing power grows, developing countries can be expected to continue to close the gap with the industrialized countries; Asian countries have already begun to equal or surpass Europe as a consumer of a number of commodities. For industrial roundwood, Latin America is also significant on the world scale.
Box 6
Fuelwood, charcoal and wood energy
Two in five people worldwide rely on fuelwood or charcoal as their main or sole source of domestic energy for cooking and heating. One-half of today's estimated 2 000 million users face fuel shortages as supplies of wood fuels dwindle. Among these, perhaps 100 million already experience virtual 'fuelwood famine'. Estimates suggest that the number of people relying on wood fuel will increase to 3 000 million by the end of the century.
Alternatives to wood fuels are often limited in rural areas that are remote from national power grids or centres of distribution of fossil-based fuels such as kerosene or coal. Yet, even where such conventional or 'convenience' fuels are available, many cannot afford them or simply prefer to use wood fuels for specific purposes.
Concern arose in the 19 70s and early 19 80s of the possible social and environmental consequences of fuelwood shortages, including, among others, deforestation, desertification, negative nutritional impacts and hardship associated with fuel collection. There was concern that the 'fuelwood crisis' was already occurring in some places, most notably, in Africa's Sahel, Brazil's northeast and the highlands of Nepal. National and international efforts were launched to find ways to increase production, to reduce household consumption of wood and wood-based fuels, and to identify alternative renewable energy sources for household use. The 1981 UN Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, convened in Nairobi, Kenya, acted as a stimulus for these activities.
Without doubt, fuelwood shortages and overcutting can have negative economic, environmental and social effects. But, in most cases, fuelwood collection is not a primary cause of deforestation. Furthermore, it is now clear that fuelwood production and harvesting systems can be, and often are, sustainable. While the extent and the nature of the 'fuelwood crisis' has been reassessed, dependence on wood fuel is, and will continue to be, a reality, necessitating continued efforts to ensure adequate and sustainable supplies. In addition, economic and environmental concerns may provide opportunities for an expanded role for wood energy. Its potential as an environmentally-friendly and affordable energy source for industry is being considered and, in some cases, realized by many countries. The potential of biomass energy, including wood fuels as a substitute for fossil-based fuels, is also being investigated as a means of mitigating global warming.
Box 7
Europe: energy dominates wood end-use
It is reported that in 1990, 47 percent of wood harvested in Europe, equivalent to 208 million m^3, was used for energy.^22 However, only about 44 percent of this was actually used in the form of fuelwood; another 24 percent was in the form of pulping liquors while the rest ended up as energy through other channels, such as in the burning of discarded pallets etc. According to the report, energy generation is 'by far the largest end-use for wood in volume terms [in Europe].' Equivalent information is not readily available for other regions.
^22 European Timber Trends and Prospects: into the 21st Century. Geneva Timber and Forest Study Papers No. ECE/TIM/SP/11. UN-ECE/FAO. UN, New York and Geneva, 1996.
Notwithstanding the growth of both population and incomes, sawnwood seems to have reached a plateau, with long-term consumption nearly stagnant relative to other processed forest products. Although the developing countries have achieved a doubling of sawnwood production since 1970, this is far less than the gains achieved for other commodities: a five-fold increase in pulp for paper and also in total fibre furnish; almost a six-fold increase in panels and recovered waste paper; and more than a six-fold increase in paper and paperboard (see Box 8).
Production of wood-based panels (veneer, plywood, particle boards, and fibreboards) has been particularly dynamic. Production in the developing countries has grown more than five-fold. New types of panels have competed with traditional ones and have also created new opportunities for use. Market shares are undergoing continual change in many markets.
There has been particularly rapid growth in the consumption of pulp and paper products and, in parallel, greater recycling. So rapid has this growth been, that world per caput consumption has increased by about 40 percent; consumption in developing countries is up more than three-fold, the fastest gains being in Asia. Non-wood fibre use has also grown rapidly in Asia.
Pressure on resources and responses As indicated earlier, the post-1970s period has witnessed a major increase in population; e.g., in Africa, population has nearly doubled. As much of the population increase has been in poorer countries, the demand for land for cultivation and pasture, in addition to infrastructure development, has exerted considerable pressure on forests. Meanwhile, the rising incomes of some major countries in the developing world have also created a greater demand for industrial forest products. This has added to other pressures and to already high consumption levels in developed countries.
These pressures have resulted in concern over deforestation and the sustainability of forests. International efforts to alleviate these problems became a hallmark of the late 1970s to mid-1980s. In industrialized countries, concern and economic pressures have led to a surge of efforts to use wood more efficiently. In. fact, one of the most significant developments of the 1970-94 period has been the efficiency gains achieved in processing. More products are being made with less wood from the forest, a situation which has major long-term implications for the sustainable management of forests and the adequacy of raw material supplies.
Successful adaptation is shown by the fact that, although processed products grew very rapidly (by two-thirds for pulp for paper, two-fold for total fibre furnish, and more than two-fold for paper and paperboard), consumption of the roundwood raw material itself was practically stagnant, having only increased by 15 percent. Particularly in developing countries, much of the waste that was previously left as forest residues at harvest sites is now being collected; wastes from saw and veneer mills increasingly end up as feedstock for reconstituted-panel products mills to make particle boards or fibreboards, and for pulp mills. Box 5 on page 31 presents developments in recycling; Figure 4 in this section shows the growing significance of recovered paper (which is recycled) in total fibre supply for paper and paperboard manufacture.
Box 8
Sawnwood - possible reasons for its slow-down in growth
Sawnwood consumption appears to have reached a plateau in most countries. There is at least partial evidence of effective substitution for sawnwood by wood-based panels in certain key end-uses; in 1970 panels were equivalent to only 17 percent of sawnwood in volume but this ratio climbed to 24 percent by 1990 and 30 percent by 1994. This may have contributed to the slow-down in demand for sawnwood, although some of the increase in the use of panels may reflect new markets altogether. It seems likely that some of the most important factors restraining sawnwood consumption are as follows:
· Sawnwood is a product that generally demands larger and higher quality logs, which are increasingly scarce. Those that are available may be being diverted to more profitable end-uses (such as plywood). Availability of large logs for industry may also be increasingly constrained by environmental pressures to protect old-growth forests.
· The leading consumer countries (in North America, Scandinavia and Europe generally) may be approaching saturation levels of per caput requirements. Furthermore, relative to panels and non-wood sheet material substitutes, sawnwood demands relatively more labour to use (a costly and scarce factor in these countries).
· The current group of rapidly developing countries may not have the same timber construction traditions that drove the high demand in developed countries when they were at the same income levels. There is one more possible explanation: in the main producing countries, there may be a preference for higher value-added products being made directly from sawnwood so that an increasing share of sawnwood output is not produced as a commodity for sale but for input into secondary products, milled products, furniture and joinery components etc. Such output might not even feature in sawnwood statistics just as utility veneer is reported mostly as its end product, plywood.
Clearly, more research is needed to clarify the dynamics of the sawnwood industry today.
It is worth noting, however, that much of this change can be credited to marketing efforts in combination with technological advances. For example, marketing has created a demand for entirely new products to the point where panels made from chipped waste wood have not only partly substituted for existing products (sawnwood and plywood) but have also created new opportunities for the use of wood.
Forest products in 1994
As for other post-1990 years, 1994 was well below the historical trend in terms of production and consumption of forest products - the dislocation of production in the former USSR was still affecting world totals, particularly those for the developed countries. Due to the growth in the use of fuelwood, however, total roundwood consumption in 1994 was only 4 percent lower than in 1990. Industrial roundwood output, however, was down by 20 percent in developed countries and up by 4 percent in developing countries compared to 1990 levels. Output of sawnwood and wood-based panels, the other solid products, was also down in developed countries but had either been stable or had increased in developing ones.
Despite the situation in the former USSR, pulp and paper production increased in both developed and developing countries. This reflects only partly the fact that, although important, the former USSR was not decisive as a producer. More important is the evidence it gives of this sector's growing independence from forest supplies of raw materials. For example, production of wood pulp (to which the former USSR is a significant contributor) declined relative to 1990; it was, however, more than compensated for by a 21 percent increase in waste paper collection so enabling paper and paperboard production to rise by 6 percent in developed and 42 percent in developing countries.
Figure 4 - Changes in composition of total fibre furnish 1970-94 (million tonnes)^23
^23 FAO Yearbook of Forest Products. 1979, 1994
In 1994, historical concentration of consumption and production continued. This also emerges as an issue in the section titled 'The global outlook for forest products' beginning on page 74. Using consumption of industrial roundwood and paper/paperboard as examples, three regions together account for 93 percent of consumption of paper and paperboard and for 81 percent of consumption of roundwood (see Table 5 of Annex 3).
As Figure 5 shows, concentration is also reflected in the fact that, of total 1994 production, the main five countries for each commodity accounted for:
· 48 percent of fuelwood (note that these were all developing countries - in order: India, China, Brazil, Indonesia and Nigeria);
· 60 percent of industrial roundwood;
· 57 percent of sawnwood;
· 53 percent of wood-based panels;
· 66 percent of total fibre furnish for paper manufacture; and
· 63 percent of paper and paperboard.
Comparing production and consumption patterns in tropical vs. non-tropical countries (see Table 6 of Annex 3), tropical regions accounted for three-quarters of both production and consumption of fuelwood and charcoal in 1994. By contrast, they accounted for only 17 percent of production and 20 percent of consumption of industrial roundwood.
References have already been made to the relative importance of developed and developing countries in production and consumption of fuelwood and industrial commodities. Table 5 reveals the rapidly growing importance of developing countries in production of processed forest products. Clearly, with growing consumption in home markets for those commodities of which they have traditionally been exporters, developing countries will be able to export less in the future. Market opportunities for forest products will grow faster in developing rather than mature-economy countries. The 'global outlook' section on pages 74-90 highlights how the shifting pattern of regional dominance and concentration may affect trade prospects for key regions.
Figure 5 - The world's five main producers in 1994, by commodity^24
^24 FAO Yearbook of Forest Products. 1994.
Fuelwood
Industrial roundwood
Sawnwood
Wood-based panels
Total fibre furnish
Paper and paperboard
A setting for the future
In summary, the following points have significance for the future:
· Fuelwood remains important and, in fact, continues to grow, with consumption now exceeding that of industrial roundwood. Provision of fuelwood must remain a central part of the forest products and resource-management agendas. Given such importance, the quality of data on fuelwood must be improved. New research is needed to update consumption coefficients, to characterize the changes in sources of fuelwood, and to place the commodity in a clearer context relative to other energy types as countries develop.
· In considering other potential uses for fuelwood, cases may exist where the demand for both fuel and industrial raw materials creates significant competition. A better information base on the sources of fuelwood relative to those of industrial inputs is therefore necessary.
· While the consumption of processed products expanded rapidly, the use of industrial roundwood grew by only 15 percent in two and a half decades. This encouraging development shows that industry has succeeded in increasing output with less roundwood raw material input, in recycling more materials and in using more residues. This suggests that a similar process must be induced in developing countries so they can enjoy consumption growth without placing unnecessary stress on the forest resource.
· The emergence of recycling of paper fibre on a major scale creates, for the first time, the prospect of a significant distance, although not a total separation, between the paper industry and the forest. This, however, may create problems for the profitable management of many forests.
· Concentration of production and consumption is a permanent feature of the industrial forest products scene. Asia's recent growth is occurring in a region which has very limited forest resources relative to its considerable needs; therefore, consumption growth is more highly dependent on trade than in the other major regions.
· The situation in the former USSR deserves increased attention. Some statistics are questionable: for example, it is surprising that in a cold climate zone, even consumption of a commodity like fuelwood has fallen dramatically. The question must be asked as to what proportion of the decline observed is real and what originates from severe disruption of the statistical systems. Of importance is the fact that policy changes may have the greatest effect on the forest products situation. It seems likely that factors outside the sector will predominate, such as changing railway tariff rates which make it uneconomic to take timber out of Siberia. A policy reversal on this and other external policies could therefore cause a rapid change in the situation.
Table 5
World production of processed products, 1970-94 (million m^3; million tonnes)
quantity
percent
quantity
percent
quantity
percent
sawnwood (million m^3)
world
developed
developing
wood-based panels (million m^3)
world
developed
developing
total fibre furnish^a (million tonnes)
world
developed
developing
pulp for paper (million tonnes)
world
developed
developing
recovered paper (million tonnes)
world
developed
developing
paper and paperboard (million tonnes)
world
developed
developing
^a Theoretically, total fibre furnish should approximate paper and paperboard after adjustment for stocks and material in process
Non-wood forest products
The term 'non-wood forest products' (NWFPs) and the similar terms: 'minor', 'secondary', and 'non-timber' forest products, have emerged as umbrella expressions for the vast array of both animal and plant resources other than wood (or timber in the case of 'non-timber') derived from forests or forest tree species. Examples of NWFPs include: food and food additives, such as edible nuts, mushrooms, fruits, herbs, spices, gums, aromatic plants and game; fodder; fibres used in construction, furniture, clothing or utensils; naval stores (turpentine, rosin); and plant or animal products for medicinal, cosmetic or cultural uses. The sources of NWFPs vary; they may be gathered from the wild or produced as (semi-) domesticated plants in plantations or agroforestry systems. Their wild or semi-domesticated status distinguish them from well-established agricultural cash crops such as oilpalm, cocoa, coconut, rubber or coffee.
Value of NWFPs
Non-wood forest products have attracted considerable global interest in recent years due to an increasing recognition of their contribution to household economies and food security, to some national economies, and to environmental objectives, including the conservation of biological diversity.
They are of major significance primarily in households and local economies. An estimated 80 percent of the population of the developing world use NWFPs to meet some of their health and nutritional needs. Several million households worldwide depend heavily on these products for subsistence consumption and/or income. This number may be an order of magnitude larger if those who are seasonally dependent on NWFPs (e.g., livestock herders dependent on forest fodder/browse in the dry season) are considered. NWFPs are also used in many village-level artisanal and craft activities throughout the world. Some NWFPs undergo large-scale industrial processing for products such as foods and beverages, confectionery, flavourings, perfumes, medicines, paints or polishes.
Presently, at least 150 NWFPs are significant in terms of international trade. Most of these are exported in raw or semi-processed form. While most are traded in small quantities, exports of some products do reach substantial levels, such as honey, gum arabic, rattan, cork, forest nuts and mushrooms, essential oils, and pharmaceutical products (see Table 6). The figures on the value of international trade in NWFPs are indicative only and should be used with caution.
The estimated total value of world trade in NWFPs is in the region of US$ 11 100 million. The general direction of trade is from developing to developed countries, with about 60 percent being imported by countries of the EU, USA and Japan. China is the dominant world trader, but India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and Brazil are also major suppliers to world markets (see Table 7).
Table 6
Value of trade in selected NWFPs (US$ million)^25
^25 Iqbal, M 1995. Trade restrictions affecting international trade in non-wood forest products. Non-Wood Forest Products Series No. 8; FAO, Rome.
product
US$ (million)
natural honey
mushrooms and truffles
nuts
spices
ginseng roots
gum arable
plants used in pharmacy
essential oils
cork and cork products
rattan
While NWFPs may represent the major actual or potential source of income from forests with low timber production potential, such as those in arid and semi-arid zones, with a few exceptions, it is unlikely that in production forests they can compete on financial terms with timber harvesting. NWFPs are likely simply to supplement the returns from timber rather than replace it as a source of revenue. Increased production of NWFPs in forests which are unsuitable for timber production, however, will enhance these forests' value, and thus at least theoretically provide a form of economic protection against conversion to other land uses. Care must be taken, however, that commercialization does not result in over-harvesting of NWFPs, since this can have its own negative environmental consequences.
Table 7
Trade direction for major NWFPs^26
^26 Partial selection from Iqbal. 1995. Table 2, Page 9
product
main origins
main markets
brazil nuts
Brazil, Bolivia, Peru
USA, UK, Germany, Australia, Canada
walnuts
China, India, Afghanistan, Pakistan
EU, Japan, Canada, Switzerland
morels
Pakistan, India, Afghanistan
France, Switzerland, Germany
shea nuts (karite nuts)
Burkina Faso, Mali, Cote d'Ivoire, Benin, Togo, Ghana, Nigeria, Guinea, Central African Republic
Japan, Sweden, EU
gum arabic
Sudan
USA, EU (UK and Germany), Switzerland, Scandinavia, Japan
gum rosin
China, Indonesia, Portugal
Japan, Germany, UK, France, Netherlands, Italy
rattan
Malaysia, Indonesia, Viet Nam, China
Italy, USA, Spain, France, Egypt, Japan, Netherlands, Germany, Greece, Thailand
bamboo
China, Thailand, Malaysia, Myanmar, Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Viet Nam, Philippines, Bangladesh
France, Germany, Netherlands
lac
India, Thailand
Germany, Egypt, Indonesia, USA
natural honey
Former USSR, China, USA, Mexico, Turkey
Germany, USA, UK, Japan
ginseng roots
Japan, China, Singapore
USA, Republic of Korea, Canada, China, EU
essential oils
China, India, Indonesia, Brazil
EU, USA, Japan
medicinal plants
China, Republic of Korea, USA, India, Chile, Egypt, Argentina, Greece, Poland, Hungary, Zaire, former Czechoslovakia, Albania
Japan, USA, Germany, France, Italy, Malaysia, Spain, UK
bidi leaves
India
Pakistan, Sri Lanka
Calls for increased attention to the production of NWFPs are often less motivated by economic considerations than by environmental and social concerns. Management of forests for NWFPs rather than for timber or in addition to timber is more likely to benefit the local economy and to provide goods and a source of income for forest-dwellers.
Factors affecting the development of NWFPs
Traditionally, maximizing revenue from timber production has driven forest policy and management decisions in many countries, and silvicultural systems have been designed specifically to enhance timber production. These policies and practices have in some places conflicted with the interests of forest-dwellers and people dependent on the forest for other uses and products, and have limited the development potential of NWFPs. With the increased recognition of the importance of NWFPs, however, more attention is being put on the development of forest management systems for sustainable use of both wood and non-wood products and services and to ensuring equitable distribution of the benefits.
The development of NWFPs has been limited, however, by the lack of accurate data on production and trade and also by weaknesses in the policy and institutional structures needed to support it. The economic importance of NWFPs is generally underestimated because much of the production and consumption is at subsistence level, and thus, data are rarely collected or published at a national level. When data on NWFPs are recorded, underreporting, double counting, grouping of NWFPs at different stages of processing or together with other products, and the use of unrealistic prices, are systematic shortcomings of such statistics. Clearly, improved statistical information will both clarify the economic significance of NWFPs and their trends, and provide essential information for management purposes.
Despite the growing attention given in many countries to the promotion and development of NWFPs, it is presently impossible to assess whether their socio-economic contribution has become more or less important. This is not only because of the lack of reliable time series of production and trade data for the majority of NWFPs, but is also due to the difficulty of differentiating production and trade from agricultural sources.
The potential for increased commercialization of NWFPs, however, would appear to be large if judged simply by the number of plant and animal products of known value for human use. Successful (and sustainable) commercialization of a NWFP that is currently collected and used in the household or sold in small quantities in a local market, however, is extremely difficult. There are a range of technical needs, and social and economic implications involved in doing so, and improved marketing processes and structures are essential. A number of important issues are being grappled with in current efforts to tap the economic potential of NWFPs. These include: the need to develop suitable management systems to avoid over-harvesting of the product in the wild; clarification of user rights over the resource, particularly where it is considered common property; research and development needs in semi-domesticating or domesticating a wild resource; development of effective marketing systems
for the product; various legal issues, including intellectual property rights (how the country, the local user or other entity can be adequately compensated for use of the resource by outsiders) and patent rights in the case of research of an active ingredient from a national product leading to its synthesis. Much of the current effort on NWFP development, such as the establishment of extractive reserves, is focusing on providing or increasing alternative sources of income for forest dwellers or poor populations living near the forest. Large-scale commercialization of a product is neither guaranteed to benefit these people nor to protect the resource. It may not even be technically feasible or economically viable.
Consistent policies and support which specifically govern the management, harvesting and processing of NWFPs are lacking in most countries, but some (e.g., Indonesia, India and Turkey) have recently made some effort to redress this. Overall, the development and implementation of national policy frameworks to support the development of NWFPs remains a major challenge.
International trade in forest products^27
^27 All figures quoted in this section are from various issues of the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products. FAO, Rome.
Trends
Only about 6-8 percent of world roundwood production enters international trade. However, the importance of international trade in forest products is clearly shown by the value of exports of primary forest products, estimated to have been worth almost US$ 114 000 million in 1994. This represents almost a 75 percent increase in real terms since 1970. For some countries, forest product exports are of major significance as a source of foreign exchange earnings.
There has been a continual upward trend in both the volume and value of forest products exports since 1970, which has become more pronounced in the last ten years. Since 1970, export volumes of industrial roundwood have increased by 21 percent to 113.4 million m^3; sawnwood has almost doubled to 108 million m^3, as has wood pulp (to 31.6 million tonnes); wood-based panels has increased four-fold to 38.2 million m^3; and paper and paperboard has trebled to 72.7 million tonnes. Figure 6 shows these trends in quantitative terms.
This growth in trade also includes that of imported material which is re-exported, either with or without further processing, a situation that is common in Europe. For example, The Netherlands and Germany both serve as major import points while also exporting considerable amounts (much of which has undergone value-adding processing) to other European countries. A similar situation occurs in Asia with Singapore, Hong Kong, Republic of Korea, and the Province of Taiwan.
The relative importance in trade of some of the products has been changing (see Figure 7). While expanding in absolute terms, industrial roundwood's share of the value of total exports dropped from 15 percent to 9 percent, largely since the early 1980s, a trend that has continued into 1995/96. Wood pulp's share of exports declined steadily as importers moved to importing final products. Sawnwood remained relatively stable. In contrast, the share of both wood-based panels, and paper and paperboard increased, reflecting the growing emphasis on higher value forest products in world trade. Paper and paperboard products now account for approximately 44 percent of the value of world forest product exports, followed by sawnwood (21 percent) and wood-based panels (13 percent).
Figure 6 - Trends in exports of forest products, 1970-94 (wood products: million m^3; fibre products: million tonnes)
Figure 7 - Share of total forest products exports (percent by value)
Figure 8 - Proportion of world production exported (percent by volume)
The share of total production that is exported has increased for all products except industrial roundwood. For example, the proportion of sawnwood exported has risen from 14 percent in 1970 to 26 percent in 1994, and of plywood from 14 percent to 37 percent (see Figure 8). In 1994, around one-quarter of the production of sawnwood, wood-based panels, and paper and paperboard, one-fifth of wood pulp production, but less than 10 percent of industrial roundwood production, were exported.
Dominance of the developed countries A feature of world trade in forest products is the dominance of the developed countries, both in exports and imports. In value terms, developed countries accounted for 81 percent of total exports in 1994, down slightly from 1970 levels. On the import side they accounted for 79 percent. Their dominance in 1994 was greatest for pulp, paper and packaging - from 85 percent of the wood pulp exports (79 percent of the imports) to 91 percent of the paper and paperboard exports (77 percent of the imports).
Figures 9 and 10 show the breakdown of imports and exports by region in 1994. They clearly indicate the dominance of Europe and North America as both importers and exporters and of Asia as an importer. Of additional note is the fact that much of Europe's exports are between countries within the region.
Another major feature of international trade in forest products is that, although many countries are involved, only few of these account both for the bulk of exports and imports (see Figures 11 and 12). In 1994, five countries accounted for 53 percent of world exports of forest products and ten accounted for 70 percent. Canada and the USA alone accounted for almost one-third. On the import side, five countries accounted for 51 percent and nine countries for 67 percent. The USA and Japan alone were responsible for 30 percent.
The main developed country importers are Japan and the USA, and a number of countries in the European Union, particularly Germany, the United Kingdom, Italy and France. Many of these countries are also significant exporters. The Russian Federation is an important exporter to both Europe and also Japan, although its exports have declined substantially in the last few years for a number of reasons including financial and infrastructural difficulties.
In recent years as their economies have grown, developing countries, particularly in Asia (notably China and the Province of Taiwan, the Republic of Korea, the Philippines and Thailand) have increased their share of global imports - mainly of logs and semi-finished wood products. China alone accounts for more than 20 percent of all developing country imports. Paper products tend to be the main imports of China, Hong Kong, Mexico and Singapore. By contrast, Thailand imports mainly industrial roundwood and sawnwood, and the Republic of Korea imports mainly industrial roundwood and wood-based panels.
Only plywood exports are dominated by developing countries; Indonesia alone accounts for 46 percent, with Malaysia accounting for a further 17 percent and Brazil for 4 percent. Most of the exports (by value) from developing countries are from Asian countries, which dominate exports of wood-based panels, logs, sawnwood, and paper products. South American countries, however, are the major developing country exporters of wood pulp. Indonesia and Malaysia have become important exporters of non-coniferous sawnwood, and Brazil, Chile and the newly industrializing Asian countries have increased their exports of wood pulp and paper products. Malaysia is the world's third largest exporter of logs (after the USA and the Russian Federation) and the fifth largest exporter of sawnwood. In general, exports by the developing countries have moved towards value-added products, although there is still substantial trade in unprocessed logs and woodchips.
Figure 9 - Forest product imports: 1994 regional shares (percent by value)
Figure 10 - Forest product exports: 1994 regional shares (percent by value)
Figure 11 - Major forest product importers, 1994
Figure 12 - Major forest product exporters, 1994
Developing countries have a dominant position in trade in the area of tropical wood. Tropical: roundwood is estimated to represent about 15 percent of world industrial roundwood production. Tropical products account for varying shares of total exports: they represent more than 20 percent of the industrial roundwood exported; 10 percent of sawnwood; less than 10 percent of pulp, and paper and paperboard products; but 39 percent of wood-based panels (see Table 8). Within the general category of wood-based panels however, they account for 71 percent of plywood exports. Actual volumes of almost all tropical products exported have risen since 1970 and, for all except industrial roundwood, their share of total exports has risen, although only marginally for sawnwood. For all, their shares in value terms have also risen. Tropical countries have also increased their share of the global export value of all of these products over the period.
Production of tropical forest products has declined in the past two to three years, as has the export of some products. The decline in export volumes of tropical logs, sawnwood and wood-based panels is due to various factors. In many cases, the global changes hide considerable regional and country variations. For example, Asian exports of some products have declined recently while, at the same time, those of South America have risen. In some cases, the moves reflect changes in only one or a few countries (e.g., Malaysia, Indonesia and Brazil) rather than all countries. Some of the factors influencing the changes include:
· increasing domestic consumption in important developing producer countries;
· reduced harvest levels due to both environmental concerns and export market conditions; and
· a shift in exports from logs and, to a lesser extent, sawnwood, towards higher-value products; for example, Malaysia's exports of industrial roundwood have fallen dramatically from the levels of the late-1980s - a decline that is seen as likely to continue - but the volume of plywood exported has trebled since 1990.
Some of these trends reflect major structural changes that are unlikely to be reversed, while others are a response to normal short-term market conditions.
Table 8
Exports of tropical wood and wood products (1970 and 1994)
total from all sources
total from tropical countries^a
percentage from tropical countries
total from all sources
total from tropical countries^a
percentage from tropical countries
industrial roundwood (million m^3)
sawnwood (million m^3)
wood-based panels (million m^3)
plywood (million m^3)
pulp (million tonnes)
paper and paperboard (million tonnes)
^a estimate
Forest product price trends
Although nominal forest product export prices have risen steadily, FAO's real forest product price index has been fairly stable since the 1970s. The index has been increasing since 1985, after falling gradually in the early 1980s. As is normal for most products, there have been substantial short-term fluctuations within these broad trends, especially for individual products. Real prices of tropical logs have moved upward since the early 1970s; prices declined briefly between 1979 and 1985, but then rose again. The real price of tropical sawnwood has followed a similar trend, although with larger fluctuations and a steeper decline in the mid-1980s and a more rapid rise recently. The real price of other products, including wood-based panels, pulp, and paper and paperboard, continued to rise throughout the 1980s. For tropical products, this long-term increase may reflect a combination of decreasing product availability and increasing demand for tropical timber products, while
the recent downturn in some real prices is linked to the depressed state of the economies in many importing countries. Prices of many wood products, both temperate and tropical, experienced strong rises in 1993-94, but subsequently declined almost to earlier levels.
Direction of trade
Recent years have also shown changes in the direction of trade, reflecting a wide range of factors, including: changes in consumption patterns; changes in resource availability from natural forests; investment decisions; development of new technologies; market preferences; political, economic and social changes; policy adjustments; and recent attitudes to environmental issues.
Significant features in recent years
Significant features that have emerged in recent years include:
· considerable expansion of the exports of most products, with an increasing number of both exporters and importers;
· a changing relative importance of products, such as:
- a decline in log exports and an increase in processed products, in particular in sawnwood and plywood, from many developing countries;
- substitution of softwood products for hardwood products in a number of markets; and
- increased overall trade in paper and paperboard;
· greater diversification of markets, and increasing intra-regional trade, the latter being fuelled by the increase in regional trade agreements such as:
- the expansion of the European Union;
- the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement between Canada, the USA and Mexico; and
- the stimulus provided by the Mercosur Agreement between Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, Paraguay and Bolivia (shortly to become an associate member).
Specific changes in trade flows
A number of significant changes in trade flows have been noted, including the following:
· the emergence or considerable expansion of log exports in recent years by a number of developing countries, such as P.R. China, Ghana, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, Cambodia and Chile;
· an overall increase in log exports since 1990 due to an increase of exports from developed countries (increases by the former USSR and New Zealand compensating for a decline by the USA) which offset a decrease from developing countries (largely reflecting a 60 percent reduction by Malaysia);
· increased intra-developing country trade flows as Asian countries such as China, the Republic of Korea and the Province of Taiwan have increased their imports (especially of logs and sawnwood) from other developing countries, including African countries;
· increased Latin American exports of all products, including pulp and paper, dominated by Brazil and to a lesser extent Chile; exports by Brazil more than doubled in value between 1987 and 1994;
· increased trade by softwood exporting countries in the Southern Hemisphere, such as New Zealand and Chile;
· expansion of imports from all sources by China, Republic of Korea, and Thailand;
· the substitution of hardwoods by softwoods in some important markets, such as Japan;
· increased trade in higher-value products - since 1990, export values have increased by 40 percent for sawnwood, 52 percent for wood-based panels, and 300 percent for paper and paperboard; there have also been increased exports of furniture components, mouldings, etc.;
· expansion of exports by a number of European countries reflecting increased intra-European trade;
· dramatic declines in supplies from the Russian Federation due to a number of factors including infrastructure problems, environmental difficulties, and financial and political constraints;
· increased exports by the USA of non-coniferous sawnwood; these have doubled since the mid-1980s as the value of the non-coniferous resource has been recognized and strong industry efforts have been made to export a range of products;
· the impact of environmental constraints on USA exports;
· the almost complete cessation of log exports in the late 1980s by two of the major exporters - Indonesia and the Philippines - with the former changing to exports of plywood and, to a much lesser extent, sawnwood; while the latter became a net importer because of a lack of harvestable forest resources;
· a substantial increase between 1984 and 1994 of Canadian exports of sawnwood (+22 percent), particle board (+300 percent), pulp (+49 percent), and newsprint (+18 percent), with the greatest proportion of these continuing to go to the USA;
· changes in patterns of trade as former political and trade ties were disrupted or modified as a result of the emergence of a number of new countries resulting from the re-unification of Germany and the breakup of the former USSR.
The impact of the Uruguay Round
Trade restrictions on forest products are many and varied and, although for most products are not of major economic significance, often act as important impediments to open trade. One of the main international mechanisms for reducing restrictions has been the series of multilateral trade negotiations carried out under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). The most recent round of negotiations, the Uruguay Round, was officially concluded in April 1994. As a result of this, trade will be encouraged by the tariff reductions agreed, greater scrutiny and control of non-tariff barriers, and improved standardization of the general rules and principles that countries should follow in their trade relationships. The impacts on trade will vary considerably between countries and by product but, for forest products in general, are likely to be beneficial though not substantial, since for most forest products, tariffs had already reached low levels in
developed countries before the Uruguay Round.
Effects of tariff changes on forest products
A number of tariff reductions on forest products will be phased in over a period of years. As tariff rates on forest products were generally quite low before the Uruguay Round, the gains will be relatively modest for many of them. Certain countries will continue to maintain high tariffs on some of their products.
For the developed countries, significant reductions were agreed upon for many products. The main importing countries committed themselves to reducing tariffs on a range of solid wood products over a five-year period, starting in 1995. Other countries also agreed to reduce tariffs on solid wood products, or at least to 'bind' their rates. Binding is where countries place a ceiling on their tariff rate, and thus agree not to raise it above this level. Reductions by the developed countries are estimated to average (on a trade-weighted basis) 43 percent for solid wood products in total. The reduction for wood-based panels is estimated to be 31 percent, and to range from 50-60 percent for more highly processed wood products. For paper and paperboard products, the overall reduction will be 99 percent, since all the main importers (USA, Canada, EU and Japan) and some others will phase out their tariffs completely over an 8 to 10 year period. In the case of furniture, some major
importers such as the European Union, Japan and the United States have agreed to eliminate tariffs completely over the next 8 to 10 years.^28
^28 GATT 1994. The Uruguay Round Deal, April.
Despite this, post-Uruguay Round rates are still high for some forest products. As has been the case previously, wood-based panels (especially plywood) and some value-added products will continue to face greater restrictions than most products.
The picture for the developing countries is more mixed. Some developing countries agreed to reduce levels on specified products - in some cases by up to 60 percent. This is from very high rates, however, so even after the changes, most rates will still be substantially higher than for developed countries.
Another feature of the changes agreed to in the Uruguay Round is that preferences, which restrict volumes (tariff quotas) for some countries, will tend to be replaced by a single bound tariff rate in the future. The best-known preferential system has been that of the UNCTAD Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) under which individual developed importing countries offer low (often zero) tariffs to developing countries, without requiring any reciprocal benefits. This system of preferences will become less common, to the detriment of developing countries, although with the general reduction in tariffs that has occurred in recent years the benefits of such schemes had already declined to a degree.
Virtually all pre-Uruguay Round rates were unbound but, under the Uruguay Round agreement, all major developed countries and many developing countries are to now bind their rates. This will provide greater certainty for exporters.
Effects on non-tariff barriers (NTBs)
The effect of the Uruguay Round negotiations on NTBs is more difficult to predict than that on tariffs since their existence and their impact is more difficult to identify. Benefits should result from the greater degree of discipline imposed and uniformity in the way in which countries interpret and implement various regulations. A number of agreements which were negotiated separately from the individual country tariff changes should further reduce the effect of many NTBs and improve the way in which trade is conducted. Two agreements which are of special interest to forestry are: the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement) which could improve conditions surrounding inspection and quarantine; and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) which could limit the use of technical regulations for other than legitimate health, safety, product quality, and environmental protection purposes. A further significant change is that,
by joining the World Trade Organization (WTO), a country is now committed to accepting all the results of the Uruguay Round without exception. Previously, countries were only controlled by the particular agreements to which they were signatories.
Overall effects of the Uruguay Round on trade in forest products
A recent study^29 on the effects of changes under the Uruguay Round estimates, conservatively, that the expansion of international trade in forest products in the main trading countries when all tariff reductions have been implemented (i.e., around the period 2000-2004) may be between US$ 340 and US$ 472 million.^30 Since this is less than half of one percent of the forest product imports of the countries analysed, it suggests that although the trade gains from the Uruguay Round are likely to be positive and worthwhile, the impact on global forest products trade may not be substantial. To a large extent this reflects the fact that tariff rates for most forest products were relatively low before the Uruguay Round began.
^29 Barbier, E,B, 1996. Impact of the Uruguay Round on international trade in forest products, FAO, Rome.
^30 These estimates are conservative since the analysis was limited to the impact of the tariff changes, and was restricted to logs, sawnwood, panels and pulp and paper (i.e. did not include products such as furniture, other paper, builders joinery).
The effects of the Uruguay Round will vary by country, by product and by market. As a group, developed countries are likely to benefit more than developing countries. When fully implemented, tariffs in developed countries on many products will be reduced to very low levels or completely eliminated. However, since some countries will continue to maintain high tariffs on some of their products, gains will be limited to certain products in particular markets. Plywood and some value-added products will continue to face greater restrictions than most other products. Stricter control over the implementation of NTBs will also be beneficial.
A significant benefit may not be from the reductions that were agreed to in the negotiations, but from the impetus that the Uruguay Round process has given to continue reductions and improvements, a situation that has already become apparent.
Environmental awareness and the effects on trade International trade in forest products has been affected by environmental concerns. Issues are related to the effects of international trade on the environment and, conversely, the impacts of environmental action on trade. One view is that the pressure generated by markets (and excessive consumption) is a major cause of damage to, or even loss of, forests. An alternative view is that international trade has no effect on the environment and therefore should not be targeted by those seeking solutions to environmental problems.
There is clear evidence that, while having an impact, trade is not a major direct cause of environmental problems, and that trade actions alone cannot ensure sustainable management of forests. Nonetheless, a variety of trade initiatives have been proposed and implemented as a response to environmental concerns. Some, such as actions relating to waste paper recycling and recovery, pollution controls, processing methods, etc., have already had an impact in some countries. They will continue to do so and are likely to extend to other countries. Other action - such as certification of forest products, listing timber species on the appendices of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), the introduction of packaging regulations, and technical regulations and standards for product and processing methods - have had less effect to date, but seem likely to have a greater impact in the future. Some of the main environmentally-driven
developments which have had or are likely to have an influence on trade are discussed briefly below. They illustrate the diverse and complex nature of the subject.
Trade in certified forest products
The certification of forest products has become one of the most topical and controversial subjects in forestry, largely as a result of the efforts of environmental groups and the pressure they have brought to bear on governments and retailers in some important importing countries (see also Part 3) Certification is currently discussed, debated and analysed at almost every meeting concerning forestry management and trade issues. Certification attempts to link trade, particularly international trade, to the sustainable management of the forest resource by assisting users to purchase products made only from timber from sustainably managed forests. Certification may also encourage improved environmental standards in post-harvest activities. While the focus so far has been mainly on timber and timber products, attention has recently expanded to include pulp and paper. There are also suggestions that the certification of non-wood forest products should be considered.
Views and attitudes towards certification range from strong support, through mild interest, to no interest or even opposition to the idea. Currently, a considerable, and growing, number of certification systems are being assessed or developed throughout the world, both in developed and developing countries, and there is now widespread acceptance of them in a number of countries, although in many cases grudgingly. It has largely become an issue of 'how', 'when' and 'by whom', not 'why' and 'whether'.
The current situation
The actual impact of certification on trade at the global level has been very small to date. The volume of products covered by operational certification schemes is insignificant at global or even regional terms. Commonly quoted (though unsubstantiated) estimates of the area covered under certification schemes range from 2.3 to 4 million ha, with the quoted roundwood output of these forests ranging from 1.5 million m^3 to 4 million m^3.^31 To put this in perspective, even the upper estimate represents less than 0.5 percent of the wood entering international trade, and a negligible proportion of total wood used for industrial purposes. The value of certified wood products currently traded, either internationally or nationally, is unknown but minor.
^31 See, for example, Sullivan, F. 1996. Certification gives the world's forests hope. Copy distributed on Internet, 3 September, 1996; Baharuddin Haji Ghazali and Simula Markku, 1996, Timber certification in transition. A report to ITTO, 22 May; Crossley, Rachel 1996. A review of global forest management certification initiatives: political and institutional aspects. Proceedings of the Conference on Ecological, Social and Political Issues of the Certification of Forest Management, Malaysia, 13-16 May.
Importing countries which have active environmental groups and trade interests who see a market advantage from providing certified products have the greatest interest in certification. Western Europe has been most active, particularly Germany, The Netherlands and the UK, while certification schemes are also being investigated in Denmark, Switzerland and Austria. Little interest in certification has been shown to date by other European countries such as France, Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Italy, or by major Asian import markets such as Japan, the Republic of Korea and China. Exporting countries most active in developing certification schemes are those whose main external markets are showing greatest interest in certified products. Among these are Australia, Brazil, Canada, Finland, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA. Regional bodies such as the African Timber Organization (ATO) have also initiated moves towards a 'green' label.
All existing or proposed certification systems are based on evaluating the standard of forest management being followed, in order to determine whether or not forests are being well/sustainably managed. Two approaches, about which there is currently considerable disagreement with respect to their relative merits, are the use of a 'performance standards' approach, as used by the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)^32, and one based on a 'process standards' approach, such as that of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). While many consider the two approaches to be incompatible, there appears to be growing recognition that they may in fact be mutually supportive, and that a degree of mutual acceptance could eventually be achieved.
^32 The FSC Is an NGO, recently established (accredited in 1994) in Mexico, It was established to act as an accreditor of certification bodies, in order to ensure that common standards are used in the certification process. Accredited certifiers must apply a set of principles and criteria that have been established by FSC. The organization has also recently released a label which may be carried by products certified by FSC-accredited certifiers. To date some five certifiers have been accredited by FSC, and these have certified a small number of forests in various countries.
Emerging issues
Despite progress made so far, and the considerable attention certification is receiving, there are still many unresolved issues and uncertainties surrounding it. Certification is based on two assumptions: first, that external pressure applied through trade will encourage improvements in forest management practices; and second, that market demand for products from sustainably managed forests is significant and that markets are prepared to pay a premium in some form (e.g., higher prices, increased demand, greater market share etc.) for them. It is still too early to judge the validity of these assumptions. Forest owners are unsure of what must be done to meet certification requirements, what the costs and benefits will be (and for whom), and how essential it will be. to be certified. Trade interests are uncertain of what the benefits and costs of certification will be to them, and how to develop an effective certification scheme which benefits both the consumer and themselves.
There is also considerable debate on what is the most effective certification process.
Views differ widely on the size and duration of the economic impact that certification schemes may have on trade. At present there is demand for some 'environmentally sound' or 'green' products in some countries, but little evidence that the size of this demand is substantial, or that price premiums will be paid other than for selected products. One possibility is that there may be considerable market benefits to some individual companies or producers but not to forestry as a whole.
Although the effect on trade is limited to date, a considerable degree of market uncertainty is being generated in many markets, together with some concern amongst many of those involved in trade in forest products, from producer to trader. One concern is that, unless carefully implemented, certification may act as a non-tariff barrier to trade by discriminating either intentionally or unintentionally against those unable or unwilling to achieve the required forest management standards. In particular it may disadvantage a number of developing countries. If imports are restricted to those of which the production has been certified as 'sustainable', even producers able to meet forest management requirements could easily face the significant barrier of adapting to different requirements in different markets. Certification may also favour industrialized countries where, at least at present, forest management practices tend to be closer to sustainability goals. Even though most
schemes seem likely to be voluntary, they may in reality be compulsory since some important retailers may be unwilling to carry uncertified products (as is occurring in the UK), and consumers may even switch to substitute products made from material other than wood (as is already occurring in some European countries to a degree). There is also concern that certification may give consumers the impression that unlabelled products (including those that have not been assessed) have been produced in an environmentally irresponsible way.
Overview of the future
Certification is still in its infancy. It seems likely, however, that certification will have an increasing impact at least for the next few years, though the exact nature of the impact is difficult to predict at present. At least in the short term, it may cause a degree of trade disruption as countries or individual interests in a country come to grips with the various systems and approaches being promoted. The longer-term impacts will depend on a wide range of factors, but in particular on the degree to which certification becomes accepted and trusted in the marketplace. It seems likely that it will begin to affect trade patterns and, in the longer term, if more widely adopted, may also affect the types of products traded.
In summary, although the direction and scope of certification is difficult to predict at this stage, the following seems likely: (a) certification activities will continue to grow, at least in the short- to medium-term (3-5 years); (b) its growth is unlikely to be rapid, if for no other reason than the fact that there is a limited area of forests which can meet the strict definitions of sound forest management; (c) the market impact will be limited to certain (but a growing list of) countries; and (d) it will probably be confined to small niche markets, with positive market benefits in some countries for some suppliers.
Box 9
The goals of certification
Certification is being promoted with two primary objectives:
· to improve the management of forests in order to achieve their sustainability; and
· to provide market access for the products from these forests.
There are two main components to certification:
· certifying the standard of forest management; and
· certifying the products that are made from wood from these forests.
At present, most of the focus is on determining whether products are derived from sustainably managed forests.
Little attention is being paid to certifying on the grounds of environmental soundness in post-harvest activities, that is, in distribution and processing (e.g., plant emissions, waste disposal, energy use and transport). Thus, in most situations, these activities do not fall into the category of 'ecolabelling'. In the case of pulp and paper, however, certification has extended beyond forest management standards to process-related issues such as plant pollution, the content of recycled or waste paper used, and the process used to manufacture the product (e.g., whether the process is chlorine-free). Other forest industries are likely to follow this trend
Impact on trade in timber species listed in the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)
The CITES uses a system of permits issued by designated authorities in member countries to regulate international trade in wildlife and wildlife products. Species, sub-species or populations may be listed in one of three appendices to the Convention: Appendix I, which essentially prohibits commercial trade; Appendix II, where trade requires an export permit issued by the Authority in the exporting country; or Appendix III, where commercial trade is subject to export permits for the country or countries listing the species, or a certificate of origin from other countries. Species presently contained in the CITES appendices are listed in Table 9. Only one included in Appendix II (Pericopsis elata) and one in Appendix III (Swietenia macrophylla) are traded internationally in significant volumes.
Although CITES has been in existence for 23 years, it has only recently become a high-profile and controversial issue for forestry. The main cause of the controversy has been attempts by developed countries, strongly supported by conservation groups, to have a number of commercially important species that are found in tropical developing countries placed in CITES appendices. This reached a peak in 1994 when The Netherlands and Germany proposed a number of tropical species for listing in Appendix II. It has continued with a proposal by Costa Rica, which resulted in big-leaf mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) being listed in Appendix III in November 1995. As a result of this latter move, all other countries in the Americas where mahogany exists now have to issue certificates of origin or certificates of artificial propagation for their exports of sawlogs, sawnwood and veneers.
Concern has been expressed by forestry and trade interests that CITES is being used to stop or limit trade. Difficult issues that have surfaced include: whether the species proposed for listing are really endangered or threatened and what procedures should be used to determine this; who should have the right to instigate the listing of a species and what the rights of the affected countries should be; and what changes are needed to the current CITES procedures used once a species is listed.
Accurate determination of whether a particular species is in fact under threat from trade, and therefore warrants listing, is often extremely difficult due to: a lack of accurate information on what is traded and what actually exists in the forests; the difficulty of identifying timber and timber products from individual species; and the complicated process through which trade in timber is conducted.
Table 9
Timber species included in the Appendices of CITES
Appendix I
Araucaria araucana (Argentina), Fitzroya cupressoides, Pilgerodendron uviferum, Dalbergia nigra, Abies guatemalensis, Podocarpus parlatorei, Balmea stormiae
Appendix II
Araucaria araucana (Chile), Caryocar costaricense, Oreomunnea pterocarpa, also referenced as Engelhardia pterocarpa, Pericopsis elata, Platymiscium pleiostachyum, Pterocarpus santalinus, Swietenia humilis, Swietenia mahogoni, Prunus africana, Taxus wallichiana, Aquilaria malaccensis, Guaiacum officinale, Guaiacum sanctum
Appendix III
Talauma hodgsonii, Swietenia macrophylla, Podocarpus neriifolius, Tetracentron sinense
Trade interests argue that the mere listing of a species - even in Appendix III - will have a negative impact on trade in that species. A more general, but highly relevant issue, on which there is little clear evidence either way, is whether the CITES system does in fact have any significant effect on the likely survival of a species.
As the result of the concerns and controversy generated, CITES established in 1994 a temporary Timber Working Group to look into the issues concerning timber and timber products. This Group met twice in 1995/6 and has made a number of proposals which will be considered by the CITES Conference of Parties when it next meets.
Recovery and recycling of waste paper, packaging waste and wood residues
Trade in waste paper worldwide has grown over the last decade and a half. Exports have increased by almost 9 percent per year since 1980 while world consumption of waste paper grew by about 5.3 percent annually over the same period. (See 'Changing processing technology and product development' on pages 30 to 33 for more information on recovery and recycling of waste paper.) Major importers of waste paper include P.R. China (specifically the Province of Taiwan), Republic of Korea, Mexico, The Netherlands, Italy, France and Japan, while the largest exporters are the USA (50 percent of world exports), Germany, The Netherlands, France, Hong Kong and Belgium.
In some cases, the policies promoting recycling of waste paper have had significant effects on trade. For example, in 1989 about 56 percent of all newsprint consumed in the United States was supplied by Canada, but by 1992 the figure had declined to 50 percent. This reduction has been influenced by US legislation (both federal and state) setting minimum levels for recycled fibre content in newsprint (typically 40 percent), together with programmes to stimulate market demand for recycled paper, and tax incentives for companies installing recycling technologies. Because Canada has a relatively small and dispersed population, consumption of newsprint is small relative to production, and hence the availability of waste paper is limited and collection is expensive. To meet the US waste paper content requirements, Canadian newsprint producers have had to import waste paper from the USA; more than 700 000 tonnes of recovered paper were imported from the USA in 1992.
As with recycling, regulations on recovery and recycling of packaging waste introduced in many western European countries have effects on the direction and extent of international trade in forest products by altering competitiveness and affecting import markets, especially from more distant suppliers (see pages 30 to 33).
Technical regulations and standards for products and processing methods
Technical regulations and standards related to the protection of animal and plant life from: pests and diseases; human health and safety; and maintenance of air, water and land quality, also result in considerable adjustment and re-adjustment in terms of trade, by changing relative costs and comparative advantages, and consequently trade patterns.
Measures include: the growing restrictions on trade in wood panels using formaldehyde glue, which poses human health risks; regulations which ban or control certain timber preservation processes and materials; and controls on processing methods. For example, there have been widespread moves to encourage or force companies to replace chlorine (which produces extremely toxic by-products) with other more environmentally-friendly bleaching agents in pulp and paper processing (see pages 30 to 33). Trade disputes have arisen over health requirements aimed at protecting the importing country from product-borne diseases. These disputes centre on differing views of the level of risk faced, and on the appropriate way to deal with the problems.
<section>6</section>
The global outlook for forest products
What does the future hold?
FAO global outlook study, 1996
Selected policy-related implications
What does the future hold?
One of the most pressing questions regarding the future outlook for the sector is whether there is enough wood to meet expected demand. To work towards a clearer view of the future, in 1996 FAO commissioned an updating of its global outlook projections on forest products to the year 2010.^1 The provisional results are released in this report with final authoritative figures to be issued in 1997.^2 Present indications are that, at least until 2010, there will be adequate wood globally to meet both industrial and fuelwood needs, although local level shortages will exist simultaneously with surpluses elsewhere.
^1 FAO Provisional outlook for global forest products consumption, production and trade. 1997. FAO Forestry Department, Policy and Planning Division, Rome, 1996. Prepared by Dali Zhang, Buongiorno, J., Rytkonen, A., Zhang, Y, and Zhu., S. Antti Rytkonen (Finland) was FAO consultant; the other team members are all affiliated with the Department of Forestry, University of Wisconsin at Madison, USA.
^2 FAO's views are provisional while awaiting finalization of the global outlook study on forest products and completion of its Global Fibre Supply Study (see Box 1).
The opinion of many recent analyses is that a real long-term increase in prices is unlikely or would, on the world scale, be far less than expected if supplies became critically short. There continues to be a need for prudent management of forest resources and an improvement in consumption behaviour. A much better future would be possible if efforts are strengthened to create new forests or to improve management of existing ones. Also, more wide-scale adoption of use of residues and recycling in forest industries, as well as less wasteful use of forest products, would be most beneficial. Addressing major fuelwood deficits will require particularly vigorous efforts.
Assuming continuation or improvement of free-trade regimes in the post-Uruguay Round era, trade should be able to match regional and national deficits for industrial products with supplies from elsewhere, even for most developing countries. These countries as a group have been playing an increasingly important role in global trade, and trends suggest they will play an even larger role in the future. However, many developing countries lack the capacity to participate adequately in trade and these will require national solutions to meet their needs. Even now, there are severe local shortages of supplies which, in the case of non-traded materials like fuelwood, cannot be corrected through the international marketplace. For these types of products, local actions will be essential to avert hardship.
A potentially tight, but not crisis, softwood supply situation is expected in North America until plantations in the southern USA and the Pacific Northwest mature. In the meantime, greater use of hardwoods can, if consumer tastes permit, ease the tight situation, and shortages in the USA could be met by imports from Canada; this would represent only a modest change in the substantial trade between the two countries. More efficient use of raw material through further technological and recycling improvements can also help, although further gains in yield will be less easy to capture than in the past. In Europe, forest growth will continue to exceed removals and further efficiency improvements are likely.
Major deficits in Asia will pose the greatest challenges. Asia's consumption of many industrial forest products already equals or exceeds that of Europe. The growth in demand is projected to outstrip supply potential for almost all products, leading to fast growth in imports. Some dislocation may occur, but trade with regions such as the former USSR, Oceania and the Americas, and increasing supplies from its own plantation resources are likely to be able to accommodate this. It is significant that Asia's consumption is dominated by countries pursuing free trade regimes, and whose reciprocal open-door trading relationships should permit international supplies to contain the situation at least until 2010.
In its revised projections, FAO has assumed that there will be no major policy changes regarding the relative importance and attention given to wood and non-wood functions in forest management. In recent years, calls for 'ecosystem management', which respects multiple purposes and functions of forests, have been supplemented or supplanted by calls for forest preservation which would exclude the harvesting of wood. Timber supplies from US public lands have already been reduced significantly; a recent study for North America (see Box 2) estimates that adoption of 'ecosystem management' has helped to reduce annual timber supplies from Federal lands in the USA from about 50 million m^3 to less than 20 million m^3.
The issue is whether the trend towards preservation-oriented forestry will continue and whether it will transform the policies of key producer countries, particularly in North America, Europe and Asia, causing them to restrict harvesting over large areas of production forests. This may also apply to South American forest resources; an additional potential brake on world flow of forest products would occur if large areas of natural forests in South America, the subject of much international scrutiny, become inaccessible (for policy reasons) as a source of industrial forest products. Recognizing society's growing preoccupation with environmental matters, the recent UN-ECE/FAO fifth European Timber Trends Study considered, among others, the possibility of a 'deep green' future. This was considered unlikely in Europe but, if it occurred elsewhere, a major reassessment of the outlook situation would be required. The severe restrictions on availability of wood that could ensue
would cause significant real price increases for forest products and thus encourage displacement of wood products in the marketplace by substitute materials.
Adoption of deep-green or similar policies is only one factor that could affect availability of forest resources for industrial utilization. Another important factor is economic accessibility. Recently, internal transport tariff charges and railway developments in the Russia have made transport of timber out of Siberia uneconomic. Many large forest areas in both Africa and South America are also physically and economically inaccessible, a situation which may not change significantly in the decade and a half ahead. On the other hand, the availability of wood from plantations is increasing rapidly in Oceania (particularly New Zealand) and South America and will eventually do so in the southern USA.
In the pulp and paper field, any shortages or restrictions to access of forest raw materials might tend to encourage greater use of non-wood fibre. In the Asia region, industry based on non-wood fibres is already significant and can expand beyond China and India, which now account for practically all the existing capacity. The transport economics of using non-forest fibres, such as straw, militate against large mills. A consequence would therefore be perpetuation of small pulpmills unable to afford pollution abatement technology. The already well-known pollution problems of this sector, caused by small-scale operation, would then worsen. Policies need to recognize and respond to the fact that, in attempting to preserve forests for environmental reasons, the pulp and paper industry may be driven to greater reliance on a polluting non-wood based alternative which could damage the environment even more. However, the recent closure of many small paper mills in China appears to
indicate a willingness to import rather than to incur environmental costs.^3
^3 AP news Beijing, 23 October 1996 reported that 'nearly 50 000 small paper mills and other factories that caused heavy pollution' had been closed.
The long-standing concentration of consumption and production of forest products (both in regional terms and with respect to countries within a region) is expected to continue. Concentration of supply of forest products demands a closer look. World industrial forest products economy is geographically-dominated mainly by three areas - North America, Asia and Europe - which already account for around 80 percent of world production of roundwood and sawnwood, and more than 90 percent of panel products, and pulp and paper commodities. The Pacific Basin countries in Asia, the Americas and Oceania, account for some two-thirds of world consumption of forest products, with Asia increasingly approaching North America in total demand, and South America's demand for industrial roundwood being about one-half of that of Asia. This situation places the forest resources of Pacific basin countries, including those of the Russian Far East and South America, at the front line of the world
supply/demand equation in the foreseeable future North America, Asia and Europe, the three leading geographical regions in terms of wood and fibre supply, together with the former USSR, include the whole of the northern temperate and boreal forests. With continuing industrial utilization and settlement, the original vegetation in accessible locations has been reduced dramatically, although large inaccessible expanses of Siberian and north Canadian boreal forests remain untouched. Public and interest-group pressure to conserve what remains by including more of it in protected area systems and/or to change management practices has increased.
This raises a number of unanswered questions. What will be the extent and impact of such pressure? Will it result in restrictions on industrial use of temperate and boreal forests over extensive areas? If so, would tropical forests become a more important source of supply? There have already been claims by some environmental groups that consumers in industrialized countries are 'exporting deforestation' to developing countries by consuming tropical forest products. Shall we see this kind of campaign escalate? There are no indications that this will happen on a major scale but local situations can affect supply/demand balance in specific countries.
Box 1
Recent global outlook studies
A number of studies have been carried out in recent years, some of which were the result of private sector concern over the projections issued by FAO in 1991 and 1995. The studies provide a variety of views on adequacy of supply relative to expected demand. For example, in 1995, Jaakko Pöyry Consulting published assessments of the global fibre situation and concluded that there is ample wood fibre available on a global basis.^4 In the same year, Sedjo and Lyon, using an equilibrium approach, predicted that wood supply and demand would increase at nearly comparable rates but foresaw the composition of industrial roundwood production shifting towards smaller logs due to greater importance of paper/paperboard and composite panels in future forest products consumption.^5
Apsey and Reed, in 1995, while recognizing that actual consumption must necessarily equal production, projected that demand would exceed availability on a global scale by a 'hypothetical gap' of some 400 million m^3 in 2010, and nearly 600 million m^3 in 2020, implying price increases.^6 A year later, Nilsson had, as his 'mainstream' result, a situation whereby potential demand would exceed supply by nearly 800 million m^3 in 2010 and nearly 900 million m^3 in 2020.^7 Solberg et al., however, concluded that the world's forests are capable of providing industrial wood consistent with consumption projections of the future.^8
Most projections of future adequacy of supply fall within the same orders of magnitude, but a few project major supply gaps. Consensus appears to be tending towards a 'non-crisis' future situation. However, no study foresees plentiful supplies. A fuller analysis of the resources situation and its prospects will be available upon completion in late 1997 of the FAO Global Fibre Supply Study^9, which was initiated following industry requests
^4 Jaakko Pöyry. 1995. Solid wood products competitiveness study document. American Forest and Paper Association. Washington D.C.; and The Jaakko Poyry Group. 1995, Global fibre resources situation: the challenges for the 19 90s. Tarrytown, New York
^5 Sedjo, Roger A. and Lyon, Kenneth S. 1995. A global pulpwood supply model and some implications. Final report to IIED; Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C. (Earlier, also published: Sedjo, Roger A. and Lyon, Kenneth S. 1990. The long-term adequacy of world timber supply In Resources for the Future. Washington D.C.
^6 Apsey, Mike; Reed, Les. 1995. World timber resources outlook, current perceptions: a discussion paper. Second edition. Council of Forest Industries. Vancouver, BC, Canada;
^7 Nilsson, Sten 1996. Do we have enough forests? International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. Laxenburg, Austria.
^8 Solberg, B. et al. 1996. Long-term trends and prospects in world supply and demand for wood and implications for sustainable forest management: a synthesis. European Forest Institute and Norwegian Forest Research Institute. Joensuu, Finland. A related detailed paper is: Brooks, D. et al. (in press). Long-term trends and prospects in world supply and demand for wood. In Solberg, B. (ed.), Long-term trends and prospects in world supply and demand for wood and implications for sustainable management, Research Report 6, European Forest Institute. Joensuu, Finland.
^9 This study Is considering fibre supplies from all forest types and will construct three supply scenarios. Raw material for solid wood products as well as pulp and paper industries will be included; non-wood pulp and recovered waste paper will also be analysed.
FAO global outlook study, 1996
This section presents in more detail the results presented above of FAO's global projections to 2010 of forest products. The recent surge in outlook activity (see Box 1), of which these revised FAO projections are part, reflects the unprecedented interest in the fate of forests which has accompanied the UNCED process. FAO issued global projections in 1991 and 1995.^10 Soon afterwards, it commissioned an evaluation of the forecasts, which revealed some methodological weaknesses and a tendency for results to be too high, partly due to over-optimistic assumptions of economic growth. A substantive updating of the projections system and a second look at the assumptions resulted in the set of provisional projections released for the first time in this report. The projections have the horizon year of 2010 and three scenarios, of which only the results of the 'most probable' scenario for the main commodities at regional level are given in this chapter. FAO plans a review process for
the outlook study culminating in an international expert meeting. Official figures will be published in 1997.
^10 Forestry statistics today for tomorrow, 1945-93; 2010. FAO. Rome, 1995. The 1995 release was an update of the earlier Forest products - world outlook projections (projections of consumption and production of wood-based products to 2010). FAO Forestry Paper No. 84, Rome 1991.
Key assumptions
The FAO study analyses the possibilities for equilibrium between demand and supply, taking into account all principal driving forces and constraints.^11 At global level, consumption and production are always the same, apart from small annual variations attributable to changes in commodity stock between production and the market.
^11 The full document should be consulted as a basis for understanding the results.
The study took particular account of population, income, prices and the availability of forest resources. Technological change was seen as an important consideration in view of evidence that it plays a key role in responding to changing supply situations. Economic growth was represented by GDP in constant 1987 US dollars with demand equations developed according to income groups. The income elasticities of demand were broadly matched to the income categories of countries. Specific constraints to the timber supply potential of each country were introduced, with the projected demand for wood as a raw material not being allowed to exceed the wood growing potential. In the absence of solid data for many countries, supply limits had to rely upon informed judgement. In total, the growth rate of world roundwood supply potential for the most probable scenario was calculated as 1.12 percent annually.
Other assumptions governing the projections were as follows: (a) capacity changes were based on past production, estimated new investments and the profitability of production; (b) technology was defined by input-output coefficients - held constant at the 1994 level, except for paper and paperboard; (c) fibre input mix assumptions were made, with substantial change expected by 2010; (d) inertia constraints to limit trade change in a given year (within 5-15 percent for the 'most probable' scenario) were introduced, given that adjustment of trade flows takes time; and (e) historical price trends suggested that the real price of industrial roundwood could peak initially but return to around the 1994 level in 2010 as price elasticities were observed to be generally low.
The projections
Indicative consumption levels for the 'most probable' scenario are presented in Table 1. Table 2 summarizes expected trade developments. The data are given at regional level for the major commodity groups. The complete set of data from the outlook study, which will be published in 1997, includes projections for sub-commodities, and for production and trade at country level. The Figures on pages 85 to 90 illustrate selected production and trade trends and prospects; for net trade the 'most probable' scenario is shown alongside two alternatives.
Table 1 - FAO 1996 provisional regional-level projections for consumption to year 2000 and 2010
Table 2 - FAO 1996 provisional projections of trade to year 2000 and 2010
Like all projections, these provisional projections and the data used should be considered in context and with caution, particularly with regard to: (a) the weakness of information on fuelwood, for which formal statistics are rarely collected; and (b) the severe disruption since 1990 of all historical trends for the former USSR, formerly a major producer and consumer of industrial forest products. The speed of its recovery is difficult to predict, as change will depend on policy developments well outside the control of either forestry or manufacturing sectors.
Significant growth can be expected for all commodities except sawnwood which is likely to maintain its slow growth. Exceptionally fast growth (near or more than 7 percent annually) has been recorded in the past for panel products, paper and paperboard, for pulp and for recovered paper for recycling. The future is likely to hold less rapid but still high growth rates of more than 4 percent for these products.
The greater use of recovered paper for recycling continues a trend which has already contributed to savings on primary raw materials. The FAO study did not analyse future trends in use of forest residues and mill wastes which can also significantly reduce demand for forest harvest. As more fibre is recycled or more residues used in manufacturing, fewer trees need to be cut for a given level of production. Europe is closer to the limits of recycling than North America and the other regions. The trade in waste paper will remain dominated by cross-Pacific exports from North America to Asia.
North America, Asia and Europe will consolidate their dominance in forest products. Within this group, Asia will increase its share of consumption and production. A number of figures in this chapter illustrate this situation for specific commodities. Demand is driven largely by income in all three regions (i.e., by the existing high incomes in North America and Europe, and the rapidly-growing incomes in the case of Asia) but, in Asia, it is also driven by rapid population increases. In a number of cases, Asia has already surpassed Europe (for industrial roundwood, fibre, paper and board) and the margin will grow with Asia's greater consumption beginning to approach or exceed North America's significance for some products. Furthermore:
· North America's broad ability to meet all its own forest products needs will remain unchanged. The surpluses of this region, although not large relative to internal consumption, will remain important for helping to fill the deficits of other regions, notably Asia.
· Asia, despite the world's fastest increases in local production, will see its trade deficits grow even further. Even for veneers and plywood where it still enjoys a surplus, Asia is expected to turn to shortfall soon after the turn of the century. Also pulp and paper, where Asian investments regularly make headlines in the industry press, the shortfalls will continue to worsen.
· In terms of demand/supply balance, Europe will continue to occupy the middle ground it already holds relative to Asia and North America. It promises no exceptional developments. Even the expected maintenance of its significant surplus of particle board and fibreboard will continue to be counterbalanced by plywood and veneer imports.
· Europe and North America, as well as Japan and China, the leading consumers in Asia, will continue to account for considerably more than three-quarters of industrial forest products. As these regions and countries are wholly or largely in the temperate and/or boreal zones, these forest ecosystems will continue to bear the main pressure for production.
· Actual production of industrial roundwood in South America is already quite significant, approaching one-tenth of the world total. Africa has very limited production at present. Both regions, however, have potential to increase supply of forest products from natural forests and, in the case of South America, from plantations. The principal bottlenecks relate to accessibility: first, due to infrastructural inadequacies in the main closed forest blocks; and second, due to public opinion barriers related to environmental concerns, especially for the rainforests of the Amazon and Zaire basins.
· Africa's largely rural population with low income creates special needs for fuelwood and non-wood forest products; African countries are faced with the need to support efforts to sustain supplies of these products even though they may not generate revenue. Competition for land with agriculture is an important factor in future resource provision strategies.
· Fuelwood consumption will remain dispersed throughout the developing world (with Asia leading) but the centre of gravity for industrial forest products will remain centred on the Pacific Basin. In many ways, North America and Asia will still serve as mirror images of each other - the former as supplier, the latter as a source of demand. The share of world consumption in 2010 for these two regions is expected to range from 56 percent for fuelwood to around 70 percent for all pulp and paper commodities. Major trade flows and supply alliances can be expected between Asia, Oceania and both Americas in the Pacific Rim and its Basin. Among these, a factor currently beyond assessment with any certainty, is the potentially large role that the Russian Far East and Siberian resource can play. South America is another area of promise whose possibilities have barely made themselves felt so far.
Table 3
World fuelwood and industrial roundwood consumption^12
^12 Brooks et al., op. cit., (footnote 8, page 76) Tables 2.1, 2.2, 3.3; FAO, op, cit, (footnote 1, page 74)
source
projected world consumption (10^9 m^3)
quantity
FAO's 1996 projection = 100
quantity
FAO's 1996 projection = 100
fuelwood
FAO 1995
FAO 1996 provisional
Apsey & Reed
n.a.
n.a.
World Bank
Zuidema (1994)
n.a.
n.a.
Nilsson(1996)
Brooks et al. constant 1990 per caput
Brooks et al. lower GDP growth
Brooks et al. higher GDP growth
industrial roundwood
FAO 1995
FAO 1996 provisional
Apsey & Reed
Sedjo & Lyon (1995)
Nilsson (1996)
Simons (1994)
n.a.
n.a.
Jaako Poyry (1995)
Brooks et al. constant 1990 per caput
Brooks et al. lower GDP scenario 1 - higher price increase
Brooks et al. higher GDP scenario 2 - zero price increase
Box 2
The regional outlook in North America
The second North American Timber Trends Study (NATTS)^13, reported by Boulter and Darr, assessed timber demand and supply to 2015 for Canada and the USA which together account for about one-third of world industrial roundwood production. The study reports that during the last three decades North American timber harvests have increased quite dramatically but that North America will remain relatively self-contained for timber supply in future.
^13 UN-ECE/FAO. 1996. North American Timber Trends Study. ECE/TIM/SP/9. Geneva.
A key observation is that the region will, for the first time, face increasing timber demands without having a reserve of high-quality coniferous roundwood. This could cause a rise in prices for wood, and potential for greater substitution by non-wood materials.
Future prospects for US timber supplies are affected largely by non-market forces; adoption of 'ecosystem management' and, in part, the application of the Endangered Species Act, have reduced annual timber from Federal lands from about 50 million m^3 to less than 20 million m^3. On private lands large diameter softwood timber will be nearly exhausted after year 2000 but by 2010 plantations will reach merchantable size in the South and the Pacific Northwest and will ensure adequate supplies in the long term. In the interim, the USA may need to resort to more intensive use of hardwoods and to imports. Consumer resistance by a market used to softwoods could be one problem; another would be how to adapt industrial infrastructure to a new raw material for what could be only a limited period before plantations offer adequate softwoods again.
In Canada, future harvest trends suggest decline because: (a) 60 percent of the allowable annual harvest for industrial roundwood is hardwoods while most demand is for softwood; and (b) there is public pressure for more non-timber and environmental values especially since forests are largely old-growth natural forests. Canada still has, however, substantial stocks of mature and over-mature timber which can be harvested if the market will accept a significant switch from softwood.
Technological improvements have so far minimized the increase in requirements for forest raw materials. US logging residues have decreased from 37 percent in 1962 to less than 10 percent of softwood growing stock volume at the logging site. In Canada, it takes only 1.98 m^3 of roundwood to produce 1 m^3 of lumber and plywood, down from 2.67 m^3 in 1970. Significant advances in pulp and paper have occurred: in Canadian pulp manufacture, consumption of wood residues already surpassed that of roundwood in 1983; recycling of paper and paperboard has reached about 33 percent in the USA from 25 percent in 1988, and 12 percent of Canadian levels; and members of the American Forest and Paper Association have already met the 1995 goal of 40 percent recovery of paper and paperboard. There is only limited further opportunity for additional residue 'harvest' that could have a significant effect on the supply situation.
Trade with other regions will continue. However, exports of coniferous logs to Pacific Rim markets, which reached over 20 million m^3 in 1989, later declined to 10.9 million m^3 in 1993. There is now a ban on exports of softwood logs from public lands in the western USA, and Canadian Provinces also have various restrictions. This trend may persist. There are no restrictions on exports of logs from private US lands and all current exports from the Western States of the US are from second-growth forests on private lands.
Box 3
The regional outlook in Europe
The outcome of the fifth European Timber Trends Study (ETTSV) has just been published with a year 2020 horizon.^14 Two base scenarios were constructed, as well as a number of alternative scenarios to explore areas of uncertainty or policy choice: for BASE LOW, GDP growth till 2005 would average about 1.8 percent per annum and for BASE HIGH, 2.8 percent per annum. After 2005, GDP would grow at about 1.5 percent per annum for both scenarios.
^14 European Timber Trends and Prospects: into the 21st Century. Doc: ECE/TIM/SP/11 Geneva Timber and Forest Study Papers. UN-ECE/FAO 1996.
Roundwood harvest from European forests is expected to rise slowly. The area of Europe's 'exploitable' forest, of which the transition countries account for just over one-quarter (26 percent), is expected to grow by just under 5 million ha (about 3 percent) between 1990 and 2020 mostly with no increase in the Nordic countries, despite the availability of large areas of former agricultural land.
ETTSV expects the demand for forest products to continue to grow, with further substitution possible among the various forest products. Long-term stability in prices was considered likely, although moderate price rises cannot be excluded. To help meet expanding needs, Europe's harvest is expected to increase by 23 percent to around 480 million m^3 a year in 2020, with an estimated maximum in strong market conditions of 530 million m^3. European forest industries production is projected to grow by 20-30 percent for sawnwood, 50-60 percent for wood based panels, 20-30 percent for pulp and around 65-85 percent for paper from the 1990 level. Projected removals in 2020 will be only 70 percent of the net annual increment and the share of European removals in the region's wood and fibre supply is expected to decline from two-thirds in 1990 to just over half in 2020.
In the BASE LOW scenario, Europe's net imports of forest products (excluding roundwood) from other regions are expected to increase, particularly with regard to paper, by about 55 million m^3 EQ (equivalent wood in the rough) and in the BASE HIGH about 80 million m^3 EQ. In addition, imports of roundwood may increase by about 25 million m^3 but this might be met from additional European supply, depending on delivered wood cost. While the share of net imports in fibre supply will rise, that of industrial wood residues will stay constant, and that of waste paper will rise steeply, to nearly one-fifth. The European transition countries are forecast to change from net exporters to net importers, because of stronger domestic demand and generally more prudent forest management policies.
The reason for continued import of forest products from other regions, while Europe's own forests are under-harvested, rests strongly on the relative competitiveness of different wood sources; European producers are frequently at a disadvantage, because of high costs, fragmented ownership and other factors compared with other regions.
About 49 percent of European consumption of paper and paperboard will be recovered for re-use in 2020 (i.e., excluding waste paper used as a source of energy) compared to 37 percent in 1990; in the transition countries the recovery rate is expected to rise from 31 percent to 36 percent. There will also be greater use of residues. About 75 percent of total residues produced will be used as raw material in 2010 (61 percent in 1990); much of the rest will be used for energy.
Comparison with other projections
Since the release of the 1991 projections, FAO has successively reduced its estimates of global consumption except for 'other fibre pulp' (which has risen in the latest projections) on the basis of lowered assumed rates of economic growth that can be sustained for long periods.
Comparisons are possible with those studies which have similar commodity or regional coverage. Table 3 shows different projections, at world level, for fuelwood and industrial roundwood consumption from the studies mentioned in Box 1. Some differences in scope or definitions should be considered in making comparisons. For example, Nilsson seems to have dealt with 'basic requirements', which could be substantially different from the actual consumption projected by FAO. Zuidema's 1994 forecasts are of fuelwood 'availability' which is not necessarily the same as consumption.
At regional level, the salient points from the results of the North American Timber Trends Study (see Box 2) and the fifth European Timber Trends Study (see Box 3) are summarized. FAO is undertaking an in-depth outlook study for Asia (to be followed by other regions) which should shed more light on key potentials, opportunities and issues in all regions, including considerations relevant to the global situation.
Selected policy-related implications
Several elements of the projected developments have policy implications, which have been discussed briefly at the beginning of this section. The following elements can be highlighted:
· While the projections suggest a situation of no-crisis in terms of meeting demand, ensuring adequate supplies will require commitment to continued establishment of additional forest resources, and to extension of management to the large proportion of existing forests which are not managed at all.
· The fact that the global picture may suggest no need for major concern should not divert attention from the urgent needs of many specific developing countries and locations where fuelwood is scarce. This commodity is not internationally tradable and countries lack adequate financial resources for improving the situation. Thus countries cannot solve their scarcity in any way except by establishing their own new resources and by containing demand.
· In the developed region of North America, potentially tight supplies of softwood offer an opportunity to broaden utilization to hardwoods. However, given that this is a temporary situation, adjustment of the industrial infrastructure to a different raw material may not prove viable. There may be opportunities for the export of hardwoods and the compensatory import of softwoods until enough North American softwood plantations mature.
· The possibility of wood supplies being adequate to meet future needs presupposes maintenance of balanced forest policies which allow continued industrial exploitation while environmental and recreation needs are also met. It will require moderation and self-restraint by society and its institutions at all levels to secure such balance. The potential of polarized positions to disrupt supplies exists in all regions whether industrialized or developing. For the tropics, campaigns in the consumer world that seek to bar improved access to major areas of forests are already in evidence; in industrialized countries, similar pressures could emerge with regard to remaining natural forests in North America and Siberia.
· North America, temperate Asia and Europe will remain dominant in the world forest products economy. Therefore, at a world level, most industrial utilization pressure will continue to be exerted largely on temperate/boreal forests. Given the increasing public concern at further erosion of biological diversity in these forests, action will be needed to ensure adoption of management practices that will continue to permit adequate timber yields while satisfying growing environmental objectives.
· The world forest products economy will be heavily dominated by two blocks on either side of the Pacific, i.e., North America and Asia. This development will, by placing all the countries that border on the Pacific on the front line of international trade, make it particularly important that open trading regimes are maintained among them to avoid dislocation of markets which could disturb forest industry patterns everywhere.
· The 'wild card' in all this is that of possible future developments in the former USSR. Russia in particular holds some of the world's largest potentially usable forests. It also spans the East and the West, being able, therefore, to influence events in both the Pacific Basin and in Western Europe. In broad terms, it is now supplying the West, alongside central European and Baltic countries, from west of the Urals. To the east of the Urals, transport and other problems have created a barrier with most of Siberia, but the Russian far east is accessible and is on the doorstep of both China and Japan - by far the largest consumer countries in Asia. Important questions are: how fast will the situation east of the Urals improve; will Russia export logs or increase industrial processing; if processing is carried out in a little-populated area such as Siberia, what will happen to the residues? These are some of the currently unanswerable questions regarding one of the largest
potential supply sources.
· Developments in Japan could also have a decisive influence; Japan is one of the world's most highly-forested countries but has so far not harvested to any extent. Its forests are generally of small size and on difficult terrain. A policy and institutional change reflected in appropriate incentives could make industrial processing of this material possible but seems unlikely. However, if it did occur, it would affect the major trade flows since Japan is a leading importer from many countries.
Finally, policy must be concerned with sustainability: the findings of the outlook study suggest the need to contain demand within supply potentials. Improvement in management is clearly needed. Deforestation remains high in some regions, pollution damage in others. Erosion of biological richness may not be fully reversible in many boreal and temperate forests, but the situation can be improved. The relative importance given to wood supply or to other functions of forests will, however, need to reflect public, choice and societal values, and may therefore differ between and within regions or even countries. The outlook study makes reference to this but it is for policy-makers and society at large to make the necessary commitments to action, bearing in mind that preservation alone is no solution and that resource creation, while important, is no solution if not accompanied by responsible consumer behaviour. Policies concerned with consumer behaviour will, however, need to
recognize that consumption levels are sometimes governed by necessity and cannot be easily modified.
Figures 1 to 11 on the following pages present a graphical summary of selected developments and prospects in production and international net trade.
Figure 1 - Total roundwood production (fuelwood and industrial roundwood combined) by region, 1990-2010
Figure 2 - Production of industrial roundwood by region, 1990-2010
Figure 3 - Net trade in industrial roundwood in 201 0^15
^15 Scenario 2 is the most probable (see text). Scenarios 1 and 3 differ in raw material and demand assumptions
Figure 4 - Production of sawnwood and sleepers by region, 1990-2010
Figure 5 - Net trade in sawnwood and sleepers in 201 0^16
^16 Scenario 2 is the most probable (see text). Scenarios 1 and 3 differ in raw material and demand assumptions
Figure 6 - Production of wood-based panels by region, 1990-2010
Figure 7 - Net trade in wood-based panels in 201 0^17
^17 Scenario 2 is the most probable (see text). Scenarios 1 and 3 differ in raw material and demand assumptions
Figure 8 - Production of paper and paperboard by region, 1990-2010
Figure 9 - Net trade in paper and paperboard in 201 0^18
^18 Scenario 2 is the most probable (see text). Scenarios 1 and 3 differ in raw material and demand assumptions
Figure 10 - Production of total fibre furnish by region, 1990-2010
Figure 11 - Production of waste paper, 1965-2010
<section>7</section>
National policies in context - issues and trends
A number of recent developments both within and outside the forestry sector have influenced forest policies and their regulatory framework. The influences and the responses are highlighted below.
At both national and international levels the economic environment is marked by increased economic liberalization and reliance on markets. Markets are increasingly integrated, and sometimes strongly fluctuating. At the same time, there is a general tendency towards austerity and a smaller public sector.
Amongst other things the forestry sector has been strongly influenced by economic restructuring. In most developing countries and countries in transition, the majority of forest land is state property, and public forest services/institutions traditionally have been responsible for the management of this land. Public forest enterprises have also been organized in many developing countries, both under free market as well as central planning systems, to exploit the forest resources and, in some cases, also to control and supervise the marketing of forest products. Under Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs), the budgets and staffing levels of national forest services have been reduced, in many places drastically, and the roles of the services have changed. There has been a strong move to privatize the state-owned forest industries. While many countries are being affected by these developments, certainly among the most dramatic recent changes in the political economy have
taken place in the countries in transition (see Box 1).
A more competitive environment and the need for increased efficiency have meant that the role of the public sector is shifting from one of implementation to one of facilitation and coordination. Although the public sector remains dominant, the private sector, non-governmental organizations, the scientific community and other entities are becoming increasingly important. Forest policies are attempting to reflect this economic and institutional reality and are adapting to a new balance between the roles of government institutions and civil society, and of central level versus regional and local level institutions.
There is increasing momentum for the decentralization of government structures and functions in most countries, regardless of their political-economic model. Decentralization is a complex process having structural, management and financial aspects and taking several forms; deconcentration, or the transfer of control from central agencies to local offices; devolution, or transfer of control to local governments; delegation of authority to local governments which act as agents of the central government; and transfer of responsibility, for example to non-governmental organizations or local associations. This process brings decision making and policy-making functions closer to the field level and thus can be more responsive to local situations and needs. Various approaches are being tried for ensuring that benefits from forestry activities accrue at least partially to the local level, and for encouraging communities to become increasingly more involved in forest management (see
'Trends in forest management and utilization' in Part 1). Although the process is far from complete in many cases, and there have been constraints in implementation, decentralization appears to be improving the chances for sustainable forest management.
The expansion of protected areas, decentralized management, and privatization of forest resources, are likely to result in increasing conflicts between the various interest groups over access and utilization of the resources. Changes in resource policy and implementation are also often sources of conflicts between the various interest groups, especially when they result in the transfer of rights and benefits from one group to another. This is especially evident as flexible, traditional access among various users is transformed into formal legal boundaries that do not recognize the needs of seasonal users (e.g., pastoralists) and those heavily dependent on the forest (e.g., the poor, women and minorities). Conflict management processes are being increasingly developed and utilized.
Since UNCED, countries have attempted to make forestry policy more consistent with the concepts of sustainability and environmental soundness. Forest policy has incorporated the concept of 'sustainability' for many years, but it was largely oriented to sustainable wood production. Many nations have been revising their policies to reflect a wider definition of sustainability which addresses both cultural and biological diversity in planning and changing views on 'trees and forests for whom and for what'. Since the late 1970s, community forestry has been developing various tools and methods for involving communities more actively in planning and managing forest resources (see Box 2).
Forestry policy development will also have to take into consideration important national and regional demographic trends. Population growth will continue to increase demand for forest products and result in increased competition for use of forest land for other purposes. In developing countries, numeric increases may, however, be overshadowed by demographic changes, including continuing rapid urbanization, and occupational transition from rural jobs to the informal sector. Migration has already led in some places to the 'feminization of the countryside' where migration of men to urban and peri-urban areas and their integration into the informal sector have meant that a majority of rural households are now being led by women. As a result, women are playing a greater role in local natural resource decision making.
Box 1
Institutional changes in forestry in countries in transition
Fundamental changes are occurring in the forestry sector of most countries in Eastern Europe, several countries in Asia, and a few others elsewhere as they move from a centralized to a market economy. Measures being taken to improve national economic performance include: reducing the role of the state in productive activities and provision of services; allowing competition between producers to improve efficiency; and stimulating investment at all levels and from all sources on the basis of an assured and fair share of the benefits in return.
Two sets of problems are being confronted by the forestry sector in these countries, i.e., those related to the macro-economic situation and those directly connected to the sector itself. Among those of the former category are the low competitiveness of the processing industry, shortage of managerial and economic skills, and weak marketing mechanisms. The most important factors in the latter are readaptation of forestry policies and legal instruments, changes in the tenure of, and access to, forest resources, and the reorganization of forestry financing and institutional systems.
In the Asian countries, important issues include: the adaptation of forestry policies and legislation; changes in tenure of forest resources; reform of state-owned forest enterprises; the use of incentives for improving forest management; criteria for attracting and assessing forestry investments; extent of value-added processing to be developed in the host country; improved competitiveness; pricing and valuation of forests and forest products; and development of market information systems and marketing support structures.
In most countries in Eastern Europe, the main concerns include: restitution of state forest land to former owners (or their heirs) and privatization of forest operations and of state-owned enterprises; reorganization of forest management systems; reorientation of forestry policies and their harmonization with national development goals and other sector policies; forestry financing; the development of an entrepreneurial culture; and the establishment of appropriate pricing, taxation and marketing systems.
There is clearly no single prescription for countries in transition wishing to make adjustments to the forestry sector. Caution is needed, and it is necessary to proceed gradually while assessing impacts and monitoring carefully the effectiveness and sustainability of reforms.
Box 2
Community forestry: what it is
Community forestry is a term used to describe the participation of communities in the management and use of forest resources. Related approaches include social forestry, farm forestry and joint forest management. In addition, agroforestry development efforts often use principles upon which community forestry is based. While communities have always been involved in the management of their resources, the development of community forestry as an institutionalized forest management approach is relatively recent. Community forestry programmes build upon both local people's and technicians' knowledge and use participatory approaches to help enable local people and their organizational structures address their own goals and concerns through improved access, use and management of trees and forest resources. Community forestry is not a separate type of forestry but is an element in forestry planning and management.
Many countries are attempting to integrate ecosystem management and more holistic management objectives into their forestry policies. This is a substantial challenge as it is often difficult to adequately address the issues of sustainability and diversity by simply 'adding' appropriate language to existing policies.
Over the last few years, several governments have responded to the increasing importance given to environmental issues by creating new institutions, such as ministries of environment, and by adding an environmental component to their development plans and programmes. These new approaches have affected the functioning and structure of forestry institutions. In some cases, responsibility for all forest policy has been transferred to a new environment ministry. Forestry and wildlife management have been separated institutionally in many countries for several years, but there is now a tendency to institutionally separate forest protection and forest production functions, one often being transferred to the new ministries of environment and the other remaining within the traditional forestry services in agriculture and rural development ministries. Another trend is to entrust the management of state-owned forests to autonomous agencies who are expected to be financially
self-sufficient.
The 'information revolution' is affecting forest policy development in a number of ways although its impact has been limited to some geographical areas. In some cases, information, which was once managed as a resource to which access was limited or controlled, is being shared in a more open environment, thus allowing more people and organizations to follow forestry debates closely, to voice their concerns, and to influence the outcome.
Finally, the importance of cross-sectoral linkages between forestry and other sectors, and their implications for forest policy development, is widely recognized; many countries are grappling with the question of just how to put such integrated planning into practice. The external policy decisions that affect forestry are too numerous to be mentioned here but include those relating to: economic growth; alleviation of poverty; agriculture; energy; environment; and land ownership and land use. Success in integrated planning, however, is still more a goal than a reality in most countries, developed and developing alike.
<section>8</section>
Trends in national forest planning
Changing perspectives in forest planning
Forest sector planning in developing countries
Forest sector planning in industrialized countries
Improved forestry planning directions: the concept of national forests programmes (NFPS)
Changing perspectives in forest planning
Until recently, the primary emphasis in forestry sector planning was on assessing forest timber resources and formulating strategies, primarily in relation to forest industries. Its scope has expanded more recently to address causes of deforestation, needs for reforestation, contributions of forests to food security and rural energy, and building the capacity of national forestry administrations. The approach of forestry sector planning has been further modified by recent calls for 'sustainable development' and 'sustainable forestry'. Forest planning efforts will focus increasingly on means to translate evolving ideas on sustainability into operational guidelines.
The evolution of forestry perspectives from a century ago until today is illustrated in Table 1.
It is becoming widely accepted that planning needs to be redefined in most countries to make it a more iterative process rather than a blueprint of activities, and to involve participation, consultation and dialogue between various concerned groups. Sound planning is based on a good knowledge of actual land uses and of various options for future land use. Such information is currently far from satisfactory in many developing countries. Better knowledge is needed on land use at national and sub-national level, and on priorities and conditions which affect resource management at the local level and which will influence participatory planning.
Table 1
Historical perspective on forests and forestry in developed countries^1
^1 Adapted from Laarman, J.G. 1995. Forestry planning: new challenges after two centuries. In Proceedings of a meeting held 18-22 September 1994, Anchorage, Alaska. Minister of Supply and Services, Ottawa, Canada.
19th century viewpoint
viewpoint today
forest outputs are timber, game, fuelwood, and water
outputs are many, including various goods but also complex ecosystem services and social values
the natural world can be managed and controlled
the effects of human interventions on the natural world can be difficult to predict and control
forest-dependent communities are local villages and farms
local, national, regional and global 'communities' demand goods and services from forests
management aims to produce commodities through sustained harvest yields
management treats the forest as a complex ecosystem and seeks to maintain its productive, protective and social values, and to preserve future options
the forester is an expert and a decision-maker.
the 'public' is the decision-maker through democratic processes; the forester is a technical advisor and facilitator
Forest sector planning in developing countries
Forestry has been addressed in several sectoral planning frameworks, many of which have international backing (see Box 1).
These planning exercises have much in common, e.g., each framework:
· emphasizes the integration of sectoral planning with overall national-level planning;
· aims to strengthen planning and policy-making systems and institutional arrangements;
· promotes multisectoral and multidisciplinary planning to improve the formulation of coordinated programmes and projects;
· aims to use planning as a means to build national consensus on broad goals and programme directions; and
· stresses the need for public participation and the participation of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the planning process.
Box 1
Planning frameworks for forestry and related sectors
Master Plans for Forestry Development (MPFD)
MPFDs date from the Finnish experience in the 19 60s followed by similar planning in Chile, Nigeria, and other countries in the 19 70s. The early forestry master plans were heavily industrial in outlook. Recent master planning in Asian countries is sponsored by the Asian Development Bank together with Finnish bilateral assistance (Finnish International Development Agency - FINNIDA), and has attempted to become broader in scope and philosophy. Since 1992, MPFD has followed the TFAP (see below) basic principles and operational guidelines.
Tropical Forests Action Programme (TFAP)
Launched in 1985, the initial goal of TFAP was to curb tropical deforestation while meeting local and national needs with respect to forests. Since revision in 1991, TFAP has become essentially a framework for strategic planning in forestry through the launching of National Forestry Action Programmes (NFAPs), and an entry point for raising awareness of issues related to tropical forests, preparing or updating forest policies, preparing specific action programmes and projects, and stimulating financial and political support to implement these initiatives. TFAP, as such, has been recently abandoned as an internationally-coordinated programme, but planning efforts continue through national programmes.
As of December 1996, a total of 54 MPFDs/NFAPs have been formulated (16 in Africa, 14 in Asia and the Pacific and 24 in Latin America and the Caribbean).
World Bank Forestry Sector Reviews (FSR)
Similar to the Forestry Master Plan approach in the 19 70s, the FSR were considered part of TFAP from 1985 to 1990. Today, they are often integrated into rural development strategies.
National Environmental Action Plans (NEAPs)
Introduced in 1987 by the World Bank, NEAPs focused initially on African countries. The scope of NEAPs covers all environmental fields, not just forestry. The intent is to lay out a comprehensive strategy to deal with environmental management and to provide a specific plan for action. NEAPs do not generally include all aspects of forests and forestry. In many countries, the NFAP is considered to be the forestry element of the NEAP.
Other planning frameworks
First proposed in 1980, National Conservation Strategies have been put forward through joint efforts of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (World Conservation Union - IUCN), the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). In addition, UNCED has called for the preparation of National Sustainable Development Strategies. The development of National Plans to Combat Desertification has been supported by UNEP and UNSO and, more recently, National Action Programmes against Desertification are being promoted by the Convention to Combat Desertification.
The differences that remain are mainly those of scope and nature of institutional participation.
Tangible and intangible benefits are apparent in those countries which have already undergone planning processes including:
· adoption of new legislation;
· institutional reorganization;
· redefinition of the role of the state;
· decentralization of forest management responsibilities;
· transfer of responsibility to communities and local groups;
· transparency of debates and participation in the decision-making process; and
· coordination and harmonization of actions within coherent, holistic and intersectoral strategic frameworks.
Regional efforts (e.g., the Central America Forest Action Programme) have resulted in increased exchange of information, and have strengthened cooperation between countries.
The experience provided by strategic planning processes in relation to the participation of different actors is unprecedented in the forestry sector. Although there is certainly scope for improvement, a flexible methodological model has been developed which involves different interest groups in discussions and decision making on forest and natural resource management. The degree of participation of private citizens, institutions and organizations has increased significantly in many countries. Consultations with community groups, work meetings with various institutions, and round-tables with many partners have been important components of most planning processes. This does not mean that all the objectives have been fully achieved. A bias still exists towards agencies of the public sector, with limited participation of the private sector and varying degrees of participation by NGOs. There are also serious physical, financial, logistical and even linguistic constraints.
Forest sector planning in industrialized countries
In many industrialized countries, higher priority is being given to an ecosystems approach, nature conservation and recreation, and maintenance of biological diversity. Questions are also being raised regarding the use of public lands and public controls over private forests. Perceptions about forests and forestry have been changing rapidly, as have concepts of planning and decision-making processes involving forest management. In principle, planning for publicly-owned forests takes place in a 'shared-power' setting of various interest groups who claim and defend different interests. Planning is expected to mediate among these diverse interests and choose between different forest management options taking into consideration these various interests. Although considerable efforts have been made to achieve this, many have not been as successful as had been hoped. In some countries there has been sharp criticism of forest management plans, despite substantial technical effort
devoted to planning. Further development of planning methodologies based on consensus building is needed in many countries.
Improved forestry planning directions: the concept of national forests programmes (NFPS)
A unifying concept of basic principles for forest sector planning was developed by FAO in collaboration with numerous partners, on the basis of past experience with National Forestry Action Programmes and other planning frameworks. These basic principles, which are the foundations for strategic planning processes called 'National Forests Programmes', have been endorsed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF). The basic principles of NFPs are:
· national sovereignty and country leadership;
· consistency with national policies and international commitments;
· integration with the country's sustainable development strategies;
· partnership and participation; and
· holistic and intersectoral approaches.
NFPs are defined as 'a generic expression for a wide range of approaches to the process of planning, programming and implementation of forest activities in a country; they comprise both the planning of forest sector activities - including the formulation of policies, strategies and action plans - as well as their implementation, including monitoring and evaluation'.
The purpose of NFPs is to establish a workable social and political framework for effective conservation, sound management and sustainable development of forests. The NFPs represent processes by which decisions are the outcome of debates, negotiations and commitments on the part of all interested actors. NFPs link together strategic and operational planning, and they are specifically designed to increase effectiveness and efficiency in sustainable forest development at the country level, leading potentially to increased commitments by potential sources of both domestic and external funds.
The IPF recommended countries to develop and implement NFPs as an effective mechanism for them to address sustainable forest management to balance increasing and competing demands for forest goods and services. The IPF emphasized a number of specific elements needing consideration when implementing NFPs, notably:
· the need for appropriate participatory mechanisms to involve all interested parties;
· decentralization where applicable and empowerment of regional and local government structures;
· recognition and respect for customary and traditional rights of special groups such as indigenous peoples, local communities and other forest dwellers, and forest owners;
· secure land tenure arrangements; and
· establishment of effective coordination mechanisms and conflict resolution schemes.
The IPF emphasized the need to adopt a flexible approach to NFPs, recognizing that some countries prefer to pursue their policy goals by means other than formal plans, and that NFPs should be implemented in the context of each country's socio-economic, cultural, political and environmental situation.
<section>9</section>
Evolving institutional framework
The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) recognized that an essential component of sustainable forestry is the commitment and genuine involvement of a broad variety of actors, including: public sector forestry services; the scientific community; private firms; local and non-governmental organizations; youth groups; unions and others. Public sector redefinition is resulting in the active or de facto transfer of responsibility and authority to private sector entities, NGOs and local organizations. While some of these trends may present challenges for sustainable forest management, they also present opportunities for improved management through capitalizing on the comparative strengths of these organizations. This shift is being manifested in various ways in different countries, such as the restructuring of the public forestry administrations of New Zealand, the United States, Canada, and Costa Rica; decentralization in Italy, Spain, Brazil and
Chile; and privatization of public enterprises in many countries of Latin America, Asia and Africa.
In forestry research, emerging institutional trends are leading to modified boundaries between public and private sector activities, and better identification and definition of the roles and targets of traditional and non-traditional research organizations. This could produce innovative ways of broadening the research funding base and sharing responsibilities. Better liaison between research providers and research users, and a balance among the research organizations, could force the system to move towards a dynamic and entrepreneurial approach, thus increasing the effectiveness of the overall research system.
The recognition of the need to strengthen the global forestry research system has led to the establishment of the Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) as part of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) system, and the incorporation of the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) into the CGIAR. In addition, the programme of the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute (IPGRI) - also part of the CGIAR - has been broadened to cover forest tree species. These international research centres focus on strategic research and applied research at global level. International research programmes will have limited impact, however, without appropriate participation and complementary research by national institutions, in both the public and private sectors. Apart from a few exceptions, developing countries do not have adequate capacity to participate in international research projects and to adapt and transfer results of
the research to the local level. The strengthening of national research systems to link them effectively both with the international research community and with users will remain an issue of great importance for a long time to come.
The development of a multi-partner and collaborative research system will also be important in the future. New tasks and renewed functions will be ascribed to national forestry research institutions. These include: promoting partnerships and joint research activities among different types of institutions; encouraging information flow among them and with the end-users; coordinating, when necessary, the efforts of various research and education organizations with regard to their research priorities; identifying gaps in the knowledge base and proposing needed studies for inclusion in the research agenda of suitable organizations; assisting non-traditional research organizations to develop rigorous scientific methodologies; and building awareness among policy-makers of the necessity of establishing favourable legal and political conditions to promote the entry of private enterprises into the research arena.
These trends have also provoked changes in the forestry education sector. In particular, at university level, traditional curricula have been and still are being revised by many forestry faculties in order to make them more responsive to a modified environment. Revised curricula often include elements of community forestry, agroforestry, environmental studies, and sustainable development. It is clear that government service, the traditional outlet for forestry graduates, is no longer the single or even the main employer. The increased relevance of commercial organizations as employers of graduate foresters has led to the introduction of courses on economics, marketing, etc., to produce graduates more suited for profit-oriented organizations.
The 'information revolution' has modified educational methods throughout the system.
Electronic information systems have opened up new possibilities for cost-effective distance learning programmes. Forestry education may be becoming more decentralized and more attuned to the needs of individual students.
Institutional changes are also notable in forestry extension. It is well known that most rural people get information from other rural people and not necessarily from the extension service, and that the private sector is also playing an increasing role providing advice and inputs in many countries. Institutional reform is well under way in some places, where certain functions have been privatized and others are carried out by non-governmental organizations under contract to the government, or by private consultants.
<section>a</section>
The international dialogue and initiatives with relevance to forests
Intergovernmental initiatives
International forestry research efforts
Private sector and NGO initiatives
The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) reflected both the broader concerns of civil society and a major intergovernmental commitment to forests. Major intergovernmental initiatives on forestry or related issues have been launched following UNCED, including the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF) and of associated meetings, and international conventions related to certain aspects of forest conservation and development. Non-governmental groups, particularly private sector organizations and NGOs, have participated substantially in many of the UN-led initiatives. They have been forceful players in the international dialogue and have launched various activities of their own. Together these initiatives represent an unprecedented level of international activity and focus on forestry.
Intergovernmental initiatives
The Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF) Two major texts on forests were adopted at UNCED:
'The Non-legally Binding Authoritative Statement on Principles for a Global Consensus on the Management, Conservation and Sustainable Development of Forests' (referred to as the 'Forest Principles'); and Chapter 11 of Agenda 21 ('Combating Deforestation'). These two documents, signed by a conference of states, represent the first international consensus on forests.
The Forest Principles constitutes a type of 'forest instrument' related to the conservation and Sustainable development of forest resources in individual countries. The Forest Principles, recognizing the sovereign right of countries over their forest resources, provides a framework, while allowing countries flexibility to manage their forest resources according to their own goals and environmental policies. Some countries continue to discuss the merits of negotiating a legally-binding global instrument on forests.
Chapter 11 of Agenda 21 is regarded as a broad and balanced foundation for the conservation, management and development of all types of forests. It urges countries to develop forest strategies and contains a comprehensive description of the various policy areas which can address deforestation. Large parts of Chapter 11 of Agenda 21 deal with the importance of ensuring the participation of affected population groups in forest conservation and development programmes.
Both documents propose general principles and programmes for action, but they do not provide precise guidance on topical issues. For this reason, the third session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD)^1 in its first review of forests (April 1995), established an 'open-ended ad hoc Intergovernmental Panel on Forests' (IPF), which is to report to its fifth session in 1997. An IPF Secretariat attached to the UN Department on Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development (DPCSD) was created and based in New York.
^1 The CSD is an Intergovernmental body of 53 member countries, created in 1993 by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations to follow the implementation of the UNCED agreements. The CSD has met once a year since 1993.
DPCSD hired a Coordinator, and it, along with FAO, UNDP, UNEP and ITTO each provided a senior professional to staff the Secretariat. A number of programme elements, or forestry issues, were identified for IFF to address (see Box 1). In order to ensure coherent support from the UN system, an informal Inter-Agency Task Force on Forests (ITFF) was formed. The World Bank, UNDP, ITTO, UNEP, the Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, DPCSD and FAO are members, and ITFF is currently chaired by the head of the Forestry Department of FAO.
It is expected that IPF will make substantive progress towards encouraging international consensus on key issues related to forests. The Panel's deliberations are expected to result in, among other things: improved national forest policies and development strategies; improved international coordination and cooperation; expanded coverage of forest resources assessment; and improved understanding of environmental implications of harvesting and trade of forest products.
A large number of ongoing processes, initiatives and meetings (see Box 2) related to IPF have been held in 1996, the results of which have been considered in IPF deliberations.
While intergovernmental in nature, IPF has also drawn extensively upon the expertise and resources of relevant organizations within the UN system, and from non-governmental and private organizations outside the UN system. These organizations have participated directly in meeting discussions and in the preparation of documents.
Box 1
List of IPF programme elements
I. Implementation of forest-related decisions of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development at the national and international levels, including an examination of sectoral and cross-sectoral linkages.
I.1 Progress in national forest and land-use plans.
I.2 Underlying causes of deforestation and forest degradation.
I.3 Traditional forest-related knowledge.
I.4 Fragile ecosystems affected by desertification, and the impact of airborne pollution on forests.
I.5 Needs and requirements of countries with low forest cover.
II. International cooperation in financial assistance and technology transfer for sustainable forest management.
III. Scientific research, forest assessment and development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management.
III.1 (a) Assessment of the multiple benefits of all types of forests.
III.1 (b) Methodologies for proper valuation of the multiple benefits of forests.
III.2 Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management.
IV. Trade and environment in relation to forest products and services.
V. International organizations and multilateral institutions and instruments, including appropriate legal mechanisms.
V.1 International organizations and multilateral institutions and instruments.
V.2 Contribution to consensus building towards further implementation of the Forest Principles, including appropriate legal instruments and mechanisms covering all types of forest.
The IPF scheduled a total of four meeting sessions during its term:
i) IPF-1: 11-15 September 1995, New York;
ii) IPF-2: 11-22 March 1996, Geneva;
iii) IPF-3: 9-20 September 1996, Geneva; and
iv) IPF-4: 11-21 February 1997, New York.
The IPF will submit its final report to the Fifth Session of the CSD in April 1997. The report will be used as input into the CSD's report on progress since UNCED, which will be presented to the Special Session of the UN General Assembly to be held from 9 to 13 June 1997.
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) was adopted at UNCED and enacted on 29 December 1993. As of October 1996, the Convention had been signed by 162 countries and ratified by 140. It is the first global attempt to address the conservation of biological diversity in natural habitats (including forest ecosystems), going beyond existing agreements for conserving species diversity, which mainly impose restrictions on trade and utilization of certain species.
The goal of the CBD is to promote the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and to ensure equitable distribution of the benefits derived from the use of genetic resources.
Box 2
List of IPF-related international initiatives
International experts group study on International Organizations, Multilateral Institutions and Instruments in the Forest Sector, sponsored by Switzerland and Peru (meetings in Geneva in March and June 1996).
International Conference on Certification and Labelling of Products from Sustainably Managed Forests, sponsored by Australia (Brisbane, May 1996).
Workshop on Financial Mechanisms and Sources of Finance for Sustainable Forestry, sponsored by Denmark and South Africa (Pretoria, June 1996).
International experts consultation 'Implementing the Forest Principles: Promotion of National Forests and Land-use Programmes', sponsored by Germany (Feldafing, June 1996).
Experts meeting on Rehabilitation of Forests' Degraded Ecosystems, sponsored by Cape Verde, Portugal and Senegal (Lisbon, June 1996).
International symposium on the Non-Market Benefits of Forests, sponsored by the UK (Edinburgh, June 1996).
Joint experts working group on Certification of Forest Products and International Trade, sponsored by Germany and Indonesia (Bonn, August 1996).
Intergovernmental Seminar on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management, sponsored by Finland (Helsinki, August 1996).
'Long-term trends in Supply and Demand for Wood Products and Possible Implications for Sustainable Forest Management'. Study funded by Norway. (Report available September 1996.)
Seminar on Sustainable Forestry and Land-use: the Process of Consensus Building, sponsored by Sweden and Uganda (Stockholm, October 1996).
International workshop on Integrated Application of Sustainable Forest Management Practices, sponsored by Canada, Japan, Malaysia and Mexico (Kochi, Japan, November 1996).
International Meeting of Indigenous and Other Forest-Dependent People on the Conservation and Sustainable Management of Forests, sponsored by Colombia and Denmark (Leticia, Colombia, December 1996).
The CBD respects the principle of national sovereignty, recognizing a nation's right to decide on the use of, and access to, its biological diversity resources, provided that there is no resulting damage to the environment in areas beyond the limits of the country's jurisdiction.
At its second meeting, held in Montreal on 2-6 September 1996, the CBD's Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and Technological Advice (SBSTTA) discussed the question of links between CBD and IFF. The SBSTTA meeting made a number of recommendations which were forwarded to the Third Session of IPF held later that month. The issues highlighted concerned the need for IPF to address gaps in knowledge about forest-based biological diversity; the use of an ecosystem approach in the IPF programme element on national forest and land-use plans and the integration of conservation measures and sustainable use of biological diversity in such plans; and the inclusion of biological diversity conservation and maintenance of forest quality in the IPF programme element on criteria and indicators.
At its Third Meeting in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on 4-15 November 1996, the Conference of the Parties (COP) agreed to improve the focus of its work programme and future agenda, define its relationship with other international regimes, and develop guidelines for action on a number of substantive issues. To this end, COP took several key decisions, one regarding the elaboration of a realistic work programme on agricultural biological diversity, and a more limited one on forest biological diversity. In regard to biological diversity contained in forest ecosystems, the meeting, in its final report, affirmed that some forests can play a crucial role in conserving biological diversity, and stressed that CBD will work in a complementary way with IPF and other forest-related fora in these issues, The report of COP-III endorses SBSTTA's recommendation (11/8), which focuses SBSTTA's initial work programme on devising methodologies for the development of criteria and indicators for the
conservation of biological diversity, and on analysing the impact of human activity on the loss of forest biodiversity. These decisions were transmitted to the Fourth Session of IPF.
The Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC) The Framework Convention on Climate Change, which was adopted at UNCED, aims to stabilize the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere at a level that prevents dangerous human-caused disturbances of the climate system. The FCCC provides a framework for protecting the climate, but stops short of requiring countries to reduce their CO[2] emissions. It does, however, commit the signatory states to carry out national surveys of greenhouse gas emissions and to develop national programmes to address this issue.
Several passages of the Convention take into account the importance of forests as a source or potential sink of carbon, and their role in climate regulation. The Convention has had a relatively minor impact as an instrument for influencing forestry, however, due in part to the wide range of ecological, economic, and social issues which have to be considered in addressing deforestation but which lie beyond the scope of the Convention on Climate Change.
The 11th session of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) which met in Rome from 11 to 15 December 1995, announced that global warming is continuing and that the earth's temperature could rise between 1 °C and 3.5 °C by the year 2100. The 'discernible human influence' on climate was clearly highlighted, as was the role of forests in both greenhouse gas emissions and carbon sequestration.
The role of forestry to mitigate climate change was discussed at the second meeting of the Conference of the Parties (8-19 July 1996). An extensive list of policies and measures that could be included in a protocol or another legal instrument was presented. Among other things, the signatory states were called upon not to harvest more wood volume than can be sustainably produced. They were also urged to observe the elements of CBD, the Forest Principles, and the results of IPF's work as they pertain to the protection and sustainable management of forests.
Although the form that legal measures will take for implementation of the Convention is still uncertain, the Conference of Parties has openly taken a stand in support of obligating its member states to protect and sustainably manage their forests.
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (CCD)
After adopting Chapter 12 of Agenda 21 (Desertification Control), UNCED recommended the negotiation of an international convention on desertification. The 47th session of the UN General Assembly in 1992 subsequently adopted resolution 47/188 calling for the establishment of an 'Intergovernmental Committee for the Negotiation of a Convention to Combat Desertification (INCD) in those countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa'.
The Convention was negotiated between May 1993 and June 1994, when the 5th session of INCD (Paris 6-17 June) finalized a text of the Convention, four regional implementation annexes (Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and the northern Mediterranean), separate resolutions recommending Urgent Action for Africa, and interim dispositions in the period before full ratification. The signature ceremony of the Convention was held in Paris on 14-15 October 1994. As of November 1996, the Convention had been ratified by more than 50 countries and came into force in December 1996. The first meeting of the Conference of the Parties is planned for October 1997 and will be held in Rome.
The objective of this Convention is 'to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought in countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification, particularly in Africa, through effective action at all levels, supported by international cooperation and partnership arrangements, in the framework of an integrated approach which is consistent with Agenda 21, with a view to contributing to the achievement of sustainable development in affected areas'.
The implementation of the Convention started immediately in Africa as the result of the resolution on special measures for Africa. A number of regional technical, programming and awareness-raising meetings were held in early 1995. International consultations were also held to look at: the practical aspects of partnership building; decentralization issues; national primary responsibility; concept and process of formulation of National Action Programmes; establishment of benchmarks and criteria and indicators for implementation; and national and international funding mechanisms.
The Indigenous People's Convention The Indigenous People's Convention was introduced by the International Labour Organization (ILO) in 1989. The Convention calls upon the signatory countries 'to take measures to protect and preserve the environment of the territories that people inhabit'. It recognizes the ownership and property rights of indigenous people to the lands (and the resources thereon) that they have traditionally inhabited, including forests (and forest resources). The Convention calls for more diversified use of forest products and the need for a 'more equitable' distribution of income from forest use, and addresses topics of planning, coordination and decision-making mechanisms. It is therefore complementary to the CBD and other instruments which have an interface with some aspects of forest conservation and development. Because the Convention establishes only a very general framework, however, it is expected to reinforce other efforts related to sustainable
forest conservation and management but to have minimal direct impact itself.
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora was implemented in 1973. It was the first global agreement of its kind, arising early in the evolution of the international environmental debate. The Convention calls for certain restrictions to be imposed on trade in threatened and endangered species, including a number of tree species (see pages 71-72).
The International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA) The first International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA) was negotiated under the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) from 1977 to 1982. It was adopted in November 1983 and came into force on 1 April 1985. Its Secretariat, the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), was set up in November 1986 in Yokohama, Japan.
The Agreement is based on four essential elements: market intelligence; reforestation and forest management; further and increased processing in producer countries; and research and development. Although originally conceived as a commodity agreement, it has evolved into an international framework for tropical timber development which takes into consideration environmental concerns.
ITTO has a current membership of 53 countries - 26 producer countries and 27 consumer countries. It continued to operate through 1996 under ITTA 1983, although the agreement formally expired on 31 March 1994. A new agreement was adopted in 1994 and brought into force on 1 January 1997 for an initial duration of four years and extendable for a total of ten years.
The new agreement has some significant differences from the original ITTA. In some places, the term 'tropical forests' has been replaced with 'timber producing forests', thus allowing for possible expansion of some elements of the agreement beyond the tropics. The new agreement is characterized by an increased focus on sustainable forest management and explicitly refers to the Forest Principles. It pledges:'... to enhance the capacity of members to implement a strategy for achieving exports of tropical timber and timber products from sustainably-managed sources by the Year 2000'; to increase 'the capacity to conserve and enhance other forest values in timber producing tropical forests';
and 'to encourage members to develop national policies aimed at sustainable utilization and conservation of timber-producing forests...'. The new ITTA calls for the establishment of a Bali Partnership Fund which would provide financial support to producing countries to enable them to make the investments required to introduce sustainable forest management.
The ITTO 'Year 2000 Objective' under which, in 1990, producer members committed themselves to having all international trade in tropical timber come from sustainably managed forests by the year 2000, has become a major focus of ITTO's work. Consumer member countries have also indicated that they will follow similar commitments for their own forests.
International forestry research efforts
The need for greatly increased efforts in tropical forestry research was recognized in the late 1970s. Several meetings (the World Forestry Congress in Indonesia, 1978; the Congress of the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) in Kyoto, 1982; and the Bellagio meetings in 1987 and 1988) highlighted the fact that investment in agricultural research had resulted in major improvements in productivity, and that investments in forestry research were significantly less than those made in agricultural research (for equivalent product value, even valuing just the timber). Research on forests has not only suffered from a lack of resources;
it has not been sufficiently interdisciplinary to provide an integrated view of forestry. The following actions have addressed some of these concerns: the creation of the International Council on Research in Agroforestry in 1977 and its integration into the CGIAR network in 1993; the launching of the Special Programme for Developing Countries (SPDC) of IUFRO in 1983; and the establishment of the Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) in Bogor, Indonesia in 1993 as part of the CGIAR network of international agriculture research centres. IPGRI, the International Plant Genetic Resource Institute, another Centre of the CGIAR, has included forest species in its programme since 1994.
In December 1995, CIFOR organized a policy dialogue on 'Science, Forests and Sustainability', hosted by the Government of Indonesia. The objective of this meeting was to identify and consider the key knowledge and research needs for supporting sustainable forest management to meet human needs, both now and in the future. It concluded that forest research must broaden its horizons and adopt a more holistic approach. It must attempt to address all functions, values and potentials of all types of forests and for the many and varied groups involved in forest management and development.
Private sector and NGO initiatives
The number and types of organizations demanding a greater role in decision making about forests is now both extensive and diverse, including private companies, rural associations, NGOs, unions and others. Many have expressed their views and participated in the UN-sponsored initiatives to promote sustainable forestry, and some have launched their own activities. Additional collaborating mechanisms are being sought and existing ones improved to gain the benefit of their interaction and ideas.
Private sector initiatives
The private sector, in particular the paper and wood products industry, has taken initiatives for the promotion of improved forest management. Industries in several countries have been involved in the development of industry guidelines and procedures relating to forest management, and are encouraging or developing schemes for the voluntary certification of products. The private sector has been closely involved with UNCED and with the efforts to develop criteria and indicators. They have also been active in such things as improved pollution controls and the more efficient use of raw materials.
These various activities and the organizations are too numerous to discuss in detail but some examples are given below:
· The Canadian Pulp and Paper Association organized a consultation on UNCED follow-up for its members in March 1995. Certification, criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management, forest principles and practices, clean technology, trade and environment and public participation were discussed.
· Both the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) - which is a coalition of 120 international companies from 34 countries with more than 20 major industrial sectors including forestry - and the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) are involved in the promotion and implementation of sustainable forest management. Since UNCED, members have reviewed and improved forest management practices. They have participated in the IPF process, stressing the need for the private sector to play an active role in a number of areas, including the encouragement of industry waste minimization and reducing air and water pollution.
· In October 1996, the Confederation of European Paper Industry organized a forum on 'Forest Management and Paper: Growing Cooperation', which addressed issues relating to European forest industry and forest owners activities in sustainable forest development, in order to sensitize the European Parliament and the European Commission to its importance.
Non-governmental organization (NGO) initiatives
Non-governmental organizations are a diverse group with a wide range of objectives and orientations. International NGOs, and some national ones, play a number of different roles at the international level. They cover a broad scope of activities, including: project funding and execution (particularly in nature conservation, rural development and other forest-related field activities); support to national forest programmes; development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management; the certification of sustainably-produced forest products; research in policy development; lobbying national governments and international organizations; and education and public awareness.
Some international NGOs are particularly well-positioned to contribute to international debates, and are playing an increasingly active role (in some cases a leading one) in international fora on policy discussions. They are being increasingly recognized as a valuable vehicle through which a broader range of interests and views can be presented. Moreover, they are able to achieve a much wider input into international fora than would otherwise be possible. Many NGOs have effective and wide-reaching networks through which they can disseminate information to members at the national, local and grassroots levels.
It is beyond the scope of this report to discuss the extensive range of NGOs active in international activities related to forestry and rural development. However, one example which may be mentioned is the World Commission on Forests and Sustainable Development (WCFSD). This is an independent body set up in June 1995 and composed of nineteen political and scientific leaders from around the world. Its aim is to work at the international level to help reconcile conflicts between groups with different views of the role of forests, to assist national governments pursuing key policy reforms, and to mobilize support to strengthen scientific research. To do this it has, to date, convened two of a planned five regional public hearings: the first in Indonesia in March 1996; and the second in Canada in September/October 1996. These provided an opportunity for a range of interest groups to present their views on aspects relating to the integration of development and conservation.
<section>b</section>
Forestry funding
Funding sources
No estimate exists of total funding going to forestry worldwide. However, actual annual funding from all sources for core forestry alone is estimated at about US$ 13 600 million. When associated investments are added, this annual total could rise to about US$ 20 000 million.^1 By comparison, UNCED estimated forestry funding needs (in 'Combating Deforestation': Chapter 11, Agenda 21) in developing countries alone to be US$ 31 250 million annually between 1993 and 2000, of which US$ 5 670 million would be concessionary and grant transfers from external sources (Table 1).
^1 Core activities are: forest resource development, wood production and processing; associated investments cover agroforestry, non-wood forest products, infrastructure and institution building. Source: Chandrasekharan, C. 'Status of financing for sustainable forestry management programmes' In Proceedings - Denmark/South Africa/UNDP Workshop on financial mechanisms and sources of finance for sustainable forestry. Pretoria, South Africa. 4-7 June 1996.
Funding sources
Forestry funding comes from three main sources: domestic official allocations; external Official Development Assistance (ODA); and the commercial private sector (both domestic and foreign). Non-profit funding sources such as trust funds are also emerging, principally to support the environmental and conservation activities of NGOs or community groups. In all developing regions, high priority is given to investment in forest resources development, including establishment of plantations. In general, the developing countries also give prominence to forest industries, utilization or other value-adding activities, while their ODA external partners have recently tended to show increasing favour towards natural resource conservation.
Domestic official funding
At a recent meeting, forestry officials in Africa called for 'more emphasis on local resources, given that prospects for external funding are not encouraging'.^2 This may be even more important as the nearly insurmountable debt obligations faced by many countries may soon threaten their creditworthiness and therefore their ability to continue to attract international private sector funds. The large domestic financing gaps, however, will make increasing internal funding for the forestry sector difficult for some countries, and creative solutions will be required.
^2 Funding for forestry development in Africa. Report of an in-session seminar. African Forestry and Wildlife Commission. Tenth Session, Sanbonani, South Africa, 27 November-1 December 1995. FAO, Rome, Doc. FO:MISC/96/1.
In all countries endowed with productive forests, domestic revenues from forests can be an important source of funding. An official Forest Fund, which captures funds through, for example, levies or taxes, is one mechanism used by many countries. In Indonesia, for example, the national Reforestation Fund receives 32 percent of total revenue^3 which now stands at more than US$ 700 million and is used to promote the establishment of private timber estates. Another means to boost revenues is to levy charges against beneficiaries on the range of services provided by forests, the most novel one being fees on water from forests. Taxation of downstream beneficiaries has for long helped to fund upland conservation in Japan. Colombia transfers some hydropower revenues to an upland watershed management fund.
^3 Domestic sources of finance for sustainable forest management - the case of Indonesia. Dr. Achmad Sumitro (Indonesia). In Proceedings - Denmark/South Africa/UNDP Workshop on financial mechanisms and sources of finance for sustainable forestry. Pretoria, South Africa. 4-7 June 1996.
Official Development Assistance (ODA)
Level of ODA
ODA given to developing countries is far from being satisfactorily monitored, yet, of all funding sources, it is comparatively the best documented. Of the estimated total annual forestry funding, the level of ODA given to developing countries was US$ 1 545 million for 19 93^4 (Table 1). There are no estimates of ODA given to countries in transition. This 1993 total of ODA is only about 27 percent of estimated ODA needs specified by UNCED.
^4 This amount represents ODA provided for 'forestry projects' and excludes forestry components of non-forestry projects. It is suggested that the gap may be counterbalanced by forestry projects having 'non-forestry components'. OECD estimates bilateral ODA commitments of DAC (see footnote 5) member countries for 'Combating deforestation' for 1993, is only US$ 174 million; for multilateral agencies, the estimate is zero (but US$ 222 million for 1994), figures that seem far too low to be accurate; if correct then they indicate a very bleak situation. (see Financial Flow Statistics: Adjustments for Monitoring the Financing of Agenda 21. Background paper No. 7, Commission on Sustainable Development, Fourth Session, 18 April-3 May 1996, New York. Division for Sustainable Development).
ODA for forestry grew by US$ 119 million (3 percent) per year between 1990 and 1993, a considerably slower rate than the 12 percent per annum which occurred between 1988 and 1990.
Thus, while international calls for more sustainable forest management efforts by developing countries grow, ODA is either in decline or failing to grow. The slow-down reflects overall reductions in ODA, which in DAC^5 member countries fell to an average of 0.30 per cent of GNP in 1993, the lowest ratio since 1973.
^5 DAG: Development Assistance Committee; an informal arrangement for consultation among the principal donor countries.
Since UNCED, international opinion is that forests warrant preferential allocation of funds. A recent workshop on financing for sustainable forestry held in Pretoria, South Africa, for example, considered that 'both socio-economic and environmental benefits of forestry justify an increase in the sector's share of ODA which now stands at only 3 percent of the total'.^6 Estimates suggest that forestry accounts for only about 1.6 percent of combined 1993 official and private funding transfers to developing countries.
^6 Report on the workshop on financial mechanisms and sources of finance for sustainable forestry. Proceedings - Denmark/South Africa/UNDP Workshop on financial mechanisms and sources of finance for sustainable forestry. Pretoria, S. Africa. 4-7 June 1996. In 1993, the ODA for forestry represented only about 3 percent of the ODA for all sectors which totaled US$ 53 000 million.
Table 1
Estimated annual 1993-2000 needs for forestry funding compared with actual 1993 flows^7
(US$ million)
^7 FAO/NFAP Unit
Agenda 21, Chapter 11 Programme areas
developing country annual funding needs^a
total
domestic sources
External aid
1993 flows
UNCED needs
actual
percent^b
A: institutional development
B: resources development
C: sustainable utilization
D: assessment and monitoring
Total for Chapter 11
(100 percent)
(82 percent)
(18 percent)
^a Estimate: UNCED, Chapter 11, Agenda 21.
^b Actual flows as a percentage of UNCED estimates of external funding needs.
Sources and distribution
Table 2 shows the main sources of forestry ODA, while Table 3 gives the breakdown of 1993 ODA for forestry by region. Table 2 shows the dominance of bilateral funding, nearly 40 percent of which came from European Union countries in 1993.^8 Loans dominated funding from Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs), which accounted for about 27 percent of total ODA, up from about 18 percent in 1990. UN organizations accounted for about 13 percent of ODA in 1993, of which nearly 60 percent was from the World Food Programme.
^8 Some bilateral funds in the form of loans have not been Included in these statistics. For example, in 1995 a German bilateral agency (KfW) gave loans for forestry projects worth DM 712 million (approximately US$ 500 million).
The regions differ in the degree to which UNCED ODA targets have been achieved. Forestry aid (as for all ODA) is concentrated on only a few recipient countries - overall, about 37 percent of the total 1993 forestry ODA flows went to Asia and Oceania, 31 percent to Africa and 20 percent to Central and South America (including the Caribbean). There is a strong tendency for donors to apply aid 'eligibility' criteria and priorities or preferences, with the result that many countries needing assistance are almost entirely neglected.
Details of the levels and uses of ODA for some developing countries have been documented through FAO surveys on forestry funding.^10 In regions such as Africa, ODA is very important; the 1995 FAO survey revealed, for example, that during the period 1990-94, more than 60 percent of responding countries relied on foreign sources for the greater part of forestry funding.
^10 Surrey results are given in; (a) Report on the in-session seminar on forestry investment in Asia and the Pacific. Fifteenth session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, Colombo, Sri Lanka, August 1993, Report No. FO:MISC/93/14, FAO, Rome, 1994; (b) Report on the in-session seminar on funding for forestry development in Africa. Tenth session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission, Sanbonani, South Africa, November-December 1995. Document No. FO:MISC/96/1, FAO, Rome, 1996; and (c) Survey on funding for forestry development in Latin America and the Caribbean. Doc. FO:LAFC/96/5, Nineteenth Session of the Latin American and Caribbean Forestry Commission Panama City, Panama, 17-21 June 1996, FAO, Rome, 1996.
Table 2
Level of ODA for forestry, 1986-93 (US$ million)^9
categories of donors
value
percent
value
percent
value
percent
value
percent
bilateral aid
multilateral development
banks (MDBs)
UN Organizations
total
^9 FAO/NFAP Unit.
Table 3
Estimated ODA needs for forestry and actual realization by geographic region, 1993 (US$ million)
region
UNCED estimate of annual needs
1993 actual
ODA in 1993 as approximate percentage of UNCED target
Africa
Asia and Oceania
South and Central America and the Caribbean
Near East
former USSR and European countries in transition
not available
multiple regions
total ^a
^a All numbers rounded off.
Note: No specific provision was made by UNCED for interregional activities or for countries in transition and East Europe.
Private sector funding
Since 1991, the private sector has accounted for all of the increase in international funding flows and now represents some 60 per cent of total external transfers to developing countries.^11 Net international private capital flows reached US$ 190 000 million in 1993, up substantially from US$ 9 000 million in 1986 (in all sectors). However, foreign private capital is, like ODA, poorly distributed among countries and is volatile.^12
^11 Mobilizing external financial resources for sustainable development. Report of the Secretary-General, Commission on Sustainable Development, Fourth Session, 18 April-3 May 1996. Doc. E/CN. 17/1996/4
^12 Most international private investment benefited only about ten countries: China absorbed the largest share, with the remainder going mostly to India, Malaysia, Mexico, Chile, Argentina, Turkey Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia.
There is renewed interest in encouraging the private sector to be involved in sustainable forestry. The issue is how to 'sell' forestry opportunities as being competitive with other investment options and how to reduce the private sector's perception of risk. Current thinking is that, to gain the business community's confidence, it is best to adapt to forestry the financing approaches that have already been proven in sectors other than forestry, rather than to develop completely new instruments.
The need for an enabling policy and institutional environment for private sector operations is crucial (see 'Evolving institutional framework' on page 99). Private sector funding requires well-developed capital markets, which only a few developing countries have. To counteract the danger of continuing the concentration of private capital on such countries and leaving the rest marginalized, public support (especially ODA) will be needed to develop capacity in the weaker countries, many of which are in Africa. The public sector will also be needed to channel funding to small-scale investors (such as farmers and local communities) that are unattractive to the private sector due to the high individual transaction costs.
It should be noted that major successes of private capital in forestry may hitherto have been limited to investments in industrial forest resources and in forest industries. Environmental activities have not performed well under venture capital and equity finance: of 64 venture capital firms active in the United States with a total of US$ 140 million invested in environmental firms in 1991, around 12 with less than US$ 35 million invested between them remained by 1995. Environmental and energy-related stocks have shown poor performance.^13 This may carry a warning for forestry investments dominated by environmental objectives.
^13 Environment and energy firms account for less than 2 percent of US venture capital. See; Financial resources and mechanisms - Addendum - Report of the Secretary-General: Current trends in resource flows and debt. Commission on Sustainable Development, Fourth session, 18 April-3 May 1996. Doc E/CN.17/1996/4/Add.l.
Combined public and private funding sources
National Environmental Funds (NEFs) and Conservation Trust Funds (CTFs) have emerged recently as sources of grants for conservation. They are funded jointly by government budgets, ODA sources, corporate or personal philanthropic donations, or from the proceeds of debt forgiveness or debt-for-nature swaps. Since 1990, approximately US$ 370 million have been provided through NEFs to 17 developing countries, mainly for NGO and local community protected area activities.^14 The volume of NEFs and CTFs is thought to be equivalent to less than 10 percent of total forestry ODA.
^14 National environmental funds: a potential source of financing for forest management and conservation. Mark Dillenbeck, IUCN US. Paper prepared for 19th Forest Advisors Group meeting, Rome, December 1994.
Innovative funding mechanisms The search for innovative mechanisms is driven by a perception that existing ones do not suffice. There is a wide array of new or re-activated ideas of varying practicality such as Resource Franchise Agreements, under which specified uses of forests are restricted in return for the payment of premiums equal to the best developmental use option. Almost all are focused on funding environmental forestry and therefore are not accessible for utilization activities, which will thus have to continue to rely largely on traditional funding sources. Innovative mechanisms are no panacea; continued attention must therefore be given to strengthening mainstream mechanisms by increasing allocations of domestic funds and ODA, as well as by ensuring better coordination, more even coverage of countries, and capacity building for better aid absorption. Forestry should also seek to capture some of the resources released by programmes of privatization and subsidy
reduction currently under way in many countries implementing structural adjustment reforms.
A UN Working Group which recently assessed the feasibility of innovative mechanisms for financing the protection of the global environment called for innovative mechanisms to be pursued alongside existing efforts to increase ODA as a share of GNP.^15 Any new approaches will complement debt-for-nature swaps, which are probably the oldest innovative mechanism. As of December 1992, these had generated approximately US$ 76 million for conservation in developing countries.^16
^15 Mobilizing external financial resources for sustainable development. Report of the Secretary-General, Commission on Sustainable Development, Fourth Session, 18 April-3 May 1996. Doc. E/CN. 17/1996/4.
^16 Combating Deforestation and the Non-legally Binding Authoritative. Statement of Principles fora Global Consensus on the Management, Conservation and Sustainable Development of All Types of Forests. Report of the Secretary General - Commission on Sustainable Development. Third Session, April 1995. Doc. E/CN. 17/1995/3 14 February 1995.
A number of innovative instruments were identified at the Third UN Expert Group Meeting on Financial Issues of Agenda 21 (Manila, February 1996), of which some relevant to forestry and biological diversity conservation are shown in Box 1.
Issues
Shortage of information is a major problem. Poor information undermines proper diagnosis of needs, monitoring of progress, as well as priority setting and targeting for funding. At its March 1996 session, the IPF requested FAO, in cooperation with other relevant agencies and organizations, 'to continue gathering and collating information as well as increasing its accessibility by all interested parties'. The challenge will be to motivate governments, agencies and the private sector to offer information freely on a regular basis.
Information is particularly needed on: domestic funding (both public and private); international private sector flows; funding distribution among beneficiary countries and among major objectives; and monitoring of the contribution of innovative mechanisms. Improved quality and reliability of valuation information would help funders set priorities when allocating budgets.
Weak policies and institutions restrict many developing countries' absorptive capacity for ODA financing, discourage private sector activity, and limit the ability of governments to extend support to small-scale individual or community investors.
There tends to be concentration of investment and aid on a few countries. Concentration of private sector funding can be explained by preference for profitable investments. However, bilateral ODA is also poorly distributed - perhaps due as much to economic attractiveness of beneficiaries as to historical and foreign policy considerations. What is less clear, however, is why the multilateral agencies are not spreading their assistance more equitably.
Future priorities for action
At the macro level, there are already significant funding initiatives, most notable being the World Bank's 'Highly Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative' and the International Monetary Fund's 'Extended Reach Initiative' for countries with difficult investment climates. Within the forestry sector, a logical future agenda on forestry funding, prioritized according to urgency, would appear to be:
· improving the information base on funding;
· diagnosing major areas of inefficiency in mainstream sources of funding, proposing improvements, and searching for new and additional resources; seeking ways to solve the marginalization of the majority of developing countries from the international financial sources, with particular focus on:
(a) enabling them to capture significant private sector funding; and
(b) diagnosing the causes of poor spread of funding by multilateral institutions and promoting improvement; and
· continuing the international dialogue on innovative funding mechanisms. In the long term, overall economic development of all countries and capacity building both for public services and for support to the private sector will be the keys to success.
Box 1
Examples of innovative financing mechanisms^17
Tradeable carbon dioxide permits: no revenue estimates known. The Earth Council plans to launch a shareholder-owned Global Environment Trading System (GETS) operating from 1999 on a pilot basis. Some carbon offsets are already occurring (Belize, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Indonesia, Malaysia, Paraguay, Russia, Uganda and the USA (certain states).
Diversion of earnings on other commodities to forestry: revenue potential undetermined. Example: Colombia diverting income from coffee price support reimbursements by the European Union to SFM.
Bio-prospecting fees: Costa Rica
Deforestation charges: Brazil, Central African Republic Ecotourism charges: Costa Rica, Kenya, Thailand; and scientific tourism fees: Costa Rica, Indonesia, Madagascar
Watershed charges: Costa Rica, Brazil, Indonesia
Tradeable reforestation credits: Costa Rica
Tradeable conservation credits: Costa Rica, Mexico
Fiscal compensation for conservation areas: Brazil (certain states)
Biodiversity patents fees
Tax on air transport: potential annual revenue US$ 1 000 million (under UN committee discussion and not yet operational)
Global taxes for the environment: unknown revenue potential. Such taxes are only at idea stage and are far from operational. They would involve a tax on economic activities that have negative global impacts (not necessarily environmental), which would be used to finance sustainable development.
The Tobin tax on foreign exchange transactions: potential annual revenue US$ 30 000 million; US$ 150 000 million according to recent UNDP-supported research. Still under discussion.
Insurance: at speculation stage.
North-South transfers: under discussion in academic circles
Diversion of military budgets to sustainable development: at speculation stage.
^17 Main information source: Report of the Third Expert Group Meeting on Financial Issues of Agenda 21. 6-8 February 1996, Manila. Japan/Philippines/AsDB/ UN-DPCSD. New York, 1996; especially the paper by Steele, P. and Pearce, D. Promoting private sector financing for sustainable development in the Asia-Pacific region.
<section>c</section>
The development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
Background
Efforts to identify criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
Implementation of criteria and indicators
Highlights of experiences and lessons learned
Conclusions
Background
There is widespread recognition of the importance of ensuring that forests are sustainably managed to provide a range of products and environmental and social services in perpetuity. The need to reconcile the productive functions with the protective, environmental and social roles of forests was forcefully stressed by UNCED in 1992 in Chapter 11 ('Combating Deforestation') of Agenda 21, and in the 'Forest Principles' (i.e., the 'Non-Legally Binding Authoritative Statement of Principles for a Global Consensus on the Management, Conservation and Sustainable Development of All Types of Forests'). In accordance with the calls for action, governments agreed to pursue, in cooperation with special interest groups and international organizations, 'the formulation of scientifically-sound criteria and guidelines for the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests'.
Several international meetings addressing sustainable forest management have made declarations and recommendations related to the development of criteria and indicators, including the following:
· the 'Bandung Declaration', arising from 'The Global Forest Conference', organized by the Government of Indonesia (February 1993);
· the 'New Delhi Resolution' passed by the international workshop, 'Towards Sustainable Forestry: preparing for the Commission on Sustainable Development 1995', organized by India and the UK (July 1994);
· conclusions and recommendations of the workshop, 'Science, Forests and Sustainability - a policy dialogue', organized jointly by the Government of Indonesia and the Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) (December 1994);
· conclusions and recommendations of the Intergovernmental Seminar on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management, organized by the Government of Finland in collaboration with FAO in Helsinki (August 1996);
· the two meetings of the 'Intergovernmental Working Group on Global Forests' sponsored jointly by the Governments of Malaysia and Canada (April 1994, October 1994); and
· the Japan/Canada 'International Workshop on Integrated Application of Sustainable Forest Management Practices', organized in collaboration with FAO and ITTO among others, in Japan (November 1996).
At the third session of the UN Commission on Sustainable Development in April 1995, during which follow-up to UNCED in forestry was reviewed, the development of criteria and indicators was identified as being among the major tasks and priorities for the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (see 'The international dialogue and initiatives with relevance to forests' on page 101). The CSD requested the IPF, in collaboration with national and international organizations and institutes, to catalyse the further development of internationally-agreed criteria and indicators against which progress towards sustainable forest management of all types of forests could be measured and to encourage their implementation at national level. Subsequently, FAO has been the UN agency responsible for providing support to the Secretariat of the IPF in this subject, working in close collaboration with other UN and non-UN agencies.
Efforts to identify criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
The role of criteria and indicators Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management (hereafter referred to as criteria and indicators) are tools which can be used in the conceptualization, implementation, and monitoring of progress in nationwide, sustainable forest management in its broadest sense. Criteria define the essential components of forest management against which sustainability may be assessed. Thus, collectively, criteria provide an implicit, generally agreed-upon global definition for the concept of sustainability. Each criterion relates to a key element of sustainability, and may be characterized by one or more quantitative, qualitative, or descriptive indicators. Through the measurement and monitoring of these indicators, the overall effects of forest management interventions, or non-intervention, can be assessed and evaluated, and action can be adjusted to meet stated aims and objectives more effectively.
Attempts have been made in a number of recent international initiatives to identify criteria, by which sustainable forest management can be defined, and indicators, by which the degree of sustainability may be monitored (see below). It seems possible to arrive at a globally-agreed core set of national-level criteria and indicators. While agreement on common indicators would facilitate international dialogue and country-based reporting on progress towards universally accepted goals, regions or ecological regions and countries may choose to develop additional indicators appropriate to their particular conditions. The indicators for any given criterion may thus vary between countries and between regions and eco-regions.
International initiatives prior to UNCED In 1990, prior to UNCED, guidelines for the sustainable management of natural tropical forests were elaborated under the auspices of the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO). Based on this, ITTO published criteria for monitoring sustainability in tropical moist forests in early 1992. These were supplemented in 1993 by guidelines for the establishment and sustainable management of planted tropical forests, and guidelines on the conservation of biological diversity in tropical production forests. The guidelines are currently under review by ITTO in light of their use by member countries.
Intergovernmental initiatives for action at national level - post-UNCED
Since UNCED, criteria and indicators have been formulated through several international and national, governmental and non-governmental processes. The intergovernmental activities have been conducted mainly within the framework of a number of major international initiatives (see Table 1). These include:
· The 'Helsinki Process' (officially entitled The European Process on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management') which focuses on the development of criteria and indicators for European forests, which include boreal, temperate and Mediterranean-type forests. The mandate of the process was laid down in two Ministerial Conferences on the Protection of Forests in Europe (Strasbourg 1990, Helsinki 1993). The European countries have agreed upon six common criteria, 27 quantitative indicators, and a number of descriptive indicators for sustainable forest management;
· the 'Montreal Process' which was initiated in the follow-up to the Seminar of Experts on Sustainable Development of Temperate and Boreal Forests, organized in Montreal, Canada in 1993 within the framework of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). The initiative deals with criteria and indicators in temperate and boreal forests outside of Europe. The ten countries originally participating, plus an additional two which have recently become involved, have agreed on a set of seven, non-legally binding criteria and 67 indicators for sustainable forest management, identified for national implementation;
· the 'Tarapoto Proposal of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainability of the Amazon Forest', which was adopted in February 1995 in Tarapoto, Peru, in a meeting held under the auspices of the Amazon Cooperation Treaty. Within the framework of this initiative, seven criteria and 47 indicators were identified and proposed for national level implementation in the eight participating countries. Criteria and indicators were also identified for the forest management unit level (an additional four criteria and 22 indicators) and for the global level (one additional criterion and seven indicators). The recommendations and conclusions of the meeting have been submitted to the governments of participating countries for their approval and ratification;
· the UNEP/FAO Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Dry-Zone Africa, held in Nairobi, Kenya 21-24 November 1995. The meeting identified seven criteria and 47 indicators which have been presented to the subsequent session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission, and submitted to the concerned 27 countries and to Secretariats of three sub-regional groupings (Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel - CILSS, Intergovernmental Authority on Development - IGAD, Southern African Development Community - SADC) for review, comments, agreement and subsequent follow-up;
· the FAO/UNEP Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in the Near East Region, held from 15-17 October 1996 in Cairo, Egypt. Seven criteria and 65 indicators were proposed by the experts and were presented immediately thereafter to the member states of the Near East Forestry Commission in its 12th Session, which met from 21-24 October 1996 also in Cairo. The Commission endorsed this set of criteria and indicators and accepted them as a 'good working document and a working draft' which would have to be tested in each country of the region;
· an Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Central America organized by FAO, in collaboration with the Central American Commission for Environment and Development (Comisión Centroamericana de Ambiente y Desarrollo, CCAD), held in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, from 20-24 January 1997. Cuba also attended the meeting in observer capacity. The meeting, which launched 'The Central American/Lepaterique Process', identified 4 criteria and 40 indicators for the regional level, and 8 criteria and 52 indicators for the national level. It drafted a declaration related to the sustainable management of the region's forests, which will be presented to the Summit of Presidents of the CCAD countries in March 1997 for consideration by Heads of State.
Table 1:
Geographic coverage of ongoing international initiatives
ecological region and initiative
number of
forest area ^a
countries
thousand ha
temperate and boreal forests ^b
Helsinki Process
38^c
Montreal Process
tropical forests
ITTO Producer Countries
Tarapoto Proposal^d
540 000^e
dry-zone sub-Saharan forests
Dry-Zone Africa
dry zone
Near East region^f
all types of forests
The Central American/Lepaterique Process^g
^a The information is based on FRA 7 990 (FAO Forestry Papers 112 and 124), and relates to forest area of countries (excluding 'other wooded lands')
^b Some countries are represented in more than one initiative, notably Russia (forest area of 739 729 000 ha), which is included in both the Helsinki and the Montreal Processes.
^c Refers to Signatory States to Helsinki Resolutions H1 and H2, plus those newly-independent Stales which have, subsequently, participated in the work of the Helsinki Process, and Albania, which did not originally sign the Resolutions but which has recently participated in the work.
^d Of the eight participating countries, only Suriname is not a member of ITTO.
^e Amazonian forests only
^f FAO/UNEP Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management, held in Cairo, 15-17 October 1996.
^g Expert Meeting organized by the Comisión Centroamericana de Ambiente y Desarrollo (CCAD) through its technical body the Consejo Centroamericano de Bosques y Areas Protegidas (CCAB-AP) in collaboration with FAO in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, in January 1997. Countries included are: Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama.
The possibilities and desirability of harmonizing ongoing initiatives related to criteria and indicators were discussed at an FAO/ITTO Expert Meeting held in Rome from 13-16 February 1995. While there was general agreement on the need to ensure comparability between them and to avoid wasteful duplication of effort, the meeting stressed the need to allow the initiatives to pursue their aims unimpeded, and in a way that would be compatible with their particular environmental and socio-economic contexts. The degree of comparability and compatibility of six of the ongoing international processes is indicated in Table 2.
International efforts at harmonizing concepts and terminology
Most of the ongoing international initiatives have elaborated definitions of key terms. Although the definitions adopted by the different initiatives are not identical, they are largely compatible. In spite of these efforts to clarify terminology, practically all recent fora have stressed the need to continue to intensify efforts to reach global consensus on key concepts and terms used in the international discussion on criteria and indicators, and to ensure consistency with terminology used in other forestry initiatives.
In response to the above recommendations, a number of efforts are under way to come to agreement on a common set of concepts and definitions making maximum use of existing, globally-accepted terms. For example, FAO is collaborating with the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) to review forestry terms and concepts used in some 25 countries in all regions of the world and in a range of languages. The first phase of the study is based on approximately 20 core terms and related concepts as originally defined in FAO's Forest Resources Assessment 1990.
Action at forest management unit level by governments and NGOs
Intergovernmental initiatives have been complemented over the past years by a number of activities carried out by both government agencies and national and international non-governmental organizations, related to formulating and testing criteria and indicators at forest management unit level. The activities of the latter include those of the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), among others.
Links between national and forest management unit level activities
International initiatives related to sustainable forest management have, as requested at UNCED, been largely focused on the development of national level criteria and indicators. There is general agreement that work on criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level should be the responsibility of individual countries.
Criteria and indicators defined at national level (or defined at regional/eco-regional level and used at national level) are aimed at improving the quantity and quality of information available to decision-makers and the general public about trends towards or away from sustainable use of a nation's forests. The use of national level criteria and indicators will help monitor progress in sustaining the various functions of forests recognized in Agenda 21 of UNCED and in the 'Forest Principles'. Information on status and trends can be used to strengthen policy and decision-making to further improve forest management practices over time.
Table 2 Summary of criteria identified in ongoing international initiatives
criteria ^a
HELS^b
MONT
ITTO
TARA
Dry-Zone Africa
Near East
LEVELS
forest management unit level
no
no
yes
yes
no
no
national level
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
global level
no
no
no
yes
no
yes
THEMATIC CATEGORIES
forest resources
extent of forest resources
yes
-^c
yes
-^e
yes
yes
global carbon cycles
yes
yes
no
no
-^f
no
forest ecosystem health, vitality
yes
yes
no
yes
yes^g
biological diversity
yes
yes
-^d
yes
yes
yes
forest functions
productive functions of forests
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
protective and environmental functions
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
development and social needs
socio-economic functions and conditions
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
institutional framework
policy and legal framework; capacity to implement sustainable forest management
yes^h
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
^a While maintaining the overall meaning of the concepts, the terminology does not necessarily follow the exact wording of the individual initiatives.
^b The following abbreviations are used in the table: HELS for the European Process: MONT for the Montreal Process; TAPA for the Tarapoto Process: DryZ Africa for the proposal for the sub-Saharan dry zone African countries and NEAP EAST for the Near East region countries. The denomination 'yes' means that the criterion is explicitly mentioned in the initiative in question: a dash (-), signifies that a criterion is not fully enunciated, although it may have been explicitly considered; and the denomination 'no' signifies that no explicit or implicit reference has been made to the criterion in question.
^c In the Montreal Process, the forest resource is not considered a separate criterion, but an indicator for two other criteria: (i) conservation of biological diversity;and (ii) maintenance of the productive capacity of forest ecosystems. ^d ITTO developed a set of supplementary 'Guidelines' addressing the issue of biological diversity rather than including this as a criterion in its forest management guidelines.
^e In the Tarapoto Proposal the criteria 'Extent of Forest Resources' and 'Biological Diversity', are merged into one single criterion 'Conservation of Forest Cover and of Biological Diversity'.
^f In the Dry-Zone Africa proposal, the criteria 'Global Carbon Cycles' and 'Extent of Forest Resources' are merged into one single criterion,
^g For the Near East proposal, this criterion includes also 'integrity' of ecosystems.
^h In the Helsinki Process, the institutional framework criterion is included through descriptive indicators attached to each of the six other criteria.
The application of criteria and indicators at the national level can stimulate and help guide the identification of criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level, and vice versa. Assessments related to internationally-agreed definitions of sustainability at the forest management unit level should contribute directly to improving on-the-ground forest management practices and can, in turn, help clarify issues related to environment and trade in forest products, including forest product certification.
While certain criteria are only applicable at national level (e.g., those related to the balance between different uses of the forest or to national policies), many other national-level criteria are based on aggregated data on indicators collected at forest management unit level.
It should be noted that, although each individual forest management unit may not satisfy all national and international criteria for sustainability, the overall national criteria may still be satisfied. Examples of this include criteria related to carbon sequestration and the conservation of biological diversity at ecosystem, species and within-species levels, in which limited forest areas can contribute towards specified national needs but cannot satisfy these needs individually.
Implementation of criteria and indicators
National level
Once identified, criteria and indicators need to be tested at field level and implemented on a pilot scale. It is the countries' responsibility to reconfirm the relevance of defined criteria and indicators in the light of prevailing environmental, economic, social and institutional realities, and to ensure their adoption by all parties concerned. Countries are also responsible for reviewing and testing means of measuring and monitoring specific indicators at field level. Ultimately, criteria and indicators will help guide national policies, and may lead to adjustment of prescriptions, decrees and national legislation governing forest management practices in the country.
Comprehensive efforts to compile data on the status and trends in sustainable forest management at the national level are presently under way within the Helsinki and the Montreal Processes. Responses by 31 out of the 39 participating countries approached in an inquiry carried out within the framework of the Helsinki Process showed that there were serious difficulties at national level in implementing and reporting on 6 of the 27 indicators which had previously been agreed upon at regional level.
A survey carried out by the US Forest Service involving 80 individuals in the technical and scientific community, academics, representatives of the forest industry and environmental NGOs, reported that, out of the 67 national level indicators for sustainable forest management agreed upon in the Montreal Process, the means existed in the USA to measure only nine. For another 20-25 indicators, data were reportedly not currently available, but could be generated if sufficient resources were put to the purpose.
The above preliminary results indicated that a lack of knowledge and resources is likely to slow down the implementation of criteria and indicators which have been agreed upon in principle by countries concerned. Unless adequately addressed, related problems may lead to the loss of enthusiasm, commitment and political credibility.
Forest management unit level
Internationally-coordinated efforts in the testing of criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level are under way in the form of a project known as 'Testing Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Management of Forests'. Coordinated by CIFOR, in collaboration with several governmental and nongovernmental organizations in tropical and temperate countries, the project aims to identify criteria and indicators which can be considered objective, cost-effective and relevant in the assessment of the sustainability of prevailing forest management practices. The project includes field trials in a number of countries. In carrying out this work, members of an interdisciplinary team of experts, who are knowledgeable about national-level activities, consult regularly with relevant interest groups to discuss the results of testing at forest management unit level. The systematic interchange of ideas and regular flow of information from national level 'down' to forest
management unit level and vice versa have provided opportunities to link the two levels. Work is continuing in collaboration with a number of developing and developed countries, aimed at rendering the conceptual framework of criteria and indicators consistent and operational.
Other examples of field implementation at the forest management unit level which have provided useful feedback to national-level activities, include:
· pilot projects in Finland and Canada, which examine the applicability of national criteria and indicators at sub-national level (provincial and forest management unit levels) and test the measurement and assessment of specified indicators in the field;
· 'Demonstration and Model Forests', established under the overall guidance of Canada, in China, Gabon, Mexico, Russia, Viet Nam and in various provinces of Canada itself, in which information on general strategies and methods of sustainable forest management are translated into action at the operational scale;
· sustainable forest management demonstration areas established in producer countries of the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO). Several projects have been started for testing strategies and methodologies for sustainable forest management at the forest management unit level. In relation with such testing, ITTO, in collaboration with the International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED) and the World Conservation Monitoring Centre (WCMC), has developed the 'Forest Resources Accounting System' to standardize monitoring of forest condition and management and to facilitate comparable reporting. The system is presently being tested in Cameroon, Ecuador and Indonesia. These activities help support the efforts to achieve the ITTO Year 2000 Objective (see 'The International Tropical Timber Agreement' on page 105 for more discussion of the Year 2000 Objective).
Considerable information gaps have been identified in these efforts to test criteria and indicators, highlighting the need for further research to facilitate implementation. As a result, a Scientific Advisory Group and a Technical Advisory Committee have been established within the framework of the Helsinki and the Montreal Processes respectively, to help to ensure soundness and scientific validity of approach, and to identify research priorities. An International Project Advisory Panel also operates in support of the forest management unit field testing activities of CIFOR.
Criteria and indicators and forest product certification
Countries with significant levels of forest product exports are likely to be those more concerned about measuring, monitoring and documenting sustainable forest management practices at the management unit level, with a view to facilitating future forest product certification. However, as certification must also take into account processing and marketing of the product, sound forest management practices alone are not enough for certification. In addition, there remains considerable difference of opinion as to the linkages between forest product certification and sustainable forest management. Some view certification as a process which can promote sustainable forest management by rewarding 'best practice' through market-driven incentives, while others doubt that certification will have a significant economic impact (see 'Trade in certified forest products' on pages 68-71 for more about certification).
Highlights of experiences and lessons learned
International coverage of initiatives
The Helsinki Process has concentrated on the geographic region of Europe, thus covering boreal, temperate and Mediterranean-type forests. Other initiatives have been based on ecological regions, or a combination of geographic and ecological regions, for example: the humid tropical forest in the case of the ITTO Guidelines and Criteria, which cover forests of ITTO producer countries in all tropical regions; the temperate and boreal zone forests outside of Europe in the case of the Montreal Process; humid tropical, tidal and riverine forests in the Amazon Basin in the Tarapoto Proposal; and arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid zone forests and woodlands in sub-Saharan Africa in the proposals of the recent UNEP/FAO Dry-Zone Africa initiative.
From a biological and silvicultural point of view, an eco-regional approach will facilitate technical and scientific dialogue and the definition of proposed strategies for action. On the other hand, there is a need to seek governmental endorsement of the recommendations made at expert meetings to ensure their political acceptance and, thus to secure national commitment to implementation. The convening of sub-regional, regional and international policy-level fora is needed for this purpose.
The stepwise approach used in many of the ongoing initiatives in the development of criteria and indicators, consisting of early dialogue and subsequent, regular reviews and refinement at technical and scientific level, complemented by policy-level discussions and endorsement of principles, has proven useful and constructive. Recent initiatives have followed this 'model' using established eco-regional and regional/sub-regional political groupings. These include the FAO/UNEP Expert Meeting for the Near East (October 1996) and the Central American initiative (January 1997).
International organizations involved to date, in collaboration with regional organizations, NGOs and others, will continue to promote the exchange of information, research results, data and experience between and among ongoing and forthcoming international initiatives on criteria and indicators, and will strive to involve countries and ecological regions which have not been part of such initiatives to date.
Forest resources assessment and criteria and indicators
FAO and the Economic Commission for Europe (UN-ECE), in collaboration with various national institutes and a range of international organizations, are presently preparing for the Global Forest Resources Assessment 2000 (see 'Recent trends and current status of forest resources' in Part 1). The main thrust of past Forest Resource Assessment studies (FRA 1980 and 1990) has been to provide information on forest area, although they have also addressed to some extent the role of forests in supplying environmental services and non-wood forest products. These ancillary aspects will be further emphasized in FRA
2000. A planning meeting for FRA 2000 held in June 1996 in Kotka, Finland reviewed the possibilities and implications of incorporating national level indicators for sustainable forest management into future global forest resources assessments. The expert working group considered that 15 of the 80 national-level indicators identified in the main ongoing international initiatives were relevant at global level, and recommended that they should, tentatively, be included in FRA 2000. The group further recommended that an attempt be made by FRA 2000 to assess the feasibility of including an additional 15 indicators in future global assessments.
Improved information flow
Those involved in the various forestry processes and initiatives concerned with criteria and indicators have been in frequent contact. This continuing dialogue between them has been of great importance, allowing countries and regions to share experiences and ensure that recommended actions are compatible. The comparability of results to date demonstrates the benefits which can be derived from having an open dialogue.
While communication within the forestry sector has been satisfactory, the flow of information to other economic sectors, at both national and international levels, has not been as successful. It is of utmost importance that efforts concerned with the development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management are linked with related efforts in other sectors. Appropriate linkages should be forged, or strengthened, with work carried out within the framework of existing, global conventions such as those related to combating desertification, to climate change and to the conservation of biological diversity, as well as follow-up to UNCED recommendations on sustainable mountain development (Chapter 13 of Agenda 21) (see 'The international dialogue and initiatives with relevance to forests' starting on page 101 for more about these international efforts). Such links will help ensure that action taken in each sector is fully understood by, and compatible with, that of
other sectors, and that it contributes to common, defined national development goals.
Conclusions
The intensified discussion on sustainable forest management, coupled with greatly increased exchange of information, experience and know-how between countries and organizations, has heightened global awareness of the issues at stake. Today it is commonly acknowledged that all kinds of forests can, in principle, be sustainably managed to produce a range of protective, productive, environmental and social benefits in perpetuity. Such recognition of the renewability and possible multiple use of the resource will help underpin and strengthen national policies and should facilitate the spread of sustainable forest management practices worldwide.
Discussion on mutually-agreeable concepts and the identification of quantifiable indicators for sustainable forest management have facilitated dialogue between various interest groups, whose views had previously been seen as competitive, contradictory, or even incompatible.
It is essential that vigorous dialogue continues between international initiatives. Regular dissemination of information in this regard is an international responsibility, and should be one of the basic components of a globally-harmonized programme on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management.
<section>d</section>
Asia and the Pacific^1,2
^1 This section on Asia and the Pacific covers two regions: Asia and Oceania. Asia includes: Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka (South Asia); Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand, Viet Nam (Continental Southeast Asia); Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore (Insular Southeast Asia); China, Hong Kong, Japan Korea (Democratic Peoples Republic), Korea (Republic), Macau, Mongolia (East Asia). Regional highlights of the Near East sub-region are treated in a separate section - see page 133. Oceania includes; American Samoa, Cook Islands, Fiji, French Polynesia, Guam, Kiribati, New Caledonia, Niue Island, Pacific Is, (Trust Terr), Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu, Australia, New Zealand.
^2 Unless otherwise stated, all data on forest cover and forest products cited are from FAO databases; Forest Resources Assessment and the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products.
The Asia-Pacific region encompasses only about one-quarter of the world's land area, but is home to more than one-half of the world's population. Some of the world's richest, and many of its poorest, countries an located in the region. Some countries have almost no forests, while others have more than two-thirds of their land covered by forest vegetation. The region includes both some of the world's leading importers and exporters of forest products.
Most Asia-Pacific countries have experienced extremely rapid social and economic changes in recent years. While forest resources have helped to fuel the surging economic development, forests have also suffered greatly from the rapid changes. Expanding populations and greater wealth have increased demand for wood products, agricultural land, water, forest-based recreation and ecotourism, electricity from hydro-electric sources, and attractive industrial and residential sites. There are also urgent new calls for the conservation of biological diversity, protection of endangered species, expansion of protected areas and carbon sequestration.
Several countries in the region (e.g., Cambodia, China, Laos, Myanmar, Mongolia, and Viet Nam) face special problems and challenges in moving towards market economies. While highly encouraging progress has been made by some of these countries, the transition to more open and flexible market economies has also brought new risks and threats to forest resources, and new management demands. A trend in privatization is seen in other countries as well (e.g., the privatization of most of New Zealand's forest plantations).
Forest resources
The Asia-Pacific region has approximately 565 million ha of forests, or about 16 percent of the world's total. Forest wealth is unevenly distributed. In South Asia, only Bhutan has more than 40 percent of its land area covered by forest, while several countries in Southeast Asia and Oceania have more than half of their land in forest.
Forest cover in the temperate areas of the region has essentially remained constant. In contrast, the region's tropical forests have declined substantially. In the tropical countries of Asia, deforestation amounted to 3.9 million ha per year between 1980 and 1990. This represented the highest annual rate of deforestation (1.2 percent) among the tropical regions of the world. The estimated rate for 1990-95 is somewhat lower (1.1 percent). The two major direct causes of forest loss in Asia and the Pacific are clearing for agriculture (including shifting cultivation) and excessive cutting of timber. Other important causes of forest destruction include fuelwood harvesting; mining, irrigation and hydroelectric projects; and urban expansion.
Forest degradation is also a serious problem in the region. Commercial harvesting has been more widespread (measured as a percentage of total forest area) and intensive (timber volume removals per hectare) in tropical Asia and the Pacific, than in any other tropical region. High population densities have also led to widespread forest degradation from fuelwood and fodder harvesting, cattle grazing, shifting cultivation, and timber harvesting for local construction.
Table 1
Annual rate of change of forest area, 1990-95
sub-region
annual change
thousand ha
annual change
percent
south Asia
continental Southeast Asia
insular Southeast Asia
east Asia
Oceania
total
Fire is a continuing threat to many of the forests of the region, exacerbated by increasing populations, increased human activity in forests, and the expanding urban-forest interface. There have been major forest fires in Australia, Indonesia, and Thailand in recent years. In 1996, more than 3 million ha of forests burned in Mongolia.
Insects and diseases present localized problems but are not considered major problems in the region. The infestation of Leucaena psyllid, which caused considerable damage to Leucaena leucocephala plantations and agroforestry plantings in the 1980s, has largely subsided with the introduction of resistant varieties of Leucaena, diversification of plantings and application of integrated pest management practices.
The Asia-Pacific region leads the world in tropical forest plantation development; its more than 22 million ha represents three-quarters of the world's total. Additionally, the Asia-Pacific region possesses most of the world's 14 million ha of rubber and coconut plantations, both of which are becoming increasingly important sources of wood. In the temperate areas of the region, China, the Republic of Korea, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Japan, New Zealand and Australia have established substantial areas of forest plantations.
Forest resources development and conservation
Until recently, Asia-Pacific countries could be conveniently classified as either 'forest-rich' or 'forest-poor.' Forest-rich countries tended to focus on economic exploitation of forest resources, often using the resulting capital to fuel overall economic development. In forest-poor countries, priority was given to social and ecological aspects of forestry, reforestation of degraded areas, plantation development, and provision of forest products for local use.
However, the lines between forest-rich and forest-poor countries have become considerably blurred in recent years. For example, several former major producers of forest products have become net importers of forest products. Nearly all countries, including those still possessing substantial forest resources, have come to realize that the resources are not inexhaustible. Greater efforts are thus being made to bring timber harvests within sustainable levels, improve forest management practices, increase forest conservation, accelerate plantation development, and provide forest-derived benefits to a broader range of people. Conversely, many countries with limited forest resources are now offering attractive incentives to individuals and corporations to encourage forest resources development.
Forest management objectives have evolved considerably in Asia and the Pacific in recent years. A major reorientation of many countries is reflected in the inclusion of social and environmental issues in their national development objectives. In India, for example, the 1988 National Forest Policy explicitly gives priority to the environmental and social functions of public forests, while encouraging forest industry to source its raw material needs from private lands. China has adopted a 'two forestry systems' approach, emphasizing environmental forest functions on sensitive sites and production functions on other lands. In 1995, the Philippines adopted 'Community-Based Forest Management' as its primary strategy for forest development. Indonesia recently outlined a long-term forest management strategy that calls for moving from 'sustained-yield management' to 'sustained forest and ecosystem management,' and from 'company profit-oriented forestry' to 'social benefit-oriented
forestry.'
Many countries in the region are reducing their reliance on natural forests to provide industrial roundwood and are shifting to other sources. Thailand, Sri Lanka, and New Zealand, for example, have restricted most timber harvesting in natural forests and now depend almost exclusively on plantations, agroforestry systems, farm forests and, in the case of Thailand, imports to satisfy industrial wood requirements. Most countries of the region have accelerated reforestation efforts in recent years. The planting programmes of China, India, Indonesia, and Viet Nam are especially noteworthy for their scale. Thailand has recently launched a 5-year programme to reforest 800 000 ha. Pakistan is set to embark on a massive regreening programme funded by the Asian Development Bank.
Many countries are giving increased attention to forest conservation, exemplified by the creation or expansion of protected areas. Australia, Bhutan, Cambodia, New Zealand, Sri Lanka, and Thailand have all designated more than 10 percent of their countries' total land as protected areas (IUCN categories I-V).^3 Lingering problems in many countries, however, are ineffective management and weak protection of designated reserves.
^3 World Resources Institute. 1996. World resources -1996-97. Oxford University Press. Oxford, UK.
Forest products
Wood products
Countries of the Asia-Pacific region produced about 1.2 billion m^3 of roundwood in 1994, or about one-third of the world's total. Fuelwood and wood for charcoal comprise the bulk (74 percent) of all roundwood removals. The Asia-Pacific region currently produces about 19 percent of the world's industrial roundwood; production rose steadily in the past decade, from 250 million m^3 in 1983 to 294 million m^3 in 1994. Most industrial roundwood is used in the countries in which it is grown.
Fuelwood and charcoal remain the most commonly used sources of energy for a substantial proportion of rural and urban dwellers in most developing Asian countries. The Regional Wood Energy Development Programme has estimated that the value of wood fuels used in its 15 member countries approximates US$ 29 000 million per year. In Thailand, for example, the value of wood fuels, which account for less than 30 percent of all energy use, is an estimated US$ 2 000 million. This represents more than 50 percent of the 1994 energy import bill of US$ 3 800 million. The substitution of wood fuels by kerosene would involve a substantial increase in the import bill, which would be difficult for the country to meet.^4
^4 Wood Energy News, Vol. 11, June 1996
Some countries (e.g., the Philippines, Thailand) have moved from being major exporters to being net importers of wood products. Reduced availability of timber in many major producer countries (e.g., Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines) has caused harvesting pressure to shift to countries previously only lightly exploited (e.g., Cambodia, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands). Other strategies to compensate for declining natural forest resources and increasing demands include expanding forest plantations and increasing agroforestry and farm forestry development.
Since the 1980s, major timber producers in the region have moved increasingly towards more domestic processing and higher value products. Exports of unprocessed logs have been banned in Indonesia, the Philippines, Peninsular Malaysia, Fiji, and Vanuatu. Similar bans are being phased in, or are being considered, in several other countries of the region. Meanwhile, production and trade of processed products continues to increase. Indonesia leads the world in the production (10 million m^3 in 1994) and export (8 million m^3) of tropical plywood. Malaysia is the world's leading exporter of tropical sawnwood, exporting 4.6 million m^3 in 1994.
With large volumes of plantation-grown radiata pine nearing maturity, New Zealand is poised to increase exports of softwood logs and sawnwood substantially. Already in 1994, New Zealand exported 5.5 million m^3 of logs (up from 1.2 million m^3 in 1983) and 1 million m^3 of sawnwood (increased from 0.4 million m^3 in 1983). The value of New Zealand's forest products exports surged from US$ 331 million in 1983 to US$ 1.45 billion in 1994.
Table 2
Forest products trade balance in Asia and the Pacific, 1994 (US$ thousand)
sub-region
exports
US$ thousand
imports
US$ thousand
trade balance
US$ thousand
south Asia
continental Southeast Asia
insular Southeast Asia
east Asia
tropical Oceania
temperate Oceania
total
The Asia-Pacific region, taken as a whole, is a major net importer of forest products, importing US$ 18 billion more than it exported in 1994 (Table 2). Much of the imbalance, however, is attributable to East Asia, especially Japan, which imported nearly US$ 17 billion worth of forest products. Other major importers are China, Republic of Korea, Thailand, and Australia. Of 35 Asia-Pacific countries, 24 are net importers of forest products (in value terms).
Indonesia and Malaysia dominate Asia-Pacific export markets, but exports have increased rapidly within the last decade from continental Asia (i.e., Myanmar, Cambodia, and Laos) and Oceania (i.e., Fiji, Papua New Guinea, and Solomon Islands).
Non-wood forest products
In recent years, increased attention has focused on non-wood forest products (NWFPs) and services (such as ecotourism) as potential income-generating alternatives or complements to timber harvesting. Lack of knowledge related to the management, utilization and marketing of these products and services, however, is limiting their development and, in some cases, raising concerns over potential over-exploitation.
Asia and Pacific countries lead in the production and trade of bamboo, rattan, pine oleoresins, lac, natural silk, medicinal plants, bidi leaves, forest-derived spices and chestnuts. Such products comprise a surprising percentage of total forest exports from some nations. More than 70 percent of all forest-based exports from India, for example, are non-wood forest products.^5
^5 Gupta, B.N.I 994, India country report on non-wood forest products. In Durst, P., Ulrich, and Kashio M. (eds.) Non-wood forest products in Asia. RAPA Publication 1994/28. FAO, Bangkok.
Because collection and processing of non-wood forest products are generally labour intensive, countries with low labour costs have considerable comparative advantage in producing non-wood forest products. In this respect, the developing countries of Asia and the Pacific can be expected to continue as the major suppliers of many such forest products in the future, providing that raw material sources can be sustained.
Forest industries
Asia and Oceania have some of the world's most competitive forest industries, with market-leading companies in both the developing and developed countries of the region. Developing countries have generally capitalized on abundant forest resources and low labour costs, while the developed countries have remained competitive by emphasizing processing efficiency and marketing acumen. A major new thrust of Malaysia and Thailand is to move progressively into exports of secondary forest products such as furniture and joinery. This transformation permits earnings from forestry to remain high even if volumes shipped decline or stabilize.
Considerable attention is now being devoted to developing processing capacity for new forest products in Asia and the Pacific. Most notable is the rapid expansion of medium-density fibreboard (MDF) and pulp and paper, particularly in Indonesia, Malaysia, China and Viet Nam. A major new product development has been the recent rapid increase in rubberwood processing, especially in Malaysia and Thailand. More than 80 percent of all furniture produced in Malaysia now uses rubberwood as the base raw material.
Some countries (e.g., the Philippines) are undergoing major restructuring of the industrial processing sector to adapt to the realities of reduced raw material supplies, smaller logs, and increased dependency on plantation-grown wood. Many Asian companies are also internationalizing their operations as domestic forest resources decline. While this adaptive strategy has long been practised by Japanese and Korean firms, it has only recently been adopted by Indonesian, Malaysian and Thai companies. Many of these companies have recently expanded operations into Cambodia, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, and even beyond Asia into Latin America and Africa.
Forestry institutions
Government forestry administrations
Throughout Asia and Oceania, most forests are under the control of central or state governments. China, Indonesia, Myanmar, and New Zealand have ministries exclusively devoted to forestry. Elsewhere forestry departments fall under a larger ministry (e.g., agriculture) and thus may have a lower hierarchical profile. Budget allocations and staff resources are often inadequate to monitor forest resources effectively and to ensure sustainable management. Meagre central government resources, a history of government forest management failures, a desire to reform economies towards a stronger market orientation, and a commitment to more socially-oriented forest management have all been factors in a recent trend towards decentralization and devolution of forest management responsibilities to local governments, user groups, and local communities. The trend is exemplified by Joint Forest Management programmes in India, Community Forest Management Agreements in the Philippines, land and
forest allocation programmes in countries moving towards market economies (e.g., Viet Nam, Laos, China), privatization of forests in New Zealand and the transfer of forest lands to user groups in Nepal. The staffing of central government forestry agencies has changed dramatically in many cases to adjust to these new economic and institutional policies. Many agencies are struggling to identify their roles and adapt to the rapidly changing resource management environments.
Commercial private sector
Private companies wield considerable influence over forestry in the region. The private sector has invested heavily in harvesting equipment and processing facilities and, more recently, in forest plantations. Commercial forest operations provide millions of jobs throughout the region, and contribute millions of dollars each year to government coffers through the taxes and royalties paid. The transition from centrally-planned economies towards market economies in China, Laos, Mongolia, Myanmar and Viet Nam is presenting new opportunities and challenges for the private commercial sector and the governments involved. These countries face both opportunities and potential risks as forest management and exploitation are opened up to private-sector investment, as state corporations are privatized and as joint ventures are established with international firms.
Non-governmental organizations
Environmental organizations (both local and international) are rapidly gaining in power and influence in many countries. In Thailand, for example, advocacy groups have strongly influenced the pace of development, the orientation of the Master Plan for Forestry, and the development of a community forestry policy. In Indonesia, a consortium of environmental groups recently succeeded in elevating the debate over reallocation of government reforestation funds to international levels by challenging the government in court. International NGOs have been especially helpful in developing local capacities in countries such as Bhutan, Cambodia, China, Laos and Viet Nam, which previously had limited links to international organizations.
Local governments and communities
In many countries of the region, local governments and community organizations are being given increasing levels of responsibility for forest management and protection. The movement is most pronounced in South Asia and the Philippines, where social forestry programmes have evolved considerably since the 1970s. In Oceania, tribal and clan ownership and management of forest resources has been a longstanding tradition. In Fiji, the Native Land Trust Board assists in the management of forest land. In other South Pacific countries, forest management decisions are made exclusively by local groups or in collaboration with government organizations.
Research and education institutions
The Asia-Pacific region has a large number of forestry research and education institutions; recent surveys identified more than 138 forestry research organizations, and 170 forestry education and training institutions in the region, including 119 in developing countries.^6 The region also hosts the Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR), the Southeast Asian Regional Research Programme of the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF), the Regional Community Forestry Training Centre (RECOFTC), the ASEAN Institute of Forest Management (AIFM), the ASEAN Tree Seed Center, the International Center for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), and several other regional or international forestry institutions.
^6 FAO. 1993a. Directory of forestry research organizations. FAO Forestry Paper 109. FAO, Rome; FAO. 1995. Directory of forestry education and training institutions. FAO, Rome.
Forestry policies and planning
Most countries in Asia and the Pacific have made significant progress in reorienting forest policies and strategies to lay the foundation for sustainable forest management in line with UNCED and Agenda 21. Particular attention is given to policies that strengthen and enhance the conservation of biological diversity, the environmental functions of forests, economic stability, social and cultural values, forest health, and participatory decision making and management.
However, considerable work remains to review and reorient policies in related sectors that have an impact on forests (e.g., agriculture, land use, population, rural development, energy, transportation, tourism, etc.).
Many countries in the region have adopted the National Forestry Action Programme (NFAP) framework, including seven that have developed Forestry Sector Master Plans in cooperation with the Asian Development Bank, World Bank and various bilateral organizations. Fourteen Asia-Pacific countries have completed the NFAP planning phase and are in various stages of programme execution (i.e., Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, Fiji, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam). Planning activities are under way, or soon to be initiated, in India, Myanmar, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu. Some countries that developed NFAPs several years ago are now reviewing and revising their NFAPs (e.g., Indonesia, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and Sri Lanka).
New initiatives in forestry
Throughout the Asia-Pacific region, attention is now focused on bringing forests under sustainable management. National initiatives, tailored to specific local needs and conditions, exist in nearly every country of the region. These country-level initiatives are complemented and supported by a wide array of international initiatives. A current challenge in the region is to operationalize the ITTO Guidelines for Sustainable Management of Natural Tropical Forests, UNCED's Forest Principles and other broad forest management concepts.
Most tropical timber producing countries in Asia and the Pacific, and most of the region's major consumers subscribe fully to ITTO's Objective Year 2000. While progress towards meeting the objective is uneven (e.g., only Indonesia and Malaysia, among Asia-Pacific producers, are judged to have a reasonable prospect of bringing their entire production forests under sustainable management by the year 2000), most countries are judged to be moving in the right direction.^7
^7 Kemp, Ronald H. and Dhira Phantumvanit. 1995. 1995 mid-term review of progress towards the achievement of the Year 2000 Objective: consultants' report. ITTC(XIX)/6. ITTO. Yokohama.
Australia, China, Japan, New Zealand and the Republic of Korea are active members of the Montreal Process which is working to develop criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in temperate and boreal forests. Indonesia and Malaysia recently proposed an initiative to develop regional criteria and indicators for Asia and the Pacific.
Various donor organizations are helping developing countries in the region to translate the concepts of sustainable forest management into action at the field level, such as through support for initiatives in reduced-impact logging, harvest planning and monitoring, 'Model Forest' management, application of codes of forest practice, community-based forest management, resource inventory, etc.
Several countries and NGOs in the region are currently exploring the feasibility of forest product certification and the ecolabelling of forest products. Several site-level certifications have, in fact, already been made in the region. Best known among the national-level initiatives is the work of the Indonesian Ecolabelling Institute, which is working with CIFOR and the Forest Stewardship Council to develop certification procedures.^8
^8 Nugroho, Tri. 1995- An illustration of implementation of sustainable forest management and forest products certification in Indonesia. Paper presented at the FAO-ITTO Regional Expert Consultation on the Implementation of Sustainable Forest Management, 12-15 December 1995, Bangkok, Thailand.
Summary
The tremendous dynamism of the Asia-Pacific region which has greatly influenced forests and forestry development in the past, is sure to continue in the foreseeable future. Forestry will remain a key economic and development sector in many countries. New competing demands for the region's forest resources will increasingly be added to the already formidable requirements the region places on its forests. While some countries in the region are coping with these pressures and are moving rapidly towards more sustainable forest management, others are likely to experience continued, or even accelerated, forest degradation in the near term.
It is likely that the region will face increased competition from other forest product producing regions in the future. This will force some less competitive companies and producing areas out of business, but others are likely to adapt by improving efficiency, diversifying product lines, developing or acquiring new raw material sources, and targeting niche markets.
Major recent trends in Asia and the Pacific are the reorientation of forestry towards local people, a more participatory approach to forest management, and the development of strategic alliances to meet, simultaneously, the needs of local communities, industries, and national and global environmental interests. Forestry organizations and institutions are undergoing major restructuring to accommodate and facilitate this movement. Policies, similarly, are being reoriented. It is likely that such restructuring and reorientation will continue; indeed, this is essential for the successful future development of forestry in the region.
<section>e</section>
The Near East^1,2
^1 The highlights for the Near East cover the following countries; Afghanistan, Bahrain, Cyprus, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
^2 Unless otherwise stated, all data on forest cover and forest products cited are from FAO databases: Forest Resources Assessment and the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products.
Various factors external to the forestry sector are having a significant impact on forest resources in the Near East region. Among these are urbanization, economic changes and warfare.
As with most other developing regions, the Near East is undergoing rapid urbanization, including both seasonal and permanent migration of rural populations to urban areas. In many forest and mountain regions, populations are now earning a significant part of their income from off-farm employment. The trends in urbanization and industrialization are expected to continue and to somewhat reduce pressure on the forests in rural areas from grazing and fuelwood collection. Rapid urbanization on the other hand, creates new pressures, such as clearance of forests in the course of urban expansion, localized overcutting in peri-urban areas to supply fuelwood to urban populations, and unplanned and uncontrolled tourism development, particularly around large settlements and coastal strips. In some areas, air pollution in industrialized regions has had negative effects on forests and trees.
Economic difficulties in most of the region's countries have been one of the main constraints to more efficient conservation and sustainable management of natural resources, including forests. On the other hand, strong economies in some of the wealthier countries (i.e., Saudi Arabia, the UA Emirates, Kuwait, Libya, Oman) have enabled them to allocate considerable financial resources to the establishment of areas of green cover.
National and regional disputes and wars have also been a cause of serious forest resource degradation in some countries of the region (e.g., Afghanistan, Iraq, Lebanon).
Forest resources
The Near East region has never been heavily forested due to its harsh climatic conditions. However, forests once covered a much larger area of the region, especially in its northern part, than they do today. Forests now cover only about 2 percent of the land area of the Near East region. Of the existing 12.7 million ha of forest lands, 11.8 million ha are located only in three countries (8.9 million ha in Turkey, 1.5 million ha in Iran, and 1.4 million in Afghanistan). The other 13 countries of the region together account for only 1.9 million ha of forest. Three countries (Bahrain, Oman and Qatar) have little or no natural forest cover. In 1990, it was calculated that 330 000 ha, or about 2.6 percent of the total forest area was in plantations, the rest being in natural forest. It is estimated that between 1990 and 1995, deforestation in the region amounted to 800 000 ha, or an annual rate of loss of 1.2 percent. Much forest land has been degraded by fire, overgrazing and
overcutting for local use of wood products. Large parts of the remaining forest areas support only poor vegetation cover.
The arid climate limits forestry potential in the region. Not only is it the cause of low productivity of the region's forests, but once destroyed, it is difficult, time consuming and expensive to reestablish forest vegetation.
In the vast areas lacking any natural forest cover, local populations cultivate fast growing, multipurpose tree species (i.e., acacias, poplars, eucalyptus, casuarina, cypress) on and around farmlands and near homesteads to meet their needs for wood and other products, to protect agricultural crops against wind damage, and to provide shelter and amenity value. Small woodlots and agroforestry systems provide significant amounts of wood in some countries (e.g., 4 million m^3 per annum in Turkey). In many countries (e.g., Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Iran), wood production outside the forest (e.g., on agricultural land) is even higher than from the forest.
Forest resources development and conservation
Until the middle of the twentieth century, most forests of the region were looked to mainly as a source of fuelwood and poles, and of game animals and other non-wood forest products (NWFPs) for local use. They have always been important grazing areas. Livestock grazing has, traditionally, played a significant economic and social role in the region. Widespread recognition of the importance of the protective functions of forests did not arise in most countries until relatively recently. Forests play vital roles in the region in protection of soil and water resources, particularly in areas prone to desertification and in the mountainous regions and steep watersheds. They also provide shelter, protection against wind damage and dust storms, stabilization of river banks and control of floods.
Forest protection is considered one of the main activities of forestry departments in many countries of the region. This includes combating forest fires and controlling grazing, encroachment and illegal cuttings. Some efforts have also been made to conserve the region's remaining mangrove forests.
Afforestation and sand dune stabilization are being carried out to limit the risks of desertification, to which most of the Near East countries are exposed. Desertification control initiatives are particularly vigorous in Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Iran.
Many countries (i.e., Syria, Turkey, Jordan, Iran) have had active programmes in afforestation and reforestation of degraded forest lands, mainly for protective purposes, although some of the plantations have a productive function as well. Reforestation of degraded forest lands has, in some countries such as Turkey and Syria, led to serious conflicts with local populations who, by tradition, have often used such areas as common grazing lands. In addition, the benefits to local people of reforestation efforts (mainly involving coniferous species) have been limited in most countries, offering mainly employment opportunities for plantation establishment and maintenance. In order to provide greater local benefit, some countries have started to plant multipurpose tree species (i.e., for fruit, fodder, honey production) in reforestation efforts (e.g., Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Israel and Jordan). Some countries have also started testing and establishing silvipastoral plantations for
forage production on degraded forest lands.
Countries have made efforts to implement integrated watershed programmes involving different institutions, including those responsible for forestry, pasture, agriculture and rural development. In some cases, efforts have been made to introduce participatory approaches to encourage the involvement of local populations in planning and management of watershed activities and improvement of land use systems. Some of these efforts are supported by external loans and grants (e.g., Eastern Anatolia Integrated Watershed Development Project in Turkey, Zarqa River Basin Project in Jordan, Watershed and Range Development Project in Iran).
The use of forests and trees for amenity and recreational purposes is gaining in importance in all countries in the region, due mainly to trends in urbanization and the demands of urban populations. Many countries have been establishing greenbelts, roadside plantations and other urban and peri-urban plantings (e.g., Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Syria, Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Kuwait, Oman).
Increased attention has been given to both conservation of biological diversity and to the development of tourism in many countries of the region. Some countries have recently adopted policies and taken steps to expand and improve the management of protected areas and national parks (e.g., Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Cyprus, Lebanon). A number of new parks and protected areas have been established in recent years. Saudi Arabia, Iran, Israel, Oman and Turkey have extensive parks and protected area systems. It is not known, however, how much forest land is included in the parks and protected area systems in the region.
Although game animals are no longer a significant source of food for local populations in the region, hunting for certain wildlife species as an organized tourist activity has become a good source of income in some countries (e.g., wild goat hunting in southern Turkey and bear hunting in eastern Turkey). This has, however, been a point of contention between local people, foresters, and NGOs and environmental groups in some places.
Forest products and industries
Fuelwood and charcoal are important products in the Near East region, their volume of production being about two-thirds that of all industrial wood products (see Table 1). Fuelwood and charcoal meet important energy needs of rural populations living within or near forested areas, particularly in cold mountain regions.
Although their production is not well quantified, non-wood forest products (e.g., fodder, game, honey, gum, fruits, mushroom, dyes, medicinal and aromatic plants) are important in local economies, providing for household needs and serving as a source of supplementary income at the local level. In some cases, NWFPs also contribute to national economies; in some countries (e.g., Yemen, Iran), revenues from the export of NWFPs exceed those from wood products exports. Most NWFPs are exported in raw, unprocessed form.
Only Turkey and, to a lesser extent, Iran and Afghanistan, produce significant quantities of wood; together, the three countries account for 96 percent of the region's total roundwood production (including 93 percent of fuelwood and charcoal, and 99 percent of industrial roundwood).
All countries of the region are largely dependent on imports for meeting their needs for wood and wood products; some countries are wholly dependent. Even Turkey, which has the largest forest area in the region, imports around 1.5 million m of roundwood each year.
Forest industry is economically important only in Turkey and Iran. In other countries, the industry is confined to small scale sawmills and panelboard factories which largely depend on imports of finished and semi-finished products.
Forestry institutions
Forestry is covered at ministerial level only in Turkey; in most of the other countries in the region, forestry is organized as a department under the Ministry of Agriculture (i.e., in Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Cyprus, Yemen, Iraq). In Iran, forestry and range management are placed under the Ministry of Jihad-e-Sazandegi, while in Saudi Arabia forestry is under the Ministry of Agriculture and Water.
Environment ministries or departments have been established recently in several countries (e.g., Ministry of Environment in Syria and Turkey, and departments of environment under different ministries in other countries). Although only newly formed, they are expected to play important roles in the future, particularly in the development of environmental policies and legislation, and in raising awareness and support for environmental issues including forests and protected areas.
The mandate of forestry departments in many countries is quite broad, including not only forest protection (all countries), but also desertification control (Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, Yemen), afforestation (most countries) and watershed management (Turkey, Jordan, Iran, Cyprus). The forestry departments in Iran, Jordan and Afghanistan, are responsible also for pasture development and management. Under the Ministry of Forestry in Turkey, the General Directorate of Forest Villages Relations implements rural development plans in forested regions and assists in the creation of rural development cooperatives for this purpose. In Iran, the Forestry and Range Organization gives special importance to rural development and people's involvement in harvesting and afforestation activities.
Table 1
Forest production, trade and consumption in the Near East region (1000 m^3 or 1000 tonnes)
product
production
imports
exports
consumption
fuelwood and charcoal (1000 m^3)
industrial roundwood (1000m^3)
sawnwood and sleepers (1000 m^3)
wood-based panels (1000m^3)
pulp for paper (1000 tonnes)
paper and paperboard (1000 tonnes)
Forestry administrations in many countries lack financial and human resources, a situation which is aggravated by their isolation from the political power structure and their limited public relations capacity. In spite of the progress made in the field of forestry education and training, a lack of skilled manpower still constitutes a major constraint in forestry development and conservation in the region. The countries of the Near East region, with few exceptions, have been slow to adopt the worldwide trend in decentralization, involving the devolution of responsibility to lower levels and regionalization.
Well-established forestry research institutions exist only in some countries (Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Syria). Most research concentrates on technical forestry problems; research on environmental and socio-economic subjects is still limited. Well-established university programmes for forestry exist in Turkey, Iran, Iraq, Israel and Cyprus, and programmes have been started recently in Syria and Jordan. The Forest and Range School in Latakia, Syria, and the Cyprus Forestry College are important regional institutions providing mid-level (i.e., technician) training. Only recently, after a long period of low enrollment, have student numbers in forestry schools increased. Greater global attention on forestry and the new international conventions related to forestry and environment have led to more interest in forestry as a profession (e.g., in Turkey, Iran, Saudi Arabia).
Although there has been considerable development in the NGO-sector during recent years, NGOs active in environmental fields are still at limited levels in most countries of the region, with the exception of Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan, where some NGOs have become well recognized and influential. The Environmental Conservation Society and Royal Society for the Protection of Nature and Environment in Jordan are unique in that they are authorized to oversee the management of protected areas in the country.
Forest policy and planning
A trend towards more comprehensive development planning continues in the region, and the role of the forestry sector within overall economic and social development is being recognized in National Development Plans (NDPs). All countries in the region have either specific forestry plans or have forestry activities incorporated into their national development plans. Many have formulated forest policies and others are planning to do so. All national forest plans in the region call for measures to:
· reduce the negative effects of deforestation and land degradation;
· encourage community involvement and private sector initiatives;
· conserve existing natural forests and expand the area of forests by reforestation and afforestation;
· increase attention to environmental roles and functions of forests; and
· expand protected area systems and ensure their proper management.
Several countries in the region have updated their forest legislation and regulations (i.e., Lebanon, Iraq, Turkey) giving new emphasis to environmental protection, socio-economic roles of forestry and community involvement in forestry/agroforestry (e.g., the Afforestation Mobilization Law in Turkey, 1995; and the law for compulsory windbreak and tree plantations in farming systems in Iraq, 1995). At the same time, they are introducing heavier penalties against forest offenses (e.g., the new Forest Law enacted in 1995 in Lebanon, and the proposed amended Forest Laws which are currently being debated in the Parliaments of Jordan and Syria).
There have been no significant changes in forest ownership in most countries of the region. Most of the forests and woodlands are state-owned. Although countries of the Near East have not as yet followed the trend in many other parts of the world towards the privatization of forests and expansion of user rights over forest lands and products, they have been examining the pros and cons of such a course of action. This question was discussed at the 16th session of Silva Mediterranea, held in Larnaca, Cyprus, in June 1996, where the discussion centred on the effects of allocation of rights over forest lands either on a collective (e.g., village forests) or private basis as a way of increasing people's involvement in, and benefit from, forest management.
In general, the development and adoption of suitable community forestry models and use of participatory approaches in rural development activities are still in early stages. However, a number of national and regional projects, including some assisted by FAO, the World Bank and German bilateral aid, have encouraged such development. The implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification is also expected to encourage partnerships and local decision making.
Recent initiatives
The forestry sector is expected to be affected by the major international developments following UNCED that link, directly or indirectly, conservation, management and sustainable development of forests and trees to sustainable national development. Some examples of recent developments that have taken place in this context are as follows:
· Most of the countries in the region have started national initiatives in relation to implementation of Chapter 11 of Agenda 21, especially IPF programme element 1.4, which addresses fragile ecosystems affected by desertification.
· Most of the region's countries have signed the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and the Convention on Biological Diversity.
· The Inter-Agency Task Force ad hoc Meeting on Desertification in the Near East, held from 23-25 September 1996 in Cairo, recommended improved linkages and enhanced networks among regional and international institutions active in the region, which would also strengthen management of forest resources.
· The FAO/UNEP Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in the Near East Region, held from 15-17 October 1996 in Cairo, identified a set of criteria and indicators suitable for the region (see page 118). The 12th Near East Forestry Commission meeting (21-24 October 1996, Cairo), adopted the set of criteria and indicators and agreed to launch national efforts for testing and adaptation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management.
The Eleventh World Forestry Congress will be held for the first time in the Near East region (Antalya, Turkey) in October 1997. This significant event is expected to draw international attention to forestry problems in the region.
<section>f</section>
Africa^1,2
^1 Included in the region are all countries listed in the following sub-regions: west Sahelian Africa, east Sahelian Africa, west moist Africa, Central Africa, tropical southern Africa, Insular East Africa, North Africa, non-tropical southern Africa. See Table 1 of Annex 3 for country listings of sub-regions.
^2 Unless otherwise stated, all data on forest cover and forest products cited are from FAO databases; Forest Resources Assessment and the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products.
Forest resources
Forests cover an area of 520 million ha, or about one-third of the land area of Africa (see Table 1). They consist of dry tropical forests located in the Sahel and in eastern and southern Africa; humid tropical forests in West and Central Africa, and various subtropical forest and woodland formations in North Africa and in the southern tip of the continent. Land-use changes, particularly over the last 20-30 years, have been largely responsible for the extent and condition of the forests today.
The dry tropical forests, including woodlands, savannah and steppe formations, are located in areas dominated by subsistence agriculture and rangelands which support large numbers of livestock. Pressure on these forests due to agricultural expansion, and increased fuelwood collection and livestock grazing is heavy in many places. Drought and fire are major causes of degradation.
Much of the West African tropical humid forests, located mainly in lowlands and accessible to the coast, have already undergone substantial commercial harvesting. In many areas, these forests have been converted to agricultural use. Nigeria and Cote d'Ivoire are cases in point. Most of the primary forests of these countries had been heavily logged by the 1970s. Expansion of agriculture onto forest lands has occurred in both countries: in the more densely populated Nigeria, clearing for subsistence agriculture has predominated, while in Cote d'Ivoire, large areas of forest have been replaced with agricultural plantation crops.
Table 1
Total land area, population and forest cover, 1995
land area
thousand ha
population
million
forest area
thousand ha
forest cover
percent
west Sahelian Africa
east Sahelian Africa
west moist Africa
Central Africa
southern Africa - tropical
insular East Africa
tropical Africa
North Africa
southern Africa - non-tropical
non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
Table 2
Change in forest cover, 1990-95
land area
forest area
annual change
sub-region
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
percent
west Sahelian Africa
east Sahelian Africa
west moist Africa
Central Africa
tropical southern Africa
insular East Africa
total tropical Africa
North Africa
non-tropical southern Africa
total non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
The forests of Central Africa, with the exception of Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Cameroon are landlocked and are not easily accessible. The forests of the huge Congo-Zaire basin are relatively intact, although strong pressures are developing on its margins.
The dry subtropical (Mediterranean-type) forests in the countries of North Africa have been degraded for many years due to livestock husbandry, extensification of agriculture, and strong dependence on the forest by local people for various products.
Information on forest area is provided in Tables 1 and 2, of which the latter shows the rates of change of forest cover between 1990 and 1995. The annual rate of deforestation in the region was estimated at 0.7 percent, with the highest rate (1.0 percent) in west moist Africa, and the lowest (0.2 percent) in non-tropical southern Africa. Afforestation efforts are unable to keep ahead of the loss of natural forests.
Forest resources development and conservation
Planting efforts in the dry areas of the region have been focused on meeting wood energy needs and controlling desertification. Dryland forest resources in the two Sahelian sub-regions continue to be exploited extensively to meet the energy needs of growing populations. In spite of the tremendous efforts in the 1970s and 1980s by countries to increase fuelwood production and reduce consumption (i.e., through improved wood stoves), the results were not as successful as had been hoped. Lessons from past experience indicate that the most successful means of increasing fuelwood production are through locally-based, sustainable management of natural forests, well-designed and managed plantations, and agroforestry practices. These approaches are now quite widely adopted and are likely to continue in future efforts to manage forests for fuelwood and other wood products for local use.
Statistics show that both rural and urban demand for wood energy has increased, and it is expected that it will continue to increase due to growing populations and macro-economic changes. Use of fuelwood has increased as an indirect result of Structural Adjustment Programmes under which all kinds of subsidies have been removed. Since most of the programmes on alternatives to wood energy were based on subsidized prices of the substitutes, much of the progress made in reducing pressure on the natural forests has been reversed. The SAPs have also resulted in the devaluation of currencies, the erosion of purchasing power, and impoverishment of segments of the population. Many people have been forced to revert to wood energy for their domestic needs.
Planting in the Maghreb countries has been carried out for the following purposes: sand dune stabilization (e.g., Morocco); rehabilitation of degraded steppe areas (e.g., Algeria); range rehabilitation and improvement; watershed management (e.g., Morocco, Tunisia); and protection of irrigated areas (e.g., Libya, Egypt, Morocco).
Plantations are becoming a more significant component of forest resources in the continent. In the non-tropical North and southern Africa (including Lesotho, South Africa and Swaziland), plantations already account for almost the entire industrial forest estate and, even in countries like Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe in the tropical belt, plantations are the major sources of timber. The total area of plantation in the continent is estimated at more than 6 million ha of which 1.5 million ha is in North Africa, 1.2 million ha is in South Africa and the rest is in tropical Africa. Since 1990, most new plantations have been established by communities, though private companies are also active in some countries (e.g., South Africa, Swaziland and Zimbabwe). Most governments, lacking the financial resources for such long-term ventures, are no longer establishing plantations themselves but are encouraging the private sector to invest. Plantations use mostly exotic species
like eucalyptus, pinus and cypress but, with the emergence of rural community forestry programmes, more attention has been paid to local multipurpose tree species, especially in west Sahelian Africa.
Agroforestry plays an important role in the region. A variety of traditional systems are practised, including the parklands system, homegardens, windbreaks and shade trees over plantation crops. In countries where forest resources are limited (e.g., Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi), incorporation of trees into the farming system may be the most feasible means for farm households to meet their needs for wood and non-wood forest products, and may provide additional income. In many areas where natural forest cover is limited and small-scale agriculture predominates, there is a positive correlation between population density and tree cover on farm (i.e., agroforestry). Trees in agroforestry systems can also provide important protection against soil erosion and contribute to soil fertility. Promising work in improved fallows in shifting cultivation, or bush fallow agricultural systems, indicate that trees can be effective in accelerating the recovery of soils after cropping.
Natural forest management in dry areas of the region has only recently received significant attention, and improvements in forest management for timber production in the moist zones have been limited. National economic policies and needs, some heightened under structural adjustment programmes, have resulted in intensified commercial harvesting in some of the region's moist tropical forests. Harvesting in some West African forests has intensified. Many of the forests in the sub-region, however, have already been extensively logged in the past, so timber companies from West Africa are now operating in Central Africa, which contains more than 90 percent of the rainforest formations of the region.
Africa has important biological diversity. The wildlife resources of East Africa, southern Africa, Central Africa and Madagascar are particularly rich. Despite the fact that some countries have well-established parks and protected area systems, some forest ecosystems are not well represented; and weak management and local economic pressures are threatening habitats and certain plants and animals. Recent efforts have been made to involve local people directly in the management of parks and protected areas and wildlife resources (e.g., in Zimbabwe, Cameroon, Burkina Faso). Various efforts are also being made to domesticate wildlife species for food, especially small rodents, antelopes and birds.
Forest products
In terms of forest products, Africa is a significant producer only of fuelwood, representing more than one-quarter of the production of fuelwood worldwide. Africa's population, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, is relying more than ever on fuelwood to meet its domestic energy needs. Eighty-eight percent of the almost 570 million m^3 of roundwood produced in 1994 in the region was used as fuelwood. This is a 2 percent increase from the 1981 level. In west Sahelian Africa, this has led to the promotion of participatory management of natural forests for woodfuel production, and creation of rural woodfuel markets. In Niger, rural markets sold 16 million tonnes of woodfuel in 1994, representing 10 to 15 percent of the wood coming into Niamey, the capital city. The market value was approximately 60 million CFA of which about 50 million benefited village woodcutters directly.
Africa produces only a small proportion of the world's total industrial roundwood and is a net importer of industrial wood products. Its only exports are logs and small volumes of primary processed forest products. The main importing countries are those of North Africa (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia), which accounted for more than 60 percent of the continent's imports in 1994. However, except for Kenya, Nigeria, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania and Zimbabwe, all the countries in sub-Saharan Africa import essentially all of their paper requirements. South Africa alone produces 73 percent of the continent's production of wood pulp. Trade in forest products represents 2 percent of Africa's total trade in terms of value, but for some countries, it represents 15-48 percent.
The dependency of African populations on non-wood forest products (NWFPs) is high. For instance, medicinal products from forests are extremely important, particularly to rural people. Even though these products carry low monetary value in the local trade, they play a fundamental role in the rural production system. Forest products, both plant and animal, play a crucial role in food security in Africa. For example, the jumping rabbit of the Kalahari desert, is a major source of protein for the people of Botswana and, during the rainy season, the mushroom consumption per person in Zimbabwe reaches 1.8 kg. Fodder from trees and shrubs in the rangelands of arid and semi-arid areas is extremely important to livestock, particularly in the dry season. This is most important to pastoral communities where milk is one of the most important staple foods.
Many programmes have been developed to include sustainable production of NWFPs in management plans of forests and to ensure their rational utilization. Some governments are making efforts to develop the traditional forest-based medicines by organizing traditional healers and setting up research institutions on medicinal plants.
Forest policies and institutions
Forest legislation has been in place in most countries since the beginning of the twentieth century, even though forest policies as such did not exist. However, weaknesses in the forest laws and lack of enforcement have limited their effectiveness in protecting forests and wildlife resources. In both Central Africa and west moist Africa, forest legislation focuses mainly on closed forests, and does not give adequate attention to forests in the savannah zones or to degraded forests. Although forest legislation in west Sahelian Africa is more comprehensive, revision may be needed in some countries to allow for community forestry needs.
During the mid-1980s, the Tropical Forests Action Programme (TFAP) was adopted throughout the continent as a means of improving forest sector planning (see 'Trends in national forest planning' in Part 2). Twenty countries have prepared a National Forest Action Programme (NFAP). In many countries (e.g., Cameroon, Guinea, Benin, Togo) this process led to policy, institutional and legal reforms. One of the major positive impacts of these reforms has been a shift from purely forestry-oriented and production-driven forestry to a more integrated approach to forest management, including what is called 'village land management' ('amènagement des terroirs'). Village land management involves decentralized and integrated management of village lands with broader participation of all interest groups. In Cameroon, Benin and Togo, the reforms introduced by the NFAP permitted better coordination of national institutions dealing with forestry and with wildlife.
Community forestry is most developed in the Sahelian west, Sahelian east and southern African sub-regions. Countries such as Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger and Senegal in the western Sahel, Kenya in the eastern Sahel and Tanzania, Zimbabwe and Zambia in the southern Sahelian sub-regions have played pioneering roles in rural forestry and participatory management of natural forests, woodlots and/or wildlife management.
The concept of village land management is being developed successfully in west Sahelian Africa, particularly in Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger and Senegal where it is officially adopted as the main strategy for community forestry development. The major constraints to adoption in these countries remain insecurity of land and resource tenure, weaknesses in land legislation, and inadequate policies related to agroforestry.
The countries in moist West Africa have recently embarked on a similar approach. Interesting work is being carried out by Sociéte de Développement Forestier (SODEFOR) in Cote d'Ivoire within the 'Commission Paysans - Forêt' Programme. In Cameroon, pilot programmes were started under the framework of the NFAP implementation: in Mbalmayo by the Overseas Development Agency (UK) and in Dimako by Fonds d'Aide et de Coopération (France).
Community forestry is less developed in Central Africa due to the low population of most of the countries (Gabon, Congo, Central African Republic, Equatorial Guinea, São Tomé and Principe), combined with the high level of urbanization (40-50 percent).
Four specialized intergovernmental organizations exist in Africa, together covering almost all countries except Benin, Togo, Guinea, Sierra Leone and insular East African countries (see Table 3). These organizations offer a forum for coordination among member countries.
New Initiatives
African countries rely heavily (70-75 percent) on external resources for the funding of their forestry sector. Essentially all internal financing comes from the public sector. The Tenth Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission held in Sanbonani, South Africa, 27 November to 1 December 1996, concluded that self-financing would be the best guarantee for sustainable funding (see 'Forestry funding' in Part 2). This might be done through generation of revenues in the various stages of I exploitation, processing and trading of forest products. Many countries have already established 'national forest development funds'. Other sources of funding include the private sector and other partners i.e., rural communities. Efforts are still required to reform land ownership and tenure systems, bank lending systems and other policy aspects. Political guarantees may even be needed before increased private investments, particularly foreign, in forest management operations
becomes significant.
Table 3
Specialized intergovernmental organizations
organization
member countries
main area of concern
Inter-governmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Headquarters: Djibouti
east Sahelian countries:
Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti, Sudan, Kenya, Uganda, Somalia.
combating desertification and food security
Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS)
Headquarters: Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso)
west Sahelian countries:
Cape Verde, Gambia, Burkina Faso, Guinea Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Chad.
combating desertification; water resources and food security
African Timber Organization (ATO/OAB)
Headquarters: Libreville (Gabon)
Central Africa and west moist Africa:
Angola, Cameroon, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Central African Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Liberia, Gabon, Ghana, Nigeria, São Tomé and Principe, Tanzania, Zaire.
timber production and market forest management; forest based industries; measurement and standardization; criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
Southern African Development Community/Forestry Sector Technical Coordinating Unit
SADC/FSTCU Headquarters: Lilongwe (Malawi)
southern Africa:
Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, Malawi, Namibia, Lesotho, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
forestry development and environmental protection
The disengagement of the state as a general policy has compelled forestry authorities to design new policies. The various recommendations and agreements adopted by UNCED have served as a good framework for policy, strategy and structural review exercises and institutional strengthening of forestry development.
The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification was the brainchild of African delegations at UNCED and has been supported strongly by African nations throughout its negotiation process. The permanent Inter-State Committee for Combating Drought in the Sahel (CILSS) is playing a dynamic role in the implementation of the CCD in west Sahelian Africa.
Various intergovernmental organizations, including the African Timber Organization (ATO), SADC, IGAD, the Organization of African States, and even the Economic Commission of West African States (ECOWAS) are making valuable efforts to develop criteria and indicators for the sustainable management of Africa's tropical forests (see Part 3 for a discussion of the development of criteria and indicators).
<section>g</section>
Europe and the former USSR^1,2
^1 This section covers the region of Europe and the area of the former USSR. The following breakdown has been used:
Nordic countries:
Finland (SF), Iceland (IS), Norway (NO), Sweden (SE)
EU(12):
Belgium (BE), Denmark (DK), France (FR), Germany (DE), Greece (GR), Ireland (IR), Italy (IT), Luxembourg (LU), The Netherlands (NL), Portugal (PT), Spain (ES), United Kingdom (GB)
EU (15):
EU (12) plus Austria, Finland and Sweden
Central Europe:
Austria (AT), Switzerland (CH)
Eastern Europe:
Bulgaria (BG), Czech Republic (CZ), Hungary (HU), Poland (PL), Romania (RO), Slovakia (SK)
S.E. Europe:
Albania (AL), Bosnia and Herzegovina (BA), Croatia (HR), Macedonia (MK), Malta (MT), Slovenia (SI), Turkey (TU), Yugoslavia (YU)
Baltic States:
Estonia (EE), Latvia (LV), Lithuania (LT) former USSR: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgystan, Moldova, Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan plus the Baltic States
^2 Unless otherwise stated, all data on forest cover and forest products cited are from UN-ECE/FAO databases.
Europe
Forest resources
Europe has nearly 215 million ha of forest and other wooded land,^3 which together account for nearly 30 percent of the land area of Europe. Forests alone cover 162 million ha. Forests and other wooded land are unequally distributed between countries within the region. Their cover is well above average in the Nordic and Baltic countries and in Central Europe, and below average in southern Europe and in some densely populated northwestern areas, such as the UK and The Netherlands. Other wooded land is located mostly around the Mediterranean (e.g., maquis and garrigue) and in harsh boreal climates.
^3 'Other wooded land' (OWL) Is wooded land which has some forestry characteristics but is not defined as forest: it Includes open woodland and scrub, notably in the Mediterranean region.
Europe's forest area is fairly stable. A slight net increase occurred between 1990 and 1995 as losses to other land uses, notably urban development and infrastructure, were more than offset by afforestation and natural regeneration, chiefly on former agricultural land.
Forest resources development and conservation
Almost all of Europe's forest is managed, although with widely differing management objectives and intensity. Eighty-five percent of Europe's forest area is considered 'exploitable', i.e. with no legal, technical or economic restrictions on wood production (see Table 1). 'Exploitable forests' are rarely managed only for wood production as non-wood goods and services are normally also supplied from this type of forest. About two-thirds of Europe's exploitable forest are in the EU(15). There is about one-third of a hectare of forest per person, but rather less in the EU(12) and Eastern Europe, and considerably more in the Nordic countries, where there is more than 3 ha per person, and nearly 1 ha in the Baltic countries. In the Nordic countries and southeast Europe, the area of exploitable forest has dropped slightly as areas have been taken out of wood production and classified for other uses, such as for nature conservation (see Table 2).
Slightly less than one-half of Europe's forest land is in private hands. In part these belong to large traditional family holdings, or the forest industries, but in many countries there are thousands, even millions, of owners with very small holdings. Whereas in a number of countries, forestry traditions, public support, and cooperative arrangements and extension services, enable these owners to manage their forests intensively and rationally, elsewhere many holdings are badly managed or not managed at all, especially where the estate has been broken up by succession and owners have left the country for the cities.
Stocking level (growing stock per hectare) is determined both by ecological conditions and by management choices. Since the 1950s, fellings have consistently been less than forest growth (net annual increment), enabling European forests to supply ever greater quantities of wood while simultaneously increasing the growing stock of forest capital. On average there are 140 m^3/ha, for a total growing stock in Europe of 22.6 billion m^3, but stocking is lower in the Nordic countries (see Table 3). In Germany and neighbouring countries, growing stock has been allowed to build up to very high levels, sometimes more than 300 m^3/ha. Of a net annual increment exceeding 700 million m^3, about 60 percent is felled, leading to a steady build-up of growing stock. Only in southeast Europe are fellings greater than the net annual increment, due to pressure from grazing, fuelwood demand and removals forced by forest fires.
Table 1
Forest area, 1995
forest and other wooded land
total forest area
exploitable forest area
other wooded land
forest cover
million ha
million ha
million ha
million ha
percent
Nordic countries
EU(12)
Central Europe
Eastern Europe
southeast Europe
Baltic States
Europe
Table 2
Changes in the forest resource, 1990-95
forest and other wooded land
total forest area
exploitable forest area
other wooded land
million ha
million ha
million ha
million ha
Nordic countries
EU(12)
Central Europe
Eastern Europe
southeast Europe
Baltic States
Europe
Two main threats to European forests are fire and pollution. In southern Europe, hundreds of thousands of hectares of forest^4 are destroyed by fire every year, effectively preventing sustainable forest management in many regions as forests are unable to achieve maturity.
^4 An average of 0.6 million ha of forest per year have been destroyed by fire over the last decade, with large year-to-year variations.
In some areas, most notably north-central Europe (Poland, Czech Republic, eastern Germany), pollution has caused considerable forest damage. This is, however, a local or regional phenomenon. The more widespread foliage loss since the early 1980s has more complex causes, of which pollution is probably only one. Much is still unknown about the relationship between pollution, climate and site characteristics. The annual survey of forest condition^5 carried out under the auspices of UN-ECE and the EU found in 1995 that, of the trees assessed, significant defoliation had occurred on more than one-quarter of the total sample. Although improvements of forest condition were reported from certain locations, overall forest damage seems to be increasing on a regional level. National reports indicated various causes of deteriorating forest condition: drought and heat had a particularly high impact, but pest infestation, human activities, game and grazing were also factors. Air pollution
is considered to be the direct cause of forest decline in some areas, particularly central Europe, but in most cases it is an indirect factor, predisposing trees to damage from other elements, such as pest and disease.
^5 Forest Condition in Europe, published by the UN Economic Commission for Europe and the European Commission, under the auspices of the Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution.
Table 3
Growing stock, increment and fellings in 1995; and change from 1990
growing stock (1995)
change (1990-95)
net annual increment
change (1990-95)
fellings (1995)
change (1990-95)
million m^3
million m^3
million m^3
million m^3
million m^3
percent
Nordic countries
EU(12)
131^a
Central Europe
Eastern Europe
southeast Europe
Baltic States
Europe
437^a
^a The 1990 fellings were exceptionally high due to the hurricane which blew down over 100 million m^3 of wood in that year, accounting for the steep drop in fellings between 1990 and 1995 in some countries.
Table 4
Key forest ratios, 1995
forest and OWL per caput
growing stock/ha
increment/ha
fellings as percent of increment
ha
m^3
m^3
percent
Nordic countries
EU(12)
Central Europe
Eastern Europe
southeast Europe
Baltic States
Europe
Continuing damage from storms (more than 100 million m^3 blown down in 1990) and insects (e.g. the regular cycle of infestation of Polish forests by the nun moth Lymantria monacha) are also significant factors in forest condition.
Forest products
After the very weak or negative growth of the early 1990s, there was strong demand for most forest products in Europe in 1994 and the first half of 1995. This was marked by high prices for all products, particularly pulp, which almost reached the psychologically significant level of US$ 1 000/tonne in the spring/summer of 1995. Consumption of some panels, notably medium density fibreboard (MDF) and oriented strand board (OSB) which compete strongly with other forest products on grounds of both performance and price, rose sharply. Rapid capacity expansion followed the strong growth in consumption, and eventually led to an over-supplied market. A weakening of demand in mid-1995, combined with destocking, resulted in steep price falls in many sectors, and to cutbacks in production. The globalization of forest products markets became increasingly apparent, as developments in the USA,
Canada, Southeast Asia, Brazil and Russia all directly (and rather rapidly) affected European forest products markets. Increasing concern was voiced about apparently increasing volatility and cyclicality of markets, notably for pulp, but also for newsprint, sawnwood and some panels. Stock cycles and capacity not adapted to real demand, as well as poor communications between buyers and sellers have been identified as aggravating factors.
Forest policy and institutions^6 Probably the most striking recent development is the number of countries which have undertaken or are carrying out a fundamental review and reappraisal of their national forestry legislation and policies. Many are doing so in the light of the new priorities identified during the widespread debate on sustainable forest management and articulated in many international fora, notably UNCED and the Helsinki Ministerial Conference. Many countries are carrying out a review of policy and drawing up or endorsing 'strategies' 'new policy concepts' or 'plans'.^7 Most of these are concerned with giving the proper weight to environmental and social functions of forests and setting up effective and efficient systems for consultation and implementation. Efforts are being made to ensure harmonization of strategies between national and regional strategies.
^6 The Information provided in this section was synthesized from 22 national reports submitted to the joint session of the FAO European Forestry Commission and the UN-ECE Timber Committee held in September 1996
^7 CZ, DK, EE, SF, DE, IR, NO, SK, SI, SE, GB.
These processes were also reflected in forestry legislation. New forest laws have been approved in the last few years in ten countries^8. In many cases the forest laws are part of a 'package' with linked sectors, notably land use, nature/biological diversity conservation and hunting - a welcome sign of the integration of policy-making processes. A major factor has also been the need to adapt the complete legal and institutional framework in transition countries. For example, Slovakia is proceeding with the establishment of a definitive legal structure for the forestry sector to replace the transitional measures which had been used in recent years of rapid social and political change. Several countries are also involved in the development of 'guidelines' or 'codes of practice' for the implementation of the broad concepts laid down in legislation or policy documents.^9 Also, as a result of changed priorities, many countries have increased the area of forest under some sort of
legal protection.^10
^8 AT, HR, DK, EE, SF, HU, LT, SI, SK (for 1997/98), CH.
^9 HR, DK, EE, SF, IR, SE,
^10 AT, BG, CY, EE, SF, DE, HU, NO.
An issue for several countries in transition is the restitution or privatization of forest land - one which, in some countries, may take many years to resolve. For example, in Croatia, the topic of 'denationalization' is being considered by Parliament as an 'especially delicate issue'.
The new policies and strategies, as well as other pressures, notably to increase efficiency and reduce costs, have led more countries to continue or start the reorganization of their forest institutions. For instance, the UK Forestry Commission now is divided into a 'Forestry Authority', a 'Forestry Enterprise' (responsible for management of public forests) and the research agency. In Germany, several Länder are reorganizing their forest services because of financial pressures. The rapid multiplication of 'clients' (i.e. private forest owners) in Hungary, combined with reductions in staffing levels, is making the provision of adequate services extremely difficult. Three countries in transition have established or strengthened specialized bodies for forestry extension and consulting, to help and guide new forest owners.^11
^11 HU, LT, SK.
Many countries have completed or are carrying out exercises, often in a consultative process, to identify criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management at the national level, to collect information on the indicators, and to assess the implications of this exercise for forest policy. The Helsinki process criteria and indicators have been used as a starting point but many countries have adapted them to national circumstances.^12 Denmark is also extending this exercise to the forest management unit level.
^12 BG, CZ, EE, DK, DE, GR, HU, LT, NO, CH.
Many countries are making efforts to increase public participation in policy making and decision making in their countries. The concepts of public participation vary widely, including creation and support of forest owners associations, the use of extension services to inform and consult interest groups as well as formal consultation during the policy formulation process (for instance by requesting written opinions or at public hearings).^13 Public participation is being manifested in various ways; for example, in Sweden an indigenous people, the Sami (or Lapps), are involved in planning forestry actions; and Switzerland is supporting research into public attitudes. While NGOs are active in organizing such public participation in most of the industrialized European countries, they are in general rather weakly-organized in countries in transition, and hence play a more limited role there.
^13 AT, BG, HR, DK, SF, DE, GR, IR, LT, NO, SK, CH, GB,
The economic situation of forestry is difficult in several countries, being affected by rising costs, falling wood prices and shrinking public budgets.^14 For example, in Austria and Slovakia there has been a marked drop in forestry's importance as a source of employment (40 percent fewer jobs than 10 years ago in Austria; an 11 percent drop in forestry employment in Slovakia between 1994 and 1995). In Switzerland there has been an average net loss of wood harvested, thinning has been neglected in Slovakia for economic reasons, and lower fellings in Hungary threaten the economic sustainability of forestry in the long run.
^14 AT, DK, HU, SI, SK, CH.
On the other hand, long-term programmes to increase forest area and/or wood supply are being maintained or even strengthened in a number of countries.^15 Some countries have adopted strategies to promote wood use or to increase/maintain the competitiveness of the forest sector.^16
^15 CY, DK, DE, IR, SK
^16 CZ, DE, IR, NO, GB
Energy aspects of forestry are of concern to some countries^17 such as rules on emissions of wood-burning installations and the encouragement of higher insulation standards. Denmark, for example, has a programme to develop energy plantations and harvesting systems.
^17 AT, DE, DK
International cooperation and negotiation
The importance of the international dimension in European forest policy has never been greater. Participation by European countries in international meetings and activities has been high. Among them were the FAO Committee on Forests meeting (March 1995) and the first global meeting of ministers responsible for forests held immediately thereafter;
the International Cooperative Programme of the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution; and several intersessional meetings organized by European countries in support of the IPF process. Some of the international discussions on criteria and indicators, in which European countries have also been active, have had direct consequences on national forest policy initiatives.
At the European level, the intergovernmental cooperation in the pan-European 'Helsinki Process' continued, concentrating on the formulation of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management, on collecting relevant information, and also monitoring forestry assistance to countries in transition.
The former USSR^18
^18 The term 'former USSR' refers to the 15 countries comprising the CIS and Baltic States (see footnote 1) Much of the information was provided by the Siberia Forest Study of the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA).
Russia is the country with both the largest land area (1 710 million ha) and largest area of forest (763.5 million ha) in the world.^19 Forests are present from the Kaliningrad region on the Baltic Sea to Vladivostok on the Pacific Ocean, although most are located in Siberia. It is necessary to bear in mind the huge geographic scale of these forests; they account for 45 percent of the land area of the largest country in the world and for 22 percent of the world's total forest area.
^19 The figure for forest area refers to forested area (i.e., land where there is forest cover at present, excluding non-forested land in the Forest Fund and temporarily unforested areas).
The 14 other countries of the former USSR are in general much smaller than the Russian Federation, although the size of Kazakhstan is nearly 270 million ha. Their ecological conditions are very different from one another and their forest cover varies widely, from more than 40 percent in Estonia, Georgia and Latvia, to less than 5 percent in the central Asian republics of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan. Together, these countries have 816.2 million ha of forest, representing 37 percent of their total land area.
Most of Russia's forest is boreal, with the features most typical of that forest type, i.e., relatively few species, mostly coniferous, slow growth due to the harsh climate, good wood quality. Nevertheless, Russia also has significant areas of other forest types. Large areas of natural forest have experienced minimal human intervention, and are reserves of biological diversity of global importance.
Timber has always represented an important source of raw material at local level, and of wood products which are important export commodities. Exploitation of Siberia's forest resources was made possible by the development of infrastructure in the region, principally the trans-Siberian railway, which allowed for export to Western Europe from Baltic ports. Trade was maintained, even when Russia was economically isolated from other regions. Large integrated plants were built to process Siberian timber, often producing sawnwood, plywood, pulp and paper on the same site. In some cases, annual wood consumption at a single plant exceeded 5 million m^3. However, the economic viability of these plants rested heavily on artificially low transport costs. Around 1990, the average trip for a sawlog from forest to mill was more than 1 000 km; sawnwood was also transported over very long distances.
Sustainability of Russian wood supply
Despite the uncertainties connected with statistics on the Russian forest resource, it is clear that, on the national level:
· the area of forest is roughly stable;
· the growing stock available for harvest is very large;
· the harvest is well below the annual increment (see Table 5).
However, when studied in more detail, the situation is more complex. According to Shvidenko and Nilsson (1996):^20
^20 Shvidenko, A, and Nilsson, S. Expanding forests but declining mature coniferous forests in Russia. IIASA Working Paper WP-6-59, June 1996.
· average growing stock has increased in all forests, except mature and overmature coniferous stands;
· growing stock has expanded in European Russia, but has declined severely in Asian Russia, probably due to disturbances such as fires, pests and anthropogenic activities;
· there has been severe local over-harvesting in regions with developed infrastructure, and 'creaming' (taking only the best trees) over huge areas. Despite these shortcomings in Russian forest management, Shvidenko and Nilsson consider the stability of Russian boreal forests and their capacity for natural regeneration to be extremely high.
In certain areas, such as the Kola peninsula, significant forest areas have been severely damaged by pollution. Nevertheless, these areas are relatively small compared to the huge areas of remote forests where human intervention has been minimal. The forests of the former USSR have also been severely damaged by widespread contamination by radioactive isotopes after the Chernobyl nuclear disaster. It is estimated that more than 7 million ha of forest and other wooded land are contaminated in Belarus, Russia and Ukraine, hindering or preventing forest work and wood harvesting. Apart from the consequences for health, the economic damage to forest-dependent communities and the general economy of the three countries, there is a danger of fires which would redistribute the radio-isotopes over wide areas. New strategies are being developed to manage this situation, but resources to deal with it are extremely limited.
In the 1980s, recorded removals of wood in the USSR, most of which came from Russian forests, totalled about 380 million m^3. The economic and physical disruptions associated with economic transition, including lack of finance, uncertainty about ownership, enterprise debt (leading to barter trade), infrastructure problems etc. caused this to drop sharply. In 1995, recorded removals in Russia were only about 110 million m^3, although it is likely that there were significant volumes of unrecorded removals. A major factor was the imposition of realistic freight charges on the trans-Siberian railways, a decision which made huge areas of central Siberia economically inaccessible overnight. There are signs that the Russian economy may be nearing its lowest point, but political and economic uncertainty is still very high. The majority of wood processing forest enterprises have been effectively privatized, and foreign investment in some industries has also been reported, as well as
joint ventures, typically aimed at producing logs for export. Practically all forest lands still belong to the state.
Table 5
Growing stock, increment and harvest on land managed by the state forest service, Russia, 1993 (million m3)^21,22
^21 The growing stock and increment figures in Table 5 refer to the forested area managed by the state forest service - 706 million ha, which gives average growing stock per ha on this land of 100 m³/ha and average increment of 1.2 m³/ha, roughly comparable to the figure for Canada, which also has large areas of natural boreal forest, On average the harvesting intensity (volume of wood harvested per hectare on average) is under 0.24 m³/ha, although some areas have been harvested very intenslvely.
^22 Shvidenko and Nilsson (1996).
growing stock
coniferous
growing stock in mature forest
coniferous
growing stock in mature forest allowable for harvesting
average increment
annual allowable cut
actual harvest (final cut)
thinnings
The outlook for the Russian forest, forest products sector, and trade potential is extremely uncertain; it is ultimately dependent on the successful outcome of economic transition. If the transition process is satisfactorily completed, Russian forests have the biological potential for sustainable supply of large volumes of wood, provided adequate policies are developed and enforced, and sufficient investment is forthcoming, notably for infrastructure and mills. Siberia could become the major source of an increasingly rare commodity - high quality coniferous wood, supplies of which have been reduced from the USA for policy reasons, and from Canada due to physical/economic inaccessibility. However, it should be borne in mind that, as the Russian economy recovers, so will domestic disposable income; this could unlock a huge potential demand for Russian forest products from the domestic market.
<section>h</section>
Latin America and the Caribbean^1,2
^1 The highlights for Latin America and the Caribbean cover all countries listed In South America, the Caribbean and Central America. Mexico is covered in the North American highlights startihg on page 156.
^2 Unless otherwise stated, all data on forest cover and forest products cited are from FAO databases: Forest Resources Assessment and the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products.
Forest resources
Table 1 gives estimates of forest cover in Latin America and the Caribbean in 1995. At that time forest covered 895 million ha, accounting for half of the total land area in the region and about one-quarter of the forest area of the world.
Almost all (95 percent) of the natural forests in the region are tropical (852 million ha), located in Central America, the Caribbean and tropical South America. The remaining resources, covering some 43 million ha, are found in temperate South America, mainly in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay.
The natural forest cover continues to decrease in all countries due to: clearance for agriculture and stockfarming; construction of roads, dams and other infrastructure; and mining. A total of 5.3 million ha of forest was lost per year over the period 1990 to 1995. The highest average annual deforestation rate occurred in Central America (2.2 percent) followed by the Caribbean (1.7 percent). Deforestation was lowest in the temperate countries of the region. Causes of forest degradation include fire, pest infestation and extraction of timber and fuelwood.
Forest fires are a major cause of forest degradation, especially in the arid and semi arid zone. They usually arise in association with the clearing of land for agriculture.
There are no major problems of pests and diseases: in natural forests excepted in isolated cases of bark beetle attacks on natural stands of pine. However, the situation is very different in forest plantations where eucalyptus and pine stands have been infested by ants, moths and other pests. This has led some countries to strengthen programmes for control of forest pests and diseases and to carry out research on the diversification of plantation species.
Table 1
Forest area, 1995; and change, 1990-95
sub-region
number of countries
land area
forest cover (1995)
annual change (1990-95)
thousand ha
thousand ha
percent of land area
thousand ha
percent/year
Central America
Caribbean
tropical South America
tropical total
temperate South America
total
The most recent complete set of data on forest plantations is from 1990. The majority of plantations are found in Brazil (4.90 million ha), Chile (1.02 million ha), Argentina (0.55 million ha), Uruguay (0.16 million ha), and Cuba (0.25 million ha). Together these account for 90 percent of the region's plantations. Among the regions, Latin America and the Caribbean account for 20 percent of the world's tropical forest plantations.
The main species used for reforestation are eucalyptus and pine. Willow, gmelina, teak and mahogany are also planted, though to a lesser extent.
Forest resources development and conservation
The forest resources of the region are subject to competing pressures. They a source of wood and non-wood products for national use and export. Forest land in many places is sought for agricultural expansion. In addition, forests provide watershed protection and a habitat to the region's rich biological resources, and they are a home to a number of forest-dwelling indigenous peoples.
Large population groups are heavily dependent on the forests for food, particularly in tropical South America. Change to the forest therefore affects directly - sometimes dramatically - their quality of life and their social and cultural customs. Concern over deforestation and its ecological, social and economic repercussions has led to increased efforts in conservation and improved forest management. National economic needs have driven the increase in forest harvesting activities.
Weaknesses in forest management in the region are due to unclear land tenure, lack of information on proper management techniques, and insufficient institutional capacity and technical knowledge. Where management plans have been drawn up, these are frequently geared exclusively towards the production of timber, neglecting any development of non-wood forest products or forest services. Moreover, when forest management plans have been approved by government bodies, these may, in some places, amount to little more in effect than straightforward felling permits because of inadequate capacity to monitor the plans and ensure that they are implemented properly.
There is an increasing tendency to require management plans before authorizing operations in natural forests. If coupled with increased effort to monitor and ensure implementation, this could lead to improved forest management. The introduction of annual felling permits instead of long-term concession agreements should also improve the situation in some countries.
There has been heavy encroachment of forests by rural poor in their search for land for agricultural use. Most of the land in the region is state-owned and, although various land reform systems and settlement schemes have been introduced to transfer public land to the people, in many places no land titles have as yet been transferred. As a result, many people who have settled on forest lands have no clear title.
Agroforestry is being seen as an increasingly important land-use system, particularly in sloping lands and mountain areas. In addition, many countries, acknowledging the social importance of their forests, are making an effort to account for and involve local populations and other interest groups in discussions and decisions related to forest use. Several countries, notably Bolivia, Costa Rica, Chile, Honduras and Peru, have introduced programmes to foster the involvement of rural communities in forestry activities.
Strong internal and external pressures are being exercised on countries with extensive tropical forest cover, to conserve and protect forests and forest ecosystems, and maintain forest-based incomes and means of survival of forest-dependants, local communities and indigenous groups.
The amount of land under some form of conservation and protection has continued to rise, with some 8 percent of the land area now classified as national park or some other category of strict protection. An additional 10 percent is under another form of protection or restricted use status, including national forest. However, there are still many forest ecosystems that are not represented in protected areas, and management is weak in many of them.
Table 2
Forest products in Latin America, 1994
sub-region
fuelwood
industrial roundwood
sawnwood
wood panels
wood pulp
thousand m^3
thousand m^3
thousand m^3
thousand m^3
thousand tonnes
Central America
Caribbean
South America
Forest products
The production and trade of forest products vary from one country to another. Some, for example, have registered increases in roundwood, fuelwood and industrial products such as pulp, paper and panels. This increase has been sourced mainly from plantations. Sizeable plantation-based forest industries have been established in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay.
In countries where production and trade are based mainly on raw materials from natural forests, the level has tended to decline because of supply problems. The forests are either remote, depleted or degraded. Moreover, the international trade of products from natural forests may be affected in the future if major importing countries insist on the certification of exported timber. Increasing focus on the protection of endangered species is also affecting production and trade; Brazil, for instance, has placed a ban on the harvesting of mahogany.
Non-wood forest products, such as wild fruits, bushmeat, flora and fauna for domestic, medicinal or industrial use, constitute a permanent and sometimes sole form of cash income, particularly in tropical South America. The gathering of fruit, stalks, leaves and other items, together with their transport, cleaning, storage, packing and processing, also provide employment opportunities.
Forest institutions
Forestry institutions in the region are undergoing legal and organizational changes as a result of structural adjustment programmes, increasing efforts of governments to address sustainable development, and the activities of environmental groups. Trends towards liberalization of the economy, privatization, government decentralization, and downsizing of the public bureaucracies have had direct impacts on forestry institutions. The role of the public sector in research and extension, and in forest industries, has decreased in favour of the contracting of private services and partnerships. Examples of these changes can be observed in Honduras, Colombia, Nicaragua, Bolivia and Chile, among others. Another change in some countries is the establishment of new ministries of the environment which have been given some of the functions previously assigned to forest departments.
The tendency towards a partial disengagement of the state, the delegation of responsibility to regional level, the reduction of public-sector forestry personnel and the emergence of private enterprises has modified the role of forest administrations. To safeguard the rights of rural communities and indigenous people, increasing recognition is given to local organizations and NGOs. The role of these institutions is crucial for counterbalancing the effects of market liberalization at the community level.
At the same time, the need for forest conservation has been placed amongst the priorities of the political agenda in many countries. The Central American countries are developing coordinated actions for promoting adequate policies for the sustainable management of forest resources, the improvement of regional investment in forestry and the establishment of a regional institutional framework. This has led to the creation of the Central American Commission on Environment and Development - a regional institution through which government decisions are implemented. In South America, various sub-regional mechanisms have been established such as the Treaty for Amazonian Cooperation, the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) and associations of Andean communities, which have furthered intra-regional cooperation in forestry.
Another positive development in the region is the use of incentives for promoting the establishment of forest plantations. Following the positive experiences of Chile and Brazil, reforestation of up to 40 000 ha per year has been achieved in Uruguay. Recent policy reforms in Guatemala are expected to stimulate the reforestation of thousands of hectares. Most of the countries of the region have some type of incentive programme for reforestation and are developing institutional and administrative systems for improving their efficiency.
The granting of forest concessions to international companies is an emerging issue in countries with important resources. Countries which have granted large concessions or are considering doing so include Suriname, Guyana, Venezuela and Nicaragua. Conservation organizations and governments from developed countries have expressed concern over the possible risks associated with these activities.
At national level the partnership between the government and the private sector is being considered through the region. Increasingly, forestry-related activities such as the management of protected areas, monitoring of resources, training, extension and research, are being contracted to the private sector.
The institutional capacity of forestry needs to be strengthened to enable countries to deal with responsibilities arising from new policies, legal reforms, international commitments, changing demands of national and international markets and, particularly, the need to achieve national forestry objectives and goals. This will require increased national investment in the forestry sector.
Numerous regional and international organizations are cooperating with the forestry sector. These include, FAO, UNDP, UNEP, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Organization of American States (OAS) and ITTO. Also playing their part are the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF), the World Conservation Union (IUCN), the Tropical Agricultural Research and Training Centre (CATIE), the Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) and the community of donor countries.
Financial institutions, such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank, play an important and influential role in developing the region's forestry sector and conserving its natural resources. A well-established network of NGOs and community-based organizations exists in many countries and the NGO sector in the region in general continues to gain in strength.
Forest policy and legislation
Recent changes in national forest policies reflect a broader vision beyond the traditional timber orientation of the past. Policy-makers are increasingly receptive to the notion of sustainability, to the variety of goods and services provided by forests, to interlinkages within the forestry sector and with other sectors, and of the role of forests in the sustainable development of countries and especially rural communities. New mechanisms are being introduced for the compilation of national accounts, the determination of both market and non-market values of forests, and the assessment of impacts of policies external to the forestry sector. Economic incentives are generally aiming to provide an economic base that will make sustainable forest management both attractive and profitable.
There has been intense debate in the region with respect to natural forest management and use reflecting the various social, environmental and economic roles that forests play. Many countries have revised and updated their forestry legislation and passed new laws and regulations. In other countries, legislative proposals are under discussion in their respective legislatures.
At the same time, efforts are being made to ensure participation of farmer and user groups in decision making and resource conservation and management and to ensure broader access to resources. These measures include recognition of traditional rights and communal stewardship of forest resources and efforts to help local people gain greater financial benefit from these resources. Increased recognition is being given to local organizations and NGOs.
New initiatives affecting the forestry sector
The Tropical Forests Action Programme (TFAP) -- and the National Forestry Action Programme (NFAP) - has been an important mechanism for the promotion of forestry planning in the region and revision of forest policies and strategies. It has spurred most countries to appraise the role of the forestry sector in terms of national development, and to identify and formulate results-oriented projects to be financed nationally or externally funded. National plans have been prepared in 32 countries of the region.
There have also been important initiatives, in follow-up to the proposals of Agenda 21 of UNCED, related to the management of fragile ecosystems to control desertification and drought, and the use of mountain areas. Many countries have signed the Convention to Combat Desertification. National plans to combat desertification are either under way or in the pipeline in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile and Peru. Many countries are also engaging in actions for the sustainable development of mountain areas.
The region's countries are involved in intergovernmental initiatives to establish criteria and indicators for sustainable management for Amazonian forests (the Tarapoto Proposal), for Central America (the Central American/Lepaterique Process), and for temperate and boreal forests (Montreal Process).
<section>i</section>
North America^1,2
^1 The above highlights for North America cover Canada, the United States of America and Mexico,
^2 Unless otherwise stated, all data on forest cover and forest products cited are from FAO databases: Forest Resources Assessment and the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products.
Social and economic conditions play a major role in shaping forest resource conditions, patterns of use and forest policies. In all three countries of North America the over-riding and increasing importance of demographic trends and economic policies is clear. Population growth has a significant effect on the I forests of Mexico - approximately one-quarter of Mexico's population lives in rural areas; one-half of these people live in forested areas, and the demand for agricultural land is high. In the United States, and to a lesser extent Canada, population growth also leads to changes in patterns of use and ownership. In all three countries, demographic changes contribute to significant changes in expectations for forests and forest policies. Macroeconomic policies and trade policies (such as the North American Free Trade Agreement - NAFTA) affect forest use and forest industries primarily through their effects on levels and patterns of economic growth. In general, economic
growth has been associated with higher demand for commodities, including forest-based commodities, and higher expectations for the environmental benefits that forests can provide.
Forest resources
Following two centuries of almost continuous decline, the forest area of the United States stabilized in the early 1990s. In Mexico, there is a long history of forest clearing associated with demand for land for agriculture; this process continues today. The current forest cover of North America is estimated to be about three-quarters of the original (pre-European settlement) extent.
Table 1
Total land area, population and forest cover^3
^3 FAO, UN-ECE (1996) North American Timber Trends Study. ECE/TIM/SP/9. Geneva; Smith et al. (1994), Forest Statistics of the United States, 1992. Gen. Tech. Rep. NC-168.
land area
population
forest area^a
other wooded land
total forest and other wooded land
forest cover
forest and other wooded land cover
million ha
millions
million ha
million ha
million ha
percent
percent
Canada
245.4^b
167.5^c
416.2^d
United States
212.5^b
85.6^c
Mexico
total
^a The discrepancy between the figures here for Canada and Mexico and those given in Data Table 2 of Annex 3 are due to the use of a different data set.
^b Productive forest land, including non-exploitable productive forest land.
^c Forest land defined as 'unproductive' for timber harvesting.
^d Includes area of unspecified forest.
Forests and other wooded land today cover approximately 850 million ha in North America, slightly more than 40 percent of the total land area. Of this, forests account for about 500 million ha, or 25 percent of the land area. North America represents about 16 percent of the world's land area and an equal share of the world's forests. The forests are quite varied and, in some cases, unique. Forest types from each of the boreal, temperate and tropical zones of the world are present. In addition, the region accounts for a significant share of the world's coastal temperate rainforest and nearly all of the world's temperate forest that has never been harvested.
Forests are not evenly distributed across the countries of the region or within each country. Canada accounts for half of the forest cover of North America, some 416 million ha of forest and other wooded land. Nearly half (45 percent) of the land area of Canada is forested (including other wooded land). However, cover varies from less than 20 percent of the land area in the Northwest Territories to nearly 85 percent in New Brunswick. The area of Canada's forest that is both productive and available for timber production is more or less equally distributed between western and eastern provinces.
The United States accounts for 35 percent of the forest and other wooded land of North America, nearly 300 million ha. Roughly one-third of the land area is forested but the forest cover of individual states varies widely, from one percent of the land area to nearly 90 percent. Total forest area is more or less evenly distributed between east and west but nearly three-quarters of the forest area that is both productive and available for timber production is in the eastern states.
Mexico accounts for less than 10 percent of the land area but 15 percent of the forest area of North America. More than two-thirds of the land area has forest cover, but the majority of the forested vegetation is open woodland, shrub and brushland that is classified as 'other wooded land'.
While the area of forest in Canada and the United States has roughly stabilized, in Mexico the annual reduction in natural forest area has been estimated to be about 1.4 percent over the period 1980-90. Some of this area has been reclassified as 'other wooded land' with the result that there has been a considerably slower rate of loss (-0.5 percent per year) estimated for the broader measure of forests and other wooded land.
In the mid-1990s, more than 1.5 million ha per year were planted or direct seeded in Canada and the United States. Intensively-managed plantations cover about 15 million ha in North America, most of which (more than 13 million ha) are in the United States. These are important contributors to the sustained production of fibre.
Fire protection and suppression are important components of forest management. Although the area consumed by fires has been considerably reduced as compared to the early 1900s, on average 2 to 4 million ha of forest are burned each year. In Canada, losses to fire and insects exceed the volume of timber harvested for industrial raw material.
Forest resources development and conservation
Patterns of forest ownership play an important role in present conditions, management and prospective developments in the forests of North America. In addition to differences across the three countries, there are significant regional or sub-national variations in forest ownership patterns (see Table 2). For example, the vast majority of Canada's forests and other wooded land are publicly owned: 94 percent of the forest area is in public ownership, most of which (71 percent) is managed by provincial governments. Only 6 percent of Canada's forests are privately owned by more than 425 thousand individuals and companies. Most private forest land in Canada is in eastern provinces. In contrast, more than half (55 percent) of all forest land in the United States is privately owned, and nearly three-quarters of the forest area that is both productive and available for timber production is owned by nearly 10 million private individuals or companies (see Table 3). The share of forest
land in private ownership is highest in the eastern United States (more than 85 percent of productive available forest land). Unlike Canada, the US federal government owns and manages two-thirds of the publicly-owned productive forest land.
Table 2
Ownership of forest and other wooded land (percent)^4
^4 Smith et al. 1994; UN-ECE, 1996; Monreal Ing, Saul. 1996 pers. com
public
private
common^a
Canada
United States
Mexico
North America
^a Ejidos (common lands) and community forests
Table 3
Ownership of productive forest land by sub-region (percent)^5
^5 UN-ECE. 1996; Monreal (pers. com).
Public
private
common
Canada, total
East
West
United States, total
East
West
Mexico, total
North
South
In Mexico, the federal government owns 5 percent of the forest area, 15 percent is privately owned and 80 percent of the forest area is in common ownership that includes common lands (ejidos) and community lands under the management of indigenous groups. More than half of the forest area that is both productive and available for timber production (about 30 million ha) is owned by nearly 3 500 ejidos and communities whose total! ^3 population is 8.5 million. State governments do not own or manage forests.
More than one-third of the current forest and woodland area in the region is unavailable for timber harvesting, either because the forests are classified as unproductive for timber production, or because they are protected by legislation (e.g. parks and wildlife preserves) or by policy (e.g. protection forest on sensitive sites). (See Table 4.) Forests comprise a significant share of the nearly 200 million ha of formally protected areas (parks, wilderness areas, etc.) in North America.
The North American approach to forest management combines the philosophies of both multiple use and dominant use management as a means of assuring sustained production of a variety of forest-based goods and services. Forestry research is playing an increasingly important role in the implementation of forest management policies and is significantly influencing the development of forest policies. Collaboration among scientists from the public and private sectors across the continent is resulting in a broader understanding of the biological, social and economic dynamics associated with the forest ecosystems of North America.
Greater public attention paid to environmental issues has shifted the focus of forest management in North America, especially on public lands, from efforts to sustain the yield of fibre to assuring that forests sustain a broad range of outputs defined by the diverse objectives of the population. A combination of pressure from interest groups, and the implementation of legal and administrative requirements, has resulted in public forest management in the United States giving increasing weight to habitat requirements for forest-dependent species, sustaining biological diversity and a greater recognition of large-scale and long-term consequences of management and use of forests.
Table 4
Area of forests unavailable for timber harvesting (million ha)^6
^6 UN-ECE. 1996; Monreal (pers, com.).
'unproductive'
productive, reserved
other
total
Canada
United States
Mexico
n.a.
n.a.
6.4^a
North America
^a Area owned and managed by the federal government
In all three countries, forest management decision making is being challenged to be more transparent and to incorporate effective participation of those affected by decisions. Alternative approaches to establishing consensus on objectives and new partnerships are forming among government, industry, labour, environmental groups and indigenous peoples. For example, in 1991 Canada embarked on extensive public consultations to produce a national forest strategy. Published one year later, the strategy identifies close to one hundred commitments that reflect the values, vision and goals held for Canada's forests. An independent panel will evaluate progress in implementing the strategy before it terminates in March 1997. Findings will then be used to develop a new strategy that is likely to be released in the autumn of 1997, again after full consultation with partners and interest groups.
Table 5
Volume of growing stock inventory (1000 million m^3)
softwood
hardwood
total
Canada
United States
Mexico
n.a.
n.a.
North America
n.a.
n.a.
Forest products and services
North American forests currently have a timber inventory of nearly 50 billion m^3 (see Table 5). Two-thirds of this is in softwood species. In all three countries, estimated net growth of this stock exceeds the rate of harvest, although the greatest surplus is in hardwood species.
North America accounts for 20 percent of world production of wood and nearly 40 percent of world production of industrial roundwood (see Table 6). The United States currently accounts for 70 percent of the timber harvest in North America, and Canada accounts for about 25 percent. In both the United States and Canada, more than 80 percent of timber harvested is used as raw material for industrial products. Coniferous species account for more than two-thirds of the total volume harvested in the United States and Canada. Mexico's share of total timber harvest in the region is small (5 percent), and the majority of wood harvested (nearly 70 percent) is fuelwood. Less than 5 percent of timber harvesting in Mexico occurs in tropical hardwood forests.
Over the period 1960-94, timber harvests in the United States, Canada and Mexico increased sharply (see Table 7). In the United States, the volume harvested increased by roughly 40 percent; it nearly doubled in Canada and increased by 40 percent in Mexico.
Private forests, which account for 25 percent of the forest area (see Table 2), provide more than 70 percent of the timber produced in North America (see Table 8) and accounted for nearly all of the increase in timber harvesting over the period 1960-90. In the USA, private lands - comprising about half of all forests - provide more than 90 percent of production. Similarly in Canada, private forests produce a far greater proportion of timber than its share of forest land (19 percent production on 6 percent of forest land).
Table 6
Wood production by type, and forest products trade value, 1994 (million m^3, US$ 1000 million)
industrial roundwood
fuelwood and charcoal
total roundwood
forest products imports
forest products exports
net trade (value)
million m^3
million m^3
million m^3
US$ 1000 million
US$ 1000 million
US$ 1000 million
Canada
United States
Mexico
North America
World
North America share (percent)
Table 7
Industrial roundwood harvest, 1960-94 (million m^3)
Canada
United States
287.4 ^a
Mexico
5.3 ^b
North America
^a data for 1962
^b data for 1961
Table 8
Timber harvest by owner category, 1993
total harvest
percent of total harvest from public lands ^a
percent of total harvest from private lands
million m^3
Canada
United States
Mexico
50 e
50 e
North America
^a includes harvest from common forest in Mexico
e = estimated.
Wood-based manufacturing industries employ more than 1.6 million persons in the region and an additional 2.0-2.5 million jobs can be attributed to the economic activity of these industries. Wood-based manufacturing accounts for about 3 percent of the GDP of both the United States and Canada, and about 2 percent of the GDP of Mexico. Forest products trade among the three countries accounts for nearly one-quarter of the value of world trade in forest products.
In addition to wood products, the forests of North America provide a range of goods and services and contribute to national economies through employment in forest-related industries such as recreation and tourism. They play an important role in sustaining environmental services such as watershed protection, and provide habitat for a wide variety and an abundant quantity of terrestrial and aquatic wildlife.
Timber harvest from public lands in the western United States has declined since the late 1980s in response to legal mandates to sustain wildlife habitats and biological diversity, and in response to demand for non-commodity services from public forests. Among the consequences of this are a greater reliance on private forests, increased imports from Canada and reduced exports.
Demands on North American forests are projected to increase over the next two decades. In the United States, much of the production potential rests on plantations established over the past two decades, especially in the southern states. The shortage of high-quality softwood timber is expected to result in higher prices which will, in turn, stimulate the use of wood-based panels and the relatively under-utilized hardwood resources of both Canada and the United States, where growth currently exceeds removals.
Forestry policies
In all three countries, forestry policies continue to emphasize the need to balance long- and short-term social and economic benefits. Although attention was originally focused on public lands, in the United States, private forest management is increasingly being affected. In all three countries, forest owners are increasingly engaged in partnerships to define objectives for forest management across multiple ownerships and large landscapes. At the same time, it is recognized that, because the region is important in world trade in forest products, changes in regional policies may have consequences outside the region and outside the forest sector and forest environment. This also presents new challenges to the countries in developing resource policies and in management decisions.
Forestry institutions
While each of the three countries within North America has its own infrastructure for dealing with forest issues nationally, the FAO North American Forest Commission (NAFC) is the main forum for addressing common concerns on a continental basis.
Canada, Mexico and the United States carry out collective applied research, natural resource management activities and technical exchanges in the following areas: fire management; insects and disease; atmospheric changes and forests; silviculture; forest genetic resources; the protection of habitats of neotropical migratory species; and forest products, including non-wood forest products.
New Initiatives
A network of model forests has been established through cross-border cooperative arrangements, and innovative forest management practices are being tested and implemented in a variety of situations including on an international level. Canada's model forest programme was established in 1991 to accelerate the implementation of new approaches to forest management based on shared decision making. Ten model forests were selected to represent the ecological diversity of the major forested regions of Canada. Mexico was the first country to join the international network with the establishment of two sites: Calakmul and Chihuahua. Each is twinned with a Canadian partner to facilitate the exchange of technical information and enhance working relationships. The United States and Mexico also have established pairings of managed forests through the Sister Forest programme. In March 1995, three sites in the United States were linked to the international network - one Adaptive Management
Area (AMA) from each of the Pacific Coastal states. With the addition of the Cispus AMA in Washington, the Applegate AMA in Oregon, and the Hayfork AMA in California, there are now managed forests throughout the temperate rainforest region of North America.
Canada, Mexico and the United States are all members of the Montreal Process for defining and implementing criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management for boreal and temperate forests outside Europe (see Part 3). Participation by all three countries in this effort is expected to further cooperative approaches to management of forests on a continental basis.
Summary
The forest issues of North America are many and varied. Some are unique to specific countries while others clearly cross and transcend national boundaries. The challenge ahead for both private and public forestry is to implement sustainable forest ecosystem management as the understanding of the biological, social, and economic issues and complexities evolves.
In an effort to meet growing demands for a variety of outputs, the implementation of management objectives and practices is becoming increasingly complex and costly, especially in public forests. Therefore, market conditions are a critical consideration in the ability to implement some aspects of ecosystem management successfully.
Advances related to environmental and economic dimensions of forest ecosystem management are being made but have only begun to be addressed for social and cultural aspects. Similarly, more remains to be done to assess the multiple benefits of forests to society and outline society's responsibility towards sustainable forest management within the context of participatory decision making.
<section>j</section>
Forestry in economic/political regional groups^1
^1 Unless otherwise stated, all data on forest cover and forest products cited are from FAO databases: Forest Resources Assessment and the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products. 1994.
This section presents summary information on the eight economic/political regional groups listed below, together with data on forest resources, production and international trade in forest products. In each case, the figures for imports and exports take into account the value of international trade with all countries, including those within the regional group.
The economic/political regional groups covered here are:
· The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
· Comisión Centroamericana de Ambiente y Desarrollo/Central American Commission on Environment and Development (CCAD)
· Comité permanent inter-Etats de lutte centre la sécheresse dans le Sahel/ Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS)
· European Union (EU)
· Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD); formerly the Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD)
· Southern African Development Community (SADC)
· South Pacific Forum (SPF)
· Tratado de Cooperación Amazonica/Amazon Cooperation Treaty (TCA)
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
Members (7): Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet Nam
Established: 1967
Headquarters: Jakarta, Indonesia
General description
ASEAN was formed to: (i) accelerate economic growth, social progress and cultural development in the region; (ii) promote collaboration in economic, social, cultural, technical, scientific and administrative fields; (iii) provide mutual assistance in training and research facilities in the educational, professional, technical and administrative spheres; and (iv) promote Southeast Asian studies. Five summits have been held, the last one in Bangkok in 1995. Establishing the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) is currently one of ASEAN's primary activities for which it enacted the Common Effective Preferential Tariff (CEPT) in 1993. This will eventually reduce tariffs on intra-regional trade to between 0 and 5 percent by 2008.
Description of forestry sector
Forest resources
ASEAN countries are rich in tropical forest resources which cover almost half of the land area. They are important in terms of biological diversity. The annual rate of forest resource loss is relatively high across the region, particularly in Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand.
Forest products
ASEAN is an important timber producing region, especially for tropical hardwoods. Malaysia and Indonesia are major producers of sawnwood and plywood, and the region is rapidly developing a substantial pulp and paper industry. Rubber, rattan and bamboo are important exports.
Trade
Indonesia and Malaysia are major exporters of forest products. ASEAN nations together supply 65 percent and 46 percent of the world's total plywood and tropical industrial roundwood exports, respectively. Malaysia is the second largest exporter of logs in the world. A significant proportion of trade in Asia is with Japan and China. Trade patterns have been changing, however, most notably with the emergence of Thailand and the Philippines as importers of sawnwood.
Forestry-related activities
Forestry issues are addressed by the ASEAN Senior Officials on the Environment (ASOEN). In 1993, ASEAN Ministers signed the ASEAN Cooperation in Food, Agriculture and Forestry (AMAF). This initiative addresses several themes related to forestry including: (i) promotion of forest products; (ii) technology generation and transfer; and (iii) natural resources management. ASEAN recently convened a meeting of private business representatives that resulted in an Action Plan for the promotion of forest products. One of its top priorities is promoting an increase in product quality and diversification.
Environmental protection and promotion of the principle of sustainable development are among ASEAN's top priorities. ASEAN supports UNCED principles on sustainable management of all forests and has called for new and additional financial resources to meet incremental costs of protecting the global environment as well as the transfer of appropriate technologies. It also supports, in principle, sustainable forestry certification for all types of timber, not only tropical. ASEAN is involved in a few regional projects involving forestry. The Mekong Basin Development Cooperation may result in an increased focus on riparian forests in efforts to improve the quality of the Mekong River.
Forest resources
land area (thousand ha)
total forest, 1995 (thousand ha)
percent forest land
forest hectares per person
annual change in forest area, 1990-95 (thousand ha)
percent annual change, 1990-95
Wood-based products
production
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
International forest products trade (Including between ASEAN countries)
product
exports
imports
quantity
US$ thousand
quantity
US$ thousand
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
Comisión Centroamericana de Ambiente y Desarrollo/ Central American Commission on Environment and Development (CCAD)
Members (7): Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, Nicaragua
Established: 1990
Headquarters: Guatemala City, Guatemala
General description
CCAD is not only a coordinating body, but the highest regional political entity in matters related to environment and development in member countries. It is currently the only regional group that has signed the UNCED convention and has begun a process of implementation through the relevant departments in each member country. CCAD was created through a legally binding charter that establishes conditions for coordination and implementation. The Commission is composed of the heads of each member's Ministries of Natural Resources and Environment, who have been active in promoting sustainable development within its region and internationally. Because of its strong collaborative leadership for the region, it is seen as a model organization around the world. Funding and technical assistance are of national, bilateral and multilateral character.
Description of forestry sector
Forest resources
Forest resources in the CCAD region are limited in size but very rich in terms of biological diversity due to a diverse topography. Although nearly 40 percent of the area remains under forest cover, the annual rate of loss is high.
Forest products
Most of the wood from the region's forests is consumed as fuelwood and charcoal. The largest producers of wood products among the member countries are Costa Rica and Guatemala. A variety of non-wood products such as fruits, nuts, and medicinal plants have important values in rural households as well as global markets.
Trade
In this region, Panama and Costa Rica are the largest importers of most products and exporters of paper. Leading exporters in other products are Honduras and Guatemala.
Forestry-related activities
The Central American Council of Forests and Protected Areas, CCAB-AP, is responsible for the implementation of the CCAD policies and strategies related to the sustainable use of forest resources and the conservation of biological diversity. The CCAB-AP is composed of the heads of the Forest Services and National Parks Departments, and the Coordinators of the National Forest Action Plans of the member countries.
CCAD uses the strength of its charter to develop regional programmes and negotiate funding from donors. Among the main activities carried out are: a study of the regional forestry policy; regional forest fire control; establishment of a regional biological corridor; study on the agriculture frontier; promoting participation in forestry by indigenous groups, rural communities and the private sector; and listing plants and animals in danger of extinction. Efforts to improve the forestry sector within each member country continue.
CCAD was instrumental in creating the Central American Alliance for Sustainable Development, Natural Resources, Biological Diversity and Environmental Legislation, a regional and national strategy containing the principles and commitments of actions on environmental matters. CCAD is also promoting the extension and sharing of the Alliance principles and establishing collaborative agreements (Alliances) with other countries, including the USA, Mexico, Canada, and the European Union.
Forest resources
land area (thousand ha)
total forest, 1995 (thousand ha)
percent forest land
forest hectares per person
annual change in forest area, 1990-95 (thousand ha)
percent annual change, 1990-95
Wood-based products
production
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
International forest products trade (including between CCAD countries)
product
exports
imports
quantity
US$ thousand
quantity
US$ thousand
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
n.a.
industrial roundwood (m^3)
n.a.
sawnwood (m^3)
n.a.
wood panels (m^3)
n.a.
paper (tonnes)
n.a.
pulp for paper (tonnes)
n.a.
Comité permanent inter-Etats de lutte contre la sécheresse dans le Sahel/ Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS)
Members (9): Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal
Established: 1973
Headquarters: Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
General description
CILSS brings together technical leadership and experience to combat the causes of food insecurity and desertification in the Sudano-Sahelian region. Since its inception, much of CILSS' work has focused on forest resources. CILSS works at two levels: (1) within member countries to coordinate monitoring, training, and research activities; and (2) with multinational institutions to negotiate funding. CILSS and its member countries are primarily supported by the Club du Sahel, a sub-group of OECD countries.
Description of forestry sector
Forest resources
CILSS countries have limited forest resources. Only 7.5 percent of the land area is forested, mainly with dryland forests. The area in plantations increased by about 15 percent between 1990 and 1995, but they remain a small proportion of the total forest cover. Deforestation is currently estimated at 0.7 percent per year.
Forest products
In CILSS countries, the wood from forests is predominately used as fuelwood and charcoal. The current rate of fuelwood/charcoal use exceeds the long-term resource supply. Forests are extremely important sources of fodder, foods, and other non-wood forest products, such as gum arabic and shea nuts. Trees play a critical role in providing protection against desertification and enhancing farming systems through agroforestry.
Trade
CILSS countries do not produce sufficient wood to meet demand and are therefore highly dependent upon imports of wood products.
Forestry-related activities
Current activities focus on how economics and policies influence the demand and supply of forest resources and, ultimately, the state of soil fertility, fuelwood supply and land use management. CILSS analyses these issues and helps institutions at the village level to promote more sustainable development. CILSS will further develop its approach as it assists member countries to formulate a National Action Plan to Control Desertification, an initiative arising out of the recent United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification.
CILSS sponsors a number of regional activities, such as the Forest Seeds Programme, which began in Burkina Faso and is being introduced in Senegal, Mauritania and Mali. Other activities include coordination of reforestation programmes, a regional programme for environmental management and natural forest management programmes.
Forest resources
land area (thousand ha)
total forest, 1995 (thousand ha)
percent forest land
forest hectares per person
annual change in forest area, 1990-95 (thousand ha)
percent annual change, 1990-95
Wood-based products
production
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
International forest products trade (including between CILSS countries)
product
exports
imports
quantity
US$ thousand
quantity
US$ thousand
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
European Union (EU)
Members (15): Austria (1995), Belgium, Denmark (1973), Finland (1995), France, Germany, Greece (1981), Ireland (1973), Italy, Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Portugal (1986), Spain (1986), Sweden (1995), United Kingdom (1973)
Established: Originally Treaty of Rome, 1957; Maastricht Treaty, 1992, established current relationship.
Headquarters: EU institutions, including the Council of Ministers, the European Parliament, the European Commission and the European Court of Justice, are located in a number of cities, including Brussels, Strasbourg, and Luxembourg.
General description
The integration of European countries into the EU has been the goal of the many treaties signed since the Treaty of Rome, 1957. The Maastricht Treaty marked a new period in the development of a closer union by furthering economic integration, an international identity and foreign policy, and a common protection of rights through EU citizenship. The European Commission, restructured by the 1992 Treaty, functions as a policy/planning body, mediator, and executant of many decisions. The Commission governs independently in the common interest of the EU and through coordination with member countries. For example, issue-specific Directorates (e.g. agriculture, transportation) work to build regional consensus for common actions and laws. The European Commission also takes political positions in specific international fora such as the recent Intergovernmental Panel on Forests.
Trade
EU countries are major international traders in forest products. Finland, Sweden, France, Germany and Austria rank among the world's top exporters. Germany, the UK, Italy, France, The Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg are among the top ten importers.
Forestry-related activities
The EU has no forest policy as such. However, forest related activities are carried out under other headings, notably agriculture (support for afforestation and forest improvement, action against forest fires), environment (forest protection, survey of forest condition), industry and development aid. A European forest sector information system is being built.
Description of forestry sector
Forest resources
Almost one-third of EU territory is covered with forests ranging from boreal to Mediterranean scrub. With the joining of Finland, Sweden and Austria in 1995, forest area in the EU nearly doubled. France, Germany and Spain also have large areas under forest cover.
Forest products
The EU as a whole is a leading producer of wood-based products, particularly panels, pulp for paper, and paper.
Forest resources
land area (thousand ha)
total forest, 1995 (thousand ha)
percent forest land
forest hectares per person
annual change in forest area, 1990-95 (thousand ha)
percent annual change, 1990-95
Wood-based products
production
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
International forest products trade (including between EU countries)
product
exports
imports
quantity
US$ thousand
quantity
US$ thousand
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD); formerly the Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD)
Members (7): Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda
Established: 1986
Headquarters: Djibouti, Djibouti
General description
IGAD is a relatively young organization and is still evolving. It was established largely in response to the 1983 drought with the intention of assisting member countries combat the effects of drought and further their overall development. IGAD is currently focusing on creating broad-scale economic development. Norway and Sweden are IGAD's largest financial supporters.
Description of forestry sector
Forest resources
IGAD's forests are varied across member countries. There is heavy pressure on resources, and the annual rate of forest loss is relatively high.
Forest production
The most important use of wood is charcoal and fuel. An important non-wood forest product in this region is gum arabic. The region has limited capacity for production of higher value goods. Kenya and Uganda benefit the most from forest resources as they contribute 19 percent and 23 percent to their GDPs respectively.
Trade
Trade in forest products is relatively low. With a few exceptions, (such as Kenya and Ethiopia in sawnwood), countries in this region are net importers of most products.
Forestry-related activities
IGAD's primary activities in forestry are addressed within its medium- to long-term integrated development programmes that aim to re-establish a productive and sustainable ecological balance in the region.^2 IGAD has also played an important coordinating role for regional initiatives, such as a project on the conservation of biological diversity in Uganda, Kenya, and Tanzania (sponsored by the Global Environmental Fund). IGAD assists member countries in policy development such as the National Action Plans to Combat Desertification as agreed to in the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification.
^2 IGAD also assists communities in emergency situations as well as providing other short-term assistance.
Forest resources
land area (thousand ha)
total forest, 1995 (thousand ha)
percent forest land
forest hectares per person
annual change in forest area, 1990-95 (thousand ha)
percent annual change, 1990-95
Wood-based products
production
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
International forest products trade (including between IGAD countries)
product
exports
imports
quantity
US$ thousand
quantity
US$ thousand
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
Members (12): Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius (1995), Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa (1994), Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Established: 1980 (as Southern African Development Coordination Conference, SADCC); 1992 (as SADC) Headquarters: Gaborone, Botswana
General description
SADC replaced its predecessor, SADCC, to form a stronger commitment and binding obligations towards promoting economic integration into a common market. Its areas of activity include: culture and information; energy; food; agriculture and natural resources; industry and trade; human resources development; mining; tourism; and transport and communications. The coordination of each of these areas of regional cooperation, as well as the sub-activities within them, is being done by the individual member states which are expected to play a leadership role in developing and managing the respective areas of cooperation. The SADC Secretariat and the coordinating units in the individual member states are supported financially by the states; the SADC Programme of Action, which is in the form of regional projects, is primarily dependent on external support.
Description of forestry sector
Forest resources
SADC encompasses a large and diverse forest area. This region includes both tropical and temperate forest cover.
Forest products
Much of the harvested wood is consumed by households as fuelwood and charcoal. However, compared to other developing regions, SADC produces a substantial amount of industrial roundwood- Non-wood forest products resources, such as honey, medicine, caterpillars, thatch grass, truffles, etc., are also important for household use and rural incomes.
Trade
SADC is a net exporting region in most wood-based forest products, with the exception of paper. Trade is largely dominated by South Africa.
Forestry-related activities
SADC develops and implements specific projects in forestry through the Forestry Sector Technical Coordination Unit (FSTCU) in Malawi. In 1990, the FSTCU developed the Forestry Programme of Action that comprises a portfolio of projects which have been approved by SADC. This programme is based on six general areas: (i) forestry training and education; (ii) improved knowledge of the forest resource base; (iii) focused forest research; (iv) improved forest resource management; (v) forest products utilization and marketing; and (vi) integration of environmental protection with forestry development. FSTCU received direct funding of US$ 117 million (US$ 50 million secured) for 16 forestry-related projects. This sum is equivalent to about 1 percent of the total SADC budget of 1994.^3
^3 SADC's Transport and Communications Office receives more than 80 percent of the US$ 8 500 million total budget to spend on the improvement of the region's roads and railways.
Forest resources
land area (thousand ha)
total forest, 1995 (thousand ha)
percent forest land
forest hectares per person
annual change in forest area, 1990-95 (thousand ha)
percent annual change, 1990-95
Wood-based products
production
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
International forest products trade (including between SADC countries)
product
exports
imports
quantity
US$ thousand
quantity
US$ thousand
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
South Pacific Forum (SPF)
Members (16): Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea (PNG), Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Western Samoa
Established: 1972; established as a Trade Bureau', and later became the South Pacific Bureau for Economic Cooperation (SPEC). The current name was approved in 1988.
Headquarters: South Pacific Forum Secretariat (which carries out daily activities of the Forum) is based in Suva, Fiji
General Description
The South Pacific Forum is the political grouping of 16 independent and self-governing states in the Pacific. Its political leaders meet annually at Head of Government/Head of State level under a rotating chairmanship arrangement. Issues of economic and political importance are often discussed. SPF is not governed by a specific constitution nor are there rules relating to purpose, membership or conduct of the meeting. Decisions are always reached by consensus. Recently, some important activities have related to nuclear test bans, fishing regulations and incorporation into the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).
Description of forestry sector
Forest resources
Forest resources are highly variable between nations. The countries best endowed with forest resources are New Zealand, PNG, Fiji, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. Forest cover in Australia and New Zealand increased between 1990 and 1995, partly due to active plantation programmes. The forests in Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and some others are undergoing substantial timber harvesting.
Forest Products
Processed wood products are almost entirely produced by Australia and New Zealand. The small island nations have abundant coconut tree resources; these are main sources of wood, coconuts, copra and palm oil for local residents.
Trade
Australia and New Zealand together account for at least 75 percent of the region's export and import trade. Industrial roundwood exports of Papua New Guinea are also significant, ranking high in quantity and value.
Forestry-related Activities
The 25th Forum, held in 1994, was focused on developing a management response to the loss of natural resources. Forestry issues included both the depletion rate and lost revenue due to poor control and enforcement of illegal harvesting by foreign companies. Since then, forum members have imposed stricter controls on the exploitation of forestry resources and begun negotiations to standardize monitoring of the region's resources. In this regard, SPF published the 'Code of Conduct for Logging of Indigenous Forests in Selected South Pacific Countries' in 1995.
Forest resources
land area (thousand ha)
total forest, 1995 (thousand ha)
percent forest land
forest hectares per person
annual change in forest area, 1990-95 (thousand ha)
percent annual change, 1990-95
Wood-based products
production
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
International forest products trade (including between SPF countries)
product
exports
imports
quantity
US$ thousand
quantity
US$ thousand
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
Tratado de Cooperación Amazonica/Amazon Cooperation Treaty (TCA)
Members (8): Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Suriname, Venezuela
Established: 1978
Headquarters: Lima, Peru
General description
Tratado de Cooperación Amazonica (TCA) fosters collaboration among member countries on policies and activities in agriculture, fisheries, forestry, and the environment within the Amazon watershed, in an effort to generate sustainable development. TCA implements work through specific Commissions of: Environment; Science and Technology; Indigenous Issues; Tourism; Health;
Transportation and Infrastructure; and Education. Each Commission coordinates work with government counterparts in each member country. FAO provides technical assistance to the Commissions of Environment (CEMMA) and Science and Technology (CECTA).
Description of forestry sector^4
^4 Data refer to forest resources in the entire country, not just the portion of each country in the Amazon watershed
Forest resources
TCA member countries contain nearly half of the earth's tropical forests. This region witnesses the largest absolute decrease in total forest cover, although the rate of change is not greater than in other developing countries. Both land and forest areas are dominated by Brazil.
Forest products
Brazil dominates production of all forest products, producing not less than 75 percent in any category. Colombia and Peru produce most of the rest. In all countries, fuelwood is the most important use of wood from forests.
Trade
Brazil is the major exporter in the region and a significant importer of certain products. Colombia and Venezuela are major importers of paper and paperboard products and pulp. NWFPs are important in the region, and Brazil nuts, rubber, and medicinal and oil products are exported in significant quantities.
Forestry-related activities
Nearly all of TCA's areas of focus involve forests. Most direct policy statements and activities are coordinated through CEMMA and CECTA. Recently, TCA produced a statement of purpose (the Declaration of Lima, 1996) that renewed its commitment to sustainable forestry as outlined at UNCED. In this regard, TCA has helped make progress on defining indicators for sustainable forest management (prepared at a regional workshop in 1995). TCA plans to coordinate designs for better soil use and management throughout the region. TCA also supports the principles of the Convention on Biological Diversity and will promote joint discussion for its implementation.
Forest resources^4
land area (thousand ha)
total forest, 1995 (thousand ha)
percent forest land
forest hectares per person
annual change in forest area, 1990-95 (thousand ha)
percent annual change, 1990-95
Wood-based products
production
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
Forest products trade with all countries, 19 94^4
product
exports
imports
quantity
US$ thousand
quantity
US$ thousand
fuelwood and charcoal (m^3)
industrial roundwood (m^3)
sawnwood (m^3)
wood panels (m^3)
paper (tonnes)
pulp for paper (tonnes)
<section>k</section>
Annex 1: Acronyms and abbreviations
Acronyms
AsDB
Asian Development Bank
CBD
Convention on Biological Diversity
CCAD
Comisión Centroamericana de Ambiente y Desarrollo
CCD
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CIFOR
Centre for International Forestry Research
CILSS
Permanent Interstate Committee for Control Drought in the Sahel
CITES
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
COP
Conference of the Parties
CSD
Commission on Sustainable Development
DAC
Development Assistance Committee
DPCSD
UN Department on Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development
EC
European Commission
ETTS
European Timber Trends Study
EU
European Union
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FCCC
Framework Convention for Climate Change
FRA
Forest Resources Assessment
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GNP
Gross National Product
ICDP
Integrated Conservation and Development Project
ICRAF
International Centre for Research in Agroforestry
IGAD
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development
IIED
International Institute for Environment and Development
ILO
International Labour Organization
IFF
Intergovernmental Panel on Forests
ITFF
Inter-Agency Task Force on Forests
ITTA
International Tropical Timber Agreement
ITTO
International Tropical Timber Organization
IUCN
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (World Conservation Union)
IUFRO
International Union of Forestry Research Organizations
NFAP
National Forestry Action Programme
NFP
National Forests Programme
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
ODA
Official Development Assistance
SAP
Structural Adjustment Programme
TFAP
Tropical Forests Action Programme
UN
United Nations
UNCED
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
UNCTAD
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UN-ECE
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
WRI
World Resources Institute
WTO
World Trade Organization
WWF
World Wide Fund for Nature
Abbreviations
inh.
Inhabitants
m^3
cubic metre
tonne
metric ton
n.a.
not available
n.ap.
not applicable
n.s.
not significant
<section>l</section>
Annex 2: Definitions
Country groups
Reference to regions and sub-regions (indicated in bold letters) below correspond to the country groups indicated in Data Table 1 and 2 of Annex 3. These in turn use the definitions of the FAOSTAT Country Groups List of FAO. In addition to the regional groups used by SOFO, the term 'Latin America' is used to represent Mexico and the countries of Central America and South America.
Developed countries
Includes all industrialized countries and countries in transition.
Industrialized countries
Includes all countries in Europe except Eastern Europe, plus Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa and the USA.
Countries in transition
Includes all countries in the area of the former USSR and Eastern Europe.
Developing countries
Includes all countries other than developed countries, namely: all countries in Africa except South Africa, all countries in Asia except Israel and Japan, all countries in Oceania except Australia and New Zealand, and all countries in North and Central America except Canada and USA, and all countries in South America.
Tropical countries
As indicated in Data Tables 1 and 2.
Temperate/non-tropical countries
As indicated in Data Tables 1 and 2.
Forest and related land cover
These definitions have been adopted for use in the Global Forest Resources Assessment of FAO. They apply to the FRA 1990 and 1995 sets of forest cover data. Some terms have two definitions: one when used in conjunction with developing countries and another when applied to developed countries. This is due to different data collection methods used by the two organizations involved; FAO (for developing countries) and the UN-ECE's Trade Division, Timber Section (for developed countries). FRA 2000 and subsequent assessments will use a common set of definitions.
Afforestation/reafforestation
The establishment of a tree crop on an area from which it has always or very long been absent. Where such establishment fails and is repeated, the latter may properly be termed reafforestation.
Reforestation
Establishment of a tree crop on forest land.:
Definitions applied for developed countries
Forest
Land with tree crown cover (stand density) of more than about 20 percent of the area. Continuous forest with trees usually growing to more than about 7 m in height and able to produce wood. This includes both closed forest formations where trees of various storeys and undergrowth cover a high proportion of the ground, and open forest formations with a continuous grass layer in which tree synusia cover at least 10 percent of the ground.
Deforestation
Change of forest with depletion of tree crown cover to less than 20 percent.
Other wooded land
Land which has some forestry characteristics but is not forest as denned above. It includes open woodland and scrub, shrub and brushland (see below) whether or not used for pasture or range. It excludes land occupied by 'trees outside the forest'.
Open woodland
Land with tree crown cover (stand density of about 5-20 percent of the area).
Scrub, shrub and brushland
Land with scrub, shrub or stunted trees, where the main woody elements are shrubs (usually more than 50 cm and less than 7 m in height) covering more than about 20 percent of the area; land not primarily used for agricultural or other non-forestry purposes such as grazing of domestic animals.
Exploitable forest
Forest and other wooded land on which there are no legal, economic or technical restrictions on wood production. It includes areas where, although there are no such restrictions, harvesting is not currently taking place, for example, areas included in long-term utilization plans or intentions.
Definitions applied for developing countries
Forest
Ecosystem with a minimum of 10 percent crown cover of trees and/or bamboos, generally associated with wild flora, fauna and natural soil conditions, and not subject to agricultural practices. The term forest is further subdivided, according to its origin, into two categories:
i) Natural forests: a subset of forests composed of tree species known to be indigenous to the area; and
ii) Plantation forests:
· established artificially by afforestation on lands which previously did not carry forest within living memory;
· established artificially by reforestation of land which carried forest before, and involving the
replacement of the indigenous species by a new and essentially different species or genetic variety.
Deforestation
Change of forest with depletion of tree crown cover to less than 10 percent. (Changes within the forest class, e.g., from closed to open forest, which negatively affect the stand or site and, in particular, lower the production capacity, are termed forest degradation and are considered apart from deforestation.)
Other wooded land
Includes the following:
i) Forest fallow, consisting of all complexes of woody vegetation deriving from the clearing of natural forest for shifting agriculture. It consists of a mosaic of various successional phases and includes patches of uncleared forests and agriculture fields which cannot be realistically segregated and accounted for area-wise, especially from satellite imagery. Forest fallow is an intermediate class between forest and non-forest land uses. Part of the area which is not under cultivation may have the appearance of a secondary forest. Even the part currently under cultivation sometimes has the appearance of forest due to the presence of tree cover. Accurate separation between forest and forest fallow may not always be possible.
ii) Shrubs, referring to vegetation types where the dominant woody elements are shrubs with more than 50 cm and less than 5 m height on maturity. The height limits for trees and shrubs should be interpreted with flexibility, as the minimum tree and maximum shrub heights may vary between 5 and 7 m approximately.
Forest products definitions
These definitions are an abbreviated form of those used by the Yearbook of Forest Products issued by FAO. See that publication for full details.
Roundwood
Wood in its natural state as removed from forests and from trees outside the forest; wood in the rough. Commodities include all forms of industrial roundwood and fuelwood.
Fuelwood and charcoal
Wood harvested for fuel. Charcoal is converted to roundwood equivalent volume.
Industrial roundwood
The commodities included are sawlogs or veneer logs, pulpwood, other industrial roundwood. In the case of trade, chips and particles and wood residues are also included.
Pulpwood and particles
Includes pulpwood, chips, particles and wood residues. In production, the commodities included are pulpwood. In trade, the aggregate also includes chips or particles and wood residues.
Chips and particles
Includes wood that has been deliberately reduced to small pieces from wood in the rough or from industrial residues, suitable for pulping, for particle board and fibreboard production, for fuelwood or for other purposes.
Other industrial roundwood
Includes roundwood used for tanning, distillation, match blocks, gazogenes, poles, piling, posts, pitprops, etc.
Wood-based panels
The aggregate includes the following commodities:
veneer sheets, plywood, particle board and fibreboard. Particle board includes varieties such as oriented strand board (OSB), flakeboard, etc. Fibreboard includes hardboard, medium-density fibreboard (MDF) and insulation fibreboard.
Wood pulp
The following commodities are included in this aggregate: mechanical, semi-chemical, chemical and dissolving wood pulp.
Recovered paper
Used paper and paperboard or residues from paper conversion, collected for re-use as a raw material for the manufacture of paper, paperboard or other products.
Paper and paperboard
The following commodities are included in this aggregate: newsprint, printing and writing paper, other paper and paper-board.
Species definitions
Coniferous (C)
All woods derived from trees classified botanically as Gymnospermae. These are generally referred to as softwoods.
Non-coniferous (NC)
All woods derived from trees classified botanically as Angiospermae. These are generally referred to as broadleaved or hardwoods.
Definitions used in relation to protected areas
Categories of protected areas (of at least 1 000 ha) according to the IUCN System are as follows.
Totally-protected areas
Totally-protected areas are maintained in a natural state and are closed to extractive uses. They encompass the following three management categories:
Category I
Scientific reserves and strict nature reserves possess outstanding, representative ecosystems. Public access is generally limited, with only scientific research and educational use permitted.
Category II
National parks and provincial parks are relatively large areas of national or international significance not materially altered by humans. Visitors may use them for recreation and study.
Category III
Natural monuments and natural landmarks contain unique geological formations, special animals or plants, or unusual habitats.
Partially-protected areas
Partially-protected areas are areas that may be managed for specific uses, such as recreation or tourism, or areas that provide optimum conditions for certain species or communities of wildlife. Some extractive use within these areas is allowed. They encompass two management categories:
Category IV
Managed nature reserves and wildlife sanctuaries are protected for specific purposes, such as conservation of a significant plant or animal species.
Category V
Protected landscapes and seascapes may be entirely natural or may include cultural landscapes (e.g. scenically-attractive agricultural areas).
Other areas
Buffer zone
An area adjacent to a protected area, on which land use is partially restricted to give an added layer of protection to the protected area itself while providing valued benefits to neighbouring rural communities.
<section>m</section>
Annex 3: Data tables
The data tables appearing on the following pages are summarized as follows:
Data table
Description
Table 1
Basic country data for all regions (Africa, Asia, Oceania, Europe, former USSR, North and Central America, and South America)
Table 2
Forest cover as at 1995 for all regions, broken down by country
Table 3
Change in forest cover from 1990 to 1995 for all regions, broken down by country
Table 4
World production and consumption of forest products
Table 5
Production and consumption of forest products by region
Table 6
Production, trade and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone
Table 1
Basic country data
a) Africa
country
land area
population
GNP per person ^b
total 1994
total 1995
density 1995
annual rate of change 1990-95
rural 1995
total ^b 1993
real annual growth rate 1985-93
thousand ha
millions
#/km^2
percent
percent
US$
percent
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Chad
Gambia
Guinea-Bissau
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Senegal
West Sahelian Africa
Djibouti
n.a.
Former P.D.R. Ethiopia^i
Eritrea^i
c
n.a.
Ethiopia^i
Kenya
Somalia
c
Sudan
c
East Sahelian Africa
Benin
Cote d'Ivoire
Ghana
Guinea
Liberia
c
n.a.
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
Togo
West Moist Africa
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Rwanda
São Tomé and Principe
Uganda
Zaire
c
Central Africa
Angola
Botswana
Malawi
Mozambique
Namibia
Saint Helena^p
n.a.
n.a.
Tanzania, United Republic^n
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Southern Africa - Tropical
Comoros
Madagascar
Mauritius
Reunion
e
n.a.
Seychelles
Insular East Africa
Tropical Africa
Algeria
Egypt
Libya Arab Jamahiriya
e
n.a.
Morocco
Tunisia
North Africa
Lesotho
South Africa
Swaziland
Non-tropical Southern Africa
Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
Table 1 (continued)
Basic country data
b) Asia, Oceania
country
land area
population
GNP per person ^b
total 1994
total 1995
density 1995
annual rate of change 1990-95
rural 1995
total ^b 1993
real annual growth rate 1985-93
thousand ha
millions
#/km^2
percent
percent
US$
percent
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
n.a.
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
South Asia
Cambodia
c
n.a.
Laos
Myanmar
c
n.a.
Thailand
Viet Nam
Continental Southeast Asia
Brunei Darussalam
f
n.a.
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Insular Southeast Asia
Tropical Asia
Afghanistan
c
n.a.
Bahrain
Cyprus
Iran
n.a.
Iraq
g
n.a.
Israel
Jordan^i
Kuwait
Lebanon
g
n.a.
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
n.a.
Syrian Arab Republic
g
Turkey
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
c
n.a.
Middle East
China
Hong Kong^k
Japan
Korea, D.P.R.
g
n.a.
Korea, Republic
Macau
e
n.a.
Mongolia
East Asia
Temperate Asia
TOTAL ASIA
Oceania
American Samoa
e
n.a.
Cook Islands^p
n.a.
n.a.
Fiji
French Polynesia
f
n.a.
Guam
e
n.a.
Kiribati
New Caledonia
e
n.a.
Niue^p
n.a.
n.a.
Pacific Is. (Trust Terr.)
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Soloman Islands
Tonga
Vanuatu
Tropical Oceania
Australia
New Zealand
Temperate Oceania
TOTAL OCEANIA
Table 1 (continued)
Basic country data
c) Europe, former USSR
country
land area
population
GNP per person ^b
total 1994
total 1995
density 1995
annual rate of change 1990-95
rural 1995
total ^b 1993
real annual growth rate 1985-93
thousand ha
millions
#/km^2
percent
percent
US$
percent
Finland
Iceland
Norway
Sweden
Northern Europe
Austria
Belgium-Luxembourg^d
Denmark
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Liechtenstein^p
n.a.
n.a.
Malta
e
n.a.
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
Western Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
c
n.a.
Bulgaria
Croatia
g
n.a.
Czech Republic
Hungary
Poland
Macedonia
n.a,
Romania
Slovakia
Slovenia
n.a.
Yugoslavia, Federal Republic
g
n.a.
Eastern Europe
TOTAL EUROPE
former USSR
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Estonia
n.a.
Georgia
n.a.
Kazakhstan
n.a.
Kyrgyzstan
n.a.
Latvia
n.a.
Lithuania
n.a.
Moldova, Republic of
Russian Federation
n.a.
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
n.a.
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
TOTAL FORMER USSR
Table 1 (continued)
Basic country data
d) North and Central America, South America
country
land area
population
GNP per person ^b
total 1994
total 1995
density 1995
annual rate of change 1990-95
rural 1995
total ^b 1993
real annual growth rate 1985-93
thousand ha
millions
#/km^2
percent
percent
US$
percent
North and Central America
Canada
United States of America
Temperate North and Central America
Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Central America and Mexico
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Bermuda
f
n.a.
British Virgin Island^p
n.a.
n.a.
Cayman Islands^p
f
n.a.
Cuba
g
n.a.
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Guadeloupe
e
n.a.
Haiti
c
Jamaica
Martinique
e
n.a.
Monlserrat^p
n.a.
n.a.
Netherlands Antilles
e
n.a.
Puerto Rico
St. Kitts and Nevis^p
St. Lucia
St. Pierre and Miquelon^p
n.a,
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
St. Vincent
Trinidad and Tobago
US Virgin Islands
f
n.a.
Caribbean
Tropical and Sub-tropical North and Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
South America
Bolivia
Brazil
Colombia
Ecuador
French Guiana
e
n.a.
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Venezuela
Tropical South America
Argentina
Chile
Uruguay
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
<section>n</section>
Annex 3: Data tables (continued)
Table 2
Forest cover 1995
a) Africa
land area
thousand ha
total forest, 1995
natural forest, 1995
thousand ha
thousand ha
percentage of land area
ha/cap
Africa
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Chad
Gambia
Guinea-Bissau
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Senegal
West Sahelian Africa
Djibouti
n.s.
Former P.D.R. Ethiopia
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Kenya
n.s.
Somalia
Sudan
East Sahelian Africa
Benin
Côte D'Ivoire
Ghana
Guinea
Liberia
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
Togo
West Moist Africa
Burundi
n.s.
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Rwanda
n.s.
São Tomé and Principe
Uganda
Zaire
Central Africa
Angola
Botswana
Malawi
Mozambique
Namibia
Saint Helena
Tanzania, United Republic
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Tropical Southern Africa
Comoros
n.s.
Madagascar
Mauritius
n.s.
Reunion
Seychelles
Insular East Africa
Total Tropical Africa
Algeria
Egypt
n.s.
n.s.
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Morocco
Tunisia
North Africa
Lesotho
n.s.
South Africa
Swaziland
Non-tropical Southern Africa
Total Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
Table 2 (continued)
Forest cover, 1995
b) Asia, Oceania
land area
thousand ha
total forest, 1995
natural forest, 1995
thousand ha
thousand ha
percentage of land area
ha/cap
Asia
Bangladesh
n.s.
Bhutan
India
Maldives
n.a.
n.a.
n.a,
n.a.
Nepal
Pakistan
n.s.
Sri Lanka
South Asia
Cambodia
Laos
Myanmar
Thailand
Viet Nam
Continental Southeast Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
n.s.
Insular Southeast Asia
Total Tropical Asia
Afghanistan
Bahrain
Cyprus
n.ap.
Iran
n.s.
Iraq
n.s.
Israel
n.s.
n.ap.
Jordan
n.s.
Kuwait
n.s.
Lebanon
n.s.
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
n.s.
Syrian Arab Republic
n.s.
Turkey
n.ap.
United Arab Emirates
n.s.
Yemen
n.s.
n.s.
Near East
n.ap.
China
Hong Kong
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Japan
n.ap.
Korea, D.P.R.
Korea, Republic
Macau
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Mongolia
East Asia
n.ap.
Total Temperate Asia
n.ap.
TOTAL ASIA
n.ap
Oceania
American Samoa
Cook Islands
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
New Caledonia
Niue Island
Pacific Is. (Trust Terr.)
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Vanuatu
Tropical Oceania
Australia
n.ap.
New Zealand
n.ap,
Total Temperate Oceania
n.ap.
TOTAL OCEANIA
n.ap.
Table 2 (continued)
Forest cover, 1995
c) Europe, former USSR
land area
thousand ha
total forest, 1995
natural forest, 1995
thousand ha
thousand ha
percentage of land area
ha/cap
Europe
Finland
n.ap.
Iceland
n.s.
n.ap.
Norway
n.ap.
Sweden
n.ap.
Northern Europe
n.ap.
Austria
n.ap.
Belgium-Luxembourg
n.ap.
Denmark
n.ap.
France
n.ap.
Germany
n.ap.
Greece
n.ap.
Ireland
n.ap.
Italy
n.ap.
Liechtenstein
n.ap,
Malta
n.ap.
Netherlands
n.s.
n.ap.
Portugal
n.ap.
Spain
n.ap.
Switzerland
n.ap.
United Kingdom
n.s.
n.ap.
Western Europe
n.ap.
Albania
n.ap.
Bosnia and Herzegovina
n.ap.
Bulgaria
n.ap.
Croatia
n.ap.
Czech Republic
n.ap.
Hungary
n.ap.
Poland
n.ap.
Macedonia
n.ap.
Romania
n.ap.
Slovakia
n.ap.
Slovenia
n.ap.
Yugoslavia, Federal Republic
n.ap.
Eastern Europe
n.ap.
TOTAL EUROPE
n.ap.
Area of the former USSR
Armenia
n.ap.
Azerbaijan
n.ap.
Belarus
n.ap.
Estonia
n.ap.
Georgia
n.ap.
Kazakhstan
n.ap.
Kyrgyzstan
n.ap.
Latvia
n.ap.
Lithuania
n.ap.
Moldova, Republic of
n.ap.
Russian Federation
n.ap.
Tajikistan
n.ap.
Turkmenistan
n.ap.
Ukraine
n.ap.
Uzbekistan
n.ap.
TOTAL AREA OF THE FORMER USSR
n.ap.
Table 2
Forest cover. 1995
d) North and Central America, South America
land area
thousand ha
total forest, 1995
natural forest, 1995
thousand ha
thousand ha
percentage of land area
ha/cap
North and Central America
Canada
n.ap.
United States of America
n.ap.
Temperate North and Central America
n.ap.
Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
n.s.
Guatemala
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Central America and Mexico
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
n.s.
Guadeloupe
Haiti
n.s.
Jamaica
Martinique
Montserrat
Netherlands Antilles
Puerto Rico
Saint Kitts
Saint Lucia
n.s.
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Saint Vincent/Grenadine
Trinidad and Tobago
US Virgin Islands
Caribbean
Tropical North and Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
n.ap.
South America
Bolivia
Brazil
Colombia
Ecuador
French Guiana
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Venezuela
Tropical South America
Argentina
Chile
Uruguay
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
GRAND TOTALS
n.ap.
Notes: numbers may not tally due to rounding.
n.s. - not significant: indicating a very small value.
n.a. = not available.
n.ap. = not applicable
<section>o</section>
Annex 3: Data tables (continued)
Table 3
Change in forest cover, 1990-95
a) Africa
country
total forest, 1990
total forest, 1995
total change, 1990-95
annual change
annual change
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
rate (percent)
Africa
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Chad
Gambia
Guinea-Bissau
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Senegal
West Sahelian Africa
Djibouti
Former P.D.R. Ethiopia
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Kenya
Somalia
Sudan
East Sahelian Africa
Benin
Cote D'Ivoire
Ghana
Guinea
Liberia
Nigeria
Sierra Leone
Togo
West Moist Africa
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Rwanda
n.s.
São Tomé and Principe
Uganda
Zaire
Central Africa
Angola
Botswana
Malawi
Mozambique
Namibia
Saint Helena
Tanzania, United Republic
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Tropical Southern Africa
Comoros
Madagascar
Mauritius
Reunion
Seychelles
Insular East Africa
Total Tropical Africa
Algeria
Egypt
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Morocco
Tunisia
North Africa
Lesotho
South Africa
Swaziland
Non-tropical Southern Africa
Total Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
Table 3 (continued)
Change in forest cover 1990-95
b) Asia, Oceania
country
total forest, 1990
total forest, 1995
total change, 1990-95
annual change
annual change
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
rate (percent)
Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
n.s.
Maldives
n.a,
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
South Asia
Cambodia
Laos
Myanmar
Thailand
Viet Nam
Continental Southeast Asia
Brunei Darussalam
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Insular Southeast Asia
Total Tropical Asia
Afghanistan
Bahrain
Cyprus
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Syrian Arab Rep.
Turkey
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Near East
China
Hong Kong
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Japan
Korea, D.P.R.
Korea, Republic
Macau
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Mongolia
East Asia
Total Temperate Asia
TOTAL ASIA
Oceania
American Samoa
Cook Islands
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
New Caledonia
Niue Island
Pacific Is. (Trust Terr.)
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Vanuatu
Tropical Oceania
Australia
n.s.
New Zealand
Total Temperate Oceania
TOTAL OCEANIA
Table 3 (continued)
Change in forest cover 1990-95
c) Europe, former USSR
country
total forest, 1990
total forest, 1995
total change, 1990-95
annual change
annual change
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
rate (percent)
Europe
Finland
Iceland
Norway
Sweden
n.s.
Northern Europe
n.s.
Austria
Belgium-Luxembourg
Denmark
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Liechtenstein
Malta
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
Western Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
n.s.
Croatia
Czech Republic
n.s.
n.s.
Hungary
Poland
Macedonia
n.s.
n.s.
Romania
n.s,
Slovakia
Slovenia
Yugoslavia, Federal Republic
Eastern Europe
TOTAL EUROPE
Area of the former USSR
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Estonia
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Moldova, Republic of
Russian Federation
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
Uzbekistan
TOTAL AREA OF THE FORMER USSR
Table 3 (continued)
Change in forest cover 1990-95
d) North and Central America, South America
country
total forest, 1990
total forest, 1995
total change, 1990-95
annual change
annual change
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
thousand ha
rate (percent)
North and Central America
Canada
United States of America
Temperate North and Central America
Belize
Costa Rica
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Central America and Mexico
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Bermuda
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Haiti
Jamaica
Martinique
n.s.
Montserrat
Netherlands Antilles
Puerto Rico
Saint Kitts
Saint Lucia
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Saint Vincent/Grenadine
Trinidad and Tobago
US Virgin Islands
Caribbean
Total Tropical North and
Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
South America
Bolivia
Brazil
Colombia
Ecuador
French Guiana
n.s.
Guyana
n.s.
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Venezuela
Tropical South America
Argentina
Chile
Uruguay
n.s.
n.s.
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
GRAND TOTALS
Notes: numbers may not tally due to rounding.
n.s. = not significant: indicating a very small value.
n.a = not available.
n.ap. = not applicable
<section>p</section>
Annex 3: Data tables (continued)
Table 4
World production and consumption of forest products; 1970,1980,1990 and 1994
world
developed
developing
world
developed
developing
world
developed
developing
world
developed
developing
PRODUCTION
fuelwood and charcoal (million m^3)
industrial roundwood (million m^3)
sawnwood (million m^3)
wood-based panels (million m^3)
total fibre furnish (million tonnes)
paper and paperboard (million tonnes)
CONSUMPTION
fuelwood and charcoal (million m^3)
industrial roundwood (million m^3)
sawnwood (million m^3)
wood-based panels (million m^3)
total fibre furnish (million tonnes)
paper and paperboard (million tonnes)
Table 5
Production and consumption of forest products by region; 1970,1980,1990 and 1994
Production
Consumption
Table 6
Production, trade and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone, 1994
a) Africa
ecofloristic zone
production
imports
exports
consumption
fuelwood and charcoal (1000 m^3)
West Sahelian Africa
East Sahelian Africa
West Moist Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa - Tropical
Insular East Africa
Tropical Africa
North Africa
Southern Africa - Non-tropical
Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
industrial roundwood (1000 m^3)
West Sahelian Africa
East Sahelian Africa
West Moist Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa - Tropical
Insular East Africa
Tropical Africa
North Africa
Southern Africa - Non-tropical
Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
sawnwood and sleepers (1000 m^3)
West Sahelian Africa
East Sahelian Africa
West Moist Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa - Tropical
Insular East Africa
Tropical Africa
North Africa
Southern Africa - Non-tropical
Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
wood-based panels (1000 m^3)
West Sahelian Africa
East Sahelian Africa
West Moist Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa - Tropical
Insular East Africa
Tropical Africa
North Africa
Southern Africa - Non-tropical
Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
Table 6 (continued)
Production, trade and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone, 1994
a) Africa (continued)
ecofloristic zone
production
imports
exports
consumption
pulp for paper (1000 tonnes)^1
West Sahelian Africa
East Sahelian Africa
West Moist Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa - Tropical
Insular East Africa
Tropical Africa
North Africa
Southern Africa - Non-tropical
Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
paper and paperboard (1000 tonnes)
West Sahelian Africa
East Sahelian Africa
West Moist Africa
Central Africa
Southern Africa - Tropical
Insular East Africa
Tropical Africa
North Africa
Southern Africa - Non-tropical
Non-tropical Africa
TOTAL AFRICA
^1 Includes wood pulp and non-wood pulp. Does not include recovered paper, unlike 'total fibre furnish'.
Table 6 (continued)
Production, trade and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone, 1994
b) Asia
ecofloristic zone
production
imports
exports
consumption
fuelwood and charcoal (1000 m^3)
South Asia
Continental Southeast Asia
Insular Southeast Asia
Tropical Asia
Near East
East Asia
Temperate Asia
TOTAL ASIA
industrial roundwood (1000 m^3)
South Asia
Continental Southeast Asia
Insular Southeast Asia
Tropical Asia
Near East
East Asia
Temperate Asia
TOTAL ASIA
sawnwood and sleepers (1000 m^3)
South Asia
Continental Southeast Asia
Insular Southeast Asia
Tropical Asia
Near East
East Asia
Temperate Asia
TOTAL ASIA
wood-based panels (1000 m^3)
South Asia
Continental Southeast Asia
Insular Southeast Asia
Tropical Asia
Near East
East Asia
Temperate Asia
TOTAL ASIA
pulp for paper (1000 tonnes)^1
South Asia
Continental Southeast Asia
Insular Southeast Asia
Tropical Asia
Near East
East Asia
Temperate Asia
TOTAL ASIA
paper and paperboard (1000 tonnes)
South Asia
Continental Southeast Asia
Insular Southeast Asia
Tropical Asia
Near East
East Asia
Temperate Asia
TOTAL ASIA
^1 Includes wood pulp and non-wood pulp. Does not include recovered paper, unlike 'total fibre furnish'.
Table 6 (continued)
Production, trade and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone, 1994
c) Oceania
ecofloristic zone
production
imports
exports
consumption
fuelwood and charcoal (1000 m^3)
Tropical Oceania
Temperate Oceania
TOTAL OCEANIA
industrial roundwood (1000m^3)
Tropical Oceania
Temperate Oceania
TOTAL OCEANIA
sawnwood and sleepers (1000 m^3)
Tropical Oceania
Temperate Oceania
TOTAL OCEANIA
wood-based panels (1000 m^3)
Tropical Oceania
Temperate Oceania
TOTAL OCEANIA
pulp for paper (1000 tonnes)^1
Tropical Oceania
Temperate Oceania
TOTAL OCEANIA
paper and paperboard (1000 tonnes)
Tropical Oceania
Temperate Oceania
TOTAL OCEANIA
^1 Includes wood pulp and non-wood pulp. Does not include recovered paper, unlike 'total fibre furnish'.
Table 6 (continued)
Production, trade and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone, 1994
d) Europe
ecofloristic zone
production
imports
exports
consumption
fuelwood and charcoal (1000 m^3)
Northern Europe
Western Europe
Eastern Europe
TOTAL EUROPE
industrial roundwood (1000 m^3)
Northern Europe
Western Europe
Eastern Europe
TOTAL EUROPE
sawnwood and sleepers (1000 m^3)
Northern Europe
Western Europe
Eastern Europe
TOTAL EUROPE
wood-based panels (1000 m^3)
Northern Europe
Western Europe
Eastern Europe
TOTAL EUROPE
pulp for paper (1000 tonnes)^1
Northern Europe
Western Europe
Eastern Europe
TOTAL EUROPE
paper and paperboard (1000 tonnes)
Northern Europe
Western Europe
Eastern Europe
TOTAL EUROPE
^1 Includes wood pulp and non-wood pulp. Does not include recovered paper, unlike 'total fibre furnish'.
Table 6 (continued)
Production, trade, and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone, 1994
e) former USSR
ecofloristic zone
production
imports
exports
consumption
fuelwood and charcoal (1000 m^3)
industrial roundwood (1000 m^3)
sawnwood and sleepers (1000 m^3)
wood-based panels (1000 m^3)
pulp for paper (1000 tonnes)^1
paper and paperboard (1000 tonnes)
^1 includes wood pulp and non-wood pulp. Does not include recovered paper, unlike 'total fibre furnish'.
Table 6
Production, trade and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone, 1994
f) North and Central America
ecofloristic zone
production
imports
exports
consumption
fuelwood and charcoal (1000 m^3)
Temperate North and Central America
Central America and Mexico
Caribbean
Tropical and Sub-tropical North and Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
industrial roundwood (1000 m^3)
Temperate North and Central America
Central America and Mexico
Caribbean
Tropical and Sub-tropical North and Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
sawnwood and sleepers (1000 m^3)
Temperate North and Central America
Central America and Mexico
Caribbean
Tropical and Sub-tropical North and Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
wood-based panels (1000 m^3)
Temperate North and Central America
Central America and Mexico
Caribbean
Tropical and Sub-tropical North and Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
pulp for paper (1000 tonnes)^1
Temperate North and Central America
Central America and Mexico
Caribbean
Tropical and Sub-tropical North and Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
paper and paperboard (1000 tonnes)
Temperate North and Central America
Central America and Mexico
Caribbean
Tropical and Sub-tropical North and Central America
TOTAL NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA
^1 Includes wood pulp and non-wood pulp. Does not include recovered paper, unlike 'total fibre furnish'.
Table 6 (continued)
Production, trade and consumption of forest products by ecofloristic zone, 1994
g) South America
ecofloristic zone
production
imports
exports
consumption
fuelwood and charcoal (1000 m^3)
Tropical South America
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
industrial roundwood (1000 m^3)
Tropical South America
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
sawnwood and sleepers (1000 m^3)
Tropical South America
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
wood-based panels (1000 m^3)
Tropical South America
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
pulp for paper (1000 tomes)^1
Tropical South America
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
paper and paperboard (1000 tonnes)
Tropical South America
Temperate South America
TOTAL SOUTH AMERICA
^1 Includes wood pulp and non-wood pulp. Does not include recovered paper, unlike 'total fibre furnish'.
<section>q</section>
Annex 4: Notes on the data tables
Table 1: Basic country data
Population statistics on total population, population density, and rate of change are taken from World Population Prospects, the 1994 Revision, United Nations, New York, 1995. The 'Total Population' and 'Population Density' data refer to 1995. The 'Annual Rate of Change' data refer to the period 1990-95. The source of 'Percentage Rural Population' data is World Urbanization Prospects, the 1994 Revision, United Nations, New York, 1995. The reference year 1994.
The 'Land Area' data are taken from the FAO Production Yearbook, 1996, FAO, Rome. The reference year is 1994, The 'Land Area' figure refers to total area of the country, excluding areas under inland water bodies.
The GNP data are taken from The World Bank Atlas 1995, World Bank, Washington, D.C., 1996. The 'GNP Per Person - Total' figures refer to 1993 and the 'GNP Per Person - Real Annual Growth Rate' figures refer to the period 1985-93.
The meaning of the notations on the figures are as follows:
a) Equivalent to total area minus inland water bodies; representing total land area.
b) From World Bank Atlas method, subtotals based on available data.
c) Estimated to be low-income (US$695 or less).
d) Combined Belgium-Luxembourg data.
e) Estimated to be upper-middle-income (US$ 2 786 to US$ 8 625).
f) Estimated to be high-income (US$ 8 626 or more).
g) Estimated to be lower-middle-income (US$ 696 to US$ 2 785).
h) Estimates for the economies of the former Soviet Union are preliminary, and their clarification will be kept under review.
i) GNP data for Eritrea are not yet disaggregated and are included in Ethiopia.
j) Total GNP per capita across former USSR countries is based on 1995 population estimates.
k) References to GNP related to GDP.
l) Data cover the East Bank only.
m) Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
n) GNP data cover mainland Tanzania only.
o) Total annual change in the former USSR is based on available data only.
p) Population rounded to zero.
Table 2: Forest cover, 1995; and Table 3: Change in forest cover, 1991-95
Method of data collection The forest cover data for developing countries contained in the tables are based on country assessments which were prepared on different dates, ' and which, for reporting purposes, needed to be adapted to the standard reference years of 1990 and 1995. This was done with the help of an adjustment function, called the deforestation model, developed to; permit the correlation of forest cover change over time with ancillary variables, including population change and density, initial forest cover and the ecological zone of the forest area under consideration.
The same model was applied for calculation of the 1990 estimates of forest cover for the Forest Resources Assessment 1990. However, the inputs to the model were updated for the State of the World's Forests 1997 report with more recent and accurate information on population, boundaries of ecological zones and, in the case of some countries, new national forest cover assessments.
The UN World Population Prospects (1994) containing updates to the 1990 population estimates and projections for 1995 was the main source of information for the new population information. It provided data needed not only to calculate 1995 forest cover figures, but to revise the forest cover estimates for 1990 that were given in FRA 1990. This more recent information showed new population estimates of state (1990) and change (1980-90) that are lower than the estimates available in 1990. This, along with new assessments of forest cover now available, account for higher estimates of forest cover for 1990 than those previously estimated by the Forest Resources Assessment 1990.
During 1996 a search was made to identify new assessments of forest cover which have been carried out since the FRA 1990 study. Many new and important national-level assessments were submitted to FAO and provided new inputs to the model for the calculation of the forest-cover area for 1995 and the recalculation of the 1990 estimate. Specifically, new forest inventory information was utilized as inputs to the model for Brazil, Bolivia, Mexico, Cambodia, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Cote d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Guinea Bissau. (Other countries submitted information which is still being analysed for use in the Year 2000 Assessment.) The effect of this new information on global totals resulted in a revision (upward) of forest-cover estimates.
For the industrialized countries, The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe and Food and Agriculture Liaison Office in Geneva (UN-ECE/FAO) conducted an enquiry into the state of forest cover. For this enquiry, official country representatives responded to a detailed questionnaire on the state of forest cover in their respective countries. This information was then passed on to FAO in Rome for compilation into composite tables and the calculation of regional, sub-regional and global totals.
Notes on Table 2
'Total forest' is the sum of natural forest and plantations. Because of difficulties in drawing a clear distinction between the two in many developed countries, only 'total forest' figures are provided for developed countries and n.ap. (not applicable) is indicated under 'natural forest'.
<section>r</section>
Acknowledgements
SOFO is the product of concerted effort and teamwork on the part of many individuals both inside and outside FAO. Overall coordination of the publication was carried out by S.M. Braatz. J. Bourke provided valuable editing assistance and advice. The following members of FAO staff and consultants were involved in collecting data, drafting sections, or reviewing the document: J. Anderson, J. Ball, S. Borelli, J. Bourke, S.M. Braatz, F. Castaneda, M.F. Chipeta.J. Clement, R. Davis, M.H. El-Lakany, M.R. de Montalembert, D.A. Harcharik, R. Heinrich, K. Janz, J.P. Lanly, L. Lintu, M. Lorenzini, M. Malagnoux, A. Marzoli, D. McGuire, M. Morell, K. Padovani, C. Palmberg-Lerche, M. Paolozzi, M. Paveri, R. Romeo, K.H. Schmincke, E.H. Sène, O. Serrano, D. Shallon, K.D. Singh, P. So, M. Trossero, P. Vantomme, K. Warner. The following colleagues in the FAO regional offices contributed the regional highlights and various other sections: A. Al-fares, P. Durst, T. Frisk, J.D. Keita, P. Kone
and E. Pepke, S. Dembner advised on production aspects, and M. Montavon provided administrative support. Colleagues in the Timber Section, Trade Division of the UN Economic Commission for Europe Secretariat provided data on 1995 forest cover for developed countries, drafted the European highlights, and provided valuable feedback on various sections of the text; for this, our thanks go to C. Prins and A. Korotkov. D. Brooks and R. McConnell provided the North American regional highlights. C. Behr compiled the table on basic country data and the forestry in economic/political regional groups' section. S.A. Oikos and B. Braatz contributed to the forest resources and global climate change sections, respectively. FAO also wishes to acknowledge its appreciation for the valuable guidance given by the members of SOFO's External Review Committee, namely: D. Barron. S. Bass, M. Dourojeanni, M. (Goumandakoye, H. Gregersen, M. Hadley, J.P. Lanly, J. Maini, O. M'Hirit, C. Prins, M.N.
Salleh, and M. Simula. Finally in many thanks are due to those who worked long and late to provide essential production support: E Rubini, L. Swain, M. Rosal, S. Tafuro, and L. Luna for secretarial assistance, and to Nigel Jones and Georgina Lucas at Words and Publications (UK) for preparation of the final manuscript for printing.
The forestry sector today is attracting an unprecedented amount of international attention. It is also undergoing dynamic evolution in response to economic, political and social developments, changing perceptions of the role of forests and the concerns of a wide range of interest groups. Accurate, current and easily accessible information on the world's forests and on developments in the forestry sector is more important than ever for the formulation of sound policies and informed public opinion. The Stare of the World's Forests (SOFO), which is published every two years, aims to provide such information. SOFO 1997 is divided into four main sections: a section on situation and prospects for forest conservation and development, which supplies information on forest cover, forest management and forest products; a section on policy, planning and institutional arrangements; a special issue section which presents information on efforts to develop criteria and indicators of
sustainable forest management; and six regional reviews which together cover all the countries of the world.
