<title>Long-Term Scenarios of Livestock-Crop-Land Use Interactions in Developing Countries</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
In recent years livestock production in developing countries is increasingly dependent on feedstuffs, whereas the importance of grazing is slowly decreasing. Parallel to this trend there is a strong increase in the per caput demand for livestock products related to strong population growth in developing countries and changes in dietary habits.
This report presents long term scenarios describing interactions between livestock, crop production and land use and the possible consequences for the nutrients required for crop production and animal waste. The livestock-crop interactions also play an important role in the emission of atmospheric pollutants. As an example, scenarios of the emission of ammonia (NH[3]) and nitrous oxide (N[2]O) from animal excreta and synthetic fertilizers are presented, as well as projections of the emission of methane (CH[4]) by ruminating animals.
The starting point is the FAO study World Agriculture: Towards 2010. To ensure that the uncertainty in future projections of agricultural production and demand is sufficiently recognized, three different scenarios are developed: a pessimistic, optimistic and medium scenario. The length of the projection period is determined by the human population in developing countries which is expected to stabilize not earlier than the second half of the twenty-first century.
Scenarios are not forecasts of the future. They are tools to analyse consequences of population increase and economic growth, and to study the effectiveness of potential agricultural or environmental strategies or policies. Future work in this field should include comparison of scenarios from different sources. Recently, the Stockholm Environment Institute developed agricultural scenarios for use in the global integrated assessment model IMAGE, a model which is being developed at the National Institute of Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) in the Netherlands. Unfortunately these scenarios were not available in final draft in the period when this report was compiled, but a comparison may reveal certain weaknesses in the different approaches of scenario construction.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
The collaboration between FAO and RIVM was undertaken through my work as visiting scientist (March-November 1995) at FAO in Rome. This was made possible through financial support from the FAO programme of cooperation with academic and research institutes in OECD member countries (Academics Scheme), and the National Institute of Public Health and the Environment (RIVM) in Bilthoven, The Netherlands. Many persons of FAO have contributed to the scenario development described in the report. First of all thanks are due to J. Bruinsma for his advice and stimulating discussions on the study and comments on earlier versions of the report. The crop production scenarios were constructed by or in collaboration with G. Blaak, W.B. Charles, E. Kueneman, J.P. Marathee and D. Van Tran. Livestock production scenarios were constructed on the basis of advice from J. Garcia de Siles, J. Henriksen and S. Mack. My heartfelt gratitude is extended to M. Sanchez for our many discussions on pig and
poultry production and general issues of livestock production; his comments on earlier versions of the report have led to major improvements. Finally, the author is grateful for the stimulating comments and advice of J. Slingenberg on the data needed on feed intake by animals, of J. Poulisse on fertilizer use and of K. Frenken on irrigation potential. The advice of A. Angé, C. Calpe, T. Gillin, K. Janz, J.M. Suttie is gratefully acknowledged.
Further, thanks are due to T. Janholt (World Food Programme) for advice on the trade scenarios, and K. Van der Hoek (RIVM) for estimates of current emissions from livestock production. The editorial assistance of Ruth de Wijs (RIVM) is gratefully acknowledged.
Finally, the author is very grateful to R. Brinkman for his immediate assistance and advice whenever needed and for reading parts of the draft, and to W.G. Sombroek both for initiating this project and for general guidance during the work.
<section>3</section>
SUMMARY
Development of agriculture in many developed countries has led to serious environmental problems. Most of these are related to the pressure on the land, which may lead to intensification on the one hand and land degradation on the other hand. There is concern that agricultural production in developing countries will cause similar environmental threats in the future as production will have to increase to satisfy the growing demand for food. Intensification leads to high inputs of nutrients in the form of mineral fertilizers and animal feed. Important parts of these inputs leak from the system in the form of nutrient leaching to groundwater and gaseous losses to the atmosphere. Additional environmental problems are land degradation and deforestation in many developing countries, which in many instances are caused by pressure on the existing agricultural land as a result of the growing demand for products and degradation of the existing agricultural land base.
The study presented in this report concentrated on the interactions between livestock production, crop production and land use. The link between livestock and crop production is through the demand for animal feedstuffs. This report presents long-term scenarios describing these interactions and the possible consequences for crop production and animal waste production. As the world population is expected to stabilize in the second half of the twenty-first century, the scenarios must cover a period of 50-100 years to include the impacts of human population numbers. The above crop-livestock interactions play a role in the emission of a number of atmospheric pollutants.
Not all environmental consequences can be quantitatively evaluated. World agriculture is currently responsible for more than half of the atmospheric increase of nitrous oxide (N[2]O), two thirds of the global ammonia (NH[3]) input into the atmosphere, and 40% of global methane (CH[4]) emissions. These compounds play important roles in atmospheric chemistry, ozone depletion, aerosol formation and greenhouse warming. Therefore, a number of examples were selected, including the emission of ammonia (NH[3]) and nitrous oxide (N[2]O) from animal waste and mineral fertilizers, as well as projections of the emission of methane (CH[4]) from ruminant animals. A number of other environmental effects related to livestock and crop production are discussed in a qualitative way.
The scenarios presented in this study are examples showing the comparison of assumptions about demography and agricultural production. Scenarios are tools to assess and compare assumptions about the future. Since ideas about the basic assumptions may change in the course of time, and depending on the purpose of the study for which they are developed, in this report all necessary steps that need to be taken to produce a scenario are described in detail. This will help other scenario developers to adapt the assumptions and construct new scenarios.
The scenarios described in this report, supplemented with scenarios for the developed countries, can be used as input for atmospheric models and integrated models of the environment. The results of this study are of interest for studies on ecological effects of N deposition, atmospheric processes under the influence of pollution. In general, description of the possible future magnitude of the problems related to the use of animal feedstuffs, inputs of nutrients and prevention or reduction of "leaks" in the production system, is of interest to fertilizer specialists, agronomists and workers in the field of rural environment. The description of the construction of the scenarios is of interest to researchers involved in the use and development of scenarios.
Starting from the "World Agriculture: Towards 2010. An FAO study" (AT2010) results, a projection of regional domestic demand and production for groups of agricultural products was made on the basis of scenarios for population, GDP and per capita consumption. The general procedure for developing crop and animal production scenarios involved region-specific assumptions of the yield or production ceilings for irrigated and rainfed crops and animals based on climate, CO[2] concentrations, soil suitability, historical developments and new technologies. For the medium scenario the growth rates for yields and animal production parameters of AT2010 were simply extrapolated to the future up to the maximum yield. In the high and low scenarios the rates of increase for crop and livestock productivity are respectively 25% higher and 25% lower than rates for the medium scenario; and yield and animal production ceilings were set higher and lower, respectively. Similar assumptions were
made for the rates of increase in irrigated areas and crop intensities.
These combinations of optimistic or pessimistic assumptions on production within a region into regional optimistic or pessimistic scenarios provide an 'outer' range of uncertainty in the projections. In the medium scenario, with a continuation of trends as in AT 2010, for crop and animal production, the pressure on land by increasing arable cultivation will decrease between 2025 and 2050. This is caused by the simultaneous slow down in the growth of demand for agricultural products and continued possibilities for increasing the land productivity. In the low scenario, more land is required for production and larger numbers of livestock are needed to meet the growing demand than in the medium scenario. In the high scenario the opposite occurs, with a lower land pressure and smaller numbers of livestock required for the same total production than in the medium scenario.
The medium scenario for the developing countries, including China, shows an increase of the irrigated area by 50% in the next 50-100 years (90-100 million ha, of which 40 million ha in the first 20 years of the projection period). For the Near East and North Africa the assumptions on total crop production have been adjusted to prevent unrealistic expansion of irrigated and total arable areas. According to the medium scenario, about half of the total increase in irrigated land would occur in South Asia, which may be an overestimate.
The available data on animal feed, which are derived indirectly from country supply-utilization accounts, indicate that at present, of the total domestic demand, about 16% cereals, 20% starchy foods and 3% oilseeds are used to feed livestock in the developing countries. According to the medium scenario the use of cereals as animal feed increases to 30% of the domestic demand in 2050, and similar increases are projected for the other crops. Major increases in the demand for crop and livestock products may occur in Near East and North Africa. In this region there is not enough productive land or water to increase crop production sufficiently to meet the growth in the demand, so in the future there may be major increases in imports of feedstuffs.
According to the medium scenario the excretion of major plant nutrients by animals may double in the coming 5-6 decades. In the high scenario, with growth towards more intensive production, the waste production is lower and even tends to decrease in the period after 2025. In the low scenario, with less growth in animal productivity, the waste production grows faster than in the other two scenarios. As a result of differential growth in the populations of the various animals, and increasing efficiency of N use by animals, the increase in NH[3] and N[2]O emissions is slower than the growth of livestock production. However, particularly in Asia, animal waste production increases rapidly. Combined with a possible concentration of livestock production, high NH[3] emission densities may lead to adverse environmental effects such as soil acidification.
Emissions of CH[4] from enteric fermentation in developing countries may increase by a factor of 2 in the period up to 2050. If no change in waste management practices occurs, CH[4] emission from animal waste will remain unimportant on a global scale. With intensification and concentration of production, however, animal waste may be increasingly stored in lagoons, in liquid form or as slurry, and CH[4] from animal waste may become a major global source. The global CH[4] emission from rice fields may stabilize if emission rates per unit area do not change. However, if the emission rates are proportional to total biomass production, the global CH[4] emission from rice paddies may increase further in the coming decades.
Future fertilizer use may increase towards the current European NPK application level. The current emissions of NH[3] from fertilizer use account for about 20% of the total use of mineral nitrogen fertilizers (including urea) in developing countries. The NH[3] loss rates may change because they are primarily determined by the type of N fertilizer. Assuming a decrease to the current loss rate of 5% in developed countries, the NH[3] emission from fertilizer use projected for 2025 in developing countries may be lower than at present. The emission of N[2]O from mineral fertilizer will increase by a factor of 3 in the coming 5-6 decades according to the medium scenario.
Conclusions and recommendations resulting from this study are summarized as follows:
- Information on the effect of land degradation on the land's productivity is scarce, in particular for tropical regions. However, such information is crucial for studies such as this one. If yields are negatively influenced by degradation, the crop production scenarios may not be realized, with the arable land areas being affected. Further detailed analysis of the results of the Forest Resources Assessment Project may yield answers to questions on the importance of loss of productivity in shifting cultivation as a driving force of deforestation and other land use changes.
- With the expected impressive increase in animal waste production and the simultaneous increase in demand for plant nutrients, associated emissions of NH[3], CH[4] and N[2]O will show significant increases. Abatement of emissions generally involves strategies to increase the efficiency of nutrient use both in crop and livestock production systems. This includes attempts to reduce the synthetic fertilizer use by integration of animal and crop production and closing the nutrient cycles (Mosier et al., in press).
- There is a need for estimates of the geographic distribution of pasture and arable land areas, their prim-iry production and intensity of use. So far, the understanding of the contribution of grazing to animal nutrition is insufficient to fully comprehend the dynamics of pastures and arable land.
- The amounts of concentrates, fodder crops and crop residues used to feed animals are poorly known. Such information is required to improve the understanding of the interactions between livestock and crop production.
- There is a strong need for further study into the irrigation potential of different parts of the world. Projections of the irrigation potential are uncertain due to the sensitivity of river discharges to climate variability and change. In addition, the seasonal distribution of irrigation water use depends on the cropping patterns and water use efficiency, which may change as a result of adaptation to warming, changes in cloud cover and precipitation and increased atmospheric CO[2]. Scenario analysis of irrigation potential may help in determining future research orientations.
- There is a need for better data on nutrient inputs in crop production from animal waste, recycling of crop residues and biological nitrogen fixation to improve the understanding of changes in mineral fertilizer use and the capability of forecasting fertilizer use.
<section>4</section>
1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION
Currently there is a concern that activities related to food production in the developing countries may be inadvertently changing the environment. This concern is based on recent experiences of environmental pollution in many developed countries with intensive crop and livestock production. The use of mineral fertilizers^1 and pesticides is growing in the developing countries. While excessive fertilizer application rates are a problem in some irrigated areas, there are also serious problems resulting from insufficient inputs of nutrients in other, particularly rainfed, areas. Additional problems in developing countries are associated with the claims laid on land and water by agriculture. The expansion of land in use for agricultural production is one of the major driving forces behind deforestation in developing countries. There is a growing demand for fresh water and agriculture has to compete with other sectors of society for scarce water resources.
1 The term mineral fertilizer in this report is used to denote all synthetic fertilizers, including urea.
Specific indicators can be used for monitoring the environmental effects of agricultural production. An indicator which has proven very useful for livestock production systems in many developed countries is the emission of ammonia (NH[3]). Other indicators are nitrous oxide (N[2]O) and methane (CH[4]). Methane emissions may be due for some 40% to agriculture (including biomass burning); for N[2]O the proportion is about 25% (Sombroek and Gommes, 1995).
Perhaps more than half of the global emission of ammonia (NH[3]) stems from agricultural production (Table 1). Most atmospheric NH[3] is returned to the surface by deposition (primarily in rain). The re-deposited NH[3] plays an important role in soil acidification, and also in the agricultural and general biospheric N cycle through its contribution to soil nitrogen. In soils part of the deposited NH[3] is converted to NO and N[2]O by nitrification and to N[2]O (and N[2]) by subsequent denitrification (Firestone and Davidson, 1989). Ammonia is also involved in the Earth's radiative balance by its role in aerosol formation and through its transformation to N[2]O in the atmosphere (Dentener and Crutzen, 1994).
Methane is associated with many sectors in the society. Major agricultural sources are livestock production (through enteric fermentation and from animal wastes), rice paddies and biomass burning (deforestation, savannah and grassland burning and agricultural waste burning). Methane is not only a reactive gas involved in ozone chemistry in the lower atmosphere, but it is also a greenhouse gas (Sombroek and Gommes, 1995). A major part of N[2]O from agricultural sources stems from manure and mineral fertilizers. Nitrous oxide is inert in the lower atmosphere, but in the stratosphere it is involved in ozone destruction (Bouwman et al., 1995). In addition, N[2]O is a greenhouse gas, since it very efficiently absorbs infrared radiation (Sombroek and Gommes, 1995).
TABLE 1
Global emissions of atmospheric ammonia (NH[3]) in million metric tons NH[3]-N per year
Domestic animals
Synthetic fertilizers
Undisturbed ecosystems
Croplands
Biomass burning
Human excrement
Oceans
Biofuel combustion
Total emission
61^a
Based on Bouwman et al. (1995).
^a Global annual deposition (primarily in rain) amounts to about 60 million tons of NH[3]-N per year.
Emissions from deforestation and biomass burning have not been considered in this study. Estimates of deforestation for the developing countries were made in FAO (1995) and (FAO, in prep.). Biomass burning is a topic currently in study in the framework of the Global Emission Inventory Activity (GEIA).
Environmental research generally involves interrelated elements of the society-biosphere-atmosphere system. The wide range of issues is reflected in, for example, UNEP (1989), IGBP (1990) and Houghton et al. (1990; 1992; 1995). Scientific and policy oriented assessments of the environment also include reconnaissances of the future on the basis of scenario analysis using different models. For example, the current integrated assessment models include detailed descriptions of society-economy-agriculture-environment processes and interactions and more simple descriptions of the ocean and atmosphere subsystems. Integrated models are appropriate for scientific questions, but since emission scenarios can be adjusted to study the effect of, for example, certain abatement strategies, they can also be used to address policy-oriented problems. Other models to study the interaction between society, biosphere and climate. Global Circulation Models, can also include models of atmospheric
chemistry.
The world population is expected to continue to grow rapidly during at least the coming 5-6 decades. Therefore, reconnaissances must cover a period of 50-100 years to study the environmental impact of population growth and changing societies. As forecasts are not realistic or even possible for such a long term, reconnaissance studies must be done in the form of scenario analyses. Comparison of the various published scenarios have made clear that further work in this field is required, in particular regarding agriculture and land use scenarios (Alcamo et al., 1995). The aim of this study is to develop a methodology to calculate regional emissions of atmospheric pollutants derived from agriculture on the basis of scenarios of the linkages between crop and livestock production and land use. The methodology can be used as an input for such global integrated models as IMAGE (Alcamo et al., 1994) to test the various scenario assumptions in a georeferenced model. The IMAGE model
includes a version of the FAO AEZ approach, allowing to test the feasibility of the crop production scenarios.
The purpose of this study is not to present new estimates or forecasts of the magnitude of environmental effects caused by agricultural production and land use changes. In the study comparisons will be made between livestock production scenarios for feed requirements and animal waste production. Crop production scenarios will be compared on aerial extent and land use practices. The indicators for environmental effects resulting from agricultural production include NH[3], N[2]O and CH[4] emissions. The procedures used to estimate these emissions are based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (IPCC, 1995), the FAO Livestock Environment Study, and procedures proposed by the Global Emissions Inventory Activity (GEIA), a project of the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Programme of IGBP (IGBP, 1990).
The scale of the study does not allow quantitative assessment of land degradation and other environmental pollution effects, such as contamination of soil and groundwater with nutrients and agricultural chemicals. Where relevant, these issues will be addressed qualitatively.
The forecasts up to the year 2010 made by FAO in the study "World Agriculture: Towards 2010" (FAO, 1993; Alexandratos, 1995) form the basis and starting point for the projection period of 1990-2100. The results will be presented as scenarios, not as forecasts. In the scenario development the general criteria formulated by Alcamo et al. (1995) were used as guidelines. These criteria include:
· Comprehensiveness. Scenarios must take into account all factors and processes that are related to agricultural production and land use.
· Reproducibility. Scenarios must be documented to ensure reproducibility and traceability of results.
· Uncertainty. Assumptions must reflect a wide range of views to express uncertainties.
· Consistency. Scenarios must be internally consistent.
To comply with these criteria, a range of uncertainty will be used for each entity around the 2010 forecast of FAO AT2010. Specific constraints must be taken into account to meet the consistency criterion. For example, the irrigated area must not exceed the irrigation potential, and the arable area may not exceed the area of productive land.
Chapter 2 of this report will discuss general aspects of the data and methods used. In Chapters 3 to 6 the scenarios for agricultural production are discussed in more detail, starting with animal production scenarios (Chapter 3). Scenarios for animal feed requirements will be developed in Chapter 4. Crop production is discussed in Chapter 5 and fertilizer use in Chapter 6. The implications of the above scenarios for land use, including those for animal feed use, will be presented in Chapter 7. In Chapter 8 the atmospheric emissions associated with the above scenario assumptions will be discussed.
<section>5</section>
2. DATA USED AND METHODOLOGY
Aggregation
Population scenario
Demand
Supply
Land use
Exceptions to the scenario rules
Atmospheric emissions associated with production
The historical data used in this study are taken from the study World Agriculture: Towards 2010 (AT2010, first published as FAO [1993]; and later in expanded form as Alexandratos [1995]). The historical data are standardized to conform to the AT2010 commodity classification. The 2010 projections of this FAO study are at the country level. They are the result of an interdisciplinary analytical analysis described by Alexandratos (1995: 407-420). For this study the FAO data and projections were aggregated; projections were made in different steps.
Although much more simple, the method used is in general terms similar to the AT2010 methodology. The various steps will be discussed in more detail. The order of the various topics discussed below reflects the order by which the different segments of the scenarios were developed. For China the AT2010 study provides forecasts of consumption, total production, trade, other uses and self-sufficiency ratios, but it does not give predictions on future areas, crop yields and animal productivity. In the scenarios for China, therefore, the historical trends were used to develop scenarios of yields.
The population scenario used in this study is different from that used in AT2010. Although the global total and the total population in developing countries is not much different, there are important regional differences (see Alexandratos, 1995: 426). For that reason the 1990 and 2010 projections of this study for food consumption, domestic demand, crop and livestock production deviate slightly from the AT2010 estimates and forecasts. In addition, the projections deviate from AT2010 where adjustments made by FAO were omitted. These adjustments concern mainly crop area and yield estimates for the base year^1. To comply with the requirement of reproducibility, only the unadjusted referenced data were used in this study.
^1 The base year of AT2010 is the 3-year average 1988/1990. indicated as 1989BY, based on data as known in May 1992, but with adjustments. These adjustments are not fully documented, but their implications for regional arable land and harvested land are indicated in Tables 4.5 and 4.6 in Alexandratos (1995).
Three baseline production scenarios have been developed. The medium baseline scenario is an extrapolation of the AT2010 projection. The other two scenarios are identical regarding the general assumptions on demography, GDP and food demand. They are different with respect to the production and technology assumptions. These differences are reflected in the estimates from 1990 onwards to include uncertainty starting from the base year. A summary of the three scenarios is presented in Table 2.
TABLE 2 - Summary of the three scenarios
Aggregation
Analysis of country data is required to analyse and understand certain conditions specific to a country. For this study the country data and projections were aggregated to the level of regions and individual crops were aggregated to crop groups. Livestock products were not grouped. The classification of regions, crop groups and livestock products is listed in Appendix 1. For each group of crops projections were made for both irrigated and rainfed production. Rainfed crop production is the aggregate of seven land classes (see Alexandratos, 1995:151-178).
Population scenario
The AT2010 study is based on the UN (1990) population projections for individual countries. In this study the updated population projection from FAO is used, which is slightly adapted from the UN (1994) population projection for 1990-2050 (Appendix 2). For the period 2050-2100 the growth rates used by Alcamo et al. (1994), which were originally produced for the IPCC IS92 scenarios by Pepper et al. (1992), were taken.
Demand
Food demand
Feed demand
Other uses
Domestic demand
Food demand
For the period 1960-2010 the FAO estimates of the mean regional per capita food demand were used. Scenarios for the period 2010-2100 were based on the relative growth rates of the per capita food demand given by Zuidema et al. (1994). Since Zuidema et al. (1994) give a scenario for total Africa, some assumptions had to be made for the two African sub-regions. The relative growth rates for Sub-Saharan Africa were assumed to be equal to those assumed by Zuidema et al. (1994) for total Africa. The growth rate for North Africa was assumed to be equal to that of the region Near East in Asia. Finally, for some commodities additional adjustments of the regional demand scenarios had to be made (see Appendix 2).
Feed demand
Historical data on the feed use of the different commodities are much less reliable than those for food consumption. Generally, information on feed use is not directly available, but is inferred from the supply-utilization-accounts (SUAs). It is even more difficult to make projections of feed demand. Alexandratos (1995) gives a very simple approach based on the fact that in developing countries much of the beef, mutton and milk production comes from non-grainfed animals, while pigs and poultry are mainly from grainfed production systems. The feed intensity weighted livestock production (referred to as Livestock Production, L.P.), calculated as 0.3 (beef + mutton production) + 0.1 (milk production) + 1.0 (pork + poultry + egg production) was used for individual countries by Alexandratos (1995).
Three scenarios of cereal feed use have been developed. The medium scenario is based on the assumption that the feed conversion rates are constant, i.e., that a 1% increase in L.I. leads to a 1 % increase in feed demand. For the aggregated data this assumption proved to reproduce the historical data reasonably well, and was therefore also used to calculate the future feed requirements for cereals, starchy foods and oil crops. For the other products the use as animal feed was assumed to be proportional to the food demand of the particular commodity in that region. For cereal feed use two other scenarios were developed to illustrate the uncertainty and the effect of variation of the feed use for the crop areas required. Chapter 4 discusses the scenarios of feed intensity.
Other uses
Other uses of the various commodities as given in the SUAs include industry, seeds and waste. The variability in the total of these other uses in the historical periods of the various regions is only small. Therefore, the total of other uses, calculated as a percentage of the food demand + use as feed, is assumed to remain constant in the period after 2010.
Domestic demand
The domestic demand is calculated as food demand (= per capita food demand x total population) + use as animal feed + other uses. For most of the animal products the use as feed and other uses are not relevant. A minor part of the milk is currently converted to animal feed.
Supply
Self-sufficiency ratios and trade
Regional agricultural production
Crop yields and animal production
Irrigated and rainfed cropped areas
Animal populations and harvested areas
Self-sufficiency ratios and trade
Alexandratos (1995) described the forecasts for import, export and self-sufficiency ratios for the year 2010. The regional self sufficiency ratios for the different commodities are assumed to remain constant beyond the year 2010. The resulting net trade for the various commodities is presented in Appendix 22. Exceptions were made for Near East and North Africa, where the expanding demand for feed cereals lead to a demand for land exceeding the land balance or irrigation potential. Analogous to AT2010, it is assumed in these cases that countries prefer to produce meat and import feed stuffs instead of importing meat.
Regional agricultural production
The regional production is calculated as the product of domestic demand and self sufficiency ratio. For sugar and oil seeds an additional term is needed, i.e., the extraction rate. The extraction rate is the amount of sugar or vegetable oil extracted from the total harvested biomass. The extraction rate for vegetable oil is assumed to remain constant after 2010, and the extraction for sugar crops is assumed to increase to 13% between 2010 and 2050.
Crop yields and animal production
The regional production can be achieved in different ways. For the crop groups temperate cereals, rice, maize, sorghum/millet, pulses, sugar, and starchy foods three scenarios were developed for both irrigated and rainfed production. These scenarios consist of different projections of irrigated areas, and irrigated and rainfed yields. For the oil crops and other crop groups scenarios were made, reflecting the mean change in yields assumed for the other crop commodity groups. Similarly, three production scenarios were developed for beef, pork, mutton, poultry and meat from goats, as well as for milk and eggs. For meat production the scenarios consist of projections for the offtake rates and carcass weights. For milk and egg production scenarios were made for the yearly yield per animal.
In general, the medium scenario forms a continuation after 2010 of the AT2010 trend. Currently, region-specific limiting conditions and constraints determine the maximum attainable production level for crops and animals. In the medium scenario the yield ceilings express these current conditions and constraints. The level of the yield ceilings may be raised as a result of major research breakthroughs, as assumed in the high, or optimistic, scenarios.
In the low or pessimistic variant of the medium scenario the expected research breakthroughs will not occur and even the current maximum levels may not be reached as a consequence of, for instance, increased incidence of pests and diseases.
Irrigated and rainfed cropped areas
The irrigated crop areas for the three scenarios are calculated on the basis of the following rules:
· Medium scenario: annual growth between 1990 and 2010 is equal to that assumed in AT2010;
· High scenario: annual growth is 1.25 x that of the medium scenario;
· Low scenario: annual growth is 0.75 x that of the medium scenario.
In all three scenarios the growth rate decreases by a factor of 2 in each consecutive period (2010-2025, 2025-2050, 2050-2075, 2075-2100). The rainfed area is calculated by taking the difference between the required production of a crop group and the irrigated production, and dividing the result by the yield. Hence the rainfed crop areas arise from the irrigated areas and yields.
Animal populations and harvested areas
The number of animals required to produce a certain volume of product can be calculated from the production scenarios. Similarly, the harvested area results from total irrigated and rainfed production, and yield level for both irrigated and rainfed crops.
Land use
Cropping intensity and arable land
Fertilizer use
Cropping intensity and arable land
The cropping intensity is the fraction of the arable area that is harvested. The cropping intensity may exceed 100% where more than one crop is harvested each year. Unfortunately, data are not available to produce estimates by crop. Therefore, only country average intensities can be used. Cropping intensities used in AT2010 deviate strongly from those derived from the production yearbooks^1. The AT2010 estimates for the years 1989 and 2010 are used to make the results of this study comparable.
^1 For example, the intensity derived from the official data from Latin America is 83%, while the intensity assumed in AT2010 is 61% (Appendix 20). For Near East in Asia the official data (70%) are much lower than AT2010 data (90%).
In the periods after 2010 the intensity was assumed to decrease by a factor of 2 in every consecutive period. Hence in 2010-2025 the annual increase is half that in the period 1990-2010, and in 2025-2050 it is half that in the years 2010-2025. The medium scenario is a continuation of AT2010, and the increase rate of the high scenario is 1.25 x that of the medium scenario, while in the low scenario the annual increase is only 0.75 x that in the medium scenario.
The cropping intensity has a certain maximum value determined by the climatic and soil conditions, and the irrigation potential. Using rough estimates for the current maximum cropping intensities for irrigated and rainfed crops, and assuming that the maximum intensity for rainfed cropping will remain constant, future maximum cropping intensities can be estimated when the irrigated area is known (see Chapter 7). The regional total harvested area and the cropping intensity determine the arable land area. The maximum arable area is given in the land balances (Alexandratos, 1995: 161-168).
Fertilizer use
The method used in this study to produce scenarios of fertilizer use is different from Alexandratos (1995)^1. The approach is based on the hypothesis that the intensity of fertilizer use increases along with intensity of crop production. The amount of nutrient inputs per unit area in the form of mineral fertilizers may increase with increasing crop yields, but the nutrient input per unit product is assumed to be stable after a certain level of technology is reached. This implies a tendency towards higher fertilizer use efficiencies. A simple relationship between the overall regional crop production level and the fertilizer intensity (the amount of mineral fertilizer applied per unit of total produce for all crops) has been devised, whereby improving efficiency in general nutrient use is expressed by the assumed constant fertilizer intensity above a certain overall crop yield level. The three scenarios differ in the point at which the fertilizer intensity levels off (Table
2). The method will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
^1 In AT2010 the fertilizer use is obtained for the projection to 2010 by multiplying fertilizer input coefficients per hectare by the projected harvested area; these coefficients are specific to each crop, land class and yield level (Alexandratos, 1995: 417). The coefficients are not country specific, but they are yield specific, and thus the method is equivalent to using yield-fertilizer response curves for each of the seven land classes. In this study only two land classes are distinguished, i.e. irrigated and rainfed. Another problem is that the fertilizer-yield response functions defined by Alexandratos (1995) refer to current ranges of crop yields. If the period to 2100 is considered, the yields may exceed the maximum possible yields in the curves. An attempt was made to develop more general yield response curves, but extreme adjustments were required to reproduce the 1990 fertilizer use.
Exceptions to the scenario rules
A number of exceptions to the general rules had to be made.
1. Since no base year estimates and projections of areas and yields to 2010 are available for China, the general procedure to extrapolate the AT2010 growth rates to the period after 2010 could not be followed. The 1980-1990 annual increase rates were used instead of the 1990-2010 growth rates. For each period (1990-2010, 2010-2025, 2025-2050, 2050-2075 and 2075-2100) the growth rate was then halved until the target yields or ceilings were reached.
2. The self-sufficiency ratios for individual cereals for the Near East in Asia and North Africa are not constant in the period 2010-2100. In these regions the potential expansion of arable land is limited by the land balance (Alexandratos, 1995) and the irrigation potential. In the Near East a gradual decrease of the SSR for temperate cereals (the major cereal in this region) from ~ 70% in 2010 to ~ 50% in 2100 was assumed to prevent the projected total arable area from exceeding the upper limit set by the land balance and irrigation potential. Similarly, in North Africa the self-sufficiency ratios for temperate cereals and maize were assumed to decrease to achieve a decrease in the self-sufficiency ratios for total cereals from 51% in 2010 to 40% in 2100.
3. For cattle in South Asia the carcass weight and offtake rates were assumed to be constant at the 1990 level in the medium scenario, at the level predicted for 2010 in AT2010 in the high scenario and at the 1989 base year estimate of AT2010 in the low scenario.
4. In cases where the calculated irrigated production exceeded the required production in a certain year, with rainfed production being eliminated, the irrigated area was adjusted downwards to match the calculated production with the demand. This correction and other adjustments were necessary in:
· East Asia: Sugar (high scenario from 1990 onwards) the rainfed area was assumed constant and the irrigated area calculated from (total - rainfed production)/irrigated yield.
· South Asia: Maize (medium scenario after 2050 and high scenario after 2025), pulses (medium + high after 2075), root and tuber crops (medium after 2075, high after 2025), sugar (high after 2025) and other crops (high after 2010). In addition, yields for other groups were assumed not to increase further after 2010 in the medium, high and low scenarios. For temperate cereals (medium + high scenario) the rainfed production was assumed to remain constant after 2010, and irrigated area is calculated as (total - rainfed production) / irrigated yield.
· Near East in Asia: Sugar (high scenario from 1990 onwards) and other crops (high scenario after 2050).
· North Africa: Maize (from 1990 onwards), roots and tuber crops (medium scenario from 2010, high from 1990, low from 2025 onwards).
· Latin America: Pulses (high scenario in 2100).
Atmospheric emissions associated with production
Agricultural production contributes directly to emissions of greenhouse gases and other atmospheric pollutants through a variety of different processes. These include:
· CH[4] emissions from livestock production. Methane is produced in herbivores as a byproduct of enteric fermentation, a digestive process. Both ruminants (e.g. cattle and sheep) and non-ruminants (e.g. pigs, horses) produce CH[4].
· CH[4] from animal waste management. Methane is produced during anaerobic decomposition of animal waste, mostly from confined animals, where animal waste is stored or disposed of in lagoons.
· CH[4] emission from rice cultivation. Methane is produced during anaerobic decomposition of organic material in wetland rice fields. The methane is transported through the rice plants.
· NH[3] and N[2]O emission from animal waste and mineral fertilizers.
In general atmospheric emissions of a compound from a specific source are calculated as E = A x e.f., where E = emission, A = activity level, e.f. = emission factor (emission per unit of activity). For example, in the case of animal production, the activity level is the number of animals and the emission factor is the emission of a substance per head and per unit of time. In this study estimates will be generated for NH[3], CH[4] and N[2]O for the following sources:
NH[3]+N[2]O
- Animal waste
- Mineral fertilizers
CH[4]
- Enteric fermentation
- Animal waste
- Wetland rice fields
The procedures for estimating atmospheric emissions used in this study are based on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines for national greenhouse gas inventories, the FAO Livestock Environment Study and procedures proposed by the Global Emissions Inventory Activity (GEIA, a project of the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Programme of IGBP).
<section>6</section>
3. LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION
Per caput demand for livestock products
Total demand and supply
Scenarios of livestock production
Animal populations
Per caput demand for livestock products
In the scenario of the per caput demand the expected increase in incomes in developing countries are believed to cause a shift towards more meat, milk and eggs in the human diet, and a relative decrease in the consumption of cereals and starchy foods. In developed countries with current high consumption levels, future per caput meat consumption may not change or even decrease as incomes rise further. In many developing countries the current meat, milk and egg consumption levels are very low compared to those in developed countries and major increases in the per caput consumption of livestock products can be expected along with rising incomes. The consumption scenarios used as a basis for this study (Appendix 2) were adapted from Zuidema et al. (1994). Although it is difficult to predict future consumption, certain generalizations can be made recognizing specific regional, cultural or religious differences and nutritional preferences. However, considering the extremely long
time period covered by the scenarios, even these factors may change. Hence, the scenarios must be considered as one possible orientation for changes in consumption patterns, based on only one scenario of economic development. It must be stressed that even the base year data include considerable uncertainty.
The per caput total meat consumption shows an increase by a factor of 2 between now and 2050, and by a factor of 2.5 between now and 2100 in developing countries (both with and without China) (Figure 1; Table 3). The assumed increase in the demand for eggs is even faster (factor 3) and the demand for milk will increase by about a factor of 2 between now and 2100 (Appendixes 7 and 8). In most regions the per caput demand for pork and poultry meat make up the major part of the growth in total meat demand (Figure 1), while beef is assumed to increase in Near East in Asia and North Africa. In the scenario South Asia is assumed to remain basically vegetarian. It is not certain, however, that India, the major country in the South Asia region, will not change its consumption pattern in the next century as per caput incomes increase^1.
^1 An increase in the meat consumption in South Asia would have important repercussions for the feed demand and consequently the production and harvested areas of cereals (mainly maize), root and tuber crops, and oil crops.
The per caput egg and milk consumption is assumed to increase dramatically in all regions, although milk consumption remains at a relatively low level in China and East Asia. In the last two regions only a minor part of the population consumes milk at present, and in the scenarios the increase is caused by the consumption of more milk-derived products (Appendix 2).
FIGURE 1
Scenario of population and food consumption for all developing countries including China
a) population;
b) per caput consumption for all commodities (including total cereals, i.e. including non-food use);
c) per caput consumption of livestock products;
d) total consumption of livestock products.
TABLE 3 - Demand per caput^a, total domestic demand^b, production and self-sufficiency ratios (SSR)^c for total meat for developing regions
^a Per caput demand in kg per year
^b Total demand and production in 10^6 metric ton per year
^c SSR is expressed in % of domestic demand
Total demand and supply
While the per caput demand for meat, milk and eggs in the scenario increases by a factor of 2-3 in most regions, the total demand increases much faster (Figure 1). For all developing countries including China the total meat consumption may increase by a factor of 4 between now and 2050 and by a factor of 5 between now and 2100; a somewhat faster increase is seen for all developing countries excluding China (Table 3).
A very fast increase occurs in the scenarios for Sub-Saharan Africa (> factor 6 in 1990-2050; > factor 10 in 1990-2100), Near East in Asia (> factor 6 in 1990-2050; > factor 10 in 1990-2100), East Asia (> factor 4 in 1990-2050; factor 8 in 1990-2100).
The meat consumption pattern differs from one region to another (Appendixes 3-6). At present pork is the major contributor to animal proteins in all developing countries including China (Appendix 2). If China is excluded, beef is the most important animal protein source, while in China pork is the most prevalent kind of meat. These patterns may change in the future (Appendix 2). The importance of poultry meat may increase at the cost of pork and beef in all developing countries and in China. The increase in the production of total meat is mainly caused by the increase in production of pork and poultry meat (Figure 1).
The total demand for eggs increases by almost a factor of 5 between now and 2050, and by almost a factor of 8 between now and 2100 (Figure 1; Appendix 7a). The production scenario shows an identical pattern. For all developing countries, excluding China, the increase in the demand is even faster, indicating a slower than average increase in China. The regions with highest rates of increase in egg consumption are Sub-Saharan Africa (> factor 10 in the period 1990-2050; > factor 20 for 1990-2100); South Asia (factor 8 between 1990 and 2050; factor 15 for the period 1990-2100); Near East in Asia (close to a factor of 8 in the period 1990-2050; factor 14 in 1990-2100).
According to the scenario the total milk consumption will increase more slowly than meat and egg consumption (Appendix 8a), i.e., by a factor 3.6 in the period 1990-2050 and a factor 5 for 1990-2100 in all developing countries including China. Regions with current low milk consumption (East Asia, China) remain relatively low in both their per caput and total consumption.
Scenarios of livestock production
General aspects
Meat production
Egg production
Milk production
General aspects
In the past the dominant sources of growth in livestock production in the developing countries have been livestock numbers and offtake rates. Alexandratos (1995) concluded that there is considerable uncertainty in the historical data on animal populations, which makes it difficult to describe past developments. There has been a general trend towards more intensive production systems; this trend will continue and in the future much of the increased output of pork and poultry meat, and dairy products, may come from further expansion of intensive and semi-intensive production systems with the use of supplementary feedstuffs. Eggs, pork and to a lesser extent, dairy production systems, tend to be relatively responsive to changing market conditions. At the level of individual production units, the growth process tends to be discontinuous rather than evolutionary. Ruminant meat production is much less responsive to changes in demand because of the longer reproduction cycles.
Therefore, in ruminant systems the changes occur more slowly than in non-ruminant production. The possibility of increasing production through gradual transformation from traditional to intensive production is generally insufficient to meet the growing demand. For this reason, modern production systems similar to those in developed countries have emerged in many developing countries alongside the traditional production systems. This development will continue in the future, with a growing share of total production coming from intensive systems. In the following sections scenarios will be presented for carcass weight and offtake rate (determining collectively the meat production per head) for cattle, pigs, goats and sheep and poultry. The milk production per milking animal for dairy cattle, goats and sheep and the egg production per head for poultry will also be demonstrated.
For each item three scenarios will be presented (Table 2). The medium scenario is a continuation of the annual increase proposed for 1990-2010, up to a maximum or production ceiling (Table 2). The high or optimistic scenario has faster growth (1.25 x that of the medium scenario) and a higher production ceiling than the medium scenario. The low or pessimistic scenario describes a slower growth (0.75 x that of the medium scenario) with a lower production ceiling than the medium scenario. In the case of meat production, future increases can be achieved by accelerating both the growth process (increasing offtake rates) and the weights at slaughter (carcass weights). The animal populations depend on the total demand and the production per animal, the latter being the resultant of offtake rate and carcass weight. The scenarios are summarized in Table 2. The full set of assumptions is presented in Appendixes 3-8.
Meat production
Beef
The maximum carcass weight assumed is 250 kg/head in the medium scenario, 275 kg/head in the high scenario and 200 kg/head in the low scenario for all regions (Appendix 3b). The carcass weight of 250 kg equals the current level for cattle in Western Europe. For the offtake rate maximum values selected are 35%, 40% and 30% for the medium, high and low scenario, respectively. An offtake rate of 40% is considered as the maximum level of extraction at which the population can be maintained. Exceptions are made where the present levels for offtake rates or carcass weight already exceeds the ceiling assumed for a certain scenario. For example, the carcass weight for beef cattle in 1989/1991 in Latin America was 204 kg/head. As this value exceeds the maximum of 200 kg/head of the low scenario, the carcass weight is assumed to remain constant at 204 kg/head in the low scenario. Similarly, the offtake rate in the region North Africa is 35% in 1989/1991. Therefore, in the low scenario
the offtake rate is assumed to remain at 35 %.
Pork
The carcass weight of pigs is assumed not to exceed 85 kg/head, which is the present carcass weight of animals in the United States and Western Europe. This maximum carcass weight is equal in all three scenarios (Table 2; Appendix 4b). Offtake rates differ, the maximum value being 160% in the medium scenario (equal to the current rate in the U.S.), 200% in the high scenario (considered as a possible future attainable offtake rate due to faster growth of the animals) and 120% in the low scenario. There are a number of exceptions to the scenario rules, in particular where the present level of offtake rate or carcass weight is already higher than the maximum value assumed for the low scenario (e.g. the medium scenario for offtake rates for East Asia and the low scenario for offtake rates for the regions South Asia, Near East in Asia, North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, where values are assumed to be constant at 1990 levels).
Mutton and goat meat
The production of mutton and goat meat, and milk generally takes place in more traditional systems than pig and cattle production systems. For some regions, however, the high scenario reflects a shift towards more intensive production, with strongly increasing carcass weights and offtake rates (Appendix 5b). As the animal species differ from region to region and as the production takes place in various environmental conditions, the scenarios also differ between regions. As the per caput consumption of mutton and goat meat is nearly constant (Appendix 2), the increase in demand reflects the increase in human population.
Poultry meat
In the three scenarios of poultry meat production the maximum carcass weight used is 2.0 kg/head; differences between scenarios are achieved by varying the offtake rates, reflecting the growth of the animals and the period needed to achieve the carcass weight (Appendix 6b). The maximum offtake rate in the medium scenario is 750%, indicating a period of slightly less than 7 weeks to reach the carcass weight of 2 kg. In the high scenario the maximum offtake rate is 1250%, or a period of slightly more than 4 weeks to reach the 2 kg carcass weight. In the low scenario the offtake rate is 500%, corresponding to a period of about 10 weeks. The optimism of the scenarios is based on the expected very fast increase in the demand for poultry meat. Even the low scenario indicates a shift to more intensive production than at present in most regions. Latin America, Near East in Asia and North Africa already have a rather high level of productivity at present (Appendix 6b).
Egg production
The medium scenario of egg production describes a growth to a maximum annual production of 22.5 kg/head (Appendix 7). The high scenario is based on a maximum production of 25 kg per head and the low scenario on a maximum annual egg production per head of 20 kg/head. The fast growth in per caput demand for eggs and the fast human population growth (Appendix 2) cause a dramatic increase in the total demand for eggs, as discussed above. Despite the optimistic assumptions on the production in all three scenarios, the population of laying hens needs to increase in all regions for all scenarios to meet the growing demand.
Milk production
Dairy cattle
As for the meat production scenarios, three different growth rates coupled with different production ceilings were taken to develop three milk production scenarios (Appendix 8b). The medium scenario is a continuation of the growth rate assumed for the period 1990-2010 in AT2010, with a maximum annual production of 6,000 kg milk per milking animal. The high scenario is based on a maximum production of 7,000 kg milk per milking cow per year. With the low annual increase assumed in the low scenario, no maximum production is assumed. There are a number of exceptions. In East Asia the present production is much higher than in the other regions, and the growth in the period 1960-1990 has been much faster than in other regions. Therefore, the maximum production levels are taken as -8,000, 10,000 and 5,000 kg milk per animal per year for the medium, high and low scenarios. It should be noted that at present milk consumption and production are of minor importance in East Asia
(Appendixes 2 and 8). In the low scenario for Near East in Asia, North Africa and Latin America the production per head is assumed not to change after 1990. The major reason for this assumption is the nearly constant production per head in the historical period.
Sheep and goats
The milk production per head is assumed not to change after 1990 in the low scenario for all regions (Appendix 8c). With the continuation of the annual increase assumed for 1990-2010 from AT2010 in the medium scenario, and the higher annual increase of the high scenario, no maximum values had to be assumed, because the calculated levels approach still realistic production levels. The production for South Asia and China grow to the highest levels as a result of the continuation of the fast historical growth and present high production per head (Appendix 8c).
Camels
Camels represent a minor source of milk in only a few regions. Both the population and production per head are assumed to remain constant at 1990 levels in all three scenarios.
Animal populations
Cattle
Pigs
Poultry
Sheep and goats
Camels
Cattle
The beef cattle population in all developing countries including China increased by 1.4% per year in the period 1960-1990, and will increase by 1.2% per year in 1990-2010, 0.6% per year in 2010-2025 in the medium scenario. After 2025 the beef cattle population stabilizes and even declines somewhat in the period 2050-2100. Dairy cattle increased by 2.3% per year during 1960-1990. The increase will slow down to 1% per year in 1990-2010, 1.7% per year in 2010-2025, 0.8% per year in 2025-2050. The beef cattle population will even decline in the period 2050-2100.
Only in South Asia does the cattle population decease in all three scenarios; this is due to a stable or decreasing per caput demand for beef combined with production increases (Appendix 3b). In East Asia, China and Asian centrally planned countries. Near East in Asia and North Africa the animal populations increase in all scenarios. In Sub-Saharan Africa the population starts decreasing after an initial increase between 1990 and 2050 in the medium and high scenarios. In Latin America animal populations start decreasing after an increase in the period between 1990 and 2010 in all three scenarios.
The share of milking animals grows more slowly than that of the total population. The major regions for dairy cattle are South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. In the medium scenario the population is almost stable in South Asia; it decreases after 2010 in Latin America and increases by some 30% in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Pigs
The population of pigs in all developing countries, including China, showed an increase of close to 4% per year in the period 1960-1990; in the medium scenario this increase rate will decrease to 2.7% per year in 1990-2010, 0.9% per year in 2010-2025, respectively, and the population will stabilize and even decline in the period after 2025.
In the first decades of all scenarios in all regions except North Africa and Near East in Asia there is a drastic increase in the number of pigs (Appendix 4b). In some regions (East Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America) the populations of pigs continue to increase after 2010 in all three scenarios, indicating the fast growth in the demand for pork which can not be met by the assumed increase in productivity. In China and centrally planned Asian countries and in South Asia, the pig populations decrease after 2025 in all scenarios, caused by the assumed stabilization of the per caput demand.
Poultry
The poultry population increased by close to 5% per year during the period 1960-1990, and even more than 6% per year in 1980-1990. In the medium scenario the number of animals will continue to increase during 1990-2010, but at a somewhat slower rate of 2.3% per year, and for 2010-2025 the increase rate will decrease to 1.8% per year.
The poultry populations in most regions increase in all scenarios. Only in the high scenario in China and centrally planned Asian countries (after 2025), East Asia and South Asia (after 2050) and Latin America (after 2075) do the populations show a decrease. These patterns reflect the human population growth plus the fast increase in per caput demand for poultry meat in all regions. The resulting increase in demand can be met by combination of shifts towards more intensive production systems and rapidly increasing populations.
Sheep and goats
The sheep and goat population in all developing countries including China will continue its fast increase of 1.4% per year (1960-1990) during the period 1990-2010 (1.3% per year) according to the medium scenario, increasing even further in the period 2010-2025 (2.7% per year) and slowing down to 1.6% per year and 0.8 % per year during the periods 2025-2050 and 2050-2100.
The population of sheep and goats increases in all regions, reflecting the slow increase in production per animal in the medium scenario. The regions with major populations are China and Asian centrally planned countries. South Asia, Near East in Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. The greatest increase in sheep and goat population is seen in South Asia, where in the medium scenario the population increases by almost a factor of 3 between 1990 and 2050. In the high scenario in some regions the population shows a decrease (Near East in Asia after 2025; Sub-Saharan Africa after 2050; Latin America after 2010) or stabilization (South Asia).
The share of milking animals develops in a different way. In the low scenario the population of milking animals increases in all regions. In the high scenario the population decreases in East Asia, China and South Asia after the year 2010, while populations in the Near East in Asia, North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America decrease in a later period, in general after 2050. In the medium scenario the milking sheep and goat population continues to increase up till about 2050, except in East Asia, where population starts to decrease in about 2025.
Camels
The camel populations are assumed to remain constant after 2010.
<section>7</section>
4. FEED DEMAND
Feed intensity of livestock production
Scenarios of feed intensity
The traditional livestock production systems have been shown increasingly unable to meet the rising demand for meat and milk; therefore, in the future a larger supply is likely to come from more intensive systems. Livestock production is strongly correlated with human population density and cultivation, and only weakly with the distribution of natural grazing resources (Alexandratos, 1995). This indicates that there is a tendency of livestock production towards less dependency on availability of grazing land, and increasing dependency on feed and forage resources, and agricultural residues in human settlement areas. Although there are no good data on pasture and forage resources, it is clear that their growth is not sufficient to meet the demand for livestock products, and that concentrate feeds, mainly feed grains, have been increasingly used to supplement other fodder (Alexandratos, 1995).
TABLE 4
Livestock production, feed use of cereals, root and tuber crops and oilseeds (in 10^6 metric tons per year) and feed conversion rates to livestock products in different countries and regions of the world for 1990
Product
All developing^a
All developed
Europe
Former USSR
USA
World
Beef, mutton, buffalo and goat meat
Milk
Pork
Poultry meat
Eggs
LP^b
Total feed use
Cereals
Roots + tubers
Oilseeds^c
Feed intensity^d
Cereals
Roots + tubers
Oilseeds^e
^a "All developing countries" includes more countries than the 93 countries in this study. Therefore the numbers may be slightly different from those in Table 3 and Appendixes 3-8.
^b LP = feed intensity-weighted Livestock Production (million metric ton per year) (see Chapter 2).
^c Direct use of oilseeds as animal feed. Cakes, by-products of oil extraction, are not included. However, the claim on the arable land by feed use of oilseeds is properly addressed, at least for the historical period.
^d Feed intensity = feed use / LP (kg per kg).
^e The feed intensity for oilseeds is expressed as kg per ton.
Feed intensity of livestock production
The statistical data on feed usage of the different crops, obtained indirectly from country supply-utilization accounts, indicate that cereals are the major source of feed, while root and tuber crops, and oilseeds, are somewhat less important. There are important regional differences between the feed intensities, i.e. the amount of feed used per unit of livestock product (Table 4). While the global cereal feed intensity was 3.0 in 1990, it amounted to only 1.9 in the developing countries. The European cereal feed intensity of about 2.8 is close to the global average, while the intensity for the former USSR was close to .5 in 1990. In the period 1970-1990 the feed intensity in the developed countries have shown a decrease of 0.6% per year. In the developing countries there has been a decrease in the 1980s of 1.8% per year, mainly caused by a decrease in China from more than 2 kg/kg to close to 1.5 kg/kg in 1990. No simple explanation can be given for these trends. Increasing
efficiency of feed conversion may be involved, but cereals may also have been substituted by other feedstuffs such as fodder's and crop residues.
TABLE 5
Scenarios of the feed intensity of livestock production^a for cereals, root and tuber crops, and plantain and oil crops, for developing countries
Region
Scenario
Cereals
Roots/tubers/plantain
Oil crops^b
2050^c
2050^d
2050^d
East Asia
Low
Medium
High
China & C.P. Asia
Low
Medium
High
South Asia
Low
Medium
High
Near East in Asia
Low
Medium
High
North Africa
Low
Medium
High
Sub-Saharan Africa
Low
Medium
High
Latin America
Low
Medium
High
^a Feed intensity in kg feed per kg feed intensity-weighted livestock product
^b In oil equivalents
^c For scenario 2 the values are constant after 2010. The differences for 2010 between scenarios 1, 2 and 3 depend on the differences assumed for 2050.
^d The feed intensity for root and tuber crops and oil crops for the period after 2010 are equal to the AT2010 forecast, and no low and high scenarios were developed.
TABLE 6 - Total domestic demand for cereals, the self-sufficiency ratio (SSR) and their use as animal feed stuff for medium feed scenario (see Table 5) for developing countries
TABLE 7
Total domestic demand for root and tuber crops and plantain, the self-sufficiency ratio (SSR) and their use as animal feed stuff for medium feed scenario (see Table 5) for developing countries
ALL DEVELOPING INCL. CHINA
Domestic demand (10^6 ton)
SSR (%)^a
Use as feed (10^6 ton)
Use as feed (%)^a
Feed intensity^b
ALL DEVELOPING EXCL. CHINA
Domestic demand (10^6 ton)
SSR (%)^a
Use as feed (10^6 ton)
Use as feed (%)^a
Feed intensity^b
^a SSR and use as feed in % of demand
^b Feed intensity = kg feed/feed intensity weighted livestock production (in kg/kg)
For the total of animal feedstuffs from all sources for all different animal categories, it is difficult to analyse how the feed efficiency and intensity will develop in the future, and what substitutions may take place as a consequence of, for example, changing prices. There are important differences in the ratio of growth rates of livestock output and feed use (Alexandratos, 1995:98). For example, ratio feed input growth: livestock output growth in the Near East/North Africa was 1.6 during 1970-1990 decreasing to 0.9 in the prediction for 1989-2010. Contrary, in Sub-Saharan Africa the ratio input growth : output growth was 0.9 in the period 1970-1990 and the predicted ratio for the period up till 2010 is 1.2, indicating that in the past decades the feed intensity was on the decrease, but that the future intensity may increase again. The mean input growth : output growth ratio for all developing countries was 1.0 in 1970-1990 and the ratio predicted in AT2010 for 1990-2010
was 1.0.
TABLE 8
Total domestic demand for oil crops, the self-sufficiency ratio (SSR) and their use as animal feed stuff for medium feed scenario (see Table 5) for developing countries
ALL DEVELOPING INCL. CHINA
Domestic demand (10^6 ton)^a
SSR (%)^b
Use as feed (10^6 ton)
Use as feed (%)^b
Feed intensity^c
ALL DEVELOPING EXCL. CHINA
Domestic demand (10^6 ton)
SSR (%)^b
Use as feed (10^6 ton)
Use as feed (%)^b
Feed intensity^c
^a Demand and use as feed in harvested biomass, not in oil equivalents
^b SSR and use as feed in % of demand
^c Feed intensity in kg biomass per ton feed intensity-weighted livestock production.
Scenarios of feed intensity
The various types of feed can be interchanged. Here, the question of substitution will be avoided and in the scenarios only the cereal feed intensity will be varied to analyze the impact on total cereal demand and production. The results will allow analysis of the sensitivity of regional land use to variation in feed use. Simple rules have been used to devise three scenarios for the cereal feed intensity of livestock production (Table 5). These rules are:
· The medium scenario (Table 5) is the AT2010 prediction. After 2010 this scenario is based on the feed intensity weighted livestock production discussed in section 2.3, with a 1 percent increase in total feed demand for each % increase in the weighted livestock production. This is equal to the global average for the period 1970-1990. Changes in the feed intensity may occur as a result of a relative shift towards more pork and poultry meat, and egg production and less beef.
· The low scenario uses 0.75 x the prediction from AT2010 for the year 2050.
· In the high scenario the feed intensities for the year 2050 are derived by multiplying the AT2010 predictions for feed intensities by 1.25.
Three groups of regions can be distinguished (Table 5): (i) the regions with the highest current cereal feed intensity (Near East in Asia and North Africa); in the low scenario the feed intensity decreases somewhat, but remains at a higher level than the current European or world average; (ii) the group of regions, including East Asia and Latin America, with currently intermediate feed intensities, for which in the low scenario a slight decrease follows, while the high scenario assumes a growth to the current world (3.5 kg cereals per kg livestock products) and European averages (3.0 kg), respectively; (iii) the third group is formed by China and centrally planned Asian countries, where the feed intensity of the three groups of crops have been on the decrease in the past decade(s) (Tables 6-8) but still at a moderate level. Here, the feed intensity is assumed to decrease further in the low scenario, and to increase to the East Asian 1990 level in the high scenario.
These hypothetical scenarios do not consider the contributions from other sources of animal feed, i.e. grazing, residues, fodder crops and roughage. It should be noted that the land claim of fodder crops is neglected. This may not be an omission because part of these crops may be grown as a cover crop, or in areas or during parts of the year when no other crops can be grown, or after the first crop in regions where the growing season is too short to grow two crops.
<section>8</section>
5. CROP PRODUCTION
Per caput demand for food crops
Total demand and supply
Scenarios of crop yields
Harvested areas
Per caput demand for food crops
Cereals
Pulses
Starchy foods
Oil crops
Sugar
Other crops
Cereals
The direct food consumption of cereals is expected to increase at a rate just above that of population (Figure 1). The increase in per caput direct food consumption of cereals will increase only slightly from the present level of about 170 kg per year. Animal feed is expected to increase much more, at present accounting for some 16% of the total human consumption, and increasing to 30% in 2050 and 35% in 2100 in the medium feed scenario (Table 6). There are important regional differences in the scenario (Appendix 2). The overall total cereal consumption grows from the current 237 kg per caput to close to 300 kg in 2050 and 320 kg per caput in 2100.
Pulses
The group of pulses comprises leguminous crops such as beans, peas, chickpeas, lentils, etc. Soybeans and groundnuts are included in the oilseeds. Pulses form an important group of food crops, in particular for low-income population. In the developing countries the average per caput consumption declined from 12 to 7-8 kg per caput in the period 1960-1990. The scenario describes a further decrease to a level of 5 kg (Figure 1). If China is excluded from the developing countries the average consumption is slightly higher (Appendix 2).
Starchy foods
This category of basic foods comprises a variety of crops, the major ones being cassava, sweet potatoes, potatoes, yams, taro and plantains. An important part of the production and consumption occurs at the subsistence level. A problem with this group is that its production prevails in countries with poor statistical services and that it is subject to above-average waste and post-harvest losses (Alexandratos, 1995:100). Therefore, the uncertainty in the current per caput consumption of starchy foods is much greater than for other food crops. In general, the scenario describes a fairly stable consumption level for the developing countries as a whole (Figure 1). There are regional differences caused by a weak negative correlation between income level and starchy food consumption (Appendix 2). For the developing countries as a whole, the feed use accounts for some 20% of total demand at present, and the percent feed demand changes only marginally in the consumption scenario.
Oil crops
Projections of future demand for oil crops are uncertain. Oil crops include tree crops with slow response to changing market conditions, and annual crops with a high supply response. Furthermore, most oil crops produce oil and protein meals for livestock. There is a high degree of substitutability in the consumption of both vegetable oils and protein meals for livestock. Vegetable oils also compete with animal fats in the food market, and with fishmeals and other protein meals in the animal feed market. In addition, vegetable oils also have industrial uses. The per caput food consumption of vegetable oils in the developing countries is about 8 kg, about half of the current consumption of 16 kg per caput in developed countries. The consumption grows to 11 kg per caput in 2010, 17 in 2050 and then further to 20 kg in 2100 (Figure 1 and Appendix 2). The demand for oilseed proteins is expected to grow faster than that for vegetable oils, reflecting the fast growth in the
livestock production. No scenarios of the animal feed use of oilseed proteins were constructed (see Chapter 4).
Sugar
The current per caput sugar consumption in the developing countries of around 18 kg (Figure 1) is well below that in developed countries (37 kg). The regional consumption varies from close to 45 kg in Latin America and 33 kg in North Africa to only 8 kg in Sub-Saharan Africa. The low sugar consumption in China and centrally planned Asian countries (7 kg per caput) is due to the use of alternative sweeteners to substitute sugar. In the AT2010 projection the consumption in the developing countries increases by about 1 kg per decade to about 20 kg in 2010. In the scenario after 2010 the consumption increases more slowly to close to 30 kg in 2050 and 38 kg in 2100 (Appendix 2).
Other crops
The per caput consumption for "other crops" is not presented because this group comprises products varying from vegetables and fruits to industrial crops, such as rubber, cotton and jute (Appendix 1). The per caput consumption of this group of crops is assumed to remain constant from 2010 onwards.
Total demand and supply
Cereals
Pulses
Starchy foods
Oil crops
Sugar cane and beet
Cereals
The total demand for cereals in all developing countries rises much faster than the per caput demand (Table 6 and Appendix 2). In this scenario the population in all developing countries increases by more than 40% between 1990 and 2010, by over 100% between 1990 and 2050 and 140% in 1990-2100. Cereal demand increases by 50% between 1990 and 2010, 150% between 1990 and 2050, and more than 200% between 1990 and 2100. As the food consumption of cereals is rather stable, an important part of the increase of total demand in the scenario is caused by the increasing demand for cereal feed for livestock production, which increases from 16% of total demand in 1990 to 35% in 2100. The crop with the most rapid increase in demand is maize, with a growth from 22 to 40 million ton between 1990 and 2010, 86 million ton in 2050 and 140 million ton in 2100 (Appendix 11a). The demand for temperate cereals and rice, sorghum and millet grows much more slowly (Appendixes 9a, 10a and 12a), mainly
due to the slow growth of the demand for these crops as animal feedstuff when compared to maize. The increase rate of the total cereal production decreases from close to 3% per year observed in the period 1980-1990, to 2.2% per year in 1990-2010, 1.8% per year in 2010-2025, 1% per year in 2025-2050 and 0.5% per year in 2050-2100.
Pulses
The per caput demand for pulses in the developing countries is rather stable and even shows a slow decrease. As a result the total demand increases much more slowly than that of cereals (Appendix 13). There are important regional differences, with faster than average growth of the demand in Africa. The growth of total production in all developing countries increased by 1.7% per year between 1980 and 1990. In the scenario this growth rate will be maintained up till 2010, slowing down in the period after 2010. In the period 2050-2100 the assumed total production of pulses will even begin to decrease.
Starchy foods
The future increase of the total demand for this group of basic food crops in the developing countries reflects the population increase and the use of these crops as animal feed, because the per caput food demand is almost constant (Appendix 2; Table 7). Much of the increase is caused by the increasing total demand in Sub-Saharan Africa (Appendix 14a). The total production of starchy foods in all developing countries continues the growth observed in the period 1980-1990 (1.6% per year) up to 2025; the growth of total production will decrease to 0.9% per year (2025-2050) and 0.2% per year (2050-2100).
Oil crops
At present the total demand for oil crops in the developing countries, including China, is about 40 million tons of oil equivalents or 140 million tons of biomass (Table 8). The total demand for oil crops will increase by close to 80% between 1990 and 2010, almost 300% in 1990-2050, and 400% in the full period 1990-2010 (Table 8). Food consumption will increase by both rising per caput consumption and the population increase (Appendix 2). The use of oilseed cakes in the livestock sector is not described in the scenario, but it may cause additional increases in the demand, as noted in Chapter 4. The growth of vegetable oil production was about 4% in the period 1980-1990 in all developing countries including China (Table 8); in the scenario it will decrease to 3% per year in 1990-2010, 2.7% per year in 2010-2025, 1.6% per year in 2025-2050 and 0.6% per year in 2050-2100.
Sugar cane and beet
Total demand for sugar will greatly increase in all regions (Appendix 16a), but the strongest growth in the scenario is seen in Sub-Saharan Africa, mainly due to the low levels of consumption at present (Appendix 2). The demand in all developing countries including China will increase from the present - 95 million tons of sugar to about 150 million tons in 2010, and to - 300 million tons in 2050 and over 400 million tons in 2100. In all developing countries the production of sugar was 3.6% per year in 1980-1990. In the scenario the production growth will slow down to 2.3% in the period up to 2025, and further to 1.4% per year and 0.8% per year in 2025-2050 and 2050-2100, respectively.
Scenarios of crop yields
General aspects
Cereals
Pulses
Starchy foods
Sugar crops
Oil crops and other crops
General aspects
The projections of the yields of the different crops were made on the basis of both region-and crop-specific considerations. In general the procedure concerned assumptions of the yield maxima or ceilings for irrigated and rainfed crops and regions, based on climate, soil suitability, historic developments and expected or possible research breakthroughs at the field level. Once these maximum yields were defined, the time path for the development of current yields towards this region-specific target level was generated. For the medium scenario, in general, the growth rate of AT2010 is simply extrapolated to later years until the yield ceiling is reached. After that yields are assumed to be constant. In the high and low scenarios the respective increase rates are 1.25 x and 0.75 x that of the medium scenario from 1990 onwards until the yield ceiling is reached. The procedure for calculating the irrigated areas, and from that the irrigated production, rainfed production and
rainfed areas, is discussed in Chapter 2.
TABLE 9
Production, harvested areas and yields for three scenarios for total cereals in the developing countries.
M, H, L = medium, high and low scenario. Production in 10^6 ton/year, yield in ton/ha, area in 10^6 ha
1989BY^a
ALL DEVELOPING COUNTRIES INCL. CHINA
Production
Yield
M
H
L
Area
M
H
L
ALL DEVELOPING COUNTRIES EXCL. CHINA
Production
Yield
M
H
L
Area
M
H
L
^a 1989BY = base year estimate of AT2010. For China only projections of production are available, not of areas harvested.
TABLE 10
Production, harvested areas and yields for three scenarios for pulses in the developing countries. M, H, L = medium, high and low scenario. Production in 10^6 ton/year, yield in ton/ha, area in 10^6 ha
1989BY^a
ALL DEVELOPING COUNTRIES INCL. CHINA
Production
Yield
M
H
L
Area
M
H
L
ALL DEVELOPING COUNTRIES EXCL. CHINA
Production
Yield
M
H
L
Area
M
H
L
^a 1989BY = base year estimate of AT2010. For China only projections of production are available, not of areas harvested.
Cereals
Important increases in the cereals yields occur in all three scenarios. According to the medium scenario for all developing countries the yield of cereals increases at a rate of 1.6% per year in 1990-2010, and 1.4% per year, 0.9% per year and 0.3% per year in the respective periods 2010-2025, 2025-2050 and 2050-2100. Over the whole projection period 1990-2100 the cereal yields increase by a factor of 2.5, and by about a factor of 3 in the high scenario (Table 9). The scenarios for the individual cereals in the developing regions show similar increases.
For the high scenario the maximum regional average yields for temperate cereals are about 4 ton/ha for rainfed production and 8 ton/ha for irrigated production (Appendix 9b). An exception is North Africa, where, in the high scenario, the yields increase to 10 ton/ha. In the low and medium scenario the maximum yields of temperate cereals amount to 6 and 7 ton/ha, respectively.
Current rice yields exceed those of the other cereals in most regions (Appendix 10b). Rainfed rice is mainly unfertilized and the maximum yields are assumed not to exceed 3 ton/ha. The maximum yields for East and South Asia (8 ton/ha and 7 ton/ha, respectively) are somewhat lower than those for China^1. The main reason for this assumption is that these regions have tropical climates, and rice yields in temperate conditions such as in China are generally higher.
^1 The reasoning behind the yield scenarios for rice is illustrated with an example for China. The current mean irrigated rice yield in China is about 5.8 ton/ha. Of the total harvested area of 42 Mha, about 35 Mha is irrigated, and there is about 15 Mha of hybrid rice sown at present. The new "super rice" varieties may have 20% higher yields than hybrid rice, and 40% higher than non-hybrid rice. For the medium scenario 100% penetration of super rice is assumed, so that the mean irrigated yield for China may increase by some 40% to > 8 ton/ha in the next decades. Assuming further increase in rice growing technology, a maximum average yield of 9 ton/ha will be reached by the middle of the next century. In the high scenario for China the maximum irrigated yield is assumed to be 10 ton/ha, and in the low scenario 8 ton/ha.
Maize yields also show major increases in the scenarios, with a high yield ceiling of 15 ton/ha in North Africa and 12 ton/ha in the Near East in Asia (Appendix 11b). For maize rainfed production also shows major increases. Highest rainfed maize yields are assumed for East Asia, where there is a fast growth from current 1.7 ton/ha to 4 ton/ha in 2050, and Latin America, with an assumed growth from current 1.7 to 4.5 ton/ha in 2050. For regions where dry climates prevail, such as North Africa, lower rainfed yields were assumed.
Sorghum and millet form an important group in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (Appendix 12b and c). The yield scenario for sorghum and millet follows the scenario for total cereals. The highest maximum irrigated yields in the medium scenario are assumed for North Africa (6.5 ton/ha) and Latin America (5.5 ton/ha).
TABLE 11
Production, harvested areas and yields for three scenarios for root and tuber crops and plantain in the developing countries.
M, H, L = medium, high and low scenario. Production in 10^6 ton/year, yield in ton/ha, area in 10^6 ha
1989BY^a
ALL DEVELOPING COUNTRIES INCLUDING CHINA AND C.P. ASIAN COUNTRIES
Production
Yield
M
H
L
Area
M
H
L
ALL DEVELOPING COUNTRIES EXCLUDING CHINA AND C.P. ASIAN COUNTRIES
Production
Yield
M
H
L
Area
M
H
L
^a 1989BY = base year estimate of AT2010. For China, only projections of production are available, not of areas harvested.
TABLE 12
Production, harvested areas and yields for three scenarios for sugar cane and sugar beet in the developing countries.
M, H, L = medium, high and low scenario. Production in 10^6 ton/year, yields in ton/ha, area in 10^6 ha
1989BY^a
ALL DEVELOPING INCL. CHINA
Production^b
Yield^b
M
H
L
Area
M
H
L
ALL DEVELOPING EXCL. CHINA
Production
Yield
M
H
L
Area
M
H
L
^a 1989BY = base year estimate of AT2010, For China, only projections of production are available, not of areas harvested.
^b Biomass harvested, not sugar equivalents.
Pulses
Yields of pulses are assumed to increase at a fast rate in the developing countries as a whole. The current average yields are close to 0.6 ton/ha, increasing to 0.8 ton/ha in 2010 in the medium scenario. The current increase rate (1.3% per year) of the pulses yield in all developing countries slows down to 1.1% per year (2010-2025), 1% per year (2025-2050) and 0.6% per year (2050-2100) in the medium scenario, giving a total increase over the period 1990-2100 of a factor of 3 in the medium scenario (Table 10). In the high scenario an accelerated increase occurs between 2010 and 2025. For the individual regions the yield development is very similar to that of the developing countries as a whole, with irrigated yields increasing to 2.5 - 3.0 ton/ha in 2050 in most regions in the medium scenario, and with the lowest yields in Sub-Saharan Africa (Appendix 13b).
Starchy foods
In the developing countries the medium scenario the yields for this group of crops increase from 9-10 ton/ha to 11-12 ton/ha in 2010 (1 % per year) and further to 14 ton/ha in 2025 (1 % per year). The increase continues to 2050, when levels of 17-18 ton/ha are achieved and further to 2100 with yields of 30 ton/ha (Table 11). Hence, as for most other crops, a total increase of the yield by a factor 3 is assumed between 1990 and 2100. The individual regions show differences in yields caused by differences in the importance of the individual crops within the group (Appendix 14b). The most important regions in terms of area harvested are China and centrally planned Asian countries and Sub-Saharan Africa. In the first region the demand shows only a very slow increase, and this has resulted in a scenario with a much slower yield increase than in the other regions, from 14 to 17 in 2010 and a factor of 2.5 between 1990 and 2100. In Sub-Saharan Africa the yield increase is initially
slower in the medium scenario, although the total increase over the period 1990-2100 represents a factor of 4.
Sugar crops
In the medium scenario the yields of sugar crops in all developing countries show a decreasing growth from the present 1% per year (1990-2010) to 0.8% per year (2010-2050) and 0.4% per year (2050-2100) (Table 12). In addition to the biomass production, the sugar yield is also determined by the extraction rate. This rate increases in all regions from present levels to 13% (Appendix 16a). In the medium scenario the irrigated yields of cane increase to a maximum of 100 ton biomass per hectare in all regions, equivalent to a sugar yield of 13 ton/ha (Appendix 16b). In the high scenario the maximum yield is 125 ton/ha and in the low scenario 90 ton/ha. Only in North Africa are these absolute maxima for cane not reached. In the Near East in Asia the major crop is beet, for which lower maxima for the high scenario for irrigated fields of 90 ton per ha were assumed. The maximum rainfed yields are 60-85 ton/ha. With the development in irrigated areas this results in a overall yield
increase for sugar cane to a maximum of about 100 ton/ha in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa, and about 120 ton/ha in East Asia.
Oil crops and other crops
The yield scenarios for oil crops and the group of other crops were assumed to be identical to the average yield development for the other crops in the three scenarios. They are not presented because these groups are so diverse.
Harvested areas
Cereals
Pulses
Starchy foods
Sugar crops
Oil crops and other crops
Total harvested area
Cereals
The aggregated results for the harvested area of all cereals in all developing countries show an increase rate of 0.5% per year for the period 1990-2010, 0.2% per year for 2010-2025, nearly no change up till 2050 and a slow decrease in the period 2050-2100 (Table 9), The increase is a result of the assumed relative increases of irrigated and rainfed areas and the yield scenarios. There are considerable differences in the composition of total cereals between the various regions (Appendixes 9c-12c)^1.
^1 As noted in Chapter 2 the self-sufficiency ratios for all products were assumed constant for all regions, except for North Africa and the Near East in Asia where the fast growth in the total demand for cereals led to expansions of arable land that by far exceeded the unused productive land and irrigation potential. In the Near East in Asia the self-sufficiency ratio of the major cereals (wheat, barley and other cereals) was assumed to decrease from the estimated ~70% in 2010 to ~50% in 2100, the self-sufficiency ratio for total cereals decreases to 55 % (Table 6). In North Africa the self-sufficiency ratio for temperate cereals was assumed to remain almost constant over the period 1990-2010, and after 2010 up to 2100 it was assumed to decrease to 39%. The ratio for the second major cereal, maize, decreases from 61% to 50% in AT2010. Between 2010 and 2100 it was assumed to further decrease to 28 %. The self-sufficiency ratio for total cereals thus decreases from 56% to
50% between 1990 and 2010, and to 40% in the period 2010-2100.
Temperate cereals are most important in China and centrally planned Asian countries, South Asia, Near East in Asia, North Africa and Latin America (Appendix 9c). In the medium scenario the harvested area will begin to decrease in South Asia after 2010, and Latin America (after 2050). The harvested area of temperate cereals for the medium scenario in China and North Africa is nearly stable.
Major rice growing areas are in Asia (Appendix 10c). Because of the decreasing per caput food demand and the high assumed growth rates in rice yields, the harvested areas will decrease according to the medium scenario in East Asia, China and South Asia after 2010, while the area is nearly stable between 1990 and 2010. In the medium scenario important increases in the harvested area occur in Sub-Saharan Africa. In the high scenario even a decrease of the harvested area is projected for East Asia, China and South Asia between 1990 and 2010.
Maize shows a major growth mainly because of the growing demand for feed. Major maize growing regions are China and C.P. Asian countries, Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America (Appendix 11c). In China an important increase in the harvested maize area occurs even according to the high yield scenario. Sub-Saharan Africa shows a decreasing harvested area after 2050 in the medium scenario and much earlier in the high scenario. The harvested area of maize also begins to decrease in Latin America after 2025 in the medium yield scenario.
Sorghum and millet are most important in South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (Appendix 12c). In South Asia the harvested area will begin to decrease from 1990 onwards, while in Sub-Saharan Africa the decrease in harvested area begins only in 2050 according to the medium scenario.
Pulses
According to the medium scenario for all developing countries the harvested area of pulses will increase by 0.5% in the period 1990-2010, with nearly no change in area between 2010 and 2025, and decrease 0.7% per year in the period 2025-2050 (Table 10). This decrease will continue after 2050 according to the medium scenario. The most important regions for pulses are South Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa (Appendix 13c). According to the medium scenario for South Asia the harvested area will start to decrease after 2010, while in Sub-Saharan Africa the area starts to decrease much later, after 2050.
Starchy foods
The harvested area in the medium scenario for all developing countries shows an increase rate of 0.8% per year in the period 1990-2010, 0.6% in 2010-2025 and a steady decrease of 0.2% per year (2025-2050) to 0.9% per year (2050-2100) thereafter (Table 11). The major regions for this group of starchy foods are China and centrally planned countries and Sub-Saharan Africa (Appendix 14c). In China a decrease started in the period 1980-1990, but according to the medium scenario the harvested area is stable in the period 1990-2025, followed by a decrease. In Sub-Saharan Africa the medium scenario shows a decrease in harvested area in the period after 2025.
Sugar crops
The harvested area of sugar crops for all developing countries will increase steadily during the whole projection period according to the medium scenario. Increase rates for 1990-2010 (1% per year), 2010-2050 (0.8% per year), and 2050-2100 (0.3%) cause a doubling of the harvested area in 100 years. Even in the high-yield scenario the harvested area will show an increase. Sugar cane is by far the dominating sugar crop in all regions. Only in the Near East in Asia is sugar beet dominant. The major regions for sugar cane are South Asia and Latin America. In South Asia the increase rate is higher than the average for all developing countries in all scenarios, while in Latin America it is lower than average. All other regions show major increases in harvested area throughout the projection period.
Oil crops and other crops
The overall increase in area for oil crops and other crops estimated from the total production and yield scenarios followed are not presented here.
Total harvested area
In all developing countries the harvested area increased from 665 Mha in 1980 to 726 Mha in 1990 (Table 13). According to the medium scenario the area will increase further to 831 Mha in 2010, followed by a slow increase until 2050 when a maximum of 890 Mha has been reached (Table 13). The growth rates for the period 1960-1990 are 0.8-0.9% per year. The annual increase for the medium scenario is 0.7% per year for 1990-2010 and 0.4% per year for 2010-2025. The total harvested area will increase in all regions in the period 1990-2010 according to the medium scenario (Figure 2). The growth in the 1990-2010 period compared to 1960-1990 in China and centrally planned Asia is accelerated, while in all other regions the growth rate seems to be on the decline.
In particular, Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America will show a fast increase of the harvested area in the first 20-year period of the medium scenario (about 1% per year). In Sub-Saharan Africa this increase rate is maintained in the period 2010-2025, and slows down in the periods after 2025. In Latin America the annual growth declines after 2010 to low values of 0.3% per year (2010-2025). The increase in the harvested area according to the medium scenario in North Africa is much lower in 1990-2010 (0.5% per year) than in 1980-1990 (1.2% per year) or 1960-1990 (1.0% per year). After 2010 the increase rate remains stable at levels of 0.2-0.3% per year. Similarly, in the medium scenario for the Near East in Asia the increase in 1990-2010 (0.8% per year) is much lower than in the period 1980-1990 (1.4% per year). After 2010 the increase rate declines further to 0.7% per year in 2010-2025 and 0.2% per year in 2025-2050.
FIGURE 2
Historical total harvested areas and calculated future harvested areas for three scenarios. Areas in million ha.
a. East Asia
b. China and C. P. Asian countries
c. South Asia
d. Near East in Asia
e. North Africa
f. Sub-Saharan Africa
g. Latin America
h. All developing incl. China
TABLE 13
Total harvested areas for three scenarios in the developing countries. M, H, L = medium, high and low scenario. Areas in 10^6 ha
1989BY^a
ALL DEVELOPING INCL. CHINA
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
ALL DEVELOPING EXCL. CHINA
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
^a 1989BY = base year estimate of AT2010. For China only projections of production are available, not of areas harvested.
<section>9</section>
6. FERTILIZER USE
Fertilizer intensity of crop production
Scenarios of fertilizer intensity
Scenarios of fertilizer use
One scenario of global fertilizer use covering the period 1990-2100 has been published by Pepper et al. (1992). This scenario was based on the growth in GDP, assuming that higher incomes will drive the fertilizer use upwards. The scenario was later used by Alcamo (1994). Contrary to Alcamo (1994), in the projections of Alexandratos (1995) the use of fertilizers is driven by crop production, and fertilizer use is estimated with crop- and land-class-specific fertilizer response curves. As discussed in Chapter 2, the method applied by Alexandratos (1995) to derive projections of fertilizer use is not appropriate for the level of aggregation in this study. Extensive literature studies exist on the subject of plant nutrition, fertilizer-yield relations, and economics of fertilizer use. It is yet very difficult to derive yield response curves for countries or regions. The major reason is that the use of nutrients is not uniform. In particular in developing countries only a minor
group of farmers use synthetic fertilizers, while the majority produces at a subsistence level based on crop rotation, recycling of crop residues, organic wastes and animal excreta. Correlation of statistical data of country or regional averaged fertilizer application rates with the average crop yields is therefore not appropriate, although there have been some attempts at it (IFDC, 1992). Another reason why response functions cannot be used for long-term scenarios is the uncertainty about nutrient requirements to sustain future high-yield crops.
Fertilizer intensity of crop production
A simple model was developed to describe the relationship between the total biomass production and the fertilizer intensity, analogous to the feed intensity in livestock production. The fertilizer intensity is the fertilizer input (expressed as the amount of N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O) as a fraction of total biomass production. The fertilizer intensity is not identical to fertilizer efficiency of nutrient intensity. Only synthetic fertilizers are considered. Nutrient inputs from animal excreta, biological N fixation, crop residues, precipitation and other sources of nutrients, are omitted, so that the total nutrient input used for crop production may be underestimated. The fertilizer intensity was correlated with the total biomass production from all crops per unit area. Several methods to express total biomass were tested; these are:
· The sum of the harvested biomass of all crops, including unmilled rice (Figure 3a), which does not yield a satisfactory correlation coefficient because of regional differences in the composition of the biomass. For example, Latin America has a fair amount of sugar cane, and in Sub-Saharan Africa root and tuber crops are important. Root and tuber crops and sugar cane produce much more biomass at lower nutrient intensities that other crops such as cereals.
· The sum of harvested biomass from all crops, except oil crops, sugar cane and beet (for which oil and sugar equivalents were used, respectively), which yielded a somewhat better correlation (Figure 3b).
· The sum of the harvested biomass of cereals, including unmilled rice, pulses, the category "other crops", 0.10 x the root and tuber crops and plantain production, oil and sugar equivalents (Figure 3c).
· As the third method, without the category "other crops" (Figure 3d).
FIGURE 3
Relationship between overall yield (Y) and fertilizer intensity (FI) for seven regions covering all the developing countries for 1961/63,1969/71,1979/81,1988/90 and 1989/91; Data represent
a) total harvested biomass;
b) total harvested biomass, sugar and oil;
c) total harvested biomass for cereals, pulses and "other crops" + sugar + oil + 0.10 x roots/tuber/plantain;
d) as c, but excluding the group "other crops";
e) as c, plus data for the U.S.A., former U.S.S.R., Europe, all developed countries, and the world;
f) the curves used to compute the high (top curve), medium (middle curve) and low (bottom curve) fertilizer scenario.
The best correlation was found for the data presented in Figure 3c. Regression analysis of the data set yielded r^2 for both quadratic and linear functions of close to 0.8 (Figure 3f). The fertilizer intensities vary from one region to another, reflecting differences in the mix of agricultural products, and differences in crop production systems, incorporation of legumes in rotations, recycling of organics and management of animal excreta. Nevertheless it is surprising that the data set shows such a coherent pattern, in which apparently the production becomes more dependent on inputs from synthetic fertilizers at increasing yield levels (Table 14).
TABLE 14
Overall yield (Y) and fertilizer intensities (FI) for the developing regions, and other countries and regions
Region
Correction factor^a
All dev'ping incl. China
y^b
FI^c
All dev'ping excl. China
Y
FI
East Asia
Y
FI
China & C.P. Asia
Y
FI
South Asia
Y
FI
Middle East
Y
FI
North Africa
Y
FI
Sub-Saharan Africa
Y
FI
Latin America
Y
FI
USA
Y
FI
Europe^d
Y
FI
Former USSR
Y
FI
Developed countries
Y
FI
World
Y
FI
^a Correction factor used to adjust the results of the equation for the medium scenario for 1990 shown in Figure 3 to achieve consistency with the 1990 data. In some cases additional adjustments were needed to scale to the AT2010 projection.
^b Overall yield, Y (ton/ha) = P / A, where P = the sum of the production of cereals (incl. unmilled rice), pulses, 0.10 x starchy roots production, production of vegetable oils, sugar and other crops (see Appendix 1) in 1000 ton; A = total harvested area in 1000 ha.
^c Fertilizer intensity, FI (in ton/1000 ton) = NPK / P; NPK = the total amount of NPK use in ton (N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O).
^d The value of FI for Europe, as calculated from the total fertilizer use, may be incorrect because in this region some of the synthetic fertilizers is applied to grasslands (FAO/IFA/IFDC, 1994).
There are important differences between developing and developed regions (Figure 3e). In most developed regions there is a decrease from about 1980 or earlier (Table 14). In particular the USA has shown a strong decrease in fertilizer intensity with rising yield levels. This may have been caused by an increase of crop rotation with soybeans or other legumes. The crop planted after the legume benefits from the nitrogen in the residues and soil. The overall result of this development is a countrywide increase in the synthetic fertilizer efficiency.
Scenarios of fertilizer intensity
At the same overall yield level the fertilizer intensities are different in the various developing regions^1. However, the increase rate of the fertilizer intensity at increasing yield levels in general is very similar. If the data from the former USSR are excluded, the highest fertilizer intensity is currently seen in Europe. Within Europe the variation is high. For example, the fertilizer intensity in the Netherlands is about 78. European fertilizer intensities may in reality be much lower, since part of the synthetic fertilizer is applied to grasslands.
^1 The contribution to the nutrient input from synthetic fertilizers in China is about 65%, the remainder coming from animal and human excreta, residues, wastes, etc. Including all sources of nutrients would cause an increase of the Chinese "nutrient intensity" to perhaps a level comparable to that in the Netherlands.
In general, the efficiency of nutrient inputs decreases at increasing yields of a specific variety (FAO, 1981; Jauregui and Sain, 1992; Tisdale et al., 1993). However, with improving technologies, the efficiency of synthetic fertilizers use can be increased (Tisdale et al., 1993), and with existing technology it can be made more efficient by, for example, introducing leguminous crops into the rotations or by recycling crop residues. Finally, the use of synthetic fertilizer can be substituted by animal excreta. All these aspects may cause variation in fertilizer intensity between regions.
The scenarios are based on the assumption that the fertilizer intensity reaches a maximum at a general overall yield of 5 ton/ha. This yield level is exceeded in only a few regions in the medium scenario. The assumption of a maximum intensity does not mean that nutrient inputs are bound to a maximum. Using a maximum intensity indicates that in the future the fertilizer use efficiency needs to be increased along with crop yields. As will be demonstrated below, this does not imply constant application rates per unit area. Instead, the application rates per unit of product, which is by definition the fertilizer intensity, are constant.
Different values for the maximum fertilizer intensity were used in the scenarios. The maximum value for the medium fertilizer scenario is the current average fertilizer intensity in Europe of 56 ton NPK/1000 ton, approximately equal to that in all developed countries, achieved at a fairly high yield level. For the high-fertilizer scenario variant a level of 66 ton NPK/1000 ton was assumed; this fell between the European and The Netherlands level. In the low fertilizer scenario variant the maximum intensity is equal to the current world average fertilizer intensity of 46 ton/1000 ton. The latter intensity is close to that of China, a country known for its intensive use of animal and human excreta as fertilizer. All fertilizer scenarios are combined with the medium yield scenarios.
Assuming that crop yields will increase and that fertilizer intensities are constrained, functions describing the fertilizer intensity must have a decreasing slope. Here, quadratic functions were selected with a maximum at yields of 5 ton/ha. At higher yields the fertilizer intensity is constant. Based on the three maxima for the fertilizer intensity, three types of curves result (Figure 3f).
TABLE 15
Synthetic fertilizer use for three scenarios for the period 1960-1990, and the required nutrients for crop production for developing countries, developed countries and the world
ALL DEVELOPING INCL. CHINA
Total NPK^a
FM^c
FH^c
FL^c
NPK use/ha^b
FM
FH
FL
ALL DEVELOPING EXCL. CHINA
Total NPK
FM
FH
FL
NPK use/ha
FM
FH
FL
DEVELOPED
Total NPK
NPK use/ha
WORLD
Total NPK
NPK use/ha
^a Total NPK = total use / requirements in million tons N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O
^b NPK use/ha is the use/requirement in kg N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O per hectare of harvested land.
^c FM, FH, LF = fertilizer scenarios; FM = medium variant, FH = high variant and FL = low variant of the medium production scenario.
The functions were used to reproduce the fertilizer use for the developing regions for 1990. The exact position of the curves shown in Figure 3f is different from the data for most regions. However, the shape and slope of the curves are similar to the development of fertilizer intensity for individual regions. Therefore, the fertilizer consumption can be reproduced using the same function with region-specific adjustments, in which the shape of the curve and at the same time the maximum corresponding to the scenario are maintained. After this adjustment for some regions a further adjustment is required for the medium scenario to reproduce the AT2010 forecast (Table 14). After 2010 the scalars gradually approach the value of 1, i.e. their effect decreases with time.
Scenarios of fertilizer use
The results for the developing countries as a whole indicate considerable increase in both the total fertilizer use and the fertilizer requirements (Table 15). By the year 2025 the nutrient requirements in the medium scenario even exceed the current fertilizer application rates observed in the developed countries. The strong increase in nutrient requirements is caused by the crop yield increases. The nutrient requirements per hectare increase to values similar to the current EC fertilizer application rate of about 300 kg ha^-1. In some individual regions the required NPK rates even increase to higher values than the current EC fertilization rate (Appendix 18). The environmental consequences of these scenarios in terms of atmospheric emissions of ammonia and nitrous oxide will be discussed in Chapter 8.
It must be noted that the data set used for this analysis is very limited. It may be useful to repeat the study of fertilizer intensity on the basis of country data to better understand the fertilizer intensity. The weakness or greatest uncertainty of the model is the constraint on the fertilizer intensity, which is not allowed to exceed a certain arbitrarily chosen ceiling. In addition, the functions used do not describe the accumulation of stocks. For example, the required phosphorus inputs may decrease with continued fertilization (Van Duivenbooden, 1995).
<section>a</section>
7. ARABLE LAND
Irrigated land
Cropping intensity
Arable land
Arable land for different cereal feed scenarios
Irrigated land
At present, the irrigated area in all developing countries, including China, makes up about 25 % of the total harvested area. The percentage irrigated area will slowly increase in the medium scenario to some 27% in 2010, 28% in 2025 and 30% in 2050. The increase rate assumed in the medium scenario in all developing countries is about 1 % per year when China is included and even faster at 1.2% per year if China is not included (Table 16; Figure 4).
Based on preliminary FAO estimates, the potential for expansion of irrigation is limited in North Africa. For North Africa there may be water and land available for some additional 2 million ha irrigation (FAO, in prep.). By adjusting the production in North Africa, as discussed in Chapter 2, the expansion of irrigation was limited to levels which are close to the estimated potential (Appendix 19). With the projected increase of 1.9%/yr in the period 1990-2010, and decreasing growth rates thereafter, the irrigated areas in Sub-Saharan Africa do not exceed the estimated current irrigation potential (FAO, in prep.). For the other regions only estimates of the irrigation potential made by FAO (1984) are available. On the basis of these estimates, the irrigation potential will be exceeded in the Near East in Asia. It was assumed that there may be water and land for some additional 10 Mha of irrigation. Similar to the North Africa situation, the domestic production of cereals was
reduced in order to avoid inconsistent projections of irrigated and arable land. In the near future the estimates of irrigation potential for all developing countries will be updated.
For South Asia AT2010 assumes a fast growth of 1.3% per year in the period 1990-2010 leading to an increase from the current 76 to 99 million ha in 20 years. Even with the assumed decrease by a factor 2 in the growth rate after 2010, the irrigated area increases by an additional 10 million hectare in the medium scenario between 2010 and 2025. For this region the low scenario is possibly more realistic than the medium and high scenarios. In Latin America the growth rate is high (1.2% per year in the period 1990-2010). Even with this fast increase the irrigated areas remain relatively low in absolute terms and as a percentage of arable land, while the irrigation potential may allow for much faster expansion.
Cropping intensity
The cropping intensity for all developing countries, including China, increases from 87% at present to 94% in 2010 (Table 16). The maximum intensity in the medium scenario is 100%, which is the result of the relative increase of irrigated areas. If China is excluded from the data, the intensity is much lower, close to 80% at present and increasing to 85% in 2010, 88% in 2050 and 92% in 2100 in the medium scenario. The region with most intensive cropping is China and centrally planned Asian countries.
TABLE 16
Total irrigated and arable areas, and cropping intensity for three scenarios for developing countries. The arable area for two feed intensity scenario variants of the medium scenario are also presented. Areas in million ha. Cropping intensity in % of the arable area
IRRIGATED AREA
All developing incl. China
Medium
High
Low
All developing excl. China
Medium
High
Low
CROPPING INTENSITY
All developing incl. China
M
H
L
All developing excl. China
M
H
L
ARABLE AREAS
All developing incl. China
Medium
836 (851)^a
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
All developing excl. China
Medium
726 (742)^a
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
^a The number in parentheses denotes the adjusted number used in AT 2010
In the latter region the intensity is 142% (Appendix 20) calculated on the basis of the FAO yearbooks^1. Assuming a maximum cropping intensity of 140% for irrigated land and using crude estimates for rainfed cropping, overall maximum cropping intensities can be estimated. In none of the regions (except China, as noted above) does the cropping intensity exceed the estimated maximum intensity.
^1 Alexandratos (1995) noted that the actual arable land area may be some 30% higher than the reported area of 109 million ha. Assuming an arable area in China of 125 million ha, the actual cropping intensity may be some 120%. The increase calculated in the scenarios then changes to lower values of maximum ~140% in 2050.
FIGURE 4
Current total irrigated land areas and calculated future irrigated areas for three scenarios. Areas in million ha.
a. East Asia
b. China and C. P. Asian countries
c. South Asia
d. Near East in Asia
e. North Africa
f. Sub-Saharan Africa
g. Latin America
h. All developing incl. China
FIGURE 5
Current total arable land areas and calculated future arable areas for three scenarios. Areas in million ha.
a. East Asia
b. China and C. P. Asian countries
c. South Asia
d. Near East in Asia
e. North Africa
f. Sub-Saharan Africa
g. Latin America
h. All developing incl. China
Arable land
The arable land area is calculated from the harvested areas presented in Appendix 17 and discussed in Chapter 4, and the cropping intensities. For all developing countries, including China, the arable area increases at a rate of 0.3% per year from 836 in 1990 to close to 890 million ha in 2010 in the medium scenario (Table 16; Figure 5). In the years 2010-2025 the arable area increases by 0.2% per year to a maximum area of ~ 920 million ha in 2025, after which a slow decrease occurs close to the 1990 area. If China is excluded from the data, the area increases in the medium scenario at 0.3% per year from ~ 730 million ha at present to ~ 770 million ha in 2010. The arable area increases at an annual rate of 0.2% to a maximum of ~ 800 million ha in 2025, and then begins to decrease. The individual regions show similar results, with an increase in the first 40-50 years, and a stabilization or even a slow decline in the period after 2025 (Figure 5; Appendix 21). Due to the lack
of available land in North Africa, the arable area remains constant.
Arable land for different cereal feed scenarios
The effect of the different variant scenarios of the cereal feed intensity on the arable land area is most important in the regions with major livestock production, such as Latin America, and least important in regions with no important livestock production, such as South Asia. Although the high feed demand scenario results in a minor increase in the arable land areas (1% in 2010; 3% in 2025; 7% in 2050), the absolute increase for all developing countries is some 10 million ha in 2010, close to 30 million ha in 2025 and 70 million ha in 2050. It is obvious that the impact of higher feed intensities in the high feed scenario variant grows when livestock production increases. The feed demand scenarios relate to cereals only, and cereals production in all developing countries makes up more than 50% of the total harvested area. This explains the impact of small variations in the cereal feed demand on the arable area in use (Figure 6).
Figure 6 - Effect of cereal feed use on arable land areas of developing countries, including China. Areas in million ha.
<section>b</section>
8. EMISSIONS
Emissions from animal waste
Emissions from synthetic fertilizer use
Emissions from enteric fermentation
Emissions from wetland rice cultivation
Emissions from animal waste
A number of estimates are available of the amount of nutrients in animal excreta. For example, the American Society of Agricultural Engineers (Midwest Plan Service, 1985) produced estimates of manure production for North American conditions, ECETOC (1994) produced estimates for European conditions and Bouwman et al. (1995) estimated worldwide excretion of nitrogen. The nitrogen excretion by animals is determined largely by the maintenance requirements of the animal, the amount of nitrogen in the milk production and the amount accumulating in meat. In general, extensive production systems are less efficient in N use than intensively producing systems. Therefore, nitrogen excretion does not increase proportionally with the production per head.
To estimate the current production of nitrogen by animals the excretion factors of Bouwman et al. (1995) are used (Table 17). The body weight and milk production largely determines the total feed intake (IPCC, 1995; Livestock Environment Study, in prep.). Estimates of the current body weights and feed intake averaged over the total population of an animal category are available for continents (IPCC, 1995). To approximate changes in body weights for non-dairy cattle, carcass weights were used as a correlate, in which the nitrogen excretion increases linearly towards a value between the current excretion in that region and the West European excretion. For dairy cattle the annual milk production per head is taken as a correlate for the nitrogen excretion, with a similar linear increase towards the European values. For the other animal categories constant N excretion rates were used, as these rates are not as variable for total regional populations as the N excretion of cattle
(Bouwman et al., 1995).
TABLE 17
Nitrogen excretion, ammonia volatilization loss, feed intake and methane conversion factors for different animal categories
Category
Nitrogen excretion
NH[3] loss
Feed intake
CH[4] conversion
(kg/head/yr)
MJ/day
Non-dairy cattle
Dairy cattle
Pigs
Sheep and goats
Poultry
Camels
Nitrogen excretion estimates based on Bouwman et al. (1995), NH[3] loss from RIVM-EDGAR (1995), feed intake and methane conversion from IPCC (1995).
The ranges of nitrogen excretion are given in Table 17. Although the body weight may not be proportional to carcass weight for non-dairy cattle, the relation used describes the increasing efficiency of nutrient use generally observed in developing livestock production systems (see, for example, ECETOC, 1994). To calculate the total nutrient excretion (N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O), factors specific for animal categories from Midwest Plan Service (1985) were used. According to the medium scenario for the period 1990-2010 the populations of the different animal categories in the developing countries will continue the fast increase observed in the past decades (Table 18). The total excretion calculated on the basis of the above assumptions varies between regions depending on the population and productivity scenarios of the different animal categories (Figure 7). In most regions, however, the animal excretion is dominated by cattle. The total nutrient excretion in all developing
countries showed a fast increase of 1.75% per year in the period 1960-1990; the increase in the medium scenario will continue at a fast rate of 1.5% per year in the period 1990-2010, and somewhat slower in 2010-2025 (1.2% per year).
After 2025 the excretion will stabilize at a level of 250 million ton (Figure 7h). Comparison of the different scenarios shows that the low scenario results in higher, and the high scenario in lower waste production per unit product than the medium scenario (Figure 8). This results largely from the assumptions on the efficiency of nutrient use in the different scenarios. Emissions of NH[3], N[2]O and CH[4] from animal waste have been estimated.
Ammonia (NH[3])
The volatilization of NH[3] from animal wastes depends on whether the waste is dropped in a stable or in the field. The type of stable is important for the NH[3] losses, as well as the management of the waste. Field emissions are determined by many factors, of which wind speed, temperature and rainfall are the most important. In their global inventory Bouwman et al. (in prep.) used NH[3] volatilization rates of 15-20% for stable and storage conditions, 25% for NH[3] loss for manure application as fertilizer, and 10-15% for grazing conditions. The resulting estimates for the NH[3] losses from animal waste vary from 40% for poultry to 20-30% for cattle (Table 17).
TABLE 18
Populations of different animal categories for three different scenarios. M, H, L = medium, high and low scenario. Populations in million heads
Category
1989BY
Cattle
M
H
L
Dairy cattle
M
H
L
Pigs
M
H
L
Sheep and goats
M
H
L
Poultry
M
H
L
FIGURE 7
Estimated current and future animal nutrient excretion for the medium scenario from all animal categories. Excretion in million ton N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O.
a. East Asia
b. China and C. P. Asian countries
c. South Asia
d. Near East in Asia
e. North Africa
f. Sub-Saharan Africa
g. Latin America
h. All developing incl. China
TABLE 19
Ammonia emission (a) and nitrous oxide emission (b) from animal excreta for developing countries for 1990. Emissions in million metric tons N per year
Region
a. NH[3]-N
East Asia
China and C.P. Asian countries
South Asia
Near East in Asia
North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America
Developing
Developed
World
b. N[2]O
East Asia
China and C.P. Asian countries
South Asia
Near East in Asia
North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America
Developing
Developed
World
Emission calculations based on RIVM-EDGAR (1995).
FIGURE 8 - Estimated current and future animal nutrient excretion from all animal categories and synthetic fertilizer use in all developing countries including China. Excretion and fertilizer in N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O.
Because in most regions the excretion is dominated by cattle, the total regional NH[3] loss can be expected to be close to that of cattle. The current emission of NH[3] associated with the ~ 100 million ton N in animal waste is about 23 million ton NH[3]-N per year (Table 19). For developing countries including China, the NH[3] emissions amount to about 16 million ton NH[3]-N per year from the 70 million ton of nitrogen in excreta. The percentage of NH[3] loss from animal excreta in developed countries is very close to that in developed countries (Bouwman et al., in prep.). This indicates that the productivity level and the animal waste management have minor influence on the NH[3] losses for large regions of the world.
Therefore, in the emission scenario the NH[3] loss rates are assumed to be constant in time, and the nitrogen excretion varies according to the above assumptions (Table 17). It must be noted that considerable reductions in NH[3] losses can be achieved for animal excreta applied as fertilizer to arable land^1. In the medium scenario the NH[3] emission from animal waste in the developing countries will increase considerably from current 15 million tons NH[3]-N per year to 20 million tons in 2010, and 24 million tons in 2025. After 2025 the emissions increase at a much slower rate to 26 million tons in 2050. (Table 19).
^1 A higher N recovery can be achieved from reduction of NH[3] volatilization by incorporating the manure. At the same time the animal manure substitutes part of the synthetic fertilizer.
Nitrous oxide (N[2]O)
Very few measurement data are available from literature for nitrous oxide (N[2]O) emissions from animal waste. Therefore, the emission rate of 1% proposed by Bouwman et al. (1995) is used for both grazing and confined animals^2. The annual emission of N[2]O from animal excreta also showed a rapid increase from 0.4 million ton N[2]O-N in 1960 to 0.6 million ton in 1990, and further to 1.2 million ton in 2050 (Table 19). In comparison, the annual N[2]O emissions estimated for 1990 for the developed countries were 0.4 million tons (Table 19).
^2 This simple method does not account for differences in animal waste management systems. The animal waste management is an important factor regulating N[2]O emission rates. For example, low emission rates of <0.01% of the N from anaerobic digesters can be expected, and high emissions of up to 15% N from deep litter stables (IPCC/OECD preliminary report of the IPCC/OECD working group on N[2]O emissions from agriculture [in prep]. This group is preparing more default estimates of N[2]O from grazing animals and animal waste management systems, including animal manure applied as fertilizer).
Methane (CH[4])
The emission of CH[4] from animal waste depends on the waste management system. Highest CH[4] emissions occur where animal waste is stored in lagoons, or where the waste is stored in liquid form or as a slurry. These systems are not widespread in the developing countries, except in parts of Asia. In the developing countries most of the non-dairy cattle are grazing animals. In dairy production both grazing and daily spreading of manure are widespread. Much of the pig manure in Asia is stored in liquid form.
Of the global emission of 10-15 million ton CH[4] per year, the developing countries may contribute some 30%. The emission rates can be assumed constant in the future scenarios, and then the emission from developing countries would increase from the current ~ 4 to perhaps ~7 million ton CH[4] per year in 2050. However, the amount of waste produced in developing countries will increase in all scenarios, as discussed above. This may create waste disposal problems, whereby other systems with high emission rates (such as lagoon or liquid storage systems) may increasingly be adopted. With the increase of animal waste production resulting from the scenarios (Figures 8 and 9), this may lead to a significant increase in the emission from developing countries. Assuming that the emission rates for the year 2050 are equal to those used for current European emissions by IPCC (1995), the emission in 2050 from developing countries would perhaps be 50 million tons CH[4] per year, which is
close to the estimated 80 million ton CH[4] from enteric fermentation in 2050 (Figure 10).
FIGURE 9
Comparison of fertilizer use and animal nutrient excretion for the medium scenario. Nutrients in million ton N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O.
a. East Asia
b. China and C. P. Asian countries
c. South Asia
d. Near East in Asia
e. North Africa
f. Sub-Saharan Africa
g. Latin America
h. All developing incl. China
Emissions from synthetic fertilizer use
The scenarios of synthetic fertilizer use presented in Chapter 6 can be used to produce estimates of emission scenarios of nitrous oxide. The fraction N in of the total NPK use as presented in Appendix 18 does not show much variation over the period 1960-1990. Therefore, the percentage N in the NPK fertilizer used in the fertilizer scenario is the average 1960-1990 level. On the basis of the NPK scenario and the assumed constant N fraction, the N fertilizer use calculated for the developing countries will increase from the current 41 million ton N per year to 77 million ton in 2010, 105 million ton in 2025 and close to 140 million ton in 2050 for the medium fertilizer scenario variant.
The estimated global emission of NH[3] from current synthetic N fertilizer use is about 9 million ton N per year. Most of this occurs in the developing countries (7.5 million ton N), and about half in China. The average N losses as ammonia from synthetic fertilizer use of 18% in developing countries is much higher than that in developed countries (5%). The loss rates are related to the type of fertilizer and to the climatic conditions. In addition, the NH[3] emission may be higher in wetland rice cultivation than in dryland fields. In developing countries about 50% of the nitrogen fertilizer used is in the form of urea (IFA, 1994). Asman and Bouwman (1995) indicated that NH[3] losses from urea may be 25% in tropical regions and 15% in temperate climates. In China 40-50% of the nitrogen fertilizer used is in the form of ammonium bicarbonate (Asman and Bouwman, 1995), which is a highly volatile compound^3. The NH[3] loss from ammonium bicarbonate may be 30% in the tropics and
20% in temperate zones. Contrary, the NH[3] loss from injected anhydrous ammonia, which is widely used in the USA, is only 4% (Asman and Bouwman, 1995).
^3 Urea is less volatile than ammonium bicarbonate. In the soil urea is converted to ammonium bicarbonate by the enzyme urease, which takes about 2-3 days.
It is obvious that future NH[3] emissions depend very much on the type of fertilizer. The mix of N fertilizers may change in the future, so that the average NH[3] loss rate may also change. Here, it is assumed that all developing countries achieve a reduction of NH[3] losses to a rate of 5%, equal to the current loss rate for developing countries. The N fertilizer thus saved would be 5 million ton N per year, which is 13% of the current fertilizer N use in developing countries and 7% of current global N fertilizer use^4. If the loss rate of 5% is applied to the future scenarios of fertilizer use, the NH[3] loss from fertilizers will still be lower in 2025 than the current emission (Table 20).
^4 The saving in fertilizer represents about US$ 2 billion at current prices, using the October 1995 price of urea. The saving of 5 million ton N is the equivalent of the nitrogen content of 250 million ton rice, about equal to the total Chinese rice consumption in 1990.
Nitrous oxide emissions amount to 1.25 ± 1 % of the nitrogen applied. This estimate is the average for all fertilizer types, as proposed by Bouwman (1995) and adopted by IPCC (1995). The emission rates vary from one fertilizer type to another (Bouwman, 1995). For example, the N[2]O loss from injected anhydrous ammonia is generally much higher than losses evolving from nitrate-based fertilizers. However, the data set available from measurements published in the literature is too limited to produce reliable estimates of emission rates by fertilizer type (Bouwman, 1995). According to the medium fertilizer scenario this loss of 1.25% results in an increase from the current 0.5 million ton N[2]O-N to 1.0 million ton N in 2010, and further to 1.7 million ton N in 2050 for all developing countries including China (Table 21).
FIGURE 10
Estimated current and future methane emission from all animal categories for the medium scenario. Methane emission in million ton CH[4] per year.
a. East Asia
b. China and C. P. Asian countries
c. South Asia
d. Near East in Asia
e. North Africa
f. Sub-Saharan Africa
g. Latin America
h. All developing incl. China
TABLE 20
Synthetic N fertilizer use in 1990 and NH[3] emission from fertilizers
Region
N fertilizer use in 1990 (Mton N)
NH[3] loss in 1990 (%)
NH[3] loss in 1990 (Mton N)
NH[3] loss of 5% (Mton N)
East Asia
CP Asia
South Asia
Near East Asia
North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America
Developing
Developed
World
TABLE 21
Emission of N[2]O caused by synthetic fertilizer application. Emission in million ton N[2]O-N per year
Region
East Asia
China and C.P. Asian countries
South Asia
Near East in Asia
North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America
Developing
Developed
World
Emissions from enteric fermentation
The current CH[4] emission associated with enteric fermentation by cattle, pigs, sheep and goats, and camels, is calculated with the method described in IPCC (1995). Future emission rates are estimated on the basis of similar assumptions to those used to estimate nitrogen excretion. The animal body weight is assumed to determine the future energy intake, and carcass weight is used as a correlate for the body weight for all animals, except dairy cattle, where milk production is assumed to determine the energy intake. The CH[4] emission is calculated from the energy intake as follows: emission (kg/head/yr) = GEI x Y / EC, where GEI is the gross energy intake (MJ/head/day) (Table 17), Y the methane conversion rate in decimal form (Table 17), and EC the conversion factor to compute methane emission (EC = 55.65 MJ/kg of methane). The range of gross energy intake estimated for the different animal categories (Table 17) shows much more variability than the nitrogen excretion
ranges. This reflects the observed large differences in the CH[4] emission per animal between intensive and extensive production systems (IPCC, 1995).
FIGURE 11 - Estimated current and future methane emission from all animal categories for three scenarios in all developing countries, including China
The CH[4] emissions by animal category for the different regions (Figure 10) show that cattle is by far the major source of CH[4] from enteric fermentation. Latin America and South Asia, with their large cattle populations, are important contributors to the total emission from all developing countries. The current contribution to the global emission from all developing countries is about 50%. The emission of CH[4] from enteric fermentation from developing countries increases in the medium scenario by about a factor of 2. Comparison of the different scenarios shows that the low scenario results in higher, and the high scenario in lower total emission than the medium scenario (Figure 11). This result is very similar to the scenarios of nutrients in animal waste, and is caused by the higher feed use efficiency in more intensive production systems.
Emissions from wetland rice cultivation
In the most recent IPCC assessment (Prather et al., 1995) rice cultivation is considered to be a minor global source of CH[4], contributing less than 10% and probably only about 5% to the global emission of about 500 million ton CH[4] per year. More than 90% of the global rice production occurs in developing countries. No attempt has been made to estimate future emissions. However, the general tendency in the medium scenario is a nearly constant harvested area of rice. If the CH[4] emission per hectare of rice does not change, the source strength will, therefore, not change in the medium scenario (Figure 12). The global rice area will, however, increase in the low scenario. If the CH[4] emission is related to the biomass production, an important increase of the global emission can be expected because the global rice production will double between 1990 and 2050.
FIGURE 12
Results of the scenario for rice cultivation
a) total, rainfed and irrigated harvested areas (in million ha) for medium scenario;
b) index of production and area for medium scenario, 1990 = 100.
<section>c</section>
9. PRESSURES ON AGRICULTURAL RESOURCES AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Pressures on fresh water
Pressures on land resources
Pressures on the environment
Although this subject has been considered in depth by Alexandratos (1995), some aspects relating to the results of this study will be briefly discussed. The more regional constraints on agricultural production are those imposed by available water and land resources. Some pressures on the environment are of a local nature, others are of global importance. Local environmental effects are, for example, leaching of nutrients from fertilized soils, and acidification caused by re-deposited NH[3] from animal wastes. More global environmental effects are caused by, for example, radiatively active gases causing global warming, or compounds (such as NH[3]) involved in aerosol formation in the atmosphere. In this chapter effects of agrochemical use will not be discussed.
Pressures on fresh water
A number of attempts have been made to estimate the irrigation potential in developing countries. For example, FAO (1979) indicated that close to 400 Mha of land is suitable for irrigation on the basis of the land's physiographic position, slope and soil characteristics. Alexandratos (1988) estimated that there is potential for about 300 Mha of irrigation in all developing countries. More recent information is available for Africa. According to preliminary FAO estimates there is still the potential for an additional 2 Mha in North Africa, while the current irrigated area and the projected increases for Sub-Saharan Africa do not exceed the irrigation potential for that region. Preliminary estimates for a few countries in the Near East (Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Turkey) indicate a potential expansion of the irrigated area of close to 5 Mha. Based on the current climatic conditions and current demand of water from the other sectors in society, both in North Africa and Near East,
the agricultural water demand will be testing the limits of the irrigation potential. Based on the estimates of FAO (1984), the irrigated areas in the other regions will not exceed the potential.
It is very difficult to estimate future water availability for agriculture, since both the demand and supply may change (Lins et al., 1992). The causes of changes in water demand are numerous, and many of them are even unpredictable. Non-agricultural water use is expected to increase rapidly along with continued urbanization and industrialization. Competition between agriculture and other sectors for limited water resources will become more intense and in many cases may only be accommodated by increasing water use efficiency. Agricultural water demand is highly sensitive to variations in climate. The areas that can be cropped and the chance of failure can change significantly if temperatures rise or precipitation reduces, and the variation of the impact of change through the year is important. Additional parameters determining the water requirements and irrigation potential include the CO[2] effect on plant transpiration, hours of sunshine and wind speed.
Changes in the water resources may be caused by climatic changes because river discharges are very sensitive to climatic characteristics (Nemec and Schaake, 1982; Nemec, 1983). The smaller the catchment area, the higher the sensitivity to climatic changes. The major hydrological processes and their interrelationships are complex as they involve seasonal variation of precipitation, evapotranspiration, storage and runoff, and differ from one catchment to the other.
Pressures on land resources
This study has not considered possible negative effects of land degradation on the land's productivity. The extent and degree of degradation has been estimated globally (Oldeman et al., 1992), although it is not known whether these areas are at present stable, in a process of degradation or in a process of rehabilitation. Degradation of land may also affect crop yields and grassland production, but in temperate regions productivity losses are thought to be only marginal^1. There are few studies for tropical regions. For example, loss of productivity and the resulting economic damage is significant in South Asia (FAO, 1994). With the available data it is not possible to estimate effects of the rate and status of the degradation process on the land's production potential. This information is crucial for studies such as this one. If yields are negatively influenced by degradation, the crop production scenarios may not be realized; as yields are important factors in determining
the areas of arable land required for a certain volume of production, declining productivity may also cause arable land expansion needed to replace the lost productivity, and indirectly deforestation rates.
^1 For the USA it has been estimated that continuation of current rates of soil erosion for the next 100 years would reduce crop yields by between 3 and 10% (Crosson, 1986; Alt et al., 1989).
The process of deforestation is a very important form of land degradation. If the information on global land use changes currently available is combined, it is clear that there is a large discrepancy between the estimates of deforestation (about 15 Mha per year in all developing countries) and the expansion of arable land and pastures (about 4 Mha per year in all developing countries). Alexandratos (1995) concluded that agriculture is not the sole cause of deforestation. However, analysis of the results of the forest resources assessment project reveals that a very important part of the forest conversions are long fallow and short fallow shifting cultivation^2. Assuming that the rate of land conversion to urban land is of the order of 2 million ha per year (Alexandratos, 1995), the major part of the annual 15 million ha permanent forest clearing is, in fact, involved in shifting cultivation. Increasing land pressure and shortening rotation periods may cause a degradation and
loss of productivity of the land, which is an important cause of deforestation^2.
^2 Results of the forest Resources Assessment Project show that in Latin America the conversion of tropical forest to short and long fallows makes up about 10% of total changes, but in Africa (-20%) and Asia (-20%) it is much more important. In Africa the conversion of closed forest to short fallow (small-scale subsistence farming) alone is close to 15% of the total changes; the other transitions in Africa with similar frequency are closed forest - open forest - fragmented forest - other land cover, representing the various progressive stages of forest depletion. In Asia the typical pattern is closed forest - long fallow - other land cover (mainly agriculture and waste land) and closed forest - short fallow - other land cover. There is an imbalance between the high rate of transition of closed forest to long fallow and regrowth of long fallows to closed forest. In Latin America the major type of conversion is closed forest to large-scale cattle grazing or to small-scale
permanent cropping.
If land degradation plays a major role in the dynamics of land use of the developing countries, future scenarios have to account for this process. However, on the basis of the data currently available, it is not possible to make projections of land degradation and its effects on crop yields and grassland productivity.
Pressures on the environment
Livestock production
Synthetic fertilizers
Livestock production
Land scarcity, bought-in feed, manure disposal problems, concerns with water quality, disease and odours, and animal welfare, define the basic parameters of livestock-environment interactions in much of the EU and to some extent the USA. In intensive production systems the primary environmental concerns arise from animal excreta and associated problems of water pollution, gaseous pollutants and odours. Pig, cattle and poultry production generate both solid and liquid slurry manure of varying physical and chemical properties. The elements nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium are of particular concern. In some developing regions the nitrogen excreted by the animals exceeds the amount of fertilizer nitrogen used in crop production (Figure 9).
Because animal manure has a high biological oxygen demand (BOD), higher than human waste, a small leak into a water source can cause a major pollution problem. Water pollution from animal excreta can arise from direct runoff from farms into surface waters and from leaching of nutrients from the soil in periods of excess rainfall. As livestock production becomes more intensive, the incidence of pollution rises. High levels of BOD waste, nitrate and phosphate are major causes of pollution, with phosphorus generally the major cause of eutrophication of inland fresh water systems and excess nitrogen the cause of eutrophication in coastal or marine environments. An additional impact on water quality is waterborne illness. Cryptosporidium, a parasite whose oocysts are common in livestock, has been associated with various outbreaks of human illness in recent years.
Livestock production also generates a variety of gaseous pollutants. The CH[4] emissions from enteric fermentation contribute significantly to the global CH[4] injection into the atmosphere (Prather et al., 1995), and the scenarios presented in this study indicate that the contribution from the developing countries may increase substantially in the future. The CH[4 ]emissions from the waste are not significant at present, but they may increase by one order of magnitude if the waste management changes into a lagoon/liquid storage system.
It is difficult to prevent emissions of ammonia from animal waste. Most of the ammonia is re-deposited again contributing to soil acidification. Part of the NH[3] plays a role in atmospheric aerosol formation and chemical reactions where N[2]O is formed in the atmosphere. Odours from animal waste may become a particular problem in densely populated areas. Animal wastes contain as many as 60 volatile compounds, of which about a dozen contribute to bad odours.
One way to avoid environmental problems related to livestock production is by reducing livestock production, current in some countries in the E.U. This is, however, probably not a realistic assumption for most developing countries. In general, the efficiency of production can be improved by increasing animal productivity. Virtually all efforts that improve animal productivity will reduce methane emissions (Hogan, 1993) and nitrogen use efficiency. The composition of the animal diet can also greatly influence the digestibility and nitrogen use effiency^1.
^1 The following example illustrates the reason for low nitrogen use efficiencies in pig production: 1 kg of maize containing 15 g N is fed to a pig. At an efficiency of 20%, 3 g N will be found in the pork, and 12 g N in the excreta. For the maize crop N fertilizer was used with a recovery rate of 40%, the average for Europe (Van Duivenbooden, 1995). The losses of 20% of the nitrogen as NH[3] from the excreta, 5% as NH, from fertilizer, 20% of the N in excreta + fertilizer lost by leaching and denitrification, yield a total of 15 g N. Hence, the leaching and gaseous N losses exceed the N found in the meat by a factor of 5. This situation may be common in current European pork production. However, considerable reduction of the environmental effects could be achieved by improving the digestibility of the feed. If the digestibility is improved to, for example, 40%, the N excretion could be brought back to half of that in the above example. If, in addition, the animal waste
is used to fertilize the maize crop, part of the gaseous and leaching losses from synthetic fertilizer use could be avoided.
There are some examples of intensive livestock production where animal wastes are recycled, and crop and animal production integrated. Most pork in China comes from individual home producers. The production is concentrated in relation to land area. The primary constraint is the feed availability. In the face of chronic shortages of animal feed, improvements in yields is a priority, enhancing the value of animal waste as a fertilizer. Accordingly, Chinese pig breeders receive an allotment to purchase feed grains in exchange for manure. This is in marked contrast to the practice in the EU. In addition to the use as fertilizer, slurry and waste from pork production have been employed as a source of biogas from home use, further increasing its value.
Synthetic fertilizers
The projections presented in Chapter 6 indicate that fertilizer in the developing countries will grow more slowly than in the past three decades. This can be explained in part by the relatively high levels of synthetic fertilizer use in many countries, particularly China, the Near East in Asia and North Africa. In the last two regions the fertilizer dressings are close to reaching their ceilings at current crop yields. In addition, the projected growth of total agricultural production is slower than the historical growth, and based on the method presented in Chapter 6, this will automatically lead to a slowing down of the growth of fertilizer use.
Many countries are experiencing local environmental problems related to intensive use of fertilizers. This seemingly contradicts the statistical data presented in Chapter 6. The presentation of average fertilizer use per unit of area for regions is misleading, however. For example, in Africa the average annual fertilizer use may be in the order of 10 kg NPK/ha, but estimates of fertilizer use by crop show that in many countries fertilizers are used by a small group of farmers only (FAO/IFA/IFDC, 1994), with application rates not different from those in developing countries (IFA, 1992). If the scenarios are realistic, this implies that both the percentage of fertilized fields and the fertilizer dressings will increase because application rates will have to increase along with the growth in crop yields.
Fertilizer use in Sub-Saharan Africa is limited to a very small group of farmers. Yield levels are very low compared to other regions. The fact that yields are low, but stable may be explained by an efficient system of organic recycling and animal waste use as fertilizer. As indicated in Chapter 7, the nutrient excretion by animals exceeds synthetic fertilizer use by more than a factor of 10.
Duxbury et al. (1993) estimated that roughly about 25% of nitrogen fertilizer may be lost by leaching. According to the estimates of fertilizer use by crop (FAO/IFA/IFDC, 1994) about half of the fertilizer is allocated to cereals, with rice consuming about one-third. The fertilizer dressings common in high yield rice varieties are much higher than those common for other cereals. Percolation rates in rice fields are generally high (FAO, 1986), and leaching losses for nitrogen may be in the order of 10%. In addition, denitrification and ammonia losses from rice fields are also high (30% and higher), as discussed in Chapter 8. Leaching losses from fertilizer depend on the soil and climatic conditions, as well as fertilizer application rates, and timing and mode of application. With split application the fertilizer recovery may be increased, and leaching losses and all gaseous losses may be reduced when compared to one single dressing.
FAO is currently involved in experiments in rice fields to test coated urea as a slow-release fertilizer, which has been shown to cause a significant reduction in both NH[3] loss and N[2]O emission. Another option is the use of encapsulated calcium carbide, which, by producing acetylene, inhibits nitrification and has been shown to cause a reduction of N[2]O and CH[4] emissions in rice fields (Banerjee and Mosier, 1989). Calcium carbide addition to fertilized fields has also been shown to lead to higher fertilizer recovery rates and higher yields in irrigated wheat, maize, cotton and flooded rice (various references quoted in Mosier et al., in press). Many other nitrification inhibitors are available, but these need to be tested in the field for their effectivity and their environmental side-effects (e.g. on soil life) (Kroeze, 1994).
<section>d</section>
10. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
There is concern that agricultural production in developing countries will cause environmental threats in the future, as production will have to increase to satisfy the growing demand for food. Intensification leads to high inputs of nutrients in the form of mineral fertilizers and animal feed. Important parts of these inputs leak from the system in the form of nutrient leaching to groundwater and gaseous losses to the atmosphere. Pressure on the existing agricultural land may increase by growing demand for productive land and degradation of the existing agricultural land base. Expansion of agriculture generally leads to massive deforestation.
The study presented in this report concentrated on the interactions between livestock production, crop production and land use. The link between livestock and crop production is through the demand for animal feedstuffs. This report presents long-term scenarios describing these interactions and the possible consequences for crop production and animal waste production. As the world population is expected to stabilize in the second half of the twenty-first century, the scenarios must cover a period of 50-100 years to include the impacts of human population numbers.
Not all environmental consequences can be quantitatively evaluated. World agriculture is currently responsible for more than half of the atmospheric increase of nitrous oxide (N[2]O), two thirds of the global ammonia (NH[3]) input into the atmosphere, and 40% of global methane (CH[4]) emissions. These compounds play important roles in atmospheric chemistry, ozone depletion, aerosol formation and greenhouse warming. Therefore, a number of examples were selected to be worked out in detail, including the emission of ammonia (NH[3]) and nitrous oxide (N[2]O) from animal waste and mineral fertilizers, as well as projections of the emission of methane (CH[4]) from ruminating animals. A number of other environmental effects related to livestock and crop production are discussed in a qualitative way.
Starting from the AT2010 results, and using a population and per caput demand scenario, we have made a projection of regional domestic demand and self-sufficiency for groups of food products. Three scenarios of agricultural production have been compiled: one medium scenario based on the trends of AT2010, one more optimistic (high) scenario where all growth rates, yield and productivity ceilings were taken slightly higher, and a more pessimistic (low) scenario. The low scenario results in a development where more land is required for crop production and more animals are needed to meet the growing demand. In the high scenario the opposite occurs, with a smaller cropland area and fewer animals needed to achieve the same production level.
Combination of optimistic or pessimistic assumptions on crop and livestock production within a region, and combining regional optimistic or pessimistic scenarios may not be realistic. However, juxtaposing the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios provides a range of different views, one of the most important requirements of scenarios formulated by Alcamo et al. (1995). The land use scenarios have been tested against provisional and incomplete data on the irrigation potential and regional estimates of the potential for agricultural expansion. The scenarios should be tested in a geographically referenced model on the basis of the FAO-Agro Ecological Zones (AEZ) approach (e.g. the IMAGE model) to analyse the feasibility of scenarios of the resulting land use.
The scenario development described in this report clearly reveals the linkages between the production of livestock and crops. Apart from the arable land used to support livestock production through feed crops, there are other effects, such as on fertilizer use. The main conclusions from the study follow:
· If the assumptions on increasing land productivity and the population scenario for the period 1990-2025 are realistic, the arable land area in the developing countries may stabilize or even decrease to a level close to the current one. In the medium scenario, i.e. with crop and animal production increasing at current trends or trends that have been predicted by FAO, the area in use for crop production will decrease between 2025 and 2050. This is caused by the simultaneous slowing down of the growth in demand for agricultural products - as determined by population and economic development - and continued possibilities for increasing the productivity of the land. This conclusion is in line with Alexandratos (1995). It should be noted that potential effects of land degradation on the land's productivity and deforestation are not considered.
· The scenarios for irrigated land are based on the trend predicted for 1990-2010, with a slowly decreasing growth rate in the course of time. For the developing countries, including China, this resulted in a 50% increase for the medium scenario. For the Near East and North Africa regions the assumptions on total crop production had to be adjusted to avoid projections that exceed the land and irrigation potential. For the other regions the future irrigated areas do not exceed the estimates of the irrigation potential based on information available in the late 1970s, although the result of the medium scenario that about half of the total increase in irrigated land will occur in South Asia may be unrealistic.
· There may be a growing demand for land either grazing areas or arable land producing animal feedstuffs required to support livestock production. Currently, about 16% of the domestic demand for cereals, 20% starchy foods and 3% oilseeds comes from livestock production in the developing countries. In addition, part of the production is exported and used as animal feed in developed countries. According to the medium scenario the feed use of cereals may increase to 30% of the total demand in 2050, and similar increases may occur for other crops.
Major increases in the demand for livestock products may occur in the Near East and North Africa. As there is not enough productive land or water in this region to increase the feed and food production sufficiently to meet the projected growth in the demand, this may entail much larger feed imports (Appendix 22). This is on the assumption that livestock production will increase on the basis of imported feedstuffs.
The extent of permanent grassland is not changing rapidly at present: there has been even a decrease of about 9 million ha per year in the developing countries over the past three decades. One may doubt the reliability of the estimates of grazing areas, but they are consistent with the tendency towards decreasing reliance on grazing and increasing importance of fodder crops and feed concentrates noted by Alexandratos (1995). If this tendency continues in the future, the land demand induced by livestock production will increasingly come from feed and fodder production.
· Intensive livestock production is more nutrient- and energy-efficient than more extensive production. According to the medium scenario animal excretion of N, P, and K will double in the coming 5-6 decades. In the high scenario, with growth towards more intensive production, the waste production is much lower and even tends to decrease in the period after 2025. In the low scenario, with less growth in animal productivity, the waste production grows much faster than in the other two scenarios. However, it should be stressed that more intensive systems with more confined animals tend to lead to concentration of production. Systems may be increasingly based on the production of feedstuffs elsewhere, creating problems of animal waste disposal.
As a result of differential growth of the population of the different livestock species and the increasing efficiency of N usage by the animals, the increase in NH[3] and N[2]O emissions is less than would be expected on the basis of growth of total livestock production. However, in some regions, particularly in Asia, the projected growth of production and intensification is rapid and concentration of ammonia emissions may lead to adverse environmental effects such as soil acidification.
· Intensive crop production is more nutrient-efficient than more extensive crop production. The scenarios of fertilizer use show impressive increases, on the average to NPK levels now prevailing in Europe. At present there are large losses of nitrogen from mineral fertilizers. NH[3] volatilization to the atmosphere amounts to almost 20% of the total mineral N fertilizer use in developing countries. Because the emissions are related mainly to the type of fertilizer, the large N losses can be avoided. If the loss rates are assumed to decrease to current levels in developed countries (5%), the NH[3] emission in developing countries projected for 2025, based on the fertilizer scenario, may be lower than the current emission. According to the medium scenario, N[2]O emission from mineral fertilizers will increase by a factor of 3 in the coming 5-6 decades.
· Further environmental aspects of the growing fertilizer use have not been assessed. However, leaching and contamination of groundwater by fertilizers and agrochemicals may increase, in particular, in intensive rice growing areas where percolation rates and associated nutrient losses are high. Groundwater contamination as observed at present in Europe (RIVM/RIZA, 1991) may also become a problem in developing countries with intensification of agriculture.
· According to the medium scenario, the methane emissions from enteric fermentation will double in the period 1990-2050. Without major changes in the different waste management systems, the CH[4] from animal waste will remain an unimportant global source. However, with increasing intensity and concentration of production, there may be growing disposal problems with more waste storage in lagoons, in liquid form or as slurry; the associated CH[4] emission may then become a major global source.
· The CH[4] emissions from rice fields may stabilize if emission rates per unit area do not change. However, if the emission rates are proportional to total biomass production, the global CH[4] emission from rice paddies may increase further in the coming decades.
By looking into the interactions between the different production systems, the study has helped to lay bare a number of important knowledge gaps and this has resulted in the following recommendations for future studies:
LAND DEGRADATION
There are few studies on the effect of land degradation on productivity in developing countries. This information is crucial for studies such as this one. If yields are negatively influenced by degradation, the crop production scenarios may not be realized, leading to effects on the arable land areas. Further detailed analysis of the results of the Forest Resources Assessment Project may provide answers to questions about the importance of loss of productivity in shifting cultivation as a driving force of deforestation and other land use changes. In addition, in most developing countries in both dry and humid climates many changes in the state of forest resources are caused by pastoral uses of forests and woodlands with no or insufficient management.
LAND USE
Worldwide grazing areas are known from FAO country estimates of permanent pastures. To complement the understanding of land use dynamics worldwide, geographic information on the extent, productivity and the intensity of use of pastures and arable lands is urgently required. It is interesting to study the possible evolution of forest conversion for livestock production. This seems to be a process occurring in many countries, particularly in the Amazon Basin. This information will also help to quantify the contribution of grazing to animal nutrition.
IRRIGATION POTENTIAL
The most recent information on the irrigation potential is the estimate for Africa and for other regions from FAO (1984). In the near future analysis of the most recent data on fresh-water resources will yield revised estimates for all developing countries.
Because additional uncertainties are associated with possible effects of climatic change, it is more difficult to forecast irrigation potentials. River discharges are extremely sensitive to minor changes in annual rainfall and seasonal distribution patterns. In addition, the seasonal water usage depends very much on the cropping patterns, which may change as a result of adaptation to climate change. A possible way to study future irrigation potentials may be through scenario analysis of climate change and adaptation.
ANIMAL NUTRITION
Estimates of the proportions of the various crops used as animal feed are derived indirectly from the supply-utilization accounts. Direct estimates of feed use from the Livestock Environment Study may lead to different estimates of the feed intensity for the various regions. Combination of the direct and indirect approaches may lead to more reliable estimates of feed intensities. Agricultural products that do not enter the market are neither recorded in the FAO statistics, nor in those of many individual countries. Therefore, no data are available on the production of fodder crops or on the extents of land needed to produce them. Information on the use of agricultural residues is very scarce as well. Crop residues may play an important role in animal nutrition, but they may also be burnt. During the burning many polluting compounds are released into the atmosphere. More complete knowledge on the direct use of crop products as animal feed, and the role of fodder's and crop
residues would be a major contribution to understanding the interactions between livestock and crop production.
PLANT NUTRITION
It will be useful to repeat the assessment of fertilizer intensity on the basis of country data. The greatest uncertainty of the model presented in this study is the arbitrarily chosen maximum fertilizer intensity. In addition, the functions used do not describe the accumulation of soil stocks. For example, the required phosphorus inputs may decrease with continued fertilization (Van Duivenbooden, 1995). An alternative to developing scenarios or making projections on fertilizer use is based on yield response functions. Response functions cannot be developed on the basis of total country fertilizer use. Country and crop-specific data on the percentage of the area that is actually fertilized and the fertilizer application rates are needed. A first attempt has been made by FAO/IFA/IFDC (1994), with reported data for 81 countries. Such information should be linked with data on nutrient inputs from animal wastes, crop residues and biological nitrogen fixation, which are important
contributors to plant nutrition. These need to be quantified to better understand the observed changes in the fertilizer intensity and to assess strategies to reduce avoidable losses and increase fertilizer recovery.
ABATEMENT OF POLLUTION
No abatement strategies have been taken into account in this study, except for the assumption that higher animal productivity leads to lower CH[4] production from enteric fermentation and less waste production per unit product. Strategies to avoid environmental pollution effects from fertilizer use include the promotion of slow-release fertilizers that may increase the N-use efficiency and decrease NH[3] volatilization and N[2] emission. Similarly, incorporation of animal manure prevents NH[3] volatilization and improves the N recovery rate.
<section>e</section>
References
Alcamo J. (ed.). 1994. IMAGE 2.0: Integrated Modeling of Global Climate Change. Kluwer Academic Publishers. Dordrecht. 318 p.
Alcamo J., Bouwman A.F., Edmonds J., Grübler A., Morita T. and Sugandy A. 1995. An evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission scenarios. In: Climate Change 1994. Radiative forcing of climate change and an evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission scenarios. J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.). Cambridge University Press, pp. 247-304.
Alexandratos N. (ed.). 1988. World Agriculture: Towards 2000. An FAO Study. Belhaven Press, London and New York University Press, New York.
Alexandratos N. (ed.). 1995. World Agriculture: Towards 2010. An FAO Study. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome / Wiley and Sons, Chichester. 488 pp.
Alt K., Osborn C. and Colaccio D. 1989. Soil erosion: what effect on agricultural productivity. Agricultural Information Bulletin 556. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Washington, D.C.
Asman W.A.H. 1992. Ammonia emission in Europe: updated emission and emission variations. Report 228471008. National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection. Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
Asman W.A.H. and Bouwman A.F. 1995. Global inventory of ammonia emission caused by application of fertilizers. Paper presented at the 6th Workshop of the Global Emission Inventory Activity (GEIA), Gøteborg, Sweden, 1-3 July 1995.
Banerjee N.K. and Mosier A.R. 1989. Coated calcium carbide as a nitrification inhibitor in upland and flooded soils. J. Ind. Soc. Soil Sci. 37:306-313.
Bronson K.F. and Mosier A.R. 1991. Effect of encapsulated calcium carbide on dinitrogen, nitrous oxide, methane and carbon dioxide emissions from flooded rice. Biol. Fert. Soils 11: 116-120.
Bouwman, A.F. Asman W.A.H., Dentener F., Lee, D.S., Van der Hoek K.W. and Olivier J.G.J. 1995. Global inventory of ammonia emissions. In preparation for J. Geophys. Res.
Bouwman A.F., Van der Hoek K.W. and Olivier J.G.J. 1995. Uncertainties in the global source distribution of nitrous oxide. J. Geophys. Res. 100:2785-2800.
Crosson P. 1986. Soil erosion and policy issues. In: Agriculture and the Environment, Resources for the Future. T. Phipps, P. Crosson and K. Price (eds.). Resources for the Future. Washington, D.C.
Dentener F.J. and Crutzen P.J. 1994. A three-dimensional model of the global ammonia cycle. J. Atmos. Chem. 19:331-369.
Duxbury J.M., L.A. Harper and Mosier A.R. 1993. Contributions of agro-ecosystems to global climate change. In: Agricultural Ecosystem Effects on Trace Gases and Global Climate Change. ASA Special Publication 55. D.E. Rolston, J.M. Duxbury, L.A. Harper and A.R. Mosier (eds.). American Society of Agronomy, Crop Science Society of America and Soil Science Society of America, Madison, U.S.A. pp. 1-18.
ECETOC. 1994. Ammonia emissions to air in Western Europe. European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals, Brussels. Technical Report 62.
FAO. 1979. Agriculture: toward 2000. Report C79/24 for FAO conference 20th session November 1979. Food arid Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome
FAO. 1980. Maximizing the efficiency of fertilizer use by grain crops. FAO Fertilizer and Plant Nutrition Bulletin 3. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome (Reprinted in 1988). 30 p.
FAO. 1981. Crop production levels and fertilizer use. FAO Fertilizer and Plant Nutrition Bulletin 2. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 69 p.
FAO. 1984. Land, Food and People. Based on the FAO/UNFPA/IIASA report "Potential population supporting capacities of lands in the developing world". Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
FAO. 1986. Yield response to water. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper 33. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United nations, Rome. 193 pp.
FAO. 1991. Agrostat PC, Computerized Information Series 1/3: Land use. FAO Publications Division. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
FAO. 1993. Agriculture: Towards 2010. FAO Conference report C93/24. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
FAO. 1994. Land degradation in South Asia: its severity, causes and effects upon the people. World Soil Resources Report 78. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
FAO. 1995. Forest Resources Assessment 1990. Global synthesis. FAO Forestry Paper 124, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
FAO (in prep.) Forest Resources Assessment. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United nations, Rome
FAO/IFA/IFDC. 1994. Fertilizer use by crop 2. ESS/MISC/1994/4. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Rome (data on disk IFA, Paris, 1994). 44 p.
Firestone M.K. and E.A. Davidson. 1989. Microbiological basis of NO and N[2]O production and consumption in soil. In: Exchange of Trace Gases Between Terrestrial Ecosystems and the Atmosphere. M.O. Andreae and D.S. Schimel (eds.). Wiley and Sons. New York. pp. 7-21.
Graedel T.E. and P.J. Crutzen. 1993. Atmospheric Change: an Earth System Perspective. W.H. Freeman and Company. New York. 446 pp.
Hogan K.B. 1993. Options for reducing methane emissions internationally. Volume I: Technological options for reducing methane emissions. Report to Congress. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air and Radiation, Washington, D.C.
Houghton J.T., Jenkins G.J. and Ephraums J.J. (eds.). 1990. Climate Change. The IPCC scientific assessment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 364 pp.
Houghton J.T., Callander B.A. and Varney S.K. (eds.). 1992. Climate Change 1992. The supplementary report to the IPCC scientific assessment. University Press, Cambridge. 200 pp.
Houghton J.T., Meira Filho L.G., Bruce J., Hoesung Lee, Callander B.A., Haites E., Harris N. and Maskell K. (eds.). 1995. Climate Change 1994. Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 339 pp.
IFA. 1992. World Fertilizer Use Manual. International Fertilizer Industry Association. Paris. 632 pp.
IFA. 1994. Nitrogen fertilizer statistics 1988/89 to 1992/93. Information and Market Research Service, International Fertilizer Industry Association, Paris.
IFDC. 1992. Fertilizer use statistics and crop yields. International Fertilizer Development Center. Muscle Shoals, AL. 34 pp.
IGBP. 1990. The International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme: a study of global change. The initial core projects. IGBP report No. 12. The International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). Stockholm.
IPCC. 1995. Greenhouse gas inventory reference manual. IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Vol. 3. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the International Energy Agency (IEA) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Bracknell, U.K.
IRRI. 1993. Rice Almanac. International Rice Research Institute, Los Baños, Laguna, Philippines.
Jauregui M.A. and G.E. Sain. 1992. Continuous economic analysis of crop response to fertilizer in on-farm research. CIMMYT Economics paper 3. CIMMYT (International Maize and Wheat Development Center). Mexico. 103 p.
Kreileman G.J.J. and A.F. Bouwman. 1994. Computing land use emissions of greenhouse gases. Water Air Soil Pollut. 76: 231-258.
Kroeze C. 1994. Nitrous oxide. Emission inventory and options for control in the Netherlands. Report No. 773001004. National Institute of Public Health and the Environment. Bilthoven, The Netherlands.
Lins H.F., Shiklomanov I.A. and Stakhiv E.A. 1992. Impacts on hydrology and water resources. In: Climate Change: Science, impacts and policy. Proceedings of the second World Climate Conference. J. Jäger and H.L. Ferguson (eds.). Cambridge University Press, pp. 88-97.
Midwest Plan Service. 1985. Livestock Waste Facilities Handbook. 2nd edition. Midwest Plan Service. IOWA State University. Ames, Iowa 50011.
Mosier A.R., Duxbury J.M., Freney J.R., Heinemeyer O. and Minami K. (in press) Mitigating agricultural emissions of nitrous oxide. Submitted to Climate Change.
Nemec, J. 1983. Role of hydrological forecasts and river flow modelling in rational agricultural water management in the perspective of a climate change - a case study of the rivers upper Nile and Niger. Agricultural Water Management 13:383-392.
Nemec J., and Schaake J. 1982. Sensitivity of water resource systems to climate variation. Hydrol. Sci. J. 27:327-343.
Oldeman L.R., Hakkeling A.T.A. and Sombroek W.G. 1992. World map of the status of Human-Induced Soil Degradation. International Soil Reference and Information Centre (ISRIC). United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). Wageningen/Nairobi. 26 pp. with map in 3 sheets.
Pepper W., Leggett J., Swart R.J., Wasson J., Edmonds J. and Mintzer I. 1992. Emission scenarios for the IPCC, un update. Assumptions, methodology and results. Prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Working Group I.
Prather M., Derwent R., Ehhalt D., Fraser P., Sanhueza E. and Zhou X. 1995. Other gases and atmospheric chemistry. In: Climate Change 1994. Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios. J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.). Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, pp. 73-126.
RIVM / RIZA. 1991. Sustainable use of ground water. Problems and threats in the European Community. Report No. 600025001. National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection / National Institute for Inland Water Management and Waste Water Treatment. Bilthoven / Lelystad. The Netherlands.
Schlesinger W.H. and Hartley A.E. 1992. A global budget for atmospheric NH[3]. Biogeochemistry 15:191-211.
Smaling E. 1994. An Agro-Ecological Framework for Integrated Nutrient Management, with special reference to Kenya. Doctoral thesis. Wageningen Agricultural University. Wageningen. 250 pp.
Sombroek W.G. and Gommes R. (1996) The climate change - agricultural conundrum. In: Global climate change and agricultural production. F. Bazzaz and W.G. Sombroek (eds.) Wiley and Sons, Chichester (in the press).
Tisdale S.L., Nelson W.L., Beaton J.D. and Havlin J.L. 1993. Soil Fertility and Fertilizers. 5th edition. Macmillan Publishing Company. 634 pp.
UN. 1994. World population prospects: The 1994 revision. United Nations Estimates and Projections Service, New York.
UNEP. 1989. Environmental Data Report 1989-90. Prepared for United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) by the GEMS Monitoring and Assessment Research Centre (London) in cooperation with the World Resources Institute (Washington, D.C.) and the U.K. Department of the Environment (London). Basil Blackwell Ltd. Oxford, viii + 547 pp.
Van Duivenbooden N. 1995. Land Use Systems Analysis as a Tool in Land Use Planning With Special Reference to North and West African Agro-Ecosystems. Doctoral thesis. Wageningen Agricultural University. Wageningen.
Zuidema G., Van den Born G.J., Alcamo J. and Kreileman G.J.J. 1994. Simulating changes in global land cover as affected by economic and climatic factors. Water Air Soil Pollut. 76: 163-198.
<section>f</section>
Appendixes
Appendix 1
a. LIST OF THE REGIONS AND COUNTRIES
EAST ASIA
Indonesia
Korea, Rep.
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
CHINA and ASIAN CENTRALLY PLANNED COUNTRIES
China
Kampuchea
Korea, DPR
Laos
Mongolia
Viet Nam
SOUTH ASIA
Bangladesh
India
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
NEAR EAST in ASIA
Afghanistan
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Lebanon
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Turkey
Yemen
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Rep.
Chad
Congo
Cote d'Ivoire
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zaire
Zambia
Zimbabwe
NORTH AFRICA
Algeria
Egypt
Libya
Morocco
Tunisia
LATIN AMERICA and CARIBBEAN
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Rep.
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
b. LIST OF COMMODITIES
Crop groups
Crops
1. Temperate cereals
Wheat
Barley
Other cereals
2. Rice
Rice
3. Maize
Maize
4. Sorghum/millet
Sorghum
Millet
5. Pulses
Pulses
6. Roots/tubers/plantains
Potatoes
Sweet potatoes and yams
Other roots
Cassava
Plantains
7. Vegetable oils and oilseeds
Oil crops
Palm oil
Soybeans
Groundnuts
Sunflower seeds
Sesame seeds
Coconuts
Seed cotton
8. Sugar
Sugar beet
Sugar cane
9. Other crops
Vegetables
Bananas
Citrus fruit
Other fruit
Cocoa
Coffee
Tea
Tobacco
Jute and hard fibres
Rubber
Livestock
Beef, veal and buffalo meat
Mutton, lamb and goat meat
Pork
Poultry meat
Milk and dairy products
Eggs
Appendix 2
POPULATION^1 AND PER CAPUT^2 CONSUMPTION FOR DIFFERENT PRODUCTS FOR NINE DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
^1 Population data (in million inhabitants) presented in this table are from FAO, adapted from UN [1994]. In AT2010 the UN 1990 estimates were used. The estimates of per caput consumption in kg per caput per year for all developing countries with or without China and centrally planned Asian countries differ slightly from the AT2010 forecasts due to differences in these population assumptions.
^2 For per caput consumption the period 1960-2010 FAO data and estimates as presented in Alexandratos (1995) were used. For scenarios covering the period 2010 - 2100 the rates of change proposed by Zuidema et al. (1994) were scaled to the 1990-2010 FAO estimates. After scaling the per caput consumption assumptions were corrected for some regions (see notes 3-7).
DEVELOPING INCLUDING CHINA AND C.P. ASIAN COUNTRIES
DEVELOPING EXCLUDING CHINA C.P. ASIAN COUNTRIES
EAST ASIA^3
^3 East Asia: the per caput consumption for maize and sorghum/millet were assumed to be constant in the period 2010-2100. Milk consumption is assumed to increase to a level of about 10 kg per caput per year, and in addition consumption of milk-derived products is 50 g milk equivalents per day. A similar assumption was made for China ^4.
CHINA AND CENTRALLY PLANNED ASIAN COUNTRIES^4
^4 China and Asian centrally planned countries: the decrease in the consumption of pork between 2010 and 2100 was removed. Milk consumption in a large part of China is very low. The milk consumption of about 2.5 kg milk per caput per year in 1960-1980 is the consumption of a small part of the total population calculated as an average for the whole region. The scenario is based on the assumption that the per caput consumption of milk-derived products will increase to 50 g milk per day, giving a total of close to 20 kg milk per year.
SOUTH ASIA^5
^5 South Asia: the decrease to zero per caput food consumption of sorghum/millet for the period 2010-2100 was changed in a constant level of 7 kg per caput per year. Although vegetarianism currently dominates in South Asia, the increase in the meat consumption to ~ 10 kg meat per caput per year may be low compared to other regions with similar economic development.
NEAR EAST IN ASIA^6
^6 Near East in Asia: the decrease in sheep & goat meat consumption between 2015 and 2100 was removed; consumption of sorghum/millet and of roots/tubers/plantain was assumed constant after 2010.
NORTH AFRICA^7
^7 North Africa: the growth of the consumption of meat, milk and eggs was assumed equal to that of the Near East in Asia region.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA^8
^8 Sub-Saharan Africa: the growth in per caput consumption of all meat products, eggs, milk and sorghum/millet is assumed to be 50% of the growth assumed by Zuidema et al. (1994) for total Africa.
LATIN AMERICA^9
^9 Latin America: the decrease in mutton and goat meat consumption after 2010 is removed; consumption of sorghum/millet is assumed to be constant after 2010.
Appendix 3
A. DOMESTIC DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR BEEF FOR NINE DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. CARCASS WEIGHT (KG/HEAD), OFF TAKE RATE (%) AND POPULATION (MILLION HEAD) OF CATTLE FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. THREE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS ARE PRESENTED FOR EACH PROPERTY
Appendix 4
A. DOMESTIC DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR PORK FOR NINE DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. CARCASS WEIGHT (KG/HEAD), OFF TAKE RATE (%) AND POPULATION (MILLION HEAD) OF PIGS FOR 7 DEVELOPING REGIONS. THREE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS ARE PRESENTED FOR EACH PARAMETER
Appendix 5
A. DOMESTIC DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR MUTTON AND GOAT MEAT FOR NINE DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. CARCASS WEIGHT (KG/HEAD), OFF-TAKE RATE (%) AND POPULATION (MILLION HEAD) OF SHEEP AND GOATS FOR 7 DEVELOPING REGIONS. THREE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS ARE PRESENTED FOR EACH PARAMETER
Appendix 6
A. DOMESTIC DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR POULTRY MEAT FOR NINE DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. CARCASS WEIGHT (KG/HEAD), OFF-TAKE RATE (%) AND POPULATION (MILLION HEAD) OF POULTRY FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. OFF TAKE RATE CALCULATED OVER THE POPULATION GIVEN AS TOTAL POPULATION MINUS THE NUMBER OF LAYING HENS. THREE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS ARE PRESENTED FOR EACH PARAMETER
Appendix 7
A. DOMESTIC DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR EGGS FOR NINE DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. EGG PRODUCTION (KG PER HEAD PER YEAR) AND POPULATION (MILLION HEAD) OF LAYING HENS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. THREE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS ARE PRESENTED FOR EACH PARAMETER
Appendix 8
A. DOMESTIC DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR MILK FOR NINE DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. MILK PRODUCTION (KG PER HEAD PER YEAR) AND POPULATION (MILLION HEAD) OF DAIRY CATTLE FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. THREE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS ARE PRESENTED FOR EACH PARAMETER
C. MILK PRODUCTION (KG PER HEAD) AND POPULATION (MILLION HEAD) OF MILKING SHEEP AND GOATS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. THREE DIFFERENT SCENARIOS ARE PRESENTED FOR EACH PARAMETER
Appendix 9
A. DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR TEMPERATE CEREALS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. YIELD IN TON/HA OF TEMPERATE CEREALS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M = MEDIUM, THE CONTINUATION OF THE AT2010 PREDICTION WITH INTERMEDIATE YIELD CEILINGS; H = HIGH, 1.25 X THE AT2010 ANNUAL GROWTH RATE AND HIGH YIELD CEILINGS; L = LOW, 0.75 X THE ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF AT2010 AND LOW YIELD CEILINGS
C. HARVESTED AREAS IN 1000 HA OF TEMPERATE CEREALS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M, H, L = RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO THE MEDIUM (M), HIGH (H) AND LOW (L) YIELD SCENARIOS, RESPECTIVELY, IN APPENDIX 9B
Appendix 10
A. DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR RICE FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. YIELD IN TON/HA OF RICE FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M = MEDIUM, THE CONTINUATION OF THE AT2010 PREDICTION WITH INTERMEDIATE YIELD CEILINGS; H = HIGH, 1.25 X THE AT2010 ANNUAL GROWTH RATE AND HIGH YIELD CEILINGS; L = LOW, 0.75 X THE ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF AT2010 AND LOW YIELD CEILINGS
C. HARVESTED AREAS IN 1000 HA OF RICE FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M, H, L = RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO THE MEDIUM (M). HIGH (H) AND LOW (L) YIELD SCENARIOS, RESPECTIVELY, IN APPENDIX 10B
Appendix 11
A. DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR MAIZE FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. YIELD IN TON/HA OF MAIZE FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M = MEDIUM, THE CONTINUATION OF THE AT2010 PREDICTION WITH INTERMEDIATE YIELD CEILINGS; H = HIGH, 1.25 X THE AT2010 ANNUAL GROWTH RATE AND HIGH YIELD CEILINGS; L = LOW, 0.75 X THE ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF AT2010 AND LOW YIELD CEILINGS
C. HARVESTED AREAS IN 1000 HA OF MAIZE FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M, H, L = RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO THE MEDIUM (M), HIGH (H) AND LOW (L) YIELD SCENARIOS, RESPECTIVELY, IN APPENDIX 11B
Appendix 12
A. DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR SORGHUM AND MILLET FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. yield in TON/HA OF SORGHUM/MILLET FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M = MEDIUM, THE CONTINUATION OF THE AT2010 PREDICTION WITH INTERMEDIATE YIELD CEILINGS; H = HIGH, 1.25 X THE AT2010 ANNUAL GROWTH RATE AND HIGH YIELD CEILINGS; L = LOW, 0.75 X THE ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF AT2010 AND LOW YIELD CEILINGS
C. HARVESTED AREAS IN 1000 HA OF SORGHUM/MILLET FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M, H, L = RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO THE MEDIUM (M), HIGH (H) AND LOW (L) YIELD SCENARIOS, RESPECTIVELY IN APPENDIX 12B
Appendix 13
A. DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR PULSES FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. YIELD IN TON/HA OF PULSES FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M = MEDIUM, THE CONTINUATION OF THE AT2010 PREDICTION WITH INTERMEDIATE YIELD CEILINGS; H = HIGH, 1.25 X THE AT2010 ANNUAL GROWTH RATE AND HIGH YIELD CEILINGS; L = LOW, 0.75 X THE ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF AT2010 AND LOW YIELD CEILINGS
C. HARVESTED AREAS IN 1000 HA OF PULSES FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M, H, L = RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO THE MEDIUM (M), HIGH (H) AND LOW (L) YIELD SCENARIOS, RESPECTIVELY IN APPENDIX 13B
Appendix 14
A. DEMAND, PRODUCTION AND USE AS FEED (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR), SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE OF DEMAND) AND FEED INTENSITY* FOR ROOT AND TUBER CROPS AND PLANTAINS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS
B. YIELD IN TON/HA OF ROOT AND TUBER CROPS AND PLANTAINS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M = MEDIUM, THE CONTINUATION OF THE AT2010 PREDICTION WITH INTERMEDIATE YIELD CEILINGS; H = HIGH, 1.25 X THE AT2010 ANNUAL GROWTH RATE AND HIGH YIELD CEILINGS; L = LOW, 0.75 X THE ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF AT2010 AND LOW YIELD CEILINGS
C. HARVESTED AREAS IN 1000 HA OF ROOT AND TUBER CROPS AND PLANTAINS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. M, H, L = RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO THE MEDIUM (M), HIGH (H) AND LOW (L) YIELD SCENARIOS, RESPECTIVELY. IN APPENDIX 14B
Appendix 15
DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR OIL CROPS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. DEMAND AND PRODUCTION ARE IN OIL EQUIVALENTS. EXTRACTION IS THE % OIL EXTRACTED FROM THE CROP
Appendix 16
A. DEMAND AND PRODUCTION (IN MILLION TON PER YEAR) AND SELF-SUFFICIENCY RATIOS (IN PERCENTAGE) FOR SUGAR CROPS FOR DEVELOPING REGIONS. DEMAND AND PRODUCTION IN SUGAR EQUIVALENTS, EXTRACTION IS THE % SUGAR EXTRACTED FROM THE CROP BIOMASS
B. YIELD IN TON/HA IN HARVESTED BIOMASS OF SUGAR CROPS FOR DEVELOPING REGIONS. M = MEDIUM, THE CONTINUATION OF THE AT2010 PREDICTION WITH INTERMEDIATE YIELD CEILINGS; H = HIGH, 1.25 X THE AT2010 ANNUAL GROWTH RATE AND HIGH YIELD CEILINGS; L = LOW, 0.75 X THE ANNUAL GROWTH RATE OF AT2010 AND LOW YIELD CEILINGS
C. HARVESTED AREAS IN 1000 HA OF SUGAR CROPS FOR DEVELOPING REGIONS. M, H, L = RESULTS CORRESPONDING TO THE MEDIUM (M), HIGH (H) AND LOW (L) YIELD SCENARIOS, RESPECTIVELY, IN APPENDIX 16B
Appendix 17
TOTAL HARVESTED AREAS FOR THREE SCENARIOS AND TWO VARIANT SCENARIOS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. AREAS IN MILLION HA
Appendix 18
A. TOTAL FERTILIZER USE FOR 1960-1990 AND FERTILIZER REQUIREMENT FOR 2010-2100 FOR THREE SCENARIOS AND SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. TOTAL NPK = TOTAL FERTILIZER USE/REQUIREMENT IN MILLION TON N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O PER YEAR, NPK USE/HA = KG N + P[2]O[5] + K[2]O PER HA PER YEAR
B. ANNUAL GROWTH (%) OF SYNTHETIC FERTILISER USE FOR THE PERIOD 1960-1990. AND OF THE REQUIRED NUTRIENTS FOR CROP PRODUCTION FOR DEVELOPING REGIONS FOR THREE SCENARIOS. M, H, L = MEDIUM. HIGH AND LOW SCENARIOS
Appendix 19
TOTAL IRRIGATED AREAS FOR THREE SCENARIOS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. AREAS IN MILLION HA
EAST ASIA
Medium
High
Low
CHINA AND C.P. ASIAN COUNTRIES^a
Medium
High
Low
SOUTH ASIA
Medium
High
Low
NEAR EAST IN ASIA
medium
High
Low
NORTH AFRICA
Medium
High
Low
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Medium
High
Low
LATIN AMERICA
Medium
High
Low
^a For China base year estimates of yields and harvested areas are not made in AT2010. Therefore the 1990 estimate is presented here.
Appendix 20
CROPPING INTENSITY FOR THREE SCENARIOS FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. CROPPING INTENSITY IN % OF ARABLE AREA
EAST ASIA
Medium
High
Low
CHINA AND C.P. ASIAN COUNTRIES^a
Medium
High
Low
SOUTH ASIA
Medium
High
Low
NEAR EAST IN ASIA
Medium
High
Low
NORTH AFRICA
Medium
High
Low
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Medium
High
Low
LATIN AMERICA
Medium
High
Low
^a For China base year estimates of yields and harvested areas are not made in AT2010. Therefore the 1990 estimate is presented here.
Appendix 21
TOTAL ARABLE AREAS FOR THREE SCENARIOS AND TWO FEED INTENSITY VARIANTS OF THE MEDIUM SCENARIO FOR SEVEN DEVELOPING REGIONS. AREAS IN MILLION HA
1990^a
EAST ASIA
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
CHINA AND C.P. ASIA^b
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
SOUTH ASIA
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
NEAR EAST IN ASIA
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
NORTH AFRICA
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
LATIN AMERICA
Medium
High
Low
Medium, low feed
Medium, high feed
^a The data in parentheses is the adjusted arable area used in AT2010.
^b For China base year estimates of yields and harvested areas are not made in AT2010.
Appendix 22
NET TRADE (IN MILLION TONS PER YEAR) OF DIFFERENT COMMODITY GROUPS FOR DEVELOPING REGIONS. NEGATIVE NUMBERS INDICATE NET IMPORTS, POSITIVE NUMBERS NET EXPORTS. SUGAR IS EXPRESSED IN SUGAR EQUIVALENTS, OIL CROPS IN OIL EQUIVALENTS. CEREALS INCLUDE MILLED RICE
FAO LAND AND WATER BULLETINS
1. Land and water integration and river basin management, 1995 (E)
2. Planning for sustainable use of land resources -Towards a new approach, 1995 (E)
3. Water sector policy review and strategy formulation -A general framework, 1995 (E)
4. Irrigation potential in Africa -A basin approach, 1997(E)
5. Land quality indicators and their use in sustainable agriculture and rural development, 1997 (E)
6. Long-term scenarios of livestock-crop-land use interactions in developing countries, 1997 (E)
Availability: May 1997
Ar - Arabic
C - Chinese
E - English
F - French
P - Portuguese
S - Spanish
Multil - Multilingual
* Out of print
** In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized
FAO Sales Agents or directly from Sales and Marketing Group,
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Interactions among livestock, crops and land use under intensified agricultural production can contribute to increased emission of a number of atmospheric pollutants. This bulletin presents various long-term scenarios of livestock-crop-land use interactions and their possible effects on greenhouse warming as well as the environmental effects related to crop and animal waste production. It describes the possible future magnitude of problems related to the use of animal feedstuffs and inputs of nutrients and will therefore be of interest to fertilizer specialists, agronomists and professionals dealing with rural environmental protection.
