<title>FOREST HARVESTING IN NATURAL FORESTS OF THE CONGO. Forest harvesting in natural forests of the Republic of the Congo </title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
After the UN Conference on the Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, many countries realised the important role of forests for their economic, social and environmental development. The principles for Sustainable Forest Management have been introduced, forest legislation and regulations reformed accordingly, and institutions and forest administrations strengthened, thus allowing the implementation and enforcement of law.
At the same time, the forest products industry received more recognition and responsibility as important partner in the conservation of forest resources through their wise use. Concession holders had to realise that they could not just have the advantages of the forests without also taking care of the long-standing values of this resource. Forest management plans were to be adopted and implemented with the contribution and participation of all stakeholders.
Harvesting for timber is an important step in the management of forests. Through its recently presented Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice, FAO is assisting member countries, institutions and forest companies to improve this activity and lower its impact on soil and the remaining timber stands. In addition, FAO has commissioned case studies to examine at a practical level the effects of the Code. The objective of this particular study was to analyse the various phases of forest operations related to harvesting and to compare the results with the recommendations of the FAO Model Code, testing its applicability and aiming to promote reduced impact forest harvesting systems and techniques.
It was found that harvesting performance can be improved in many respects and, at the same time, harvesting impacts can be reduced. It is hoped that this case study will have a demonstrative effect in the country and in companies interested in introducing sustainable forest management practices.
The collaboration of the Ministry of Water and Forests in Brazzaville, Republic of Congo, together with those responsible in the private company Société Congolaise des Bois (SOCOBOIS) in Dolisie and the staff of the FAO Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch in conducting this case study is highly appreciated.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department, FAO
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report is primarily the result of field and office work by Robert Scharpenberg, FAO, Forestry Department. In the Republic of Congo, work was performed jointly with Albert Essereke and Pierre Ekiama, Ministry of Water and Forests. The enterprise "Société Congolaise des Bois" (SOCOBOIS) was instrumental in initiating this co-operative project. Technical editing was by Donald Nearhood. All photographs are by Robert Scharpenberg.
SYMBOLS
cm Centimetre
ha Hectare
km Kilometre
m Metre
m^2 Square metre
m^3 Cubic metre
min Minute
r Wood recovery
V Volume
ABBREVIATIONS
dbh Diameter at Breast Height (1.30 m)
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN
SOCOBOIS Société Congolaise des Bois
<section>2</section>
SUMMARY
The report presents findings of a case study on forest harvesting in natural forest of the Congo. It is part of a series of case studies published by FAO in the field of forest harvesting. This study is the first one carried out in collaboration with a private industrial enterprise.
The overall objective of the study is to contribute to the development of sustainable forest management in the tropics through the establishment of credible data on forest harvesting practices and harvesting impacts in tropical high forests.
The study aims at the establishment of reliable data on a ground harvesting system in the tropics, using power saws, crawler tractors and wheeled skidders. The study has been carried out in co-operation with a large private contractor operating a concession in the Republic of Congo. The concession consists of approximately 150,000 hectare of closed-canopy, broad-leaved forest located in the Chaillu Massif in southern Congo, at the border to Gabon. The annually harvested area is approximately 15,000 hectare. Annual rainfalls in the region average approximately 1,800 mm.
The case study consists of a study inventory, a harvesting performance study and a harvesting impact assessment. The size of the study area is 150 ha, subdivided into three harvesting compartments of 50 ha each. The terrain is slightly mountainous, with water courses and seasonal swampy areas between elevations. The average harvesting intensity is only 5-6 m^3 net log volume or approximately one tree per hectare. The main commercial species is Okoumé (Aucoumea klaineana), which is a medium density timber and is used for the production of peeled veneer, mainly for plywood. The low concentration of harvestable trees played an important role in harvesting efficiency and site impact.
The study inventory of all trees revealed an average density of 455 trees per hectare greater than 10 cm dbh, of which 3.3% (15 trees) is Okoumé. The proportion of Okoumé is significantly increasing in higher diameter classes. During harvesting operations, all Okoumé trees above 80 cm dbh and showing adequate stem quality were felled and removed.
The wood volume of 96 Okoumé logs from 93 trees harvested in the study area was computed in order to establish losses during felling and bucking. The average net volume of all 96 logs is 5.8 m^3. The total recovery, expressed as net log volume compared to the standing stem volume (including stump, up to the first branch of the crown) is 70%.
Out of the study area, three well defined stands of 59.5 hectare total were selected for the harvesting impact assessment. The total wood volume felled and removed from this area is 345.6 m^3 net log volume, the average skidding distance is 403 meters. Crawler tractors were used for short hauls and for concentrating logs while wheeled skidders were used for the long haul to the landing.
Damages to the residual stand occur during felling, skidtrail construction and log skidding, and were classified for study as: crown damages, bark damages and uprooted or broken trees. Felling damages were recorded on 30 felling sites. The average damage frequency is 17.7 damaged trees per felled tree. Expressed in terms of damages per recovered log volume, this is approximately 3 damaged trees per cubicmetre removed. Damage to residual Okoumé trees is 3.3% with the majority of damaged stems in the higher dbh classes. The total number of felling damages of all trees is 17.3 per hectare.
Skidding damages occur with an average frequency of 11.5 trees per hectare. The proportion of Okoumé damaged by skidding is 2.8%. On average 212 trees are damaged per kilometre skidtrail, of which 5.9 are Okoumé, again concentrated in the higher dbh classes. 46% of all skidding damaged trees were fully or partly uprooted. The average number of skidding damages per felled tree is 11.8. This equals an average of two damaged trees per cubicmetre removed net log volume.
In total, the number of felling and skidding damages per hectare is 29, the number of damages per felled tree is 30 and the number of damages per cubicmetre net log volume removed is 5. The overall damage frequency for Okoumé in all diameter classes is 7.2%, and of those trees 40-80 cm dbh (immediate future crop trees) is 9%. The damage frequency for all species and size classes is 6.3%.
The soil disturbance survey revealed a total disturbed area of 8.4% of the annual coupe area. Felling sites account for 3.8%, skidtrails for 2.7%, secondary roads for 1.0%, primary roads for 0.7% and landings for estimated 0.2%. Other facilities such as worker's camps, workshops and the private airport are not regarded since they are used as the infrastructure of several annual coupes. A more detailed soil survey on felling sites, skidtrails and landings, using two disturbance classes (depending whether mineral soil is slightly or fully exposed), shows that 0.9% of the annual coupe is seriously disturbed by skidtrails and landings and other 5.8% is slightly disturbed by felling sites and skidtrails.
Under the prevailing conditions, the observed forest operation could be called "low impact" by definition due to the low removal rate of approximately one tree per hectare. However, as with any harvest operation gains are possible toward the objective of sustainable forest practice by placing high priority on harvest planning and assessment.
<section>3</section>
INTRODUCTION
Purpose
The importance of the private sector for forest sector development is increasingly recognised by governments and international organisations. Industry is more and more involved not only in timber extraction, but also in medium and long term forest planning and management.
Long term sustainable wood production over a number of cutting cycles requires a well-planned venture that includes minimisation of damages to the remaining stand. In the past, the main concern has been with the performance of the harvesting techniques and the equipment. With growing awareness of the limited resources and the fragility of forest systems, it has become obvious that the knowledge of harvesting impacts on forests is very limited.
The FAO Forest Products Division therefore initiated a series of case studies on harvesting techniques and impacts in tropical forests. Field work for the first study was carried out in February and July 1995 in close collaboration with a private forest industry enterprise and the Ministry of Water and Forests of the Republic of Congo. The work was done jointly by Albert Essereke and Pierre Ekiama with the Ministry of Water and Forests in Brazzaville, Congo and by Robert Scharpenberg with the FAO Forest Products Division in Rome, Italy. This report was prepared by Robert Scharpenberg.
Objectives and scope
The overall objective of this case study is to contribute to the development of sustainable forest management in the tropics through the establishment of credible data on forest harvesting practices and harvesting impacts in tropical high forest.
The study consists of three parts: (a) study inventory, (b) harvesting performance study, and (c) harvesting impact assessment. A wood recovery analysis is included in the harvesting performance study. The harvesting impact assessment includes an evaluation of the road and skidtrail network, a harvesting damage survey, and a simple soil disturbance evaluation. A felling time analysis is also presented.
The case study presents a ground harvesting system as currently applied in closed forests of the Congo. The study was conducted on a 150 ha closed broad-leaved forest that is part of a 140,000 ha concession area located in southern Congo.
<section>4</section>
LOCATION OF THE STUDY
The Republic of Congo lies along the equator, stretching from the Atlantic coastline into central Africa. Two and a half million people inhabit 34 million hectares of land. The climate is tropical with an annual rainfall of about 1,800 mm and a relatively dry and cool season from May to September. Rainfall occurs from October to May although there is often a short dry period in January. According to the FAO Forest Resources Assessment 1990, forest cover of the Congo is 58.2% (19.8 million ha). More than 98% of this is closed forest.
Figure 3-1: Location of the case study
The main economic centre and the only seaport of the country is Pointe Noire. The capital Brazzaville is located about 500 km east of Pointe Noire on the Congo River. Most of the population is found in the south, along the railway line from Brazzaville to Pointe Noire.
The production facilities of the forest industry enterprise SOCOBOIS (Société Congolaise des Bois) are located in Dolisie in the south of the Republic of Congo, about 400 kilometres west of Brazzaville (Figure 3-1). Dolisie is the third largest town of the Congo and capital of the district Niari. In Dolisie, the railway line Brazzaville-Pointe Noire (Atlantic ocean) meets the national road Gabon-Angola. Dolisie was the centre of commercial wood business from 1930 to the 1970s. Due to the decline of forest resources in the vicinity of the city, most industry enterprises have reduced their activities or moved to new locations. Presently SOCOBOIS is the most important industrial enterprise of the district. It employs a total of about 700 workers.
Wood industry
The forest industry enterprise SOCOBOIS (Société Congolaise des Bois) was established in 1964 by a German wood processing company. The main products of SOCOBOIS are peeled and sliced veneer, sawn timber, and plywood. Veneer and sawn timber are produced mainly for European export markets. The total annual roundwood intake is approximately 70,000 m^3, of which an average of 38,000 m^3 is harvested in the concession of the enterprise. The remaining volume is purchased from small forest enterprises.
The production facilities of the enterprise consist of two peeling lines (of which one was replaced in 1995), two slicers, one bandmill, two continuous veneer dryers and various veneer sorting and jointing lines. The factory is directly connected to the railway system.
Production concentrates on peeled veneer for export. Orders are mainly for sized Okoumé veneer. The annual production of SOCOBOIS in export quality is estimated at 2,300 m^3 peeled veneer, 600,000 m^2 sliced veneer, and 350 m^3 sawn timber. Sawn timber and plywood are also produced for the local market. Processing residues are either used in the steam plant or sold to local charcoal producers in the surrounding area.
The most important species for veneer production is Okoumé (Aucoumea klaineana), which is a relatively lightweight, homogenous species highly suitable for peeling. Another species used for veneer production is Limba (Terminalia superba).
Concession
The forest concession of SOCOBOIS is located in the Chaillu massif in the district of Lekoumou/Bambama at the southern border of Gabon (Figure 3-1). The forests are on both sides of the river Ogoué, which is the largest stream in Gabon. The transport distance between the concession area and the factory in Dolisie is approximately 500 km.
The mountains of the Chaillu massif reach elevations of 400-900 m. In the concession the altitude is estimated at 400 m. Because of their limited fertility, soils in the Chaillu mountains are less suitable for permanent agriculture and the land still has a relatively high degree of forest cover.
The current concession consists of 150,000 ha of broad-leaved forest, of which 13,163 ha (9%) grow on permanent or temporary swamps. The concession area is part of the district of Bambama at the southern border of Gabon where approximately 8,000 people live. The majority of the inhabitants depend on non-wood forest products such as game, fish, and edible plants. Small scale trade and new settlements are occurring along the forest roads.
Mainly, because of a lack of appropriate experience, only 14% of the employees of the SOCOBOIS company are residents of the concession area. Other areas of Congo provide the remainder of the workers. Some nearby villages have become suppliers of manioc and other foodstuffs for the company's temporary basecamp. The basecamp consists of a dormitory for the forest workers, a sickroom, a well for drinking water, a workshop, a carpenter shop, a small sawmill, and office buildings.
No previous commercial harves-ting has been done in the concession. The most important species for harvesting is Okoumé. Other potentially commercial species include (trade names): Movingui, Olon, Ayele, Oboto, Moabi, Dibetou, Niove, Padouk, and Douka. The commercial value of a species in this concession is determined by its suitability for veneer or sawn timber production. The quantity of the species mentioned above is too small for a continuous supply to the mill and the quality of the stems is not always suitable.
The reconnaissance report by the Forestry Administration authorises SOCOBOIS to utilise an area of approximately 15,000 ha annually for a period of ten years. This allows the company to harvest up to 45,000 m^3 per year. The current concession will end in 1997.
<section>5</section>
HARVESTING SYSTEM
Harvesting is carried out by chainsaw felling in combination with a ground skidding system and temporary landings. In this chapter, harvesting operations such as planning, road construction, felling, extraction, landing operations, and transportation are introduced.
Planning
Regulations and limitations
Legal guidelines for forest harvesting in the Congo are set in the `Code Forestier' (Law No. 004/74 of 04.01.1974) The code, which deals with administrative, technical, and legal instructions, provides the legal framework for all forest operations and is currently under review. Harvesting in the concession of SOCOBOIS is limited by minimum diameter requirements. The currently applied minimum diameter for Okoumé is 80 cm. After this first harvesting, the concession is to be closed down for a number of years in order to regenerate. Presently, an enterprise does not automatically have the opportunity to re-harvest a concession.
Harvesting is further limited by weather conditions. Although harvesting operations are allowed during all months of the year, production usually declines during the rainy season (October-November and March-April) due to difficult terrain conditions and inaccessibility of parts of the forests. Road construction is normally interrupted during the rainy season.
An economically limiting factor for harvesting is the considerable transport distance of approximately 500 km from the forests to the mill site. The harvest manager has to ensure that only roundwood of suitable quality for the production process is transported to the mill.
Pre-harvest survey
The concession (150,000 ha) is divided into "annual coupes". An annual coupe is the area foreseen for harvesting in a certain year. A pre-harvest survey, called a "prospection" is usually carried out 2 years before harvesting commences. Only harvestable trees (above 80 cm dbh) are counted and the number of harvestable trees per compartment is noted. It is a requirement of the concession license that the results of the prospection must be submitted to the forest authorities, before obtaining a harvest permit.
The case study was carried out in the 1995 coupe "VMA95" (VMA = Volume Maximum Annuel) which consists of 15,550 ha of primary closed forests. The topography of the area is characterised by hills with maximum slopes of 40-50% on short sections. The hills are separated by small creeks and temporary swampy areas (Figure 5-2).
Coupe VMA95 (15,550 ha) is subdivided into 311 harvesting compartments of 50 ha each. The orientation of the grid is south-north and compartments are identified by rows (A-V) and columns (1-117). The boundaries of these compartments are established during the pre-harvest survey by the prospection team. Each compartment is approximately 500 m x 1,000 m. The division into compartments is carried out by a group of 7-8 men with machetes who clear all boundaries of shrubs at the rate of about three km per day.
The most important species being harvested in the concession is Okoumé. Due to their limited occurrence, all other commercial species have relatively little importance. The number of harvestable Okoumé trees in each of the 311 harvesting compartments ranges from less than 10 to more than 100 trees or, from 0.2 to 2.0 harvestable trees per hectare.
According to the pre-harvest survey (prospection), the distribution of harvestable trees in the 1995 coupe is as follows:
Table 4-1: Harvestable trees in annual coupe VMA95 (15,550 ha)
Species
Scientific Name
Total Number of Trees
Trees per ha
Trees per compartment (50 ha)
Okoumé
Movingui
Padouk
Moabi
Dibetou
Douka
Longhi
Niove
Oboto
Bilinga
Bosse
Sapelli
Aucoumea klaineana
Distemonanthus sp.
Pterocarpus soyauxii
Baillonella toxi-sp-erma
Lovoa trichilioi-des
Tieghemella africana
Gambeya africana
Staudtia stipitata
Mammea africana
Nauclea diderric-hii
Guarea sp.
Entandophragma cylindricum
TOTAL
According to this survey, the average density of harvestable trees in coupe VMA95 is less than one tree per hectare.
Maps
The following maps were available for harvest planning and operations:
· the Congolese national geographic map (1:200000);
· the VMA map (1:20000), prepared by the enterprise at the annual coupe level. It shows compartment boundaries, the number of harvestable trees by species and water courses;
· the road planning map (1:50000), prepared by the enterprise at the annual coupe level. It shows the existing and the planned primary and secondary roads, the compartment boundaries, the location of landings, and main water courses.
A major challenge for the enterprise is presented by the lack of topographic maps. Maps at a scale between 1:10000 and 1:50000 showing forest cover, important topographic features, contour lines, stream locations, and protected areas would be of great assistance.
Roads
The objectives of a proper road layout are convenient access to the forest, minimisation of soil erosion, and minimisation of the area required for roads and landings. The basis for the transportation and extraction layout is the VMA map containing the number of harvestable trees in each compartment. An effort to reduce haul distances is made through a road layout oriented toward the compartments with the highest timber density. Since topographic information from public maps is either not available or unreliable, an extensive reconnaissance of the terrain by an experienced forest engineer and an assistant is required. The engineer develops the road layout directly in the forest. The design follows the contour of the land as much as possible and attempts to avoid streams wherever possible. The resulting quality of the road layout is quite good.
Second pre-harvest survey and harvesting plan
Shortly before harvesting commences, a second survey of harvestable trees is done by a second crew consisting of 5-6 men. From this survey the operation plan for the felling crews is developed. The number and location of harvestable trees is reported to the felling operation manager, who decides the deployment of the felling crews.
Road construction
Road planning and construction are done entirely by the enterprise. The machinery available for road construction consists of crawler tractors (Caterpillar D6 and D7), graders (120G/120B), loaders (966C), and trucks (Benz 1113). Road construction is normally accomplished one year in advance of harvesting in order to allow the roads to dry. The following types of facilities exist within the concession area:
· access roads (long term, more than 10 years)
· primary haul roads (long term, during the concession)
· secondary haul roads (short term, up to three years)
· skidding trails (short term, few days up to several months)
· landings (short term, up to several months)
The trees on the road construction site are marked, felled, and deposited alongside the road. Commercial trees are crosscut and integrated into the production process. The bulldozer then starts clearing the site and preparing the roadbed. Simple wooden culverts are constructed for small seasonal water flows crossing the road. They consist of three logs, of which two are the basic layer with the third log on top. Since gravel is not available in the vicinity of the concession, the road base consists of uncompacted natural soil only.
The road carriageway is shaped by graders. The only available surfacing material is laterite. With few exceptions, the maximum road gradient in the concession does not exceed 15%. Although roadside ditches are used on slopes, no cross-drains are applied to the surface to channel water away from the road structure. Surface erosion is a common problem during the rainy season, which results in considerable maintenance effort throughout the year. It is worth mentioning that surface erosion is not limited to steep sections. It also occurs on flat terrain and seems to be related to the absence of a sealed surface rather than to the road gradient. The enterprise also maintains the national road, which is used for long-distance log transport.
The average cleared width for main haul roads in the forest is 40 m, while the carriageway does not exceed 7-10 m. Secondary roads (feeder roads) are cleared to a width of 25 m and the carriageway is not more than 4-7 m. The cleared width for skidtrails usually does not exceed 4 m. This width reflects the minimum space required for skidder and tractor operations.
Harvesting
Felling and topping
Felling is carried out by a felling crew consisting of three persons: chainsaw operator, helper, and guide. The chainsaw operator wears personal safety equipment (safety boots and helmet) to protect himself against falling branches and other hazards. The guide identifies harvestable trees and determines the next felling site. He also provides information on the location and number of felled trees to the skidding crew. Before felling begins, the helper cleans the bark along the sawkerf to remove sand and stony material.
The chainsaw (Stihl 070) is usually equipped with a 75 or 90 cm blade. Felling does not utilise special techniques such as sidenotches, undercuts, or auxiliary equipment such as wedges to determine felling direction. The operator starts in the middle of the stem cutting the entire cross section. He continues with the buttresses, starting with the one in the assumed felling direction. However, due to difficult felling conditions the resulting, actual direction of fall is highly variable. The falling tree, climbers, and re-springing neighbouring trees pulled down by climbers, make felling dangerous and stressful for the crew.
After felling, topping of the crown is done by the helper. Some timber breakage occurs due to inappropriate cutting technique, especially if difficult "hangers" must be cut. For legal reasons and work control, the logs and the stump are numbered and recorded with species and the number of the harvesting compartment.
The average performance of a felling crew is 20 trees per day; the range is from 13 to 30 trees. Normally the enterprise operates three felling crews simultaneously, which amounts to an average of 60 felled trees per day. Under the assumption of an average volume per tree of 6 m^3, this is a total of 360 m^3 prepared per day (net log volume).
Extraction
Skidding is carried out by two Caterpillar D6H tractors and two Caterpillar 528 wheel skidders that are used in various combinations. Usually a crawler tractor works together with a wheel skidder. In this combination, the extraction of the logs is carried out in two phases. The crawler tractor first pulls the logs directly, or by winch, from the felling site to the skidtrail. This produces a concentration of logs at the skidtrail. During the second phase, the wheel skidder is used for long distance skidding; pulling the logs to the landing. All tractors and skidders are equipped with front blades and single cable drums. Only wheel skidders have rear fenders. Cables are used only for short inhaul distances, up to 15 m.
Skidtrail planning is done by a guide during operations. The guide locates felled trees and marks a way for the skidder. The most important criterion for the layout of skidtrails is avoiding water and swampy areas. Wet soil bearing capacity is not sufficient for heavy equipment and negative environmental impacts may occur.
Skidtrails can be established by both the D6H and the 528. The skidders avoid trees above 30-40 cm dbh during skidtrail construction. The skidder usually drives within 5-20 m of the felled tree and pulls the log with the winch. The maximum skidding load is usually two logs (gross volume 12-15 m^3. Logs are skidded either to a road or to a temporary landing.
Landing operations
Landing operations consist of crosscutting, sorting, measuring, and loading logs. Since harvesting in the concession is concentrated mainly on a single species and one product (Okoumé logs in veneer quality), landing operations are rather simple and standardised.
Depending on the distance between the harvesting site and the next road, landings are established either directly alongside the road or at temporary sites in the forest. A secondary road must then connect the temporary landing site with the main road.
The logs are crosscut upon arrival at the landing. Defects at the log-ends that occur due to felling and skidding and possible decay are removed. Then all logs are measured, re-numbered and marked with paint for later recognition. Measurement is carried out by one person using a meter stick and volume tables. Volume calculation is based on the mean log diameter. Spraying of fungicides and insecticides is also done to protect against damage.
Logs are crosscut to a maximum possible transport length of 15 m. Usually the log lengths range from 8 to 15 m. Logs are loaded onto trucks by a wheeled front-end loader. Further log length optimisation takes place after transportation to the log yard of the mill.
Transport
Transportation of logs to the mill in Dolisie is by heavy duty trucks (Benz 1928/2628, payload up to 60 metric tons). A truck-trailer backpack system is used. This allows the truck to carry the trailer while travelling unloaded. The transport distance is approximately 500 km. Approximately 100 km of this distance is tarmac surface and the rest either bare soil or a layer of laterite. The national road used for the long distance transport crosses the Chaillu mountains; gradients of 12-15 % occur on short sections. Due to the relatively long transport distance, difficult road conditions, and the high risk of accidents, the enterprise puts emphasis on proper road maintenance throughout the year. This reduces repair cost for trucks and increases reliability of operations.
<section>6</section>
METHODOLOGY
The case study consists of three major parts: (a) study inventory, (b) harvesting performance study, and (c) harvesting impact assessment. A wood recovery analysis is included in the harvesting performance study. The harvesting impact assessment includes an evaluation of the road and skidtrail network, a harvesting damage survey, and a simple soil disturbance evaluation.
Study area
The study was carried out in annual coupe VMA95, which consists of 15,550 ha of broad-leaved forest. This forest is part of a 150,000 ha concession of the forest industry enterprise SOCOBOIS. Out of annual coupe VMA95, a 150 ha study area was selected. The study area consists of three adjacent harvest compartments H108, H109, and H110 (Figure 5-1 Layout). These compartments are located close to the main haul road.
Figure 5-1: Study area layout
For the harvesting impact assessment an additional zoning of the study area was necessary. Three zones were selected with all three clearly delimited by natural terrain features such as creeks or valleys and by the main road. Zone boundaries are at the centre of water courses. The establishment of these limited zones allows clear attribution of harvesting impacts to harvesting performance data. The total area of Zones A, B, and C is 59.5 hectares excluding the main road. All of the area is forested (Figure 5-2).
Figure 5-2: Study area layout and selected Zones A, B, C
Study inventory
The study inventory is required for the assessment of harvesting impacts. The inventory was carried out on a total sample area of 20 ha. Ten rectangular strips (Figure 5-3, Strip A-K) of 1,000 x 20 m each were established from south to north by compass. The demarcation of strips was achieved by clearing corridors of shrubs and setting stakes every 50 m. The width of the strips was then measured every 50 m in order to obtain the true inventory area. All trees equal to or greater than 10 cm dbh were recorded, Okoumé separately from all others. The results were grouped in 10 cm classes. The diameter was determined by measuring the girth at breast height; where buttresses occurred, the girth was taken 20 cm above the buttress.
Figure 5-3: Inventory layout
Since the main road crosses the study area, only 9 of the 10 strips were actually forested. The actually stocked and inventoried area is 17.7 hectares.
Volumes
Volume equations were not available for the forests in the study region. In order to obtain an indicator for the standing volume of Okoumé, an equation found in the literature was used. The total stem volume (including bark) equation that has been developed for Okoumé in Gabon^1 is:
Inventory of harvestable trees
In the study area all harvestable trees, that is trees equal to or greater than 80 cm dbh, were located and marked on a sketch map. Felling directions were also recorded.
Harvesting performance
Wood production
The number of felled trees and the harvested volume in Zones A, B, and C were recorded. The reported volume (under bark) is net after crosscutting. The volume harvested in the three zones is needed for the efficiency assessment of skidtrails and roads.
Wood recovery
A large part of the wood value lost in wood production occurs in the felling, topping and crosscutting operations. This loss is from breakage, unused stumps, and top end cut-offs. In order to estimate wood losses during harvesting, 96 Okoumé logs from 93 trees were traced through all processing steps from the stump to the landing.
The bulk of the loss occurs during felling. Usually the chainsaw operator fells the tree at breast height in order to reduce the area to be cut. A considerable portion of the buttress is left in the ground. In addition to the stump loss, parts of the upper stem may be removed together with the crown for quality reasons. Figure 5-4 illustrates stump (V[S1]) and top end (V[T1]) volume losses during felling. The resulting log (Figure 5-4, detail C) is skidded to the landing.
At the landing a second crosscutting of the log takes place. The remaining buttress (V[S2]) and defects at the top end of the log (V[T2]) are removed. The resulting log is loaded and transported to the mill (Figure 5-4, detail D).
The calculation of the wood recovery is subdivided into the recovery at the felling operation (r[1]) and the total recovery (r[2]) after the second crosscutting. Both recoveries refer to the stem volume of the standing tree (V[0]).
The stem volume of the standing tree, which was taken as 100%, was calculated from the ground (including stump) to the first branch (Figure 5-4, Detail A). Only Okoumé trees were considered since this is the major species used. Many methods for calculating volumes and recovery rates exist. This variation must be considered when comparing recovery data.
The formula used for the calculation of the stem volume (V[0]) is:
The stem volume includes the volume of the stump. Since an exact measurement of the stump diameter is nearly impossible, a cylindrical continuation of the stem from breast height downwards to the ground was assumed. Only the average stem taper, which was obtained from logs, was taken into account. Thus the total stem volume is slightly underestimated. The diameters actually measured are the small and large end diameters of the log after crosscutting at the landing (d[21], d[22]). All other diameters are derived from these by applying log taper and length. The measured lengths are: the stem length (l[0]), the height of the stump (l[S1]), the remaining buttress (l[S2]), and the log lengths (l[1] and l[2]).
The mean diameter d[0] of the standing tree used in the formula above for the calculation of V[0] was obtained from measuring the large and small end diameter of the logs. The minimum diameter was usually taken on both ends since in the peeling process only the cylindrical portion of the log can be used for the production of veneer. All diameters given are under bark.
The first wood recovery rate is calculated for the log volume after felling and topping (Figure 5-4, Detail C). V[1] is the stem volume reduced by the stump volume and other stem cut-offs. During topping, the crown is removed and frequently parts of the upper stem, which can be of relatively poor quality or shape. The recovery (r[1] ) after felling and topping is:
The volume V[1] after felling and topping is calculated as follows (see Figure 5-4):
The second wood recovery rate is computed for the net log volume after crosscutting takes place at the landing. V[2] is the log volume after all remaining buttresses are removed and some centimetres are cut-off at the small end of the log to remove stones and defects. The log is then transported to the mill. The recovery rate (r[2]) after felling, skidding, and crosscutting is:
Figure 5-4: Measurements used for recovery calculations
The volume V[2] after crosscutting at the landing is calculated as follows:
Figure 5-4 illustrates the stem and log volumes used for calculating wood recoveries on different harvesting levels. Detail A shows the standing tree, B the tree after felling, C the log after removing the crown (topping) and D the log after removing the remaining buttresses and crosscutting the top end.
The log taper was computed for all 96 logs. The log taper is expressed in terms of diameter decrease per meter of log length (cm/m).
Felling time
The objective of the felling time study was to characterise the current felling efficiency and to derive recommendations for improvement of felling organisation and technique.
The felling cycle for 60 trees was measured by subdividing the task into the following work elements:
· productive worktime
· reconnaissance
· felling preparation
· felling
· topping
· supportive worktime
· maintenance work
Rest time was not included. The survey was carried out by cumulative timing. The length of each work element was measured by noting the beginning time and the end time. Later the time difference between the two times was computed. The advantage of this method is its easy application and reduced error frequency. Times are easily recorded without stopping and starting the watch. A problem of the time survey was that several work elements were carried out at the same time, e.g., preparatory work for the next tree was carried out by the helper or the guide while the operator was still cutting a tree. The number of observations for each work element varies and is given in Table 6-9. The complete set of work elements was observed at 40 of the 60 trees. The felling work element was observed for all 60 trees.
Harvesting impacts
Skidtrails, roads, and landings
The objectives of the road and skidtrail survey are to provide information on the proportion of forest area used for infrastructure, to derive characteristic relationships between required infrastructure and wood production, and to describe the efficiency of the road network. Since all road construction was not finished by July 1995, planned road data had to be used for the assessment. The total planned length and the average clearing width (taken from existing roads) were recorded separately for primary and secondary roads.
Skidtrails were surveyed in Zones A, B, and C; the study areas selected for the impact assessment. The average width, the maximum gradient, and the length of skidtrails were measured. Skidding distances were determined for all three zones.
The total area used for landings is calculated by using planning data. An average landing size of 80 x 100 m was assumed.
Damages
Damages to the residual stand attributed to harvesting operations occur along skidtrails and on felling sites. They can be subdivided into bark damage, crown damage, and uprooting. It is assumed that partly uprooted trees do not fully recover and their commercial value is substantially reduced. For the assessment, they are considered to be out of production. Bark and crown damages may lead to decay and insect attacks. A bark damage was recorded when sapwood was visible. It is assumed that crown damage will considerably reduce the vitality of the tree. A tree was recorded as crown damaged if significant crown breakage could be observed. Because the assessment could be done only from the ground, a more detailed classification of crown damage was not possible.
Skidding damages
The dbh was recorded for damaged trees on both sides of skidtrails. If Okoumé trees (future crop trees) were damaged, this was noted. Along skidtrails only bark damage and uprooted trees occur, thus the assessment was limited to those two damage types.
Felling damages
On felling sites all three types of damages occur. The number of damaged trees was noted together with the type of damage and the dbh. Damaged Okoumé trees were recorded separately.
Felling site size
During field work several attempts were made to measure the size of felling gaps that were created during the fall of the trees. It turned out that the borders of the gaps could not be determined with the accuracy necessary to justify the relatively time consuming and dangerous work of measuring gaps. Furthermore, the shape of the gaps was extremely irregular. However, it was observed that virtually all trees within a felling gap were damaged. This observation was used to compute the approximate size of each felling gap. The number and size of damaged trees were recorded in the felling damage assessment.
For the calculation of the gap size based on the number of damaged trees the assumption was made that the trees on the felling site were standing at a density equal to those on the study inventory plots. The approximate size of each gap could then be computed by dividing the number of damaged trees by the average tree density obtained during the harvesting inventory.
The average tree density used in this calculation was 455 trees (_ 10 cm dbh) per hectare
Soil disturbance
Soil disturbance occurs on felling sites, skidtrails, landings, and roads. It was assessed by visual evaluation of the surface condition. Two soil disturbance classes were established:
· Class I no or slightly exposed mineral soil
· Class II mineral soil partly or fully exposed, in combination with gullying
Soil compaction was not estimated. It can be assumed that on felling sites only very little soil compaction occurs, while it is serious on skidtrails and landings depending on the machine type and the frequency of tractor movement.
1 Projet de Développement Forestier du Gabon; in: "L'Okoumé", published by Centre Technique Forestier Tropical 1990
<section>7</section>
RESULTS
In this chapter results are presented for the study inventory (6.1), the harvesting performance study (6.2), and the harvesting impact assessment (6.3). The study methodology is described in Chapter 5.
Study inventory
The harvesting impact assessment is based on a comparison of the unharvested forest with the harvested forest. A study inventory was carried out prior to harvesting in order to obtain information on the natural forest. Tree species and breast height diameter were recorded. From the literature only very little information is currently available on the forests of the study region and their growth.
The inventory layout consisted of 10 strips 20 x 1,000 m each. Only 9 of the 10 strips were actually forested. All trees greater than or equal to 10 cm dbh were measured and recorded. The inventoried area is 11.8% of the total study area. An attempt was made to classify all trees into categories of commercial, potentially commercial, and others. The identification of commercial species other than Okoumé was not possible with the desired degree of certainty, especially for younger trees. Thus only two classes were used: Okoumé and other species.
Table 6-1 and Table 6-2 give the inventory results by strip. The mean diameter of all inventoried trees was 23.8 cm; the maximum diameter found was 133.7 cm.
Table 6-1: Number of trees by inventory strip for all trees 10 cm dbh
Inventory Strip
A
B
C
D
E
G
H
I
K
Total/
Average
Trees 10 cm
Area
ha
Trees 10 cm/ha
trees/ha
Table 6-2: Mean, median and maximum dbh
for all trees 10 cm dbh
Inventory Strip
A
B
C
D
E
G
H
I
K
All strips
Mean
cm
Median
cm
Maximum
cm
Standard dev.
cm
Table 6-3 shows results by diameter class for the study area. The total stocked area of the ten inventory strips was 17.7 ha; the total number of inventoried trees was 8,062. The average density of all trees greater than or equal to 10 cm diameter was 455 per hectare, 15.3 or 3.3% Okoumé. The basal area for all trees 10+ cm was 28.6 m^2 per hectare, for Okoumé it was 2.7 m^2. The inventory found 46.9 trees per hectare between 40 and 80 cm diameter breast height, 5.1 Okoumé trees/ha (10.8 %). The total number of trees above 80 cm dbh was 3.9 per hectare, 1.2 Okoumé trees/ha (30.1%). The proportion of Okoumé increases considerably in diameter classes above 50 cm.
Table 6-3: Number of trees 10 cm dbh per hectare
Diam. class
(cm)
Okoumé
Others
Total
Okoumé
_ Okoumé
_ All Species
Total
Figure 6-1 and Figure 6-2 provide a graphical presentation for the diameter distribution of all species and Okoumé.
Figure 6-3 shows the occurrence of Okoumé in each diameter class. Its proportion increases with increasing diameters. Since the database for this graph is very limited, the results, especially the shares of 48% and 57% in the 90 and 110 cm classes should be taken as indicative only. During harvesting operations almost all Okoumé trees above 80 cm dbh are removed; future harvestable trees are those with diameters between 40 and 80 cm dbh. The share of Okoumé in these classes is considerably lower than in higher diameter classes. If future crop trees become damaged during harvesting operations, the future harvestable volume and thus the commercial value of the forest would be further reduced.
Figure 6-1: Diameter distribution for all trees 10 cm dbh
Figure 6-2: Diameter distribution for Okoumé 10 cm dbh
Figure 6-3: Portion of Okoumé in each diameter class
Volume
Volume equations for forests in South-Congo are not available. Only a rough estimate of the volume of Okoumé trees could be attempted using an equation that was developed for Okoumé in Gabon (Chapter 5, Methodology). Results are presented in Table 6-4.
Table 6-4: Estimated volume for Okoumé
Diam. class
(cm)
Okoumé
Assumed mean diameter
(cm)
Estimated
stem volume
(m^3/ha)
(m^3/ha)
TOTAL
The equation used for table Table 6-4 is:
Based on the formula, the total standing volume of Okoumé trees equal or greater than 10 cm dbh would be 37.5 m^3 per hectare. The harvestable volume ( 80 cm dbh) based on this equation would be 11.8 m^3 per hectare. This volume is gross including defect stems, harvesting losses and stem cut-offs.
Figure 6-4 presents graphically the results of the computation based on the volume equation. The same source reports an average annual diameter increment of 0.8 cm for adult and dominant Okoumé trees. Young Okoumé can show a diameter increment up to 1.5 cm per year.
Figure 6-4: Standing Okoumé volume; estimate based on volume equation
Harvestable trees
All harvestable trees in the study area (111 Okoumé, 5 others) were located and marked on a sketch map. The total number of harvestable trees was 116 with an average of 0.8 trees per hectare. This is less than the expected density of harvestable Okoumé trees derived from the average density in the study inventory, which was 1.2 harvestable Okoumé per hectare. The reason for the difference between the study inventory and the commercial harvest survey is mainly due to the assessment of the stem quality of trees above 80 cm dbh. Not all trees recorded in the inventory are harvestable because of decay and poor stem shape. Some of the difference might be caused by the fact that during the commercial inventory some trees with diameters close to the minimum diameter may have been overlooked or left out in order to ensure that the required minimum diameter limit was met.
Harvesting Performance
Wood production
A detailed wood production record was created for Zones A, B, and C of the study area (Figure 5-2). The total area of Zones A-C amounts to 59.5 ha and 58 trees were harvested in this area. The average harvesting density was 1.0 trees per hectare or 5.8 m^3. The total wood volume extracted from Zones A-C was 345.6 m^3. All volumes are net log volumes after skidding and crosscutting. Table 6-5 provides summarised results of the wood production survey.
Table 6-5: Wood production in Zones A-C of the study area
Subject
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Total/
Average
Total area
ha
Trees felled
Trees/ha
trees/ha
Volume harvested*
m^3
Volume harvested/ha*
m^3/ha
* net volume after crosscutting
Wood recovery
The wood volume of 96 Okoumé logs from 93 trees harvested in the study area was computed in order to compare it with losses during felling and crosscutting. Felling losses are due to improper felling and topping techniques and to the removal of second quality stem wood. Further losses occur during crosscutting at the landing site. The net volume (under bark after crosscutting) of all 96 logs was 560.1 m^3. This is an average of 5.8 m^3 per log. The maximum log volume was 11.10 m^3; the minimum was 2.63 m^3 (Table 6-6).
Table 6-6: Net wood volume under bark for 96 Okoumé veneer logs
Mean
Standard
deviation
Variation
coefficient
Median
Minimum
Maximum
m^3
m^3
m^3
m^3
m^3
The diameter at breast height (dbh) and the log taper for the 96 logs were also recorded. The mean breast height diameter was 91 cm, with a standard deviation of 9.5 cm. The mean log taper was 1.5 cm/m. The dbh was taken at the landing 20 cm above the buttress; the log taper was obtained from crosscut logs and therefore does not include buttresses. Table 6-7 provides results for the average breast height diameter and the log taper.
Table 6-7: Diameter at breast height (dbh) and log taper for 96 Okoumé logs
Mean
Standard
deviation
Median
DBH
cm
Log taper
cm/m
Wood recovery was computed for the felled trees and the crosscut logs (Chapter 4, Methodology and Figure 5-4). The stem volume of the standing tree, including the stump and up to the first branch, is taken as 100%. For comparison of the results with recoveries obtained in other studies, it should be born in mind that the assumptions for the 100% volume differ widely. Figure 6-9 shows results for the volume recovery computations. The average recovery is 86% after felling and 70% after crosscutting, which is done after skidding to the landing. Both recoveries refer to the same stem volume for the standing tree.
The extremely low minimum recovery of 39% in one case (Table 6-8) is due to decay in the centre of the stem. However, the relatively low standard deviation of all measurements indicates a relatively good estimate of the mean volume. This is confirmed by a small difference between mean and median. In the evaluation of the results it should be recognised that neither uprooted nor damaged trees are included in the losses. Only the felled tree volume and losses directly related to topping and crosscutting were computed. The total wood loss is thus considerably higher.
Table 6-8: Recovery after felling (r[1 ]) and after crosscutting (r[2 ])
Operation level
Mean
Standard deviation
Median
Minimum
Maximum
Felling
r[1 ]
Crosscutting
r[2 ]
Felling time
Table 6-9 shows the results of the time analysis for felling 60 Okoumé trees. The dbh for all felled trees was equal to or greater than 80 cm.
Usually the cutting time depends on the dbh of the tree and the tree volume. Often other factors, such as saw chain condition or the occurrence of climbers, affect cutting time. The relatively low variance coefficient for this element could be an indicator of the consistency of the chainsaw operator. Time for topping is much more influenced by site difficulties (steep terrain, swamps, brush) and blocked chainsaws, occurring when cutting difficult "hangers" or "bridges".
Table 6-9: Mean felling time for 60 Okoumé trees
Recon-naissance
Prepa-ration
Cutting (felling)
Topping (crosscutting)
Mainte-nance
Complete Observations
No of observations
Mean time
Min.
% of total time
Variation coefficient
Figure 6-5 illustrates the average time required for each work element during the felling cycle, expressed in percentage of the total mean felling time. Fifty percent of the felling cycle time was used for maintenance, reconnaissance, and preparation of trees, the other fifty percent for cutting (felling and crosscutting). The time required for the reconnaissance could probably be reduced by using harvesting maps during all operation phases.
Figure 6-5: Time distribution for felling 60 Okoumé trees
Harvesting impacts
The harvesting impact assessment carried out in the case study focuses on impacts that can be measured or estimated using simple instruments and methods. The harvesting impacts surveyed during the field work are: road length and area, felling and skidding damages, and soil disturbance.
Skidtrails, roads and landings
Forestry operations require access to the site, which is usually provided by roads and skidtrails. These elements are the most troublesome features of timber harvesting operations especially with regard to soil erosion and landscape protection. Nevertheless, with traditional ground skidding systems as used in most countries, roads and skidtrails are essential for timber extraction and forest management.
The road and skidtrail survey carried out in the case study concentrates on three aspects of roads: the total length of the road system, the surface area covered by roads, and the degree of soil disturbance from these elements. Quantitative estimates were made for all three of these characteristics.
Skidtrails
Figure 6-6, Figure 6-7, and Figure 6-8 show the skidtrail layout for Zones A-C. Zone A (Figure 6-6) is characterised by a medium harvestable timber density of 5.9 m^3 per hectare and relatively easy terrain conditions. The average skidtrail length per cubic metre was only 8.5 m. Three trees were felled in the swampy area. The maximum skidtrail gradient was 30%. All trees were skidded to a temporary landing at the main road. The average skidding distance was 331 m.
Figure 6-6: Skidtrail layout Zone A
Zone B is characterised by the highest timber density in the study area (8.1 m^3 per hectare) and easy terrain conditions. Thirty trees were felled in this zone. The measured skidtrail length was 11.1 m per cubic metre. The maximum skidtrail gradient was 30%. The skidtrail layout follows the location of harvestable trees except for one unnecessary connection (Figure 6-7). Logs were skidded directly to the main road. The average skidding distance was 393 m.
Figure 6-7: Skidtrail layout Zone B
Zone C is characterised by the lowest timber density and the most difficult terrain conditions of all three zones. The average harvested volume per hectare was only 2.7 m^3. Eight trees were felled in this zone. The skidtrail length was 24.4 m per cubic metre. The maximum skidtrail gradient was 35%. Relatively long sections of the skidtrails were in steep terrain. The logs were skidded directly to the main road. The average skidding distance was 486 m per log.
Figure 6-8: Skidtrail layout Zone C
Table 6-10 displays the skidtrail lengths and the area covered by skidtrails. The average width of skidtrails in the study area was 4 m. Results of the soil disturbance survey are presented in Table 6-13.
Table 6-10: Results of the skidtrail survey in Zones A - C
Subject
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Total/
Average
Length
m
Area
ha
Proportion of area
Density
m/ha
m/tree
m/m^3 (*)
Maximum gradient
* net volume after crosscutting
The average skidtrail density for Zones A-C was 68.4 m/ha, 70.2 m/tree, and 11.8 m/m^3. The maximum skidtrail gradient was 35%. With the difficult terrain conditions, this maximum gradient seems reasonable. The terrain slopes are up to 50%. Assuming an average skidtrail width of 4 m, the area covered by skidtrails is approximately 2.7% of the total area of Zones A-C. Table 6-11 displays skidtrail gradient classes obtained from surveying Zones A-C. All skidding was uphill except for one short skidtrail segment in Zone C.
Table 6-11: Skidtrail gradients in Zones A, B, C
Gradient class
Proportion of
total length
Table 6-12 presents results of the skidding distance survey for each Zone. The average skidding distance is 403 m, with a maximum and minimum of 705 m and 20 m respectively. The extremely low minimum of 20 m is because the main road crosses the study area. The highest average skidding distance occurs in Zone C, which has the lowest timber density. Skidding distance is highly influenced by the location of the harvesting site in relation to the roads and landings. The results of the skidding distance survey are indicative but represent only a small part of the concession.
Table 6-12: Skidding distances in Zones A, B, C
Subject
Zone A
Zone B
Zone C
Total/
Average
Average
m
Maximum
m
Minimum
m
Roads
The area actually cleared for roads is presented in Table 6-13. Results from the skidtrail survey and landing estimates are included in the table in order to provide a complete picture of the road network. Since road construction had not been finished in VMA95 by July 1995, planned road information had to be used for the evaluation of primary and secondary roads.
Landings
The total number and size of landings were estimated using the road planning map. For VMA95 (15,550 ha), a total of 34 temporary landings were planned. The average size of a landing is estimated at 80x100 m. The total estimated surface covered by landings is thus 27 ha. This results in an average of 17.5 m^2 of landing area per hectare of forest area (Table 6-13) for VMA95.
Table 6-13: Evaluation of the road and landing network for VMA95
Total
length
km
Density
m/ha
Average clearing width
m
Area
m^2/ha
Proportion of total area
Primary road
Secondary road
Skidtrail
Landing
80x100
TOTAL
The road and skidtrail network, including landings, covers approximately 4.6% of the total surface of VMA95 (15,550 ha), approximately 715 ha.
Damages
Felling damages
Felling damages can be crown damage, bark damage, and uprooted or broken trees. Felling damages were recorded on 30 felling sites. The total number of damaged trees on the 30 felling sites was 531; an average of 17.7 damaged trees per felled tree. The range is from 6 to 31. The average computed size of a felling site was 389 m^2 and a range from 132 m^2 to 703 m^2. For this calculation the average tree density derived from the inventory was used.
Twenty of the 531 damaged trees were Okoumé trees. This equals 3.8% and closely represents the average proportion of Okoumé trees, 3.3%. The proportion of damaged Okoumé trees increases in larger diameter classes. The mean diameter of all damaged trees was 26.5 cm while the mean for damaged Okoumé trees is 46.2 cm. The diameter range of damaged trees was from 10.2 to 103.1 cm. Table 6-14 provides summarised results for the felling damage assessment.
Table 6-14: Felling damage on 30 felling sites
Diameter
class
(cm)
All
species
Okoumé
Uprooted/
broken
Crown
damage
Bark
damage
TOTAL
The sum of uprooted/broken trees, crown damage, and bark damage in Table 6-14 is slightly more than 100%. This is because trees were sometimes counted twice since they had both crown and bark damage. However, uprooted or broken trees were counted only once. These uprooted or broken trees have been considered as unproductive and without any future commercial value.
Figure 6-9: Diameter distribution for 531 felling damages
The average number of felling damages per felled tree is used to compute the average felling damages per hectare of harvested area. A total of 58 trees were felled in Zones A, B, and C. The average number of felling damages per felled tree was 17.7. Thus the total computed number of felling damages in Zones A, B, and C amounts to 1026. This equals 17.3 felling damages per hectare. The number of felling damages per cubic metre of harvested volume (net after crosscutting) is 3.0.
Skidding damages
Damages to the residual stand along skidtrails occur during skidtrail construction and log skidding. The total length of skidtrail surveyed in Zones A, B, and C was 3,214 m. The total number of damaged trees was 683 (19 Okoumé, 2.8 %). This proportion corresponds reasonably well with the total percentage of Okoumé, which is 3.3%. The average number of skidding damages was 11.5 trees per hectare, which equals an average rate of 2.5% of all trees. The number of trees damaged per kilometre of skidtrail was 212 (5.9 Okoumé). Forty-six per cent of all damaged trees were fully or partly uprooted; the others were bark damaged. The share of damaged Okoumé trees increases significantly in larger diameter classes. The mean diameter of all skidding damaged trees is 22 cm, with a range from 10.2 cm to 89.1 cm. Uprooted trees occur almost exclusively in diameter classes below 40 cm dbh. Usually the skidder operator attempts to avoid big trees in order to speed-up construction work. Table
6-15 shows summarised results of the skidding damage assessment.
Table 6-15: Skidding damage along 3,214 m skidtrails
Diameter
class
(cm)
Total
damaged
trees
Okoumé
Bark damage
Uprooted
TOTAL
Figure 6-10 presents the diameter distribution for skidding damages. This distribution is commensurate with the diameter distribution for all species obtained in the harvesting inventory.
Figure 6-10: Diameter distribution for 683 skidding damages
Summary of skidding and felling damages
The following summaries compare the felling and skidding results. Table 6-16 presents totals for the felling and the skidding damage assessment. The results are based on a relatively small sample area of 58 hectares located in Zones A, B, and C, whereas the total area for harvesting in 1995 was approximately 15,550 hectares. However, the average harvested volume in Zones A, B, and C is 5.8 m^3/ha after crosscutting, which is about the average volume per hectare harvested by the enterprise during the past 30 years.
Table 6-16: Summary of felling and skidding damage assessment
Number of damaged trees...
Felling
Skidding
Total
...per hectare harvested area
/ha
...per felled tree
/tree
...per m^3 harvested volume*
/m^3
* net volume after crosscutting
Damages to Okoumé trees are considered separately since Okoumé is currently the most important commercial species. During skidding, 19 Okoumé trees, distributed on 59.5 ha, were damaged. Of these Okoumé trees, eight were under 40 cm dbh, eight were from 40 to 80 cm dbh, and three were above 80 cm. The felling survey revealed a total of 20 damaged Okoumé trees on 30 felling sites. Of these Okoumé trees, nine were under 40 cm dbh, nine were in the class 40-80 cm dbh, and two were above 80 cm.
The most important group from a commercial point of view is the 40-80 cm class, since most of these trees will become harvestable in the next 30-40 years. Table 6-17 gives summarised results of Okoumé tree damage. For easier reference, data are presented on a per-hectare basis and as a percentage of the total average occurrence of Okoumé trees.
Table 6-17: Damage frequency for Okoumé
Diameter class
Average Okoumé trees per hectare
Average damaged Okoumé trees per hectare
% Damaged Okoumé trees
cm
Felling
Skidding
Total
TOTAL
Figure 6-11: Portion of damaged Okoumé trees in three diameter groups
Approximately 9% of the future Okoumé trees in the diameter class 40-80 cm were damaged during harvesting operations. Although this percentage seems relatively low, it is not only a damage to the biological potential but also to the future commercial value of the forest. The overall damage frequency to Okoumé in all diameter classes is 7.3%; the damage frequency for all species is 6.3%.
Soil disturbance
Regarding the three zones under investigation, the total soil disturbance was: Zone A 5.5%, Zone B 9.2%, and Zone C 4.5%. The highest disturbance value occurs in Zone B, where harvesting intensity is much higher compared to Zone A and Zone C.
In order to estimate the total disturbed surface in VMA95, the areas covered by roads, skidtrails, felling sites, and landings were summed. Table 6-18 shows that approximately 8.4% or 1,306 ha of the total forest area (15,550 ha) was disturbed by these elements. Facilities such as the worker camps, workshops, and the private airport are not included in this estimate. These facilities are used for the exploitation of several annual coupes. Their contribution to the `surface consumption' is therefore relatively low.
Table 6-18: Total disturbed area, in % of the total VMA95 area (15,550 ha)
Disturbance Type
Disturbed area
Primary road
Secondary road
Skidtrail
Felling site
Landing
TOTAL
<section>8</section>
DISCUSSION
The purpose of this case study, which is the first one of the kind in the Congo, is to document first hand information on time and work studies as well as information provided by technical and management staff of the enterprise SOCOBOIS. The technical aspects of harvesting and their related impacts were the main consideration. These included felling, skidding, transport, wood recovery rates, and damage associated with felling and skidding. The case study was carried out in the southern forests of the Congo. In this region, harvesting concentrates almost exclusively on Okoumé (Aucoumea klaineana), an important species for veneer production for the plywood industry. The average harvesting intensity in the study area is approx. 6 m^3 net log volume per hectare.
The discussion of results follows the structure of the recently published FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice.^2 This approach was chosen because the model code provides a comprehensive guideline and logical structure through all aspects of forest harvesting. Although it is intended to serve as a general model for the preparation of national or regional codes of practice, it raises many important issues that are also discussed at the forest management and forest industry levels. For this discussion the model code thus serves as a checklist and the basis for proposals to reduce harvesting impacts.
Two assumptions underlie the FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. The first is that (for forest utilisation), "it is first necessary to establish which practices are technically and economically feasible." Once this is known, the legal and political feasibility must be verified. The second basic assumption is, "that it is possible to conduct forest harvesting operations in ways that are consistent with the needs of sustainability. A necessary condition for the sustainable management of forests is that utilisation, and the activities associated with it, must not compromise the potential of forests to regenerate properly and to provide products and services that are essential for the well-being of both current and future generations. ... If it were easy, the majority of forest harvesting crews around the world would already be doing it, and they are not."^3
Concerning harvesting, the model code identifies four ingredients as essential if forests are to be managed on a sustainable basis:
· comprehensive harvest planning
· effective implementation and control of harvesting operations
· thorough harvesting assessment and communication of results to the planning team and to harvesting personnel
· development of a competent and properly motivated workforce
It should be borne in mind that, because of time constraints during the field work for this study, only some of the technical aspects of forest harvesting could be studied and analysed. Social and economic aspects of the harvesting activities were not observed in detail. Furthermore, the assessment of technical data is not easy, since standards for "good forest harvesting practices" have not yet been completely developed for most forest types and in particular for the forests under discussion. The variability of forest types and harvesting systems makes any comparison with results from other studies difficult. In the following chapter the results of the study will be discussed and important elements and facts observed during field work will be highlighted. The investigations related to the environmental impact of harvesting operations have been limited to impacts caused by felling and skidding on the residual forest.
Harvest Planning
Harvesting plans are a key element of well-managed forests. The forest harvesting plan should answer the questions: what has to be done, why should it be done, where, when, by whom, and how. Harvest plans are of two types: strategic (long-term) and tactical (short-term). Both, the strategic plan and the tactical plan should consist of a written plan and of maps of different levels of detail.
The strategic harvest plan should show or describe the following features: forest cover types, important topographic features, infrastructure, protection areas, harvesting areas, problem areas, areas of non-forest land use, communities, the planned silvicultural treatment, the types of harvesting equipment to be used, an estimate of the timber volume to be removed from each coupe, a time schedule, and descriptions of any potential problems. Detailed information concerning the forest transportation system (including road design parameters for different conditions, locations, and specifications for major stream crossings, etc.) should be part of the written strategic plan.
The short-term tactical planning normally provides details of the operations that are to be carried out in the annual coupe. Its elements should include a topographic survey, a map accurately showing the boundaries of the harvest area, the location of water courses, swamps or other areas of wet soils, gullies, rock outcrops, protected areas, and other important features. On the topographic map, special management areas in which cutting is either to be prohibited or restricted should be delineated. A detailed transportation and extraction system for the operation should be laid out. The topographical map should have the trees to be harvested marked on it. Such a plan will include the haul roads, the landings, and the skidtrails. Special attention, because of environmental problems, should be paid to streams and stream crossings. If specific harvesting equipment is to be used, this should be determined.
The only public map currently available for strategic planning in the study area is the National Geographic Map at a scale of 1:200000. This does not provide sufficient details for harvest planning. For example, the location and size of many important topographic features is inadequate. Streams, swampy areas, protected areas, and locations of communities are inadequately mapped. Accurate forest cover maps and forest inventory data are not available. Two years before harvesting starts a commercial survey (prospection) is carried out by the enterprise. Knowledge of the species composition of the forests, of their regeneration potential, and of growth dynamics of the harvested forests is limited.
For tactical planning the company prepared sketch maps for each harvest unit, consisting of important terrain features, locations of harvestable trees, and the road layout. The purpose of these maps is to reduce unnecessary movements and time loss. These maps reduce the number of surveys, increase their efficiency, and improve the information flow among survey, felling, and skidding crews. Since the sketch maps have to be done entirely by the survey crew, their accuracy is limited. Any improvement or the preparation of printed maps would be time consuming and requires experience, surveying skills, and a thorough understanding of the requirements of proper harvest planning.
Harvest planning in the study area seems to be relatively well developed in relation to the tools that are available to the enterprise and the operating crews. Roads, for instance, are located at ridge-tops, following the harvesting units with the highest timber density and avoiding streams wherever possible.
The successful intro-duction of refined har-vest-ing practices requires a broad accep-tance of methods and good motivation of the workforce. While moti-vation may be achieved through financial incen-tives, the acceptance of new methods can only be achieved through a thorough understanding of what has to be done and why it is needed.
Other undertakings where harvest planning would certainly improve current practices are: organisation of operations, reduction of harvesting damage to future tree crops, road engineering in connection with improved drainage systems, harvesting assessment (success management), and follow-up actions.
Road Engineering
According to the FAO Model Code, the objective of forest road engineering is the provision of convenient, low cost access to the forest and simultaneously minimise soil erosion, stream sedimentation, and area consumption. Protected areas of any kind are to be avoided.
Improved road engineering practices can be realised through the employment of experienced forest engineers in road surveying, construction, and supervision. The results of improved practices include minimising the total length of roads, reduction of the total area of disturbance associated with roads, avoidance of areas of wet soils and high erosion risk, minimising excavation and embankment, adequate compaction and stability of the road base, construction of adequate road drainage, revegetation of roadside slopes, avoidance of water and buffer strips, and road gradients kept near optimal. Reduced impact roading includes the utilisation of stable ridge-top locations for roads, the proper maintenance of all construction elements, and the closing of secondary roads. Ripping the surface of closed roads may be required for better revegetation.
In general, forest concessionaires in the Congo have to establish all infrastructure needed for the wood harvest of the forests, including roads, bridges, workshops, and workers' camps. Where required for long-distance transport, the enterprise must also maintain national roads. Without these additional efforts, long-distance transport would become very unreliable and slow.
Road density and area consumption are parameters typically used for the evaluation of the forest road network. For both, characteristic relationships were established (see Table 6-13). The average density of primary roads is 1.8 m/ha and for secondary roads it is 3.9 m/ha, thus 5.7 m/ha in total. The total surface consumption due to harvesting amounts to 8.4 % of the total annual coupe (see Table 6-18). The largest share of the area consumption is for felling (45%), which has relatively low impact on the soil. The next highest portion is for skid trails (32%), which can have a significant negative impact on soils and forest regeneration due to the associated soil compaction. Primary and secondary roads account for 20% of the area consumption, and landings for approximately 3% (estimated).
Some reduction in the area used for roads could be realised with a further optimisation of the road and skid trail layout (see Extraction). However, due to the transport requirements of a ground skidding system the total length of roads required for operations in a particular forest area is typically much higher than that required for other extraction techniques such as cable or airborne systems. Some significant reduction in the area used for roads might be possible through a reduced clearing width for primary roads. Currently the average clearing width is 40 m. The arguments that this clearing width is required to allow roads to dry out and to avoid road blockage by falling trees should be examined. Good tropical forest management practices suggest that harvesting operations should preferably be carried out in the dry season in order to avoid unnecessary erosion, water pollution, and damage to roads. Doing this would permit a much narrower clearing width in connection with
forest roads than is currently applied.
Some erosion observed during the field work is due to inadequate road drainage. On steep road sections, cross-drains and roadside ditches would drain water quickly from the road structure and thus increase the durability of the road surface. Any investment in a well-designed road has to be seen in relation to the utilisation period of the road and its annual maintenance costs. A relatively short utilisation period, followed by a shut-down of the road, might justify relatively low road standards. But this mainly economic evaluation must also consider environmental aspects to avoid erosion and sedimentation damage.
Cutting
All cutting should be done so as to ensure the safety of workers, minimise the damage to the residual stand, soils, and streams. The merchantable wood volume and the value of logs should be maximised.
In the case study three aspects of felling were examined: damages to the residual stand, total wood recovery, and felling time.
Felling canopy gaps account for 45% of the total surface area disturbance of the entire forest harvesting phase; this equals 3.8% of the annual coupe. Harvestable trees usually belong to the dominant tree layer and therefore have considerable height and crown size. Felled trees often create relatively large canopy gaps and substantial breakage of other trees. The area considered disturbed includes both the felled and broken trees. The occurrence of climbers, which tend to bridge between tree crowns, results in the breakage of neighbouring trees during cutting operations. This climber induced damage also increases the total affected area.
Felling damages were recorded on 30 felling sites. Damages associated with felling can be crown damages, bark damages, and uprooted or broken trees. On average, 17.7 other trees were damaged while felling one harvestable tree. More significant is the felling damage frequency in terms of the wood volume extracted. The number of felling damages per 1000 m^3 extracted net volume is approximately 3000. Since very few climbers originate on the harvested tree, there seems to be very little opportunity for improvements through cutting climbers in advance.
Through the application of directional felling techniques, damage to future crop trees might be avoidable in a number of instances. However, only limited positive effects on the overall damage statistics can be expected from this. Certainly, directional felling would greatly increase the safety of the felling crews. Future crop trees would be better protected by marking them permanently, for instance with flagging or paint.
A significant improvement of the current practices with regard to erosion and water pollution could be achieved by avoiding felling across water courses or swampy zones. This might be difficult on steep slopes, but in most cases trees could be felled laterally or along the contour line. This would not only protect water, but also minimise timber breakage that sometimes occurs due to difficult crosscutting in situations on irregular terrain.
Wood recovery during felling was 86%. In other words, 86% of the standing stem volume was skidded to the landing site. The losses of 14% are in stump wood, which remains standing in the forest, and in stem wood that does not meet quality requirements. The possibilities for increasing felling recovery are very limited, since the stump wood is currently not considered useable. The entire stem up to the first branch could be considered for use since the curved parts of a log can often be used in the peeling process. Some unnecessary timber breakage could be reduced by the introduction of improved crosscutting techniques. Further recovery improvements might be possible through better co-ordination and feedback between mill requirements and the quality and dimensions of harvested logs. The usability of the logs in a tree should always be determined before felling starts. Through a better selection of harvestable trees, volume losses could be reduced and the economics of the
transport operation would improve. Environmental impacts and harvesting economics certainly improve when trees that are largely unusable because of decay or quality are left standing in the forest. This would require a detailed assessment of the forest-mill supply chain, clear quality standards, and a permanent feedback and communication link between the mill and the forest.
The felling analysis shows the average distribution of time required for each work element (Table 6-9). It is obvious that a relatively high proportion of time (24%) is required for reconnaissance and an equally high proportion is required for topping. It can be expected that by using a tree location map the time required for reconnaissance would decline considerably. The reconnaissance time recorded in the study is the walking and searching time for the chainsaw operator only; the time that the guide needs for locating a harvestable tree is much higher. Time is lost because of misunderstandings between the survey crew and the felling crew. Improved crosscutting techniques would certainly reduce the time required for the topping operation along with reduced timber breakage. All efficiency improvements will result in higher productivity only if adequate motivation is offered and continuous supervision is secured. Without incentives and supervision the success of training
efforts or organisational improvements is questionable.
Extraction
The objectives of well-organised and properly supervised extraction are: optimisation of extraction productivity, safety, minimisation of soil compaction and disturbance, minimisation of water pollution, minimisation of damage to residual trees (especially to future crop trees) and the delivery of all logs prepared by the felling crew.
To achieve these objectives the FAO Model Code provides some technical recommendations on the selection of skidders and crawler tractors. Although for log extraction the use of wheel skidders is preferred compared to crawler tractors, the FAO Model Code states that: "In spite of their problems, however, it must be recognised that in many forest areas, particularly in steep terrain with large trees and high precipitation rates, crawler tractors are likely to remain the most common type of skidding machine used."
An estimated 2.5% of all trees in the study area were damaged during skidding operations. This equals 11.5 trees per hectare or 212 trees per kilometre of skid trail. The average proportion of Okoumé damaged was 2.8%. In terms of wood volume extracted, this is approximately 2000 damaged trees per 1000 m^3 extracted. Of all damaged trees, 46% were fully or partly uprooted. The total skidding damage frequency of 2.5% of all trees is directly related to the proportion of the total disturbed area attributed to skid trails, 2.7% (Table 6-10).
The number of skidding damages is strongly related to the area required for skid trails. The total number and the proportion of skidding damages could therefore be significantly reduced by a reduction of the skid trail area. The skid trail layout (Figure 6-6) shows an almost optimised connection of harvestable trees. Slight reductions of skid trail area seem to be possible through increasing winching distances and through intensified planning. This would replace the current zigzag layout by a trail system with a planned main skid trail. However, the potential for a significant reduction of the total area used for skid trails seems to be very limited (see harvest planning). The skid trail layout used by the crews in the study area results from crew experience in harvesting this type of forest, the low harvesting intensity, and the relatively easy terrain conditions.
A further possibility for reducing the number of damages associated with extraction is a critical evaluation of harvesting conditions with regard to extraction efficiency. In some cases it might be better to omit individual commercial trees that require long skidding distances or that are difficult to harvest because of steep terrain or difficult soil conditions. In this way careful harvest planning could improve the damage statistics as well as the economics of harvesting. The average skidding distance is shown for each zone of the study area in Table 6-12. The highest average skidding distance occurred in Zone C. In terms of metres per tree the skidding distance was twice as high as in the other compartments and the relative damage frequency increased accordingly. Harvest planning should determine whether harvesting isolated trees is economically justified when all technical and environmental aspects are considered.
Many damages to residual future crop trees are due to excessive blading in the skid trails. The largest share of blading damage is attributed to crawler tractors, but wheel skidders can also cause considerable damage if operator awareness or motivation is low and the trees to be protected are not clearly marked.
In some forests, the disturbance associated with forest harvesting is considered a beneficial contribution to accelerated and improved regeneration. Preliminary observations during field work did not confirm this hypothesis, at least with regard to the regeneration of Okoumé. Very few Okoumé seedlings and saplings could be found along skid trails and on felling sites in an area harvested three years ago. In the closed canopy, the density of Okoumé seedlings and saplings seems to decrease with increasing distance from the Okoumé seed tree. It is recommended that the current harvesting practices with regard to silvicultural requirements of Okoumé and its regeneration be evaluated. The long tradition of harvesting in the Congo would certainly facilitate this work, since it gives the opportunity to conduct research in areas harvested by the same enterprise up to 30 years ago.
Landing Operations
The objectives of a well designed, properly constructed, and efficiently operated landing are: safety, cost minimisation, landing size minimisation, water protection, and proper transfer of logs to the transport system.
The design and location of the landings should be established during harvest planning, preferably in connection with road planning. Temporary roadside storage is recommended where feasible. Landings should be as small as possible, taking into account the need to unhook logs from extraction equipment, sort logs, store them temporarily, and provide for the loading of trucks.
In the annual coupe, two types of landings were found: roadside landings where a relatively small log volume was skidded directly to the main road and forest landings where larger log volumes had to be collected, sorted, and loaded. In the study area only roadside landings were used. The overall area consumption for landings is relatively low; thus the potential for area reduction is limited. The total area for landings is estimated at 0.2% of annual coupe VMA95. With regard to the requirements of environmentally sound forest harvesting, the size and organisation of landings should be evaluated since landings are potential sources of water pollutants like fuel, oil, and soil sediments.
The volume recovery of the truck-ready log in relation to the standing tree volume was computed. The average log recovery was 70% of total stem, 14% stem wood loss occurred during felling operations and 16% lost occurred during crosscutting at the landing site (Table 6-8). It should be noted that the full volume (100%) used in this study is the stem volume, including the stump, up to the first branch of the crown (see Chapter 4.3).
Other studies use different assumptions for the 100% volume. A recently published ITTO study on forest recovery in four tropical countries calculates the recovery based on all parts of the tree above the ground including crown wood to a top diameter of 20 cm. In the ITTO study, the average log recovery is 53.5%. Stem cut-offs, buttresses, and the stump account for 20.2% and crown wood for 26.3% of the losses in the ITTO study. If crown wood is extracted from the calculation, the proportion extracted as logs amounts to 72.3% of the stem volume, which is comparable to the 70% total recovery obtained in this case study. If a similar proportion of crown wood is assumed for the Okoumé trees in the Congo, the recovery result would be estimated at 50% based on the total tree volume to a 20 cm top diameter.
If an increased use of stem cut-offs and stump wood is not feasible for processing, the utilisation of residues for purposes other than industrial roundwood should be considered in order to improve the overall utilisation rate of the felled trees. The problems with the utilisation of residues in this particular concession are: the remote location, the size of the residues, the associated transport problem, and the work required to break down the residues to a usable size (for fuelwood, etc.).
Harvesting Assessment
According to the FAO Model Code a harvesting assessment is a systematic check undertaken to determine the degree to which a harvesting operation has followed the harvesting plan and met its stated objectives while complying with established standards of practice.
Critical items that should be examined during the harvesting assessment are: directional felling and crosscutting techniques; compliance of harvesting operations with harvesting plan; timber volume losses; location and condition of roads, landings, and skid trails; soil disturbance; and effects of the operation on the residual forest.
Currently a systematic harvesting assessment is not part of harvesting operations in the concession area. However, together with a harvest plan, the harvest assessment is an essential requirement and pre-requisite of sustainable forest management. Based on a written plan, harvesting operations should be effectively controlled if timber production, work quality, and environmental impacts are of concern.
The development and adjustment of current practices to meet the challenges of sustainable forest management include several steps. The adjustment process could start with a thorough review of the current organisation of harvesting, including important factors that have a significant impact on operation efficiency and work quality. These factors include work planning and organisation, internal communication, incentives, motivation, and training of staff.
A second step is the identification of potential areas for the improvement of harvesting costs. Strategies for improvement have to be developed and discussed with regard to their priority, technical feasibility, and economic efficiency. The establishment of more thorough harvesting plans, in combination with a permanent harvesting assessment, should be considered.
Harvest planning would benefit from more detailed large-scale maps, which include contour lines, water courses, swamps, etc. If the company is to prepare these maps, the additional costs accruing from the planning and surveying effort have to be compared with the possible economic and environmental benefits of an improved op-eration. The combination of low harvesting intensity with a low value species certainly complicates the introduction of improved planning tools. Not only harvesting tech-niques, but silviculture, taxes, fees, working conditions, and wages are of concern. Quali-fied government authorities should be involved in the discus-sion at each stage.
2 Dykstra, Dennis P. and Heinrich, Rudolf. 1996. FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. Rome, FAO. 85 pp.
3 Ibid. p. 5-6.
<section>9</section>
CONCLUSIONS
Under the prevailing conditions, the observed forest operation could by definition be called "low impact" because of the extraction rate of approximately one tree per hectare. However, as with any harvesting operation, gains are possible toward the objective of sustainable forest practices. By comparing measured results of the operation to the recommendations outlined in the FAO Model Code of Forest Practices, the following conclusions are observed:
· Within the confines of the study, the techniques, equipment, and labour applied to the operation were adequate for the harvesting condition.
· Harvest planning in the study area is relatively well developed in relation to the resources available. The lack of accurate topographic maps, as a basis for planning the operation, undoubtedly resulted in increased road building costs, extraction costs, soils damage, and residual stand tree damage.
· The engineering task represented enormous effort in this remote area given seasonal constraints. The road system provided adequate access to the area and utilised natural terrain features to protect water systems. The total land area dedicated to road and landing construction was low for operations of this size but relatively high as measured on a per tree basis. Observations indicate that cross drainage systems on some steep road sections could be improved to increase soil stability.
· Cutting crews were hampered primarily by the difficulty of locating harvestable trees and opening skid trails to the felling sites. There is some indication that crew safety, damage to the useable stem, residual stand damage, and extraction production rates would benefit from improved directional felling techniques.
· Extraction efficiency, using crawler tractors for minor excavation and short hauls and wheeled skidders for long hauls, proved adequate to the task. Excessive blading in the skid trails and short winching distances may have resulted in greater exposure of mineral soil and increased residual stand damage. The same practices may improve conditions for worker safety.
· Landing sites covered a minimum area due to the long skidding range of the wheeled skidders. These high impact areas should be monitored frequently for sedimentation and pollution. Efficient utilisation of each tree was limited more by a narrow range of product classes than by the skill of landing workers.
· Transport of logs from the landing to mill site was not considered part of the study but the relative efficiency of this operation is necessarily considered in harvest planning and assessment. A large share of total harvesting cost is attributed to truck transportation and can put pressure on all phases of the forest operation.
· Harvest assessment is clearly a high priority for this concession. An evaluation and adjustment process should be comprehensive and be conducted at regular intervals on a concession of this size. Ideally, an assessment should be a measurement of the success of the harvest plan. Even in the absence of comprehensive planning, an assessment can identify problems of waste, inefficiency, and unnecessary impact to the resources.
The impact of this type of forest management lies not only in the visible effects caused by operating heavy equipment. Unseen impacts with high potential for positive or negative effects lie in the growth dynamics of the future forests on this site. Commercial and non-commercial species in the residual stand and regeneration will be affected. Future operations should concentrate on developing management plans that ensure the sustainability of forest products and the total forest system.
The final decision on a commitment to Sustainable Forest Management in this region will be driven mainly by economic considerations. Additional operating costs will have to be balanced with higher returns, reduced costs elsewhere, higher efficiency, or be financed by the public. The government will have to decide the relative benefits of Sustainable Forest Management, such as higher commercial and biological value of the forest, when balanced against the immediate needs of the government, the private enterprise and the people of the region.
<title>FOREST HARVESTING IN NATURAL FORESTS OF THE CONGO. Forest harvesting in natural forests of the Republic of the Congo </title>
PHOTOGRAPHS
Photo 1:
Aerial photograph of a closed broadleaf forest. The umbrella trees (Musanga cecropioides) indicate a forest road
Photo 2:
Centring an Okoumé log for peeling at the mill
Photo 3:
Log prepared for peeling
Photo 4:
Worker houses under construction
Photo 5:
Water supply in worker's camp
Photo 6:
Felling an Okoumé tree
Photo 7:
Harvest inventory, using diameter tape
Photo 8:
Wheel skidder with an Okoumé log
Photo 9:
An exceptionally large climber
Photo 10:
Roadside landing
Photo 11:
Felled Okoumé tree
Photo 12:
Roadside landing with Okoumé logs and cut-offs
Photo 13:
Removal of the crown and some stem wood after felling an Okoumé tree (topping)
Photo 14:
Damaged log, split by improper crosscutting
Photo 15:
Typical skidtrail, slight to medium exposure of mineral soil
Photo 16:
Log truck on the main haul road
Photo 17:
A partly uprooted Okoumé tree damaged during skidding
Photo 18:
Log truck (backpack system)
Photo 19:
Skidding damage of a young Okoumé tree
Photo 20:
Decay in Okoumé logs
Photo 21:
Crosscutting an Okoumé log at landing to remove remaining buttress
Photo 22:
National road Congo-Gabon
Photo 23:
Application of a steel ring to the large end of a log to avoid splitting as the log dries
