<title>FAO's emergency activities</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
In recent years, the frequency and severity of devastating droughts, floods and storms have increased dramatically. So too have the destruction and human suffering caused by civil strife and the collapse into chaos of countries shattered by what have come to be called "complex emergencies". The world witnessed 16 major disasters in the 1960s, 29 in the 1970s and 70 in the 1980s - and the upward trend continues.
Experts do not fully understand or agree as to why the pace of disasters and emergencies has accelerated. Some scientists and computer models point to climate change and global warming as the explanation for why storms have become harsher and rainfall more erratic, while others cite cycles in climatic conditions rather than any fundamental change. Social and political factors frequently mentioned include the end of the cold war, increasing population pressures that force people to live in more marginal and dangerous places, endemic mismanagement and corruption and many others.
Whatever the cause, the toll in human lives and suffering has been immeasurable. Deaths over the course of the current decade number in the hundreds of thousands. Some 50 million people have been uprooted from their homes to live precariously as displaced persons or refugees within or beyond the borders of their native lands. On a world scale, the economic damage of disasters is estimated at US$93 000 million for the 1980s and will almost certainly exceed US$100 000 million for this decade.
w6020e01.jpg (29024 bytes)
Director-General Jacques Diouf (centre forefront), leading an advance team of the special mission to Rwanda,
gets information on the refugee situation first hand at a refugee centre in the province of Gisenyi
Emergencies are placing increasingly heavy claims on all citizens of the world, as the share of international aid given for humanitarian purposes grows. The United Nations has seen the share of its budget devoted to emergency relief double within less than ten years. FAO's spending for emergency operations has also soared. The brief on FAO's emergency activities that is delivered to my desk each month routinely catalogues the countries that are affected by disasters and their aftermath, as well as the FAO relief projects that have been approved or are in the pipeline.
We at FAO are proud of what we are contributing to an increasingly well targeted and coordinated international emergency preparedness and response system. In facing the challenges posed by natural and man-made disasters, FAO works closely with other organizations within the UN family, with national governments and with non-governmental organizations, each contributing its own special skills and experience. We are keenly aware of the importance of this partnership and cooperation.
The Rome Declaration on World Food Security, adopted by heads of State and government at the World Food Summit in November 1996, emphasized the need to move quickly from relief to rehabilitation and on to building the foundations for sustainable recovery and prevention of future disaster-related emergencies. The declaration states: "We will endeavour to prevent and be prepared for natural disasters and man-made emergencies and to meet transitory and emergency food requirements in ways that encourage recovery, rehabilitation, development and a capacity to satisfy future needs".
FAO regards humanitarian assistance as an integral part of its mandate to help raise levels of nutrition and standards of living, particularly in the rural areas of the developing world. FAO is working to advance this goal by concentrating on the areas where it can offer particular knowledge, skills and resources. Because it is primarily a development-oriented agency, the Organization has a particularly vital role to play in humanitarian assistance operations leading to sustainable recovery. FAO is the only UN specialized agency with a demonstrated capacity to plan for agricultural rehabilitation. Our philosophy is that disaster victims are best served by help that gets them back quickly to their homes and their fields.
Our experience allows us to tailor rehabilitation programmes to the particular conditions and needs of affected farm families, ensuring that the seeds they sow will sprout and that the crops they harvest will meet their nutritional and cultural requirements. Thus FAO, through its Special Relief Operations Service, arranges each year for the delivery of millions of dollars of emergency aid in the form of agricultural inputs and rehabilitation and reconstruction services.
But of course prevention is better than cure. FAO's Global Information and Early Warning System for Food and Agriculture (GIEWS) continuously monitors and analyses weather and crop conditions to forecast the possible onset of food shortages and emergencies and give governments and civil society time to prepare. Through its Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases (EMPRES), FAO monitors animal and plant pests and diseases that threaten to spill over national frontiers and coordinates prevention and control measures.
FAO has developed and promoted drought-resistant plant varieties and hurricane-resistant crops; it assists member countries with flood control systems and water harvesting; it promotes crop and livestock diversification to avoid excessive dependence on one variety, species or even farming system.
FAO's Special Programme for Food Security, launched in 1994, specifically aims at reducing variability and improving agricultural productivity through better control of water, sustainable intensification and diversification of production, and removal of socio-economic constraints, which should lead to the prevention of drought- and flood-related emergencies.
These approaches, taken together, can reduce the risk of a natural disaster becoming a human tragedy.
The world may never be free from disaster. But we can improve our ability to prepare, respond and rebuild. This booklet aims to show how a streamlined and more focused FAO is playing an active role in that process.
FIRMA-DG.gif (247 bytes)
Jacques Diouf
Director-General
<section>2</section>
Emergencies, the international response and FAO
w6020e02.gif (21934 bytes)
w6020e03.gif (23955 bytes)
w6020e04.gif (21692 bytes)
w6020e05.gif (26167 bytes)
Disasters come in many forms
Drought, an insidious slow-moving disaster, destroys food crops, kills human beings and animals and has long-term effects on the environment. Drought affects population groups in different ways; understanding and monitoring these differences is important for preventing famine. Drought may, for example, result in unusual long-distance movement of herds in search of grazing and bring them into contact with new diseases. Irrigation systems may be affected, especially when the rains fail over successive years. Crop yields are reduced when irrigation water is lacking or becomes more saline. Shallow wells, water-holes and small reservoirs dry up or become contaminated, which affects human and animal health. The land loses the protection of vegetation and becomes vulnerable to erosion by wind and - when the rains finally return - to erosion by water. Erosion in turn results in loss of soil fertility, which reduces future crop yields. Increased runoff from eroded soil can bring
flooding, silting up of dams and irrigation works and further erosion.
Pests and diseases can spread rapidly, heedless of national boundaries, with periodic outbreaks that can have disastrous consequences for crops, forests and livestock. The most dangerous plant pests are locusts and other types of grasshopper, armyworm and birds. The desert locust poses a recurrent threat to agriculture throughout Africa north of the equator, the Near East and Southwest Asia. Epidemics of contagious livestock diseases such as rinderpest and foot-and-mouth disease bring sickness and death to animals and disrupt trade between countries.
Floods are common occurrences in many countries. In some cases they are beneficial to agriculture, but unexpected floods resulting from abnormally heavy rainfall, sometimes hundreds of kilometres away, can be devastating: human lives, dwellings, livestock, infrastructure and communications can be swept away in a matter of hours.
Hurricanes, tornadoes, tropical storms and cyclones destroy standing crops, kill or injure livestock and damage homes, crops and food stores. High waves devastate low-lying coastal areas. Fishing communities suffer from storms through loss of life at sea, wrecked boats and damage to landing sites and equipment. Islands are particularly vulnerable: a single storm may be sufficient to destroy an island's infrastructure and cripple its economy.
Earthquakes destroy buildings and infrastructure and often cause heavy loss of life. Agriculture may be affected through burst dams, tidal waves or damage to standing crops or irrigation systems.
Volcanic eruptions result in deposits of ash and mud flows which can affect agriculture over a wide area, destroying crops and grazing land and clogging irrigation channels. They may force people to evacuate the immediate vicinity of a volcano, leaving standing crops and sometimes livestock behind.
Fires can destroy large expanses of forest in a few days, inflicting damage that can take years to restore. They can cause loss of human life, livestock, wildlife and crops as well as serious damage to property, livelihoods and the natural environment.
Man-made disasters cost the most in terms of human suffering, loss of life and long-term damage to a country's economy and productive capacity. The last decade has seen a marked increase in what are known as "complex emergencies" - complex because war and internal conflict lead to the breakdown and collapse of social, political and economic structures. Sometimes these emergencies are accompanied by natural disasters, which compound their complexity. Inevitably agriculture and food production are major casualties.
Emergencies take a heavy toll
Droughts and floods, earthquakes and hurricanes, locust swarms and livestock plagues, war and civil strife - natural and man-made disasters take a heavy toll, whether measured in human fatalities and suffering or in economic losses.
The devastating drought that afflicted Ethiopia and several other African countries in 1984/85 triggered a famine estimated to have killed more than 1 million people. A single cyclone that struck Bangladesh in May 1991 with wind speeds of up to 270 km per hour left the lives of an estimated 140 000 people in ruins. Some 800 000 people were killed during the civil strife that ravaged Rwanda in 1994; more than 2 million fled into neighbouring countries, and another 380 000 sought refuge in camps within Rwanda.
Natural disasters do not discriminate. They strike rich and poor countries alike. But it is the rural poor in the developing world who suffer most, those who are least able to protect themselves, those who have no cushion of savings and no alternative means of making a living. It is the poor, too, who have least choice about where they live, even when they know that their home or livelihood may be endangered.
Poverty and vulnerability also increase in the face of man-made disasters that erupt as civil wars rage and governments collapse. Essential services, including law and order, break down. Infrastructure is destroyed and people flee the land, taking with them what few possessions they can carry. Food production is no longer possible. People face immediate hunger, and mass starvation threatens. Relief agencies rush to help, but unless action is taken quickly to create the conditions in which people can return to their homes and farming can start again, large numbers risk becoming dependent on relief in the long term.
WITHOUT EARLY RECOVERY ASSISTANCE WITH EARLY RECOVERY ASSISTANCE
w6020e06.gif (37797 bytes)
Cost-effectiveness of early action: costs of emergency operations and speed of return
to sustainable development, without and with early recovery assistance
Value of emergency food operations jointly approved by the Director-General
of FAO and the Executive Director of the World Food Programme (WFP), by region,
January 1994 to June 1997 (million US$)
Region
(to June)
Africa
Asia and the Pacific
Eastern Europe and Commonwealth of Independent States
Near East
Total
Value of FAO-managed agricultural relief projects, by region, January 1994 to June 1997 (US$)
Region
(to June)
Africa
Asia and the Pacific
Eastern Europe and Commonwealth of Independent States
Latin America and the Caribbean
Near East
Total
The cost of disasters in human terms is intolerably high. In 1996 some 50 million people were displaced within their own countries or scattered abroad as refugees - a dispersed nation of the dispossessed with a population equivalent to that of Spain and Portugal combined. In that year, as a result of complex emergencies, around 40 million people were depending on international assistance for protection or survival. The economic cost is high, too. During the 1960s worldwide losses from both man-made and natural disasters were estimated at US$1 000 million a year. Annual losses jumped to US$3 000 million in the 1970s and to US$9 000 million in the 1980s, and they are likely to rise even higher as the century draws to a close.
The flow of aid has reflected this increasing need. Funding for humanitarian assistance has doubled since 1990, in a period when the overall volume of development aid has been falling. In 1994 US$6 000 million were devoted to humanitarian assistance, representing 10 percent of all the money spent on development aid around the world. The United Nations now spends more than 50 percent of its budget on emergency relief, compared with 25 percent in 1989. The bill for emergency operations managed by FAO has climbed from $150 million for the entire decade of the 1980s to $170 million for just six years since 1991.
Preparing for and responding to emergencies
When disaster strikes, the media descend and fill the world's television screens with images of destruction and suffering. These images, beamed around the globe in seconds, make a vital contribution to the general understanding of the problems confronting the people affected by the disaster. They stimulate the worldwide mobilization of resources to help victims. But once the immediate crisis is over, the media move on. As a result the focus is on immediate relief efforts, and the public does not receive a complete picture of the wide range of humanitarian assistance that is provided to tackle emergencies.
In fact, some eight distinct phases can be distinguished in what has been called the disaster cycle or emergency sequence:
* prevention;
* preparedness;
* early warning;
* impact and needs assessment immediately following a disaster;
* relief, when immediate humanitarian assistance is required;
* rehabilitation, when the first attempts to rebuild the rural livelihood system take place;
* reconstruction, when the destroyed infrastructure is replaced;
* sustainable recovery, when conditions return to normal.
Recognition of the increasing cost and complexity of emergency operations has focused attention on taking preventive action and planning for disasters before they happen. In addition, when emergencies do occur, the emphasis is on moving as quickly as possible from relief to rehabilitation, reconstruction and sustainable recovery, so that affected households can free themselves from dependence on food relief, displaced populations can return to their own areas and refugee camps can be dismantled before they become permanent settlements. There is also now a greater understanding of the need for close cooperation and partnership among all the various agencies involved to achieve a new, more integrated approach to humanitarian assistance.
w6020e07.gif (16021 bytes)
FAO assistance to help countries prepare for and prevent emergencies caused by drought,
market disruption, and pests and diseases, January 1994 to June 1997
FAO's multiple roles
FAO is primarily a development agency, and its emergency activities reflect this focus. The Organization helps countries prevent and prepare for food and agricultural emergencies; provides early warning of their approach; assesses the impact of natural and man-made disasters on agricultural production and local food supplies; evaluates needs for immediate relief and longer-term recovery; delivers agricultural inputs and services to farmers in affected areas; helps countries plan and carry out agricultural rehabilitation and reconstruction work; and helps countries design programmes and projects that will lead to sustainable recovery and prevent vulnerability to future disasters.
w6020e08.gif (5232 bytes)
Value of jointly approved WFP emergency food operations,
January 1994 to June 1997, by type of disaster
PREVENTION
Many of FAO's Field Programme activities contribute to reducing the vulnerability of agricultural communities to disaster. For example, the Organization provides support for better water control; higher-yielding crop production technologies; crop and livestock diversification; greater use of drought-resistant crop varieties; improved control of pests and diseases affecting crops and livestock; improved management of soils, rangelands and forested areas, including watersheds; better coastal fishing practices; home gardens and nutrition education; and improved on-farm storage, cereal banks and food security reserves.
PREPAREDNESS PLANNING
FAO helps governments and regional organizations plan for disasters, including measures to mitigate their effects and to mobilize rapid relief and rehabilitation assistance, should this prove necessary. As a follow-up to the World Food Summit, FAO is helping member countries develop national food insecurity and vulnerability information and mapping systems. These will build on existing national food security information systems, many of which have been established with FAO assistance.
w6020e09.gif (7408 bytes)
Value of FAO-managed agricultural relief projects,
January 1994 to June 1997, by type of disaster
MONITORING AND EARLY WARNING
FAO's Global Information and Early Warning System for Food and Agriculture (GIEWS) monitors food supply and demand around the world. It provides policy-makers and analysts with up-to-date information on crop prospects and gives early warning on imminent food crises. Also important in this regard is the Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases (EMPRES), which keeps a global watch for signs of emerging threats from pests and epidemics. The information collected by these systems enables governments and international bodies to take action early in order to prevent emergencies from developing.
FITTING THE AID TO THE NEED
Drought. FAO can help agricultural communities prevent the worst effects of drought by improving land and water management practices, introducing drought-tolerant varieties and promoting diversification of crops and farming systems that provide alternative sources of food and income. Early warning at both the national and global levels is especially effective in the case of slowly emerging disasters such as drought; such warnings can often mean the difference between life and death for affected populations.
Plant and animal pests and diseases. FAO's EMPRES helps give early warning of impending pest and disease problems so that timely preventive action can be taken. EMPRES is initially concentrating on promoting effective containment and control of the most serious plant pests and animal diseases through early warning, rapid reaction, research and coordination. The Emergency Centre for Locust Operations (ECLO) specifically monitors the locust threat and the possibility of destruction by large flocks of birds. When infestations do occur, FAO experts can mount eradication and treatment programmes.
Floods. Forest and watershed management and the construction of flood control dykes help minimize the impact of flooding. When a food emergency develops, FAO helps organize relief.
Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Damage to standing crops, farm structures and livestock requires agricultural rehabilitation services which FAO is often best placed to provide.
Hurricanes, tornadoes, tropical storms and cyclones. FAO helps countries set up warning and information systems and advises on the use of hurricane-resistant crops and forestry methods, as well as helping agricultural systems and coastal fisheries get started again in the wake of the storm.
Fires. FAO advises on strategies for preventing fires and controlling them when they do occur. Relief and rehabilitation aid may include equipment and technical assistance with clearing and replanting.
Man-made disasters. FAO's early warning systems keep a close watch on the food and crop supply situation when it is threatened by political developments. When a complex emergency occurs, FAO focuses on trying to get farmers back to their fields so that disaster victims depend on relief aid for as short a time as possible.
ASSESSMENT OF IMPACT AND NEEDS
To provide the right kind of help in an emergency it is essential to know the nature and extent of the disaster, how many people are affected and what help is needed. In the immediate aftermath of an emergency involving food and agriculture, FAO works together with the World Food Programme (WFP) to assess the situation and outlook for crops, food supplies and agricultural inputs and to estimate immediate needs for food and agricultural relief. As necessary, FAO mounts agricultural relief and rehabilitation missions to determine inputs and measures needed for the restoration of productive activity as soon as possible. Rapidly produced reports provide donor countries with crucial information to help them respond swiftly and effectively. Where relevant, this information is disseminated through consolidated inter-agency humanitarian appeals.
RELIEF
Relief efforts are aimed at saving lives in the immediate wake of a disaster. FAO's Director-General shares with the Executive Director of WFP responsibility for approving large WFP emergency food relief operations. FAO and WFP monitor pledges and deliveries of international food assistance and keep the international community informed of continuing needs. FAO, through its Special Relief Operations Service, arranges to buy and deliver agricultural essentials such as seeds, tools, fertilizers, fishing gear and livestock and veterinary supplies to permit immediate resumption of basic food production. The aim is to restore the assets and production levels of the affected communities as soon as possible.
REHABILITATION AND RECONSTRUCTION
Once emergency relief operations are under way, FAO, on request, helps governments and financing institutions prepare national rehabilitation and reconstruction plans aimed at restoring agricultural support services (extension, animal health, plant protection and input supplies) and rebuilding essential infrastructure.
During implementation of the plans, when the essential agricultural infrastructure is being rebuilt, FAO provides expertise in many areas, for example, rebuilding of fertilizer factories; repair of dams and irrigation systems; resumption of seed production; rebuilding of livestock herds; restoration of marketing infrastructure; repair of environmental damage, including damage to forests and soil quality; restoration of fishing industries; replanting of tree crops; and development of programmes for the resettlement and reintegration of refugees, the displaced and ex-combatants.
SUSTAINABLE RECOVERY
Once the situation has returned to normal, FAO helps governments formulate food and agricultural development strategies which include the framing of programmes and projects aimed at strengthening the resilience of rural communities against future disasters as part of the development process.
Partnerships
Because tackling disasters and resulting emergencies is such a complex task, many public and private bodies can contribute skills and experience. United Nations and government agencies as well as non-governmental organizations (NGOs) operating in the emergency area all have crucial roles in the process, and close cooperation is vital.
The United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA), now being reorganized, was set up in 1992 with the prime task of coordinating the UN response to complex emergencies and natural disasters. Its Inter-agency Standing Committee brings together all the main UN bodies involved, including FAO, as well as the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and representatives of non-governmental interests.
FAO takes the primary responsibility within the UN system for preventive actions linked to sustainable agricultural development, crop and food supply monitoring and needs assessment, evaluation of agricultural relief requirements, and mobilization of the assistance and resources needed to restore agricultural activity. However, FAO's wide range of disciplines and skills, its long experience in the developing world and its presence in the field allow the Organization to make a contribution in every phase of the emergency sequence.
w6020e10.gif (10989 bytes)
Value of FAO-managed agricultural relief projects, January 1994 to June 1997, by donor
WFP is one of FAO's most important partners. FAO's Director-General and WFP's Executive Director have the joint authority to approve large emergency food operations. The two organizations work closely in preparing early warning reports and in assessing food relief needs and publicizing them among donors.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) focuses on the needs of refugees and their resettlement and reintegration. Collaboration with FAO covers such areas as assessing agricultural relief and rehabilitation needs, mobilizing funds, providing emergency help to local food producers and supplying agricultural inputs to refugees.
In most countries the Resident Representative of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) acts as the humanitarian assistance coordinator, chairing a disaster management team, which includes an FAO member. FAO's particular responsibility entails helping the government coordinate its agricultural relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and recovery programmes, in which national and external partners often collaborate.
FAO has a long history of cooperating with the World Bank, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and regional financing institutions on development projects. Funds for agricultural inputs have been provided recently by IFAD and earlier by the World Bank. These institutions also play an important role in funding investment projects closely linked to rehabilitation, reconstruction and sustainable recovery following complex emergencies.
FAO collaborates with ICRC and the national members of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRCRCS) in the early distribution of seeds and tools following disasters. ICRC often intervenes directly in a conflict situation, and FAO supports its activities by providing technical advice. ICRC has supported FAO by providing logistic support for entering conflict areas.
FAO works closely at all stages of emergencies with international and private charities dedicated to humanitarian assistance. NGOs are often FAO's main partners in complex emergencies, contributing to monitoring and assessment of needs and to management of relief operations. FAO, through procurement services and technical advice, helps NGOs ensure that their operations in the areas of food and agriculture come up to accepted technical standards.
Bilateral donors are, of course, essential partners, as it is their funds that finance many of FAO's field activities at all phases of the emergency sequence. Except for small amounts of seed money provided by FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme, the funding for all FAO-assisted agricultural relief assessment missions and field operations and for many emergency prevention and preparedness activities comes from extrabudgetary resources provided by donors.
Coordinating FAO's emergency activities
Within FAO the Emergency Coordination Group (ECG) ensures that the various units involved in emergency activities work efficiently together. ECG is chaired by the Director of the Office for Coordination of Normative, Operational and Decentralized Activities and has a secretariat provided by the office of the Special Advisers to the Director-General. Key units include:
* the Global Information and Early Warning Service, which monitors crop and food supply conditions, warns of impending emergencies, organizes joint FAO/WFP crop and food supply assessment missions and evaluates requests for large emergency food operations;
* the Special Relief Operations Service, which takes the lead in conducting assessments of agricultural relief and rehabilitation needs and organizing and delivering FAO emergency assistance;
* the Procurement Service, which manages procurement of inputs for agricultural relief and rehabilitation projects;
* the Policy Assistance Division, which provides leadership for the formulation of comprehensive agricultural rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes and sustainable sector-development strategies.
Technical divisions provide technical support services, contributing advice and assistance for the management of EMPRES, the identification of vulnerable groups and their needs, the identification of inputs necessary to meet emergency situations, and the design of relief and rehabilitation projects. Key units include: the Agricultural Support Systems, Animal Production and Health, Land and Water Development, and Plant Production and Protection Divisions; the Food Security and Agricultural Projects Analysis Service; the Food and Nutrition Division; and the Fisheries, Forestry and Sustainable Development Departments.
The Investment Centre Division prepares investment programmes and projects for funding by major multilateral development banks during the rehabilitation and reconstruction and the recovery phases.
FAO has field offices covering 110 developing countries, as well as regional and subregional offices. UNDP provides representation services in other countries. At any time FAO is involved in some 1 500 agricultural projects in the developing world; experts working on these projects in affected countries are frequently called upon to help with emergency needs assessments and field operations.
When disaster strikes, FAO's representatives in developing countries are quickly involved, coordinating with the government and external partners, reporting directly to, and supporting special missions from, headquarters. Often conditions are such that staff may be in physical danger. FAO cooperates with the Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator and operates a 24-hour hot line for field staff at risk.
COORDINATING EMERGENCY RELIEF AND REHABILITATION IN THE FIELD
In countries facing complex emergencies, FAO coordinates actions that address emergency agricultural needs and assists in the development and implementation of strategies for creating conditions conducive to recovery and sustained development. FAO's approach is to set up coordination units that:
- provide technical assistance to help nationals manage the existing array of agricultural relief projects;
- monitor developments in the food situation;
- advise the numerous humanitarian organizations involved in the sector;
- help establish the country's capacity to move beyond the emergency to the recovery and rehabilitation phase; establish information collection and database management systems.
These activities bring together all government institutions, donors and NGOs engaged in the sector.
Since 1994, FAO emergency coordination units have been set up in Bosnia, Tajikistan, Rwanda, Burundi, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Iraq and Angola.
<section>3</section>
FAO in action
Emergency and Humanitarian Matters
Monthly Brief for the Director-General - May 1997
SECTION A - CROP AND FOOD SUPPLY ASSESSMENT MISSIONS OF THE GLOBAL INFORMATION AND EARLY WARNING SYSTEM (GIEWS)
A.1 - COMPLETED MISSIONS
ANGOLA
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
A.2 - MISSIONS IN PROGRESS
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
A.3 - MISSIONS PLANNED FOR JUNE
AFGHANISTAN
RWANDA
IRAQ
CONGO, REPUBLIC OF
BURUNDI
SECTION B - SPECIAL RELIEF OPERATIONS SERVICE (TCOR) - STATUS OF OPERATIONS
B.1 - NEW EMERGENCIES
COUNTRY
TYPE OF DISASTER
REQUEST
FAO ACTION
AFGHANISTAN
FLOODS
NO ASSISTANCE REQUESTED
ASSESSMENT
BANGLADESH
CYCLONE
NO ASSISTANCE REQUESTED
NONE
BURUNDI
CIVIL STRIFE
HAND TOOLS REQUESTED
TCP FORMULATION
CHINA
FLOODS
NO ASSISTANCE REQUESTED
ASSESSMENT
INDIA
EARTHQUAKE
NO ASSISTANCE REQUESTED
ASSESSMENT
JORDAN
FROSTS (APRIL)
TCP EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE REQUESTED (MAY)
TCP FORMULATION; ASSESSMENT; INTERNATIONAL APPEAL
MADAGASCAR
LOCUSTS
ECLO ASSISTANCE REQUESTED
MULTIDONOR CONTROL PROGRAMME
SIERRA LEONE
CIVIL STRIFE
HAND TOOLS REQUESTED
EMOPS SUSPENDED
B.2 - FOLLOW-UP ACTIONS ON PREVIOUS MONTH'S EMERGENCIES
COUNTRY
TYPE OF DISASTER
REQUEST
FOLLOW-UP
CHINA
EARTHQUAKE
NO
ECUADOR
FLOODS
YES
ASSESSMENT UNDERWAY
GAMBIA
GROUNDNUT SEED SHORTFALL
YES
TCP AND NORWAY-FUNDED PROJECTS APPROVED; PROCUREMENT UNDERWAY
IRAN
EARTHQUAKE
YES
TCP PROJECT APPROVED; COMPREHENSIVE REQUEST ANTICIPATED
IRAQ
LOCUSTS
YES
ASSESSMENT COMPLETED; NO EMERGENCY CONFIRMED
KAZAKHSTAN
LOCUSTS
YES
TCP PROJECT APPROVED
NIGER
DROUGHT
YES (SEEDS AND TOOLS)
TCP PROJECT TO BE REVISED
PHILIPPINES
CIVIL STRIFE
YES (NEEDS ASSESSMENT)
AGRICULTURAL NEEDS ASSESSMENT MISSION FIELDED
SOMALIA
FLOODS
YES
ASSESSMENT TO BE FIELDED
TANZANIA
FLOODS
YES
TCP PROJECT BEING APPRAISED
TONGA
CYCLONE
YES
TCP PROJECT BEING APPRAISED
UGANDA
DROUGHT/CIVIL STRIFE
YES
TCP PROJECT BEING APPRAISED; AUSTRALIA-FUNDED PROJECT APPROVED
CONGO, DEMOCRATIC REP.
CIVIL STRIFE
YES (NGO REQUEST FOR ASSESSMENT OF SEED REQUIREMENTS IN EASTERN AREA)
FOLLOW-UP WITH NEW GOVERNMENT
B.3 - ASSESSMENTS AND PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES
COUNTRY
NATURE OF ACTIVITY
ALBANIA
ASSESSMENT OF EMERGENCY AGRICULTURAL NEEDS
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
MONTHLY MEETINGS OF UN/GOVERNMENT/DONOR NGO TASK FORCE
CONGO, REPUBLIC OF
ASSESSMENT OF GRASSHOPPER DAMAGE
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
ASSESSMENT OF EMERGENCY AGRICULTURAL NEEDS
GAMBIA
PROCUREMENT MISSION FOR GROUNDNUT SEED
GEORGIA
ASSESSMENT OF EMERGENCY AGRICULTURAL NEEDS
JORDAN
ASSESSMENT OF FROST DAMAGE AND EMERGENCY AGRICULTURAL NEEDS
PHILIPPINES
ASSESSMENT OF EMERGENCY AGRICULTURAL NEEDS FOR EX-COMBATANTS, THEIR FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
B.4 - UN CONSOLIDATED APPEALS
NONE IN MAY.
B.5 - PROJECTS APPROVED AND IN PIPELINE
17 COUNTRIES:
9 APPROVED PROJECTS + 2 REVISIONS APPROVED
US$14 010 188
18 PIPELINE PROJECTS
SECTION C - OTHER HIGHLIGHTS
C.1 - JOINTLY-APPROVED WFP EMERGENCY OPERATIONS (EMOPS)
ETHIOPIA
US$11.6 MILLION
560 000 BENEFICIARIES, 3 MONTHS
TAJIKISTAN
16.0 MILLION
500 000 BENEFICIARIES, 12 MONTHS
C.2 - GIEWS REPORTS
SOMALIA - SPECIAL ALERT
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA - AFRICA REPORT
ANGOLA - SPECIAL MISSION REPORT
KENYA - CROP AND FOOD SUPPLY ASSESSMENT REPORT
C.3 - EMERGENCY AGRICULTURAL REHABILITATION
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA - BARLEY HARVEST FROM DOUBLE CROPPING PROGRAMME EXPECTED IN JULY
MADAGASCAR - LOCUST-INFESTED AREAS TREATED
SIERRA LEONE - SUPPLY OF FISHING GEAR, SEEDS AND TOOLS SUSPENDED
IRAQ - AGRICULTURAL INPUTS PROCUREMENT UNDERWAY
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
VACCINATION DRIVE HALTS CATTLE PLAGUE
in Kenya and United Republic of Tanzania
In November 1996, rinderpest, a highly contagious and often fatal livestock disease, was diagnosed among buffalo and eland in Nairobi National Park, Kenya. Afraid that the disease would spread across the border, the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania appealed for international assistance to prevent the country from reinfection after it had been free of the disease for 14 years.
In February 1997, at the request of Kenya, FAO, through EMPRES, set up a meeting of veterinary officials and wildlife experts from the two countries to assess the risk of the rinderpest spreading. The risk was judged to be high, aggravated by a drought which caused herders to drive their livestock across borders in search of grazing.
Intensive surveillance and vaccination were undertaken by the veterinary and wildlife teams of the two countries, in close collaboration with specialists from the Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources of the Organization for African Unity. One million emergency vaccinations were delivered in a three-month period. FAO provided consultants and field staff.
By the end of March 1997 the disease in Tanzania had been confined to four districts, while in Kenya infection appears to have been restricted to the area to the south and southeast of Nairobi.
Recently EMPRES has been successfully tackling a variety of animal diseases: examples include eradication of contagious bovine pleuropneumonia from Botswana, and containment of a damaging outbreak of African swine fever in Côte d'Ivoire. EMPRES is helping to develop an effective vaccine against Newcastle disease which has devastating effects on poultry in numerous countries of the world. This vaccine will be introduced as part of a package of sustainable animal health and production practices currently being developed for use by small-scale poultry producers.
w6020e11.jpg (9666 bytes)
Vaccination of cattle against rinderpest in Kenya
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
EARLY WARNING PREVENTS FAMINE
in drought-stricken southern Africa and Horn of Africa
Drought gripped southern Africa in 1991/92 and 1994/95, seriously decreasing food production on both occasions. In 1991/92, cereal production was reduced by half, leaving subsistence farmers and their families in dire need. Some 18 million people faced starvation. However, effective early warning, rapid regional coordination and adequate international support resulted in a successful relief effort which effectively overcame widespread food shortages and the threat of famine.
As a result of the experience of the 1991/92 crisis, the impact of the 1994/95 drought emergency, while serious, was less devastating. Although the seasonal rains began on schedule in October 1994, allowing planting, the rains soon tapered off to a halt, leaving withered plants in parched fields. FAO's GIEWS and other FAO-assisted national and regional early warning systems in the Southern African Development Community (SADC) issued their initial warnings of impending drought in December.
In southern Africa, as elsewhere, drought areas are typically isolated and difficult to reach; importing relief food from overseas, often through distant, inadequate ports, takes time. Soon after the first warnings were issued, governments, donors and UN agencies began meeting together to make plans for moving large-scale relief aid into the region should it be necessary.
In January and February 1995, the impending onset of food difficulties as a result of drought-induced crop losses in most countries of the subregion was confirmed. In March and April, FAO and WFP experts arrived to assess the situation. The agencies jointly approved an emergency operation to cover urgent relief needs. FAO issued a special alert, asking the international community for relief assistance. In June, donors reacted to an appeal for help by providing 1 million tonnes of food aid and other assistance. Starvation was averted.
In another region frequently racked by drought, the Horn of Africa, FAO is helping to set up a regional early warning system. The Organization is providing technical assistance and training in risk mapping, remote sensing and early warning analysis for regional staff of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and national staff in its seven member countries. FAO believes most farmers can take precautionary measures to guard against drought; the assistance covers measures to mitigate the impact of drought through better rangeland, water and farming system management and adoption of drought-resistant crop varieties, as well as preparedness plans for the rapid mobilization of relief should disaster strike.
W6020e12.jpg (19022 bytes)
Carrying bags of relief grain for refugees
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
FIRE FIGHTING
in Turkey and Uganda
When FAO receives an appeal for help against raging forest fires in developing countries, it responds by providing equipment, including communications systems, and technical assistance. FAO also advises countries on strategies to prevent forest fires and lessen their impact. For example, in Turkey forest fires are becoming an increasingly serious problem; they raged over huge coastal areas in 1994 and 1996, culminating in the catastrophic Gelibolu fire. FAO is advising the government on an overall fire prevention and control strategy.
Softwood plantations in Uganda are facing devastating wind-spread bush fires in the 1997 dry season as a result of prolonged drought and unusually high temperatures. Some 2 000 ha of the total 15 000 ha of industrial softwood plantations have already been destroyed, and further damage is expected. FAO is assisting in the development of a fire management strategy and a coordinated approach to fire prevention and suppression.
W6020e13.jpg (14894 bytes)
Fighting forest fire with simple technology
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
TACKLING THE LOCUST SCOURGE
in the Near East and North Africa
In 1992 the desert locust began to reproduce in great numbers in East Africa. International assistance was immediately requested, and FAO released funds to help fill the gap until donors could respond. Despite the quick reaction, in early 1993 locust swarms crossed the Red Sea, invading Saudi Arabia and Yemen. FAO sent experts to help organize and carry out large-scale aerial control, which was extended to Oman, Pakistan and India as the locusts spread during the summer.
Locust swarms appeared in the Sudan in June 1993 and cut a swath of destruction westwards across the continent. FAO issued warnings and forecasts, but many countries were caught unprepared. Major control operations were carried out in Mauritania, again with FAO funding until donor assistance could be organized. FAO also provided technical assistance to Mali, the Niger, Chad, Senegal, the Gambia and Guinea-Bissau as these countries were invaded from the east. As a result, the locust situation in the Sahel area is currently under control. However, in Madagascar, a dangerous infestation - the largest in 40 years - is causing serious damage to crops and vegetation. FAO is coordinating emergency assistance and mobilizing funds to suppress the swarms.
W6020e14.jpg (8370 bytes)
Aerial spraying of a sorghum crop to control locust infestation in Mali
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
PROMPT RELIEF AVERTS FAMINE
in Democratic People's Republic of Korea
In the first half of the 1990s, economic difficulties and the poor state of agriculture in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea reduced the country's food stocks to almost zero. Consequently, when widespread floods destroyed large crop areas and vital agricultural structures in 1995, a serious food emergency developed. In July 1996 flooding again reduced domestic food production and exacerbated the ongoing emergency. The country was obliged to appeal for international assistance. Furthermore, in June and July 1997 very little rain fell, and a severe drought resulted.
Throughout the emergency FAO has played a crucial role in alerting the international community to the gravity and extent of the disaster and in promoting responses to it. FAO has participated actively in the DHA-led UN consolidated appeals, the issuance of several special alerts and the organization of special donors' consultations and briefings at FAO headquarters in Rome. International response has been considerable; food relief provided so far includes 70 000 tonnes in emergency assistance and 400 000 tonnes in programme assistance.
Under the aegis of the 1997/98 consolidated appeal for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, FAO called for the urgent funding of the most immediate requirements for the agriculture sector, including support to increased cereal and vegetable production through double cropping, the repair and rehabilitation of irrigation systems and the rehabilitation of flood-affected land. In June 1997, FAO appealed on behalf of the government for the urgent supply of fertilizer to boost rice production. FAO is also providing technical assistance for the overall coordination of the emergency agricultural rehabilitation programme.
Donors contributing to the agricultural relief and rehabilitation programme have included: the European Community (EC), Norway, Switzerland, UNDP, Sweden, the Netherlands, World Vision, CARE Norway and FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme. Support to the double-cropping programme launched by the government enabled the introduction of barley and vegetables on 37 000 ha.
W6020e15.jpg (32481 bytes)
Flooding of agricultural areas can cause food emergencies
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
STORM WARNING SYSTEMS
for Indian fishermen
On the southeastern coast of India, cyclones caused severe damage in October 1994, in November 1995 and in June, October and November 1996. The last of these devastated entire fishing villages, ruined banana and coconut plantations, killed 1 675 fisherfolk, wrecked 2 400 fishing boats and damaged a further 3 000, and led to the loss of thousands of fishing nets and other articles of equipment.
Because of a lack of radio communications, the timely warnings issued by the Indian Meteorological Department reached neither the remote fishing villages of the estuary and mangrove swamps nor the fishing boats at sea. The boats also lacked basic life-saving equipment.
Beginning in two pilot villages, FAO is providing funds for technical advice, training and equipment to ensure the reliable functioning of local systems for receiving and acting on storm warnings, both in fishing villages and at sea, and to develop, test and implement improved safety procedures at sea for small-scale fishing.
w6020e16.jpg (33633 bytes)
Nets of small-scale fishermen are often lost in violent storms
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
DEFENDING AGAINST HURRICANES
in the Caribbean
In September 1996, the eastern Caribbean suffered the full force of hurricanes Luis and Marilyn. The Organization of Eastern Caribbean States asked FAO to send a team to assess the damage and devise projects for rehabilitation in the agricultural and fisheries sectors. The team travelled extensively in the region and drew up a comprehensive programme.
Every year this region is hit by hurricanes, tropical storms and depressions. As a result, in addition to helping the region meet immediate needs, FAO agreed to fund a project to strengthen national and regional prevention and preparedness through technical assistance, equipment and training. The aim is to develop hurricane-resistant farming methods, crops and forestry techniques and to reduce the impact of hurricanes on the fishing industry.
w6020e17.jpg (37080 bytes)
Destruction caused by a Caribbean hurricane
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
FIGHTING PESTS
in Iraq's no-fly zones
When large areas of Iraq's cereal and date-palm crops were attacked by pests in 1995, an insurmountable problem blocked control efforts: because of UN sanctions established after the war in the Persian Gulf, the country's planes were not allowed to fly over designated zones in the northern and southern parts of the country, so pesticides could not be sprayed on the fields in these areas.
Iraq appealed to FAO, as a neutral third party, to solve the problem and save the crops, which are staples of the Iraqi diet. With funding from several countries and DHA, FAO carried out a complicated emergency relief operation in May and June 1996. The operation involved obtaining approval from the United Nations Sanctions Committee to use non-Iraqi pilots, to import pesticides and to use helicopter spare parts held in storage to maintain the helicopters needed for the spraying.
w6020e18.jpg (28514 bytes)
Date-palm plantations need protection from pests
Some 97 500 ha of cereals and more than 36 000 ha of date plantation were sprayed in the "no-fly" zones. Flying time totalled some 430 hours. The value of crops saved as a result of the aerial spraying was estimated at US$7.3 million. A second spraying campaign, carried out in May and June 1997, resulted in yield increases of wheat and dates estimated to be worth about US$35 million.
In December 1996, the United Nations Sanctions Committee approved an oil-for-food programme allowing Iraq to export oil and import food and agricultural inputs. In the northern part of the country, where the UN is managing imports under the programme, FAO has been charged with the responsibility for assessment of agricultural requirements, procurement of inputs and monitoring of inputs distribution. As of mid-1997, the value of inputs procured and under delivery in the north amounted to US$18 million.
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
RESTORING PRODUCTION
on Filipino farmers' fields buried by volcanic eruption
The eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in June 1991 spewed out an estimated 6 600 million cubic metres of volcanic debris, hurling ash up to heights of 20 000 m. Even more destructive than the ash were the mud flows. Together, ash and mud devastated large agricultural areas around the volcano. Roads, bridges and irrigation systems were destroyed, and 40 000 families lost their homes.
Relief and rehabilitation efforts were initially concentrated on provision of new homesteads and livelihood opportunities for displaced families and on repairing essential infrastructure. In this context, an FAO mission helped to assess rehabilitation needs and identified three projects for creating livelihood opportunities - in agriculture, livestock and aquaculture - which were subsequently funded by the Organization. The aquaculture project helped to restore and increase production from fish ponds. Farmers were shown how to make their fish ponds economically viable with modern feed and management techniques.
w6020e19.jpg (27289 bytes)
Aquaculture production offers livelihood opportunities in volcano-affected areas of the Philippines
Removal of the large deposits of ash and mud from agricultural land was time consuming, and the risk of secondary mud flows and flooding continued for some years after the eruption. With the return to normal conditions, in April 1997 FAO mounted an investment programming mission which identified programmes and projects for irrigation rehabilitation and watershed management, land rehabilitation and farming systems development, and income generation and livelihood support as priorities for sustainable recovery in the affected areas. These proposals are now being studied by potential financing institutions.
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
REBUILDING A NATION
after catastrophe in Rwanda
Rwanda was engulfed by a holocaust in 1994 which resulted in the death of 800 000 people, the flight of more than 2 million into neighbouring countries and the displacement of 380 000 in camps within the country. The conflict threatened to lead to widespread famine.
Since the beginning of the crisis in 1994 several FAO/WFP crop and food supply assessment missions have visited Rwanda. These missions assessed food supply difficulties, evaluated the food and nutritional status of the population and estimated seasonal requirements for cereal imports, including food aid. In addition to the joint FAO/WFP missions, FAO's Special Relief Operations Service fielded several missions to assess the most urgent needs for the agricultural sector. The most recent crop and food supply assessment mission, in June 1997, also undertook the assessment of agricultural input requirements. All the missions took into account the mass movements of Rwandan refugees to and from neighbouring countries and their prospects and needs.
w6020e20.jpg (34214 bytes)
Distribution of vegetable seeds at a refugee centre in Rwanda
Following initial assessment by FAO in 1994 of requirements for the agricultural sector and a series of UN consolidated appeals, FAO obtained funds to start an emergency operation to supply desperately needed agricultural inputs to the rural populations affected by the crisis. The operation has three main components:
* procurement and distribution of seeds and basic agricultural equipment;
* seed multiplication;
* set-up and coordination of a consultation forum of donors and other organizations providing assistance to the agricultural sector.
In the programme's first year of activity, more than 406 000 households in 95 percent of the country benefited. The value of agricultural production resulting from the distribution of seeds and tools was calculated to be about US$11 million.
The emergency operation has grown into a large-scale agricultural relief programme including measures for rehabilitation and reconstruction as well as immediate relief. Donors funding the programme have included the World Bank, IFAD, the EC, Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Italy, Sweden, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, as well as FAO through its Technical Cooperation Programme and a special mission mounted by the Director-General in December 1996.
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
RELIEF, REHABILITATION AND RECOVERY
in the Great Lakes region of central Africa
The geographical region surrounding Lakes Victoria and Tanganyika, which includes parts of several countries in central Africa, has been the scene of prolonged civil and ethnic strife for many years. Because of the movements of affected populations across borders throughout the region, it has been necessary to view the crisis from a regional perspective, even though many actions have been taken at the country level. FAO has been active in a number of different and complementary areas, which include:
* regular monitoring of the crop and food supply situation;
* continuous assessment of the agricultural input situation and emergency and immediate rehabilitation needs, and planning to assist the transition from emergency relief to rehabilitation and development;
* implementation of emergency agricultural relief programmes;
* coordination of interventions and provision of technical advice;
* preparation of in-depth studies of agricultural recovery, development options and investment needs, and assistance in government formulation of national food security strategies in line with the World Food Summit Plan of Action.
w6020e21.jpg (41217 bytes)
Technical advice on vegetable planting aids recovery in Burundi
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
GETTING THINGS TOGETHER AGAIN
in Haiti
In 1991, internal disturbances and the subsequent international embargo brought Haiti's already fragile economy to its knees. All major international assistance programmes came to a halt. Lack of imported fertilizers, seeds, spare parts for agricultural machinery and other essential inputs led to a widespread breakdown of agricultural services and food production.
From 1992 to 1994 FAO obtained substantial contributions from two major food aid donors - Canada and the EC - for emergency assistance to destitute Haitian farmers. The money was used to implement a series of agricultural relief and early recovery projects to supply bean, maize and sorghum seeds as well as hand tools and other inputs, and to restore input supply services. A special effort was made to boost local seed production by farmers' organizations and commercial farms. This effort led to the building up of a national seed industry. In addition, a network of community-owned retail shops was set up, enabling farmers to access basic inputs at reasonable prices.
An independent evaluation of these projects concluded that they have provided the basis for an exemplary evolution in food aid from relief to genuine recovery.
In December 1994, soon after the new government took office, an FAO mission visited Haiti to assess basic agricultural rehabilitation and reconstruction needs. Its main proposals concerned irrigation: rehabilitation of existing works and improvements to small and medium-sized schemes. Other proposals covered watershed management, rural infrastructure and fisheries. Several donors and financing institutions expressed interest, including the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), IFAD, UNDP, the EC and France. FAO was asked to prepare an irrigation project for IDB and a project for intensified crop development for IFAD. Both have been prepared and financing approval is expected shortly.
w6020e22.jpg (27670 bytes)
Farmers' meeting on organization of seed shops and agricultural input stores in Haiti
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
BOOSTING RICE PRODUCTION
in Cambodia
After the Paris peace agreements of October 1991, which followed two decades of conflict, Cambodia had to cope with 385 000 returnees from Thailand, 190 000 internally displaced persons and 40 000 people maimed by land-mines. Security problems persisted, with 10 to 15 percent of the country controlled by the Khmer Rouge and more than 5 million land-mines still in place. Agriculture was providing around half of a per caput gross domestic product (GDP) of less than US$200.
w6020e23.jpg (32785 bytes)
A Cambodian extension officer compares rice plants grown using
two different nutrient treatments under an FAO project to optimize use of donated fertilizer
Ninety percent of farmland in Cambodia is devoted to rice. Fertilizers are essential to maintain and increase production. From 1991 to 1996, FAO implemented six fertilizer emergency aid projects with funds from the Netherlands, Sweden and Germany. The projects involved the distribution of more than 61 000 tonnes of fertilizer, representing about two-thirds of the total quantity of fertilizer officially imported into the country during the period. FAO also assisted in rebuilding the entry port's logistic capacities to handle large quantities of fertilizer; in training more than 150 extension workers and 35 000 farmers; and in providing equipment for the national soil laboratory. From 1992 to 1996 the projects increased paddy production by a total of more than 500 000 tonnes (equivalent to 300 000 tonnes of milled rice), reducing food aid needs accordingly.
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
SEEDS FOR FARMERS
in Bosnia and Herzegovina
When war disrupts agriculture, people go hungry. This is what happened in large parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where, by the end of 1993, the breakdown of markets and the supply system for seed, fertilizer and insecticides was almost total. To provide for the minimal needs of war-affected farmers for the 1995 autumn planting season, it was estimated that more than US$11 million were needed for seed, fertilizer and crop protection chemicals.
FAO provided about 1 100 tonnes of winter wheat seed to farmers in the most destitute area, the former Bihac pocket. The seed was taken into Bihac and distributed on UNHCR trucks, with the help of the Lutheran World Service and Bangladeshi peacekeeping troops.
w6020e24.jpg (30854 bytes)
A farmer harvesting wheat raised with seed provided by
the FAO Emergency Programme for Bosnia and Herzogovina
In September 1995, the Netherlands and UNHCR agreed to contribute, respectively, US$2.2 million and US$1.3 million to support the relief programme, in partial response to a consolidated appeal for US$11 million. About 6 700 tonnes of winter wheat seed were ordered and transported into Bosnia and Herzogovina, along with needed fertilizer. The relief operation provided 90 percent of the emergency wheat seed requirements identified by FAO for the 1995 autumn planting. This seed yielded about 63 000 tonnes of wheat for a hungry population.
Agricultural relief and early recovery activities continued in 1996 and 1997.
triangles.JPG (4070 bytes)
REHABILITATION AND RECONSTRUCTION
in the aftermath of war in Afghanistan
One of the most serious consequences of 18 years of civil war in Afghanistan has been disruption of agriculture and a sharp decline in food production. FAO, supported by funding from UNDP and other donors and with the support of NGOs active in the country, has been helping to restore sustainable agricultural production through a programme for integrated crop and livestock production.
The programme combines several separate earlier projects involving agronomy, seed production, crop improvement, horticulture and plant protection, as well as support for apiculture and sericulture. The programme functions as an extension service, setting up farmers' field schools in some 80 districts in the country's main production areas. Technical information is transferred to farmers at village level through demonstration and training, with farmers selected from within the community taking the lead.
In only two years the programme has achieved a great deal. For example, in 1995/96, 17 000 tonnes of quality seed - mainly wheat but also rice, maize, barley, pulses and cotton - were produced and distributed by a countrywide network of supervised locally contracted seed growers, set up under the programme. Crop improvement is also being pursued through selection, testing and multiplication of disease-resistant varieties. In 1996 the programme established 66 new private fruit-tree nurseries in 19 provinces; a further 97 are to be established in 1997.
w6020e25.jpg (38795 bytes)
Technicians weeding seedlings at an FAO-supported fruit-tree nursery in Afghanistan
Another important area of activity has been restoration of animal health services. Afghans traditionally depend on livestock as an important source of food and income, but animal production had suffered during the war when veterinary services collapsed. Beginning in 1992, FAO has worked with other international organizations and NGOs to establish community-based veterinary field units in 219 of Afghanistan's 325 districts. The field units are staffed by more than 2 000 Afghan animal health workers. A survey conducted in seven districts after three years of operation showed that livestock mortality had been reduced by 22 to 60 percent. The financial benefit from decreased mortality averaged US$120 000 per district.
<section>4</section>
FAO's role in emergencies
MISSION STATEMENT
FAO is a key player in emergencies. Its focus is on food production and agriculture, reflecting its specialization and responsibility within the United Nations family. Assisting in preventing disaster-related emergencies, providing early warnings of food emergencies and helping in rehabilitation of food production systems are FAO's predominant roles in humanitarian aid. The main forms of FAO's intervention include needs assessments, provision of agricultural inputs and technical assistance for the planning and management of sustainable recovery and rehabilitation of rural production systems.
UNDERSTANDING EMERGENCIES
Natural disasters
Disasters in developing countries are largely associated with natural hazards. Earth-quakes and volcanic eruptions are spectacular examples of natural hazards, but these geological events do not do as much damage or cost as much as climatic hazards. Hurricanes, floods and drought cause significant loss in rural production systems, including loss of life.
People live in dangerous places because resources are found in these places. Coastlines have fish and shellfish, mangroves and other forests, but they are susceptible to hurricanes. Floodplains provide alluvial soils and access to water, but they are liable to flood. Arid and semi-arid areas offer rangeland resources for pastoralists, but the risk of drought is high.
People know the risks involved. Their social and cultural traditions are frequently designed to minimize these risks. Sharing resources, including land, and sharing agricultural inputs, including labour, are ways of minimizing risk. Sometimes calamity is too great and catastrophe overwhelms people. Their risk-minimizing strategies and their coping mechanisms cease to be operational. Disaster strikes.
Disaster does not strike equally, and not all disasters result in emergencies. A drought in the American Great Plains does not threaten mass starvation as does a drought in the African Sahel. Developed countries have a series of support schemes, such as disaster relief and crop insurance, that mitigate the impact of natural disasters; developing countries usually do not. People in developing countries are more vulnerable to changes in the environment. Vulnerability to emergencies attributable to natural disasters is largely explained by poverty.
Man-made disasters and complex emergencies
Over the past ten years a number of complex emergencies have arisen in which there has been civil strife or even war, and in some cases the State has collapsed. Although natural disasters have also frequently been present, they have not been the dominant factor in the emergency. In such circum-stances essential services are disrupted, infrastructure is destroyed, people flee from the land, and food production and marketing systems break down. Immediate hunger and longer-term dependence on food relief are the consequences unless prompt action is taken to create conditions in which affected populations can resume productive activity.
COSTS AND CONSEQUENCES OF EMERGENCIES
Global losses resulting from natural and man-made disasters were some US$10 000 million in the 1960s, rising to some US$93 000 million in the 1980s. With the increase in complex emergencies in the 1990s, costs are likely to be even higher. More important, the human cost is intolerably high. Tens of millions of people are displaced within their own countries or dispersed around the world as refugees. In 1996, as a result of complex emergencies, some 40 million people were depending on international assistance for their protection or survival. The number of lives lost to starvation-related causes may, however, be less than in previous decades, as emergency response and famine-prevention programmes have increased in magnitude and efficiency.
Aid flows reflect the increase in priority for humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance has doubled since 1990, against a fall in the value of total aid. In 1994 humanitarian assistance, amounting to some US$6 000 million, accounted for almost 10 percent of total global development assistance. The size of that bill has prompted donors to emphasize the importance of pre-disaster, precautionary planning. It has also drawn attention to the importance of rehabilitation programmes to move people quickly from expensive humanitarian assistance towards food self-sufficiency.
FAO supports the principle that prevention is better than cure. The first line of defence is action on the ground to develop production systems that are less vulnerable to disaster. In the event that disaster happens, the global warnings that FAO provides and the preparedness actions that it has supported up to that point should permit an early response to food and agricultural emergencies. When an emergency does develop, the consequences of not treating it promptly and efficiently will be chronic hunger and dependency. When a cure is required, it should be specific to the conditions created by the particular emergency situation, so that full recovery can take place in the shortest possible time.
THE EMERGENCY SEQUENCE
Intervention in emergencies can be best described in terms of a sequence of events, sometimes referred to as a disaster cycle, with eight distinct phases, each requiring different action. The phases are:
* prevention;
* preparedness;
* early warning;
* impact and needs assessment immediately following a disaster;
* relief, when immediate humanitarian assistance is required;
* rehabilitation, when the first attempts to rebuild the rural livelihood system take place;
* reconstruction, when the destroyed infrastructure is replaced;
* sustainable recovery, when conditions return to normal.
FAO is involved, together with national authorities and their internal and external partners, in all of these phases. Conscious of the high costs of emergency operations, FAO continuously seeks to prevent disaster-related emergencies, but should they occur, FAO seeks to mitigate their impact and to accelerate a recovery process that will lead to sustainable agricultural development.
PREVENTION, PREPAREDNESS AND EARLY WARNING
FAO provides technical assistance to its member countries to strengthen their capacity to prevent or mitigate natural disasters such as windstorms, hurricanes and cyclones, floods, landslides, wild fires, tropical deforestation and drought. Such assistance covers actions such as establishment of shelterbelt plantations, forestation and forest management, watershed management, range-land management, fire control, control of soil erosion, establishment of fuelwood plantations, sand dune stabilization, utilization of alternative fuels, adoption of drought-tolerant field and tree crops, introduction of early-maturing varieties, adoption of cultural practices for soil moisture retention, crop diversification and construction of flood control dikes.
The Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS) is aimed at reducing variability and improving sustainable productivity of staple production in low-income food-deficit countries. Through better water control, sustainable intensification of crop production, diversification of production and removal of socio-economic constraints, the SPFS will alleviate the impact of disasters.
FAO assists its member countries in minimizing the adverse effects of disasters through precautionary actions and by ensuring timely, appropriate and efficient organization and delivery of emergency response following the impact of a disaster.
Prevention and control of pest and disease emergencies is a significant technical service offered by FAO. Through the Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases (EMPRES), FAO tackles outbreaks of livestock diseases such as rinderpest and contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia and mounts eradication and containment programmes for screwworm. Through the Emergency Centre for Locust Operations, EMPRES also monitors the presence of locust swarms, as well as the threat of large-scale crop destruction by flocks of birds, and arranges for preventive actions when required.
FAO's assistance includes the development of institutional frameworks at regional, national and local levels for managing risk and coping with emergencies, the development of regional and national early warning and food information systems, the establishment and management of food security reserves and the formulation of preparedness plans which describe the response mechanisms to be used in the event of a disaster.
FAO operates the Global Information and Early Warning System for Food and Agriculture (GIEWS), based on satellite imagery, field reports and market information. Six times each year it publishes Food Outlook in five languages, giving a global overview of current agricultural production and stocks. Foodcrops and Shortages, published in four languages, is also distributed six times a year, detailing individual country situations. Food Supply Situation and Crop Prospects in Sub-Saharan Africa, in English and French, is published quarterly, highlighting needs for donor assistance in the most vulnerable continent. Sahel Weather and Crop Situation is produced monthly during the Sahelian growing season, providing the latest information on weather and crop conditions for the nine member countries of the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS).
FAO is also responsible for fielding, together with the World Food Programme (WFP), the FAO/WFP crop and food supply assessment missions. These missions, which review the overall food supply outlook and evaluate the seriousness and extent of food shortages within countries, are based on on-the-ground observation. Special alerts, usually based on crop and food supply assessment mission reports, are released on an ad hoc basis. GIEWS reports are available on FAO's home page on the Internet.
EMERGENCY RELIEF AND REHABILITATION
Persons directly affected by disasters, along with displaced people and refugees in complex emergencies, require food relief. But such relief should be accompanied by agricultural relief - provided through seeds and tools programmes of FAO and other partners - to move people quickly from expensive humanitarian assistance programmes towards food self-reliance as soon as possible.
FAO's work in post-disaster and complex emergency situations emphasizes rehabilitation and recovery. The reconstruction of food and agricultural production systems, including the supporting transport and market networks, is the reconstruction of rural livelihood systems - essential if people are to regain development opportunity.
Once an emergency situation has been declared, the first step in mobilizing humanitarian assistance is the assessment of needs. The assessment reports produced by the FAO/WFP missions referred to above provide estimates of critical food shortages within countries requiring international assistance, as well as of localized surpluses which may be available for local purchases. These reports have a high profile in donor pledging processes and are a critical input into any humanitarian appeal from the UN system.
Emergency food relief is provided through WFP and bilateral donors. However, approval of WFP emergency operations above a certain threshold requires the consent of the Director-General of FAO as well as of the Executive Director of WFP. Within FAO, the analysis on which the Director-General's decision is based is prepared by GIEWS.
Provision of emergency agricultural relief and early recovery assistance is the responsibility of FAO's Special Relief Operations Service. This service has four main functions:
* assessment of emergency agricultural relief requirements and related project preparation;
* resource mobilization;
* project implementation, including moni-toring and impact assessment;
* advice and support for the preparation of rehabilitation programmes.
The Special Relief Operations Service makes arrangements for quick, comprehensive assessments of the essential inputs needed to restore production following a disaster. National needs for inputs to produce food in the aftermath of a disaster are assessed by the FAO/WFP crop and food supply assessment missions. Each assessment is carefully checked by the appropriate technical services of FAO.
The essential inputs for restoring production are provided mainly through grants from members to the concerned governments, either directly or through non-governmental organi-zations (NGOs) or multilateral organizations, including FAO. From 1991 to 1996 the Special Relief Operations Service formulated and managed over 300 projects with a total value of some US$169 million. Of these projects 40 percent were in Africa south of the Sahara, 29 percent in North Africa and the Near East and 15 percent in Asia. While the average annual value of relief projects amounted to around US$28 million, in some years the figure was considerably higher. For example, in the food crisis years of 1993 and 1994 the annual value reached US$38 million and US$35 million, respectively. In 1997 the amount is expected to reach a record high, having already amounted to US$36 million in the first half of the year. (A sizeable portion of this amount is accounted for by the agricultural relief and
rehabilitation programme in Iraq.)
The major bilateral donor has been the Netherlands, with substantial monies also coming from Sweden. Italy, the United Kingdom, Canada and the United States have all contributed significantly to relief efforts. The major multilateral donor has been the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA); substantial contributions have also been made by the European Community (EC) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
FAO uses its own procurement services to purchase inputs because it can demonstrably obtain inputs quickly and at a lower cost. If inputs are available locally or in the subregion, they can be purchased by the FAO representation in the country or, if large amounts are involved, through the fielding of a procurement mission from headquarters. Such operations normally commence within one week of confirmation that funds will be provided.
FACILITATING RAPID RESPONSE
In mid-1996 a new Field Programme Circular was sent to all FAO Representatives outlining FAO's role and procedures to ensure a rapid and coherent response to any emergency originating from natural or man-made disasters affecting the food and agriculture sectors. FAO may field an Emergency Coordinator, for up to one year, to coordinate monitoring and assessment activities, provision of agricultural inputs, and planning for recovery and rehabilitation of rural production systems if the nature of the emergency so requires.
Several in-house technical guides have been prepared by the relevant technical services in FAO, for prevention, preparedness, early warning, needs assessment and relief and rehabilitation activities before, during and after a disaster. These guides are currently being drawn together in an FAO emergency preparedness and response manual for use by FAO staff, field experts and consultants in all phases of an emergency.
In order to enhance FAO's institutional capacity to respond to increasing demands for humanitarian assistance, the FAO Emergency Coordination Group, reporting directly to FAO's Deputy Director-General, has been reorganized and strengthened. FAO is prepared and ready to carry out its unique role in all phases of a food and agricultural emergency.
PARTNERS
FAO has a long tradition of partnership with others involved in humanitarian assistance.
The United Nations system has modified the way it handles emergency assistance. By decentralizing and restructuring specialist services to member countries, UN agencies, including FAO, can more accurately assess humanitarian assistance requirements and shorten response times in emergencies.
The increase in emergency situations, especially complex emergencies, saw the creation of the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs in 1992. FAO sits on the Inter-agency Standing Committee (IASC), which is chaired by the Emergency Relief Coordinator, and participates in the UN Humanitarian Early Warning System and ReliefWeb, as well as in DHA missions that pull together UN inter-agency consolidated appeals.
In the preparation of such appeals, FAO is responsible for agricultural relief needs assessment and, in cooperation with WFP, for food needs assessment. FAO is also responsible for the formulation of inter-ventions aimed at immediate relief and agricultural rehabilitation efforts for inclusion in the appeals.
FAO has formal agreements with WFP outlining respective roles and responsibilities. The Organization collaborates actively with UNHCR for the supply of agricultural inputs to refugees.
Beyond the immediate United Nations family, FAO has strong partnerships with the World Bank, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the regional financing institutions in agricultural rehabilitation and reconstruction.
FAO implements projects directly or with assistance from NGOs. NGOs are both providers and users of GIEWS information. Save the Children Fund (United Kingdom) has entered into a formal relationship with FAO for the development of risk maps as a support to the early warning analysis conducted by GIEWS. However, NGO partnerships have generally been informal.
A GLOBAL WATCH AND TARGETED ACTION
FAO is constantly monitoring events, planning precautionary interventions and issuing warnings. When disaster strikes, FAO acts to mobilize global resources rapidly for emergency operations and for short-term rehabilitation and early recovery inter-ventions. As conditions return to normal, FAO acts to restore rural production and to set farmers on the road to sustainable recovery as quickly as possible.
