<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
The denial of equal educational opportunities to girls and women has been recognized internationally as a fundamental challenge to human dignity and a limitation to the scope of human rights. (UNESCO, World Education Report, 1995) From a developmental perspective, investing in the education of females has the highest rate of return of any possible investment in developing countries. (FAO, Women Feed the World, 1996) Without such investment, and a political commitment to improving educational opportunities, women will continue to comprise nearly two-thirds of the world's illiterate adults. (UNESCO, 1995)
Activities related to women-in-development are an integral part of the Research, Extension and Training Division's educational programmes and activities. Gender issues continue to be important in the development of educational policy and in the planning of new initiatives. Based on recommendations from a series of regional round-table meetings on "Strategies and Options in Intermediate and Higher Education in Agriculture" and a Rome expert consultation on the same topic, the Extension, Education and Communication Service (SDRE) carried out five case studies on the enrolment of women in higher and intermediate agricultural education. These case studies are summarized and consolidated into this report which includes a review of the trends and constraints that have an effect on the enrolment of women in tertiary level educational programmes in the agricultural sciences.
Economic and cultural constraints are limiting factors in complex societies and people do not always agree on the value of education for women. It is within the confines of these societies that decisions will have to be made about expanding educational opportunities for women. In the developing countries, the enrolment figures for women studying agricultural subject matter at the intermediate and higher levels of education may vary from as low as five percent to as high as 50 percent. Accurate figures on enrolment rates are difficult to find and the causal factors are often speculative and based on individuals' perceptions of cultural bias and tradition.
The goal is for women to be able to participate and contribute on an equal basis with men in the social, economic and political processes of rural development and share fully in improved conditions of life in the rural areas. In a practical sense, and at the action level, this goal suggests that in education, training and extension programmes of member countries, the participation of women must be supported and their equal benefits guaranteed.
Improving women's access to education in general, and to higher education in agricultural in particular, can contribute to increased food production at the household and national levels, improved nutritional status of families, and thus to the achievement of food security. Conversely, the failure to adequately address women needs for education in agricultural is at the root of the failure of many agricultural ' development efforts and attempts to achieve food security.
The World Food Summit Plan of Action recognizes the importance of the empowerment of women to the achievement of food security and the need to remove the constraints hindering them. Commitment One, of the World Food Summit Plan of Action reads: "We will ensure an enabling political, social, and economic environment designed to create the best conditions for the eradication of poverty and for durable peace, based on full and equal participation of women and men, which is most conducive to achieving sustainable food security for all".' The achievement of this commitment is a challenge that we still face. It is hoped that this publication will make a contribution to meeting that challenge.
Louise O. Fresco, Director
Research, Extension and Training Division
Sustainable Development Department
<title>Higher agricultural education and opportunities in rural development for women - An overview and summary of five case-studies</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Introduction
Improving women's access to education, and to higher agricultural education in particular, can contribute to improved food production at the household and national levels, improved nutritional status of families, and thus to the achievement of food security. Conversely, the failure to adequately address women farmers' needs for agricultural training and information is at the root of the failure of many agricultural development efforts and attempts to achieve food security. The 1996 World Food Summit acknowledged both women's fundamental contributions to food security and the importance of enabling women to have equal access to educational opportunities. It is insufficient to increase women's educational opportunities, however, without at the same time ensuring that women can benefit equally from these opportunities. Educational opportunities and the empowerment of women go hand-in-hand. Education contributes to the empowerment of women and the empowerment of women makes its
possible for women to benefit from educational opportunities.
Women's contributions to food security can be measured both quantitatively and qualitatively. Women are the majority of the world's agricultural producers, playing important roles in fisheries and forestry as well as in farming. It is often stated that women are responsible for more than half the world's food production overall and produce up to 60 to 80 percent of basic foodstuffs in Africa and the Caribbean and over 50 percent in Asia. In Latin America, women make a significant contribution to food production, particularly in horticulture and small livestock.
Women also make crucial contributions to food security as preservers of agro-biodiversity, as those who process and prepare food for the market and their families, and as those who have the primary responsibility in the household to provide food, if not by producing it then by earning the income for its purchase. Women are also responsible for providing the basic needs of their families such as water, fuel, child rearing and basic health care all of which are necessary to the well-being of the family and the ability to live healthy and active lives.
These contributions are made in the face of constraints and attitudes that undervalue women farmers' contributions and responsibilities, reduce their productivity, place upon them a disproportionate work burden, discriminate against them and hinder their participation in decision and policy making. Among the most serious of these constraints are:
· lack of appropriate agricultural research and technologies;
· lack of appreciation for the value of women's knowledge and roles in the area of biodiversity and environmentally sustainable practices; and
· lack of participation in agricultural policy-making and development bodies.
Given women's key roles in food security, the achievement of food security for the present and for future generations depends to a great extent on urgently and seriously addressing these constraints. This presents challenges to all areas related to agricultural and rural development, not least of these education and especially women's participation in higher agricultural education. Among the constraints on women farmers listed above, several are closely related to women's participation in higher agricultural education:
· lack of access to education, extension and training;
· inadequate attention by research institutes to the needs of women farmers;
· lack of appreciation of the value of women's knowledge and roles in agro-biodiversity and environmentally sustainable development; and
· low representation of women in agricultural policy-making and development bodies.
The World Food Summit Plan of Action recognizes, in the first of its seven commitments, the importance of the empowerment of women to the achievement of food security and the need to remove the constraints hindering them.
Box 1 - Commitment One, World Food Summit Plan of Action
"We will ensure an enabling political, social, and economic environment designed to create the best conditions for the eradication of poverty and for durable peace, based on full and equal participation of women and men, which is most conducive to achieving sustainable food security for all"
Among the objectives set to meet this commitment is: "To ensure gender equality and empowerment of women". To attain this objective, governments pledged, inter alia, to:
· Ensure that institutions provide equal access for women;
· Tailor extension and technical services to women producers and increase the number of women advisors and agents;
· Focus research efforts on the division of labour and on income access and control within the household; and
· Gather information on women's traditional knowledge and skills in agriculture, fisheries, forestry and natural resource management.
This paper will give an overview of women's access to education, both formal and informal, at all levels, and particularly higher agricultural education. It will examine how improving women's access to agricultural education and opportunities to benefit from this access are related to taking the actions outlined in the World Food Summit Plan of Action, particularly in the areas of extension and technical services, research efforts, women's traditional knowledge and skills and access to development planning and policy-making institutions, and thus ultimately to both the achievement of food security and the empowerment of women.
It will then examine case studies on women's enrolment in agricultural studies in Côte d'Ivoire, Jordan, Nigeria, the Philippines, and the Caribbean Community, focusing on women's access to education and opportunities to use and benefit from this education, the constraints on women's educational access and employment opportunities, and recommendations on how to overcome these constraints.
Finally, it will draw some general conclusions and recommendations on improving women's access to higher agricultural education and their opportunities to use and benefit from it.
<section>2</section>
Literacy and access to formal education
Participation in education
Women's unequal participation in education: Causes and constraints
The process and benefits of education
An investment in development: Educational opportunities for women and girls
Literacy and access to formal education
Literacy and access to basic education are prerequisites for taking advantage of opportunities for higher agricultural education. Any efforts to improve women's access to higher agricultural education must, therefore, be linked to overall efforts to improve girls and women's literacy and access to basic education. Almost everywhere, girls' and women's literacy rates and access to basic education are considerably lower than those of boys and men.
According to UNESCO, women and girls are the "largest single category of persons denied equality of educational opportunity in the world today" (UNESCO 1995), and this is particularly true in developing countries where women are a major part of the agricultural work force. UNESCO distinguishes two forms of educational opportunity: participation and process. Participation refers to the opportunity to participate in education, while process refers to treatment during the educational process. To this could be added the opportunity to benefit from education.
Participation is quantitative and can be measured by looking at literacy and enrolment provided to girls and women. Process involves the nature and content of education given to girls and women and has both quantitative and qualitative aspects to it. The benefits of education can also be examined from both a quantitative and qualitative point of view. It is possible to have equality of participation in education without having equality of treatment during the process of education. It is also possible to have equality of treatment without being able to benefit equally from education. Greater equality in one area, however, does have a positive influence on equality in another. And, of course, equality of participation is a necessary step towards equal treatment or benefits.
Participation in education
TABLE 1 - Estimated Adult Literacy Rates by Region, 1980 and 1995*
MF
M
F
MF
M
F
World
Developing Countries, of which:
Sub-Saharan Africa
Arab States
Latin America and Caribbean
Eastern Asia and Oceania, of which:
China
Southern Asia, of which:
India
Least developed countries
Developed countries
Source: UNESCO, World Education Report 1995, Table 1.1.
* Percentage of literate adults in the population aged 15 years and over.
Worldwide, there is a gap of 10 percent between women's literacy rates and those of men. In some regions of the world, this gap is more than 25 percent. A comparison of literacy rates by region in 1980 and 1995 shows, however, that this gap is closing, albeit slowly (see Table 1).
Female participation in primary, secondary and tertiary education compared to that of males varies considerably by region. With the exception of the developed countries and Latin America and the Caribbean, however, the percentage of the female population enrolled in school is significantly lower than that of the male population at all age levels. The percentage of both males and females declines from the primary to secondary levels and from the secondary to tertiary age levels in all regions, but the gap between males and females remains, again with the exception of the developed countries and Latin America and the Caribbean.
Sub-Saharan Africa and Southern Asia are the regions with the lowest percentages of enrolment of both school age males and females and where the gaps between the enrolment of males and females at each level are greatest. These are also the two regions with the highest percentages of women farmers. Consequently, where the need is greatest for improving women's access to higher agricultural education, the challenges are also greatest since so few women in these regions have the prerequisites of basic education at the primary and secondary levels.
TABLE 2 - Estimated Net Enrolment Ratios for the Age Groups 6-11, 12-17 and 18-23 Years, by Region, 1995*
Age 6-11
Age 12-17
Age 18 -23
M
F
M
F
M
F
Sub-Saharan Africa
Arab States
Latin America/Caribbean
Eastern Asia/Oceania
Southern Asia
Developed Countries
Source: UNESCO, World Education Report, 1995, Table 2.1.
* Percentage ratio of the number of enrolled pupils/students in each age group to the total population in the age-group.
Women's participation in higher agricultural studies is significantly lower than that of men, even in the developed regions and in Latin America and the Caribbean where women participate in tertiary education in nearly equal numbers as men. As Table 3 shows, the number of women in higher agricultural education as compared to men is lowest in precisely those regions where women constitute the majority of food producers. There are also considerably fewer women than men enrolled in science and engineering, which also has a bearing on agricultural planning and policy in all regions.
TABLE 3 - Women per 100 Men in Agricultural, and Science and Engineering Studies at the Third Level, 1990
Agriculture
Science end engineering
Developed Countries
Africa
Northern Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America and the Caribbean
Latin America
Caribbean
Asia and Pacific
Eastern and South-Eastern Asia
Southern Asia
Western Asia
Source: United Nations, The World 's Women 1995, Trends and Statistics, Chart 4.1 1.
Women's unequal participation in education: Causes and constraints
The causes of women's unequal literacy rates and participation in education have been well-documented. The major obstacles that women face in access to education are:
· Lack of time: Girls in many countries are expected to begin helping out at an early age with the household responsibilities which burden women: fetching fuel and water, preparing food, childcare, cleaning, and taking part in the agricultural activities for which women are responsible. These responsibilities increase as they grow older, which explains the constant decline in girls' and women's participation in education with increasing age, particularly in regions where women comprise a large part of the food producers. Lack of time also prevents adult women from participating in adult literacy and educational programmes.
· Economic reasons: Girls are often considered as a source of household labour who will leave their families upon marriage and become part of the labour force of another family. Boys, on the other hand, are expected to provide support to their families of origin when they become adults. When this is the case, it is economically more sound to invest in the education of boys than in that of girls, particularly where money for education and basic necessities is scarce. Moreover, women generally command fewer opportunities and lower salaries in the labour market and therefore investment in girls' education yields less than that of boys.
· Organizational obstacles: In some countries, parents are unwilling for cultural reasons to have their female children study under male instructors or in mixed gender classes. The lack of female instructors and female-only schools or classes thus becomes and obstacle to female participation in schools. Other obstacles include the distances between home and school and the lack of transport, which affects females more than males where female mobility is restricted.
· Customs, traditions and attitudes: A combination of mutually reinforcing customs, traditions and attitudes places greater value on males than females in many societies. Moreover, improved employment opportunities and earning-power as a result of educational opportunities can lead to greater independence for women, which may be threatening to men's sense of superiority, control, and conviction about the place of men and women in society. Whether these attitudes are conscious or not, they act as a restraint on women's educational opportunities.
· Cycle of poverty: Extreme poverty in many countries of the world tends to lock illiterate women and girls into a cycle of early marriages and bringing up illiterate girls who continue the cycle of early marriages and illiterate children.
· Lack of motivation to learn: Girls and women sometimes have little incentive to participate in education because there are few if any opportunities to benefit from education.
While some of these obstacles, particularly the organizational ones, can be directly tackled on a practical level, most of them are inextricably tied up with a complex mixture of cultural, social and economic factors. On the whole, richer countries offer greater opportunities for women to participate in education than the poorest and least developed countries, but the gaps between male and female participation can only be partly explained by a country's GNP per capita. For instance, the gross enrolment ratio for girls in primary education in countries with less than US$ 500 per capita in 1992, ranged from less than 50 percent of that of boys to nearly equal; e.g. Guinea (47 %), Chad (48 %); Benin (50 %); Pakistan (53 %), Niger (57 %), compared to Kenya (98 %), Rwanda (98 %), Tajikistan (97 %), United Republic of Tanzania (97 %) and Madagascar (96 %) (UNESCO 1995).
In certain developing countries, the relatively large numbers of women in tertiary education compared to men can be explained by the fact that men have better employment opportunities than women. For example, in Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, and South Africa' boys frequently leave school earlier than girls in order to migrate to areas providing jobs in mines and commercial agriculture. According to UNESCO (1995), however, there are no ready explanations for the near equal participation of males and females in higher education in Latin America and the Caribbean and certain countries such as the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. A study of the reasons for this lack of disparity might throw light on how to help overcome education gaps in other countries and regions.
The process and benefits of education
Access to education is only one part of educational opportunity. Another important part is the treatment of pupils and students during the process of education. The UNESCO World Education Report 1995 raises several basic questions regarding equality of educational opportunities for girls and women in the process of education: Do girls have equal opportunities with boys to learn the same subjects and fields? Are tests and examinations fair to girls? Are teaching practices effective for both sexes?
At the elementary or basic level of education, boys and girls generally receive the same or very similar education. At the secondary level, however, major differences begin to appear in the education of males and females. One of the most significant of these differences, insofar as it impacts on agricultural education, is the decreasing participation of girls and women in technical and scientific education. By the time they reach the tertiary level of education, the number of women in technical and scientific education is only of fraction of the number of men (see Table 3).
At the root of this disparity are factors such as social conventions, assumptions and economic opportunities. In all societies, including developed ones, there is a tendency for girls to be channel led into or encouraged to take up fields of study which most closely correspond to the traditional household roles of women. There is often an implicit or explicit assumption that girls and women are less suited to or capable of mastering mathematical, scientific and technical subjects than boys and men. Moreover, girls and women are generally trained to assume a position in society that is subordinate to that of men.
The choice of study is often made by girls and women themselves, but it is often influenced by subtle or not so subtle pressures from teachers, parents and society in general. The socialization of girls and boys begins in infancy, and by the time they reach school age much of this has already been internalized. This socialization is continued and reinforced throughout their school years.
Box 2 - Socialization of Boys and Girls
"In nearly all societies, girls are socialized to identify with the family and the private sphere, while boys are brought up to act in the public sphere. Both at school and home, girls are conditioned for the roles as wives and mothers while boys are trained in skills and encouraged to develop the self-confidence needed for public life. Gender stereotyping in educational materials, the bias against women in history books, and the lack of women leaders as role models all reinforce this."
Marilee Karl, Women and Empowerment - Participation and Decision Making; 1995
The gender composition of the teaching staff and classroom in different fields of study may influence the choices made by students. In some societies, women feel more comfortable being taught by female staff. Even in societies where this is not tile case, the male teachers and classroom environment in male-dominated fields of study are sometimes subtly or not so subtly hostile to women. Furthermore, recent studies indicate that pedagogical methods may be geared to male pupils (UNESCO 1995).
Choice of field of study is also influenced by employment prospects and based on a realistic appraisal of the opportunities to benefit from the education received. The lack or limitation of work opportunities for women in scientific, technical and agricultural fields is an underlying cause of the few women taking up these fields of study at the secondary and tertiary levels. A related factor is the employment conditions in different fields of specialization. Boys and men tend to go into fields which can bestow status on them, whereas girls and women more often need and/or want to take up employment which is compatible with household responsibilities and childrearing.
In every country, women still face to a greater or lesser degree barriers to benefiting from their education. As the United Nations Human Development Report 1995 concludes:
"....providing education is necessary but not sufficient for women's empowerment. More has to be done to open opportunities for women to use the capabilities they are acquiring".
An investment in development: Educational opportunities for women and girls
Investment in the education of girls and women is one of the most effective means of raising the general level of development and promoting sustainable development, according to several studies by international agencies, including the World Bank, UNESCO and the United Nations Development Programme.
Positive correlations have been found between improved educational opportunities for girls and women in developing countries and the following:
· Lower fertility rates: A significant decrease can be seen in the fertility rates of women who have completed six to seven years of schooling. This can be attributed to the fact that educated women tend to marry later, have greater access to information on and understanding of family planning, and are thus more capable of making decisions about practicing birth control and having children.
Box 3 - Illiteracy and Fertility Rates
"In Africa and southern Asia illiteracy rates among adult women are still over 50 percent, and total fertility rates are still over five births per women. In Latin America and the Caribbean and in eastern and southeastern Asia illiteracy rates among women are largely under 20 percent and fertility rates are less than four births per woman, often much less." United Nations, The World's Women, 1995; Trends and Statistics, 1995.
· Healthier families and lower child mortality rates: Educated women also have greater access to and are more capable of putting into practice health information for the benefit of themselves and their families. They tend to take advantage of immunization programmes and are able to take measures to reduce the negative effects of poor water supply and sanitation. Healthier families translates into fewer childhood deaths, which also reduces the pressure to continue child bearing to ensure the survival of at least some children.
· Better adjustment of families to the changing economic, social, and cultural environment: Since mothers have a significant influence on the early socialization of children and on the wellbeing of their families, educated women are better able to communicate, learn and utilize information and thus help their families adjust to the transition through which many communities in the world are passing.
· Greater participation of women in the labour force and better employment prospects: Although educated women do encounter barriers in maximizing their education in the world of employment, they definitely have far greater opportunities for employment than uneducated women. As those responsible for the well-being of their families in most developing countries, the greater earning power of women translates into better living standards of their households.
· Greater participation of rural women in agricultural training and extension services: Access to basic education enables rural women to better benefit from agricultural training, information and services. It is also the first step towards higher agricultural education.
· Greater participation in decision making: educated women have knowledge, and information and self-confidence to enable them to take greater part in decision making at the household and community levels. The higher the level of education, the more opportunities women generally have to participate in decision making at higher levels.
Box 4 - The Greening of the Earth Can Only Begin With the Empowerment of Women
"There are hundreds, thousands of depressing environmental statistics....Yet one statistic stands out as more distressing than any other: there are 600 million illiterate women in the world - more than twice as many illiterate women as illiterate men.
"Why is this an environmental statistic?
"Uneducated women are less able to help protect their environment. Uneducated women are more likely to bear greater numbers of children than their environment can fully support. Uneducated women are increasingly unable to become our partners in creating a sustainable future..
"Women are vital to our vision of a sustainable future. They are the guardians of natural wisdom in their societies; they are often the principal ecosystem managers of their communities. They are the first educators, and can do the most to change the habits and beliefs of a new generation.....
"That is why the single most important step towards sustainable living that governments can take...is the education of women".
Elizabeth Dowdswell, UN Under-Secretary General (UNEP-HABITAT), in Karl, Women and Empowerment, 1995.
<section>3</section>
Access to extension and training
Obstacles to women's participation in extension and training
Improving women's participation in extension and training
Access to extension and training
Since women constitute over 50 percent of the food producers worldwide and up to 60 to 80 percent in sub-Saharan Africa, it makes sense to expect that a corresponding percentage of agricultural extension and training services would be directed to women farmers. This is far from the reality. A 1989 FAO survey on extension services in 115 countries showed that women received only two to ten percent of all extension contacts and only five percent of extension resources worldwide.
Obstacles to women's participation in extension and training
Some of the obstacles to women's extremely low access to extension and training are:
· Lack of knowledge of women's contributions to agricultural production: Lack of gender-disaggregated data and information, the unpaid nature of much of women's agricultural work, assumptions by agricultural policy makers and planners that agriculture is a male domain, all combine to make women's work "invisible" to field extensionists and extension policy makers.
· Extension priorities: Extension services are often directed to cash and export crops and to farmers who own land and have the collateral to obtain credit for inputs and other services. Women farmers are more likely to be responsible for food crops for domestic consumption and less likely than men to own land and have collateral for credit.
· Agricultural research priorities: Agricultural research is often directed to cash/export crops and to technologies which are used by male farmers. The food crops raised by women have not generally been a priority in agricultural research. Moreover, there has been little research on technologies appropriate for women, either for their agricultural production or their time-consuming responsibilities for food processing, preparation and other household tasks.
· Attitudes and assumptions: Extension personnel generally share the commonly-held attitudes of society that women do not contribute significantly to agriculture, but are mainly concerned with household responsibilities. It is often assumed that men are the heads of the households and that they will pass on agricultural information to their wives and other women in the household. The fact is that a growing number of rural households are headed by women and that even where men are household heads, they may not transfer information to women, sometimes because it is not relevant to the agricultural work that women are doing.
· Practical constraints: Extension services and personnel may not be aware of the practical constraints facing women farmers, such as lack of time due to their household responsibilities in addition to farming; timing of extension services and demonstrations which conflict with women's tasks; restricted mobility for cultural reasons, lack of money for transport, or inability to leave their children, which may prevent women attending demonstrations or training.
· Lack of female extensionists: In many societies, contact between men and women is restricted and, since the great majority of extension workers are male, women farmers may not have access to them.
· Lack of appropriate extension training materials: Extension training courses and curricula seldom deal with the role of women in agriculture or approaches for working with women farmers.
Box 5 - Problems of Extension Training
"A significant problem is that in many courses of study, in-service training and education in extension methodology there is insufficient examination and discussion of the roles of rural men and women in agricultural production and rural development. Too little time is allocated to gender analysis and a participatory approach aimed at solving the problem of how extension work can effectively be carried out with rural women".
Improving Extension Work with Rural Women, FAO, 1996.
· Low literacy and educational levels of women: Women farmers are hampered in taking advantage of and using extension services and information because of low literacy rates or lack of access to basic education.
The low percentage of women in higher agricultural education is one of the root causes of these constraints. The small number of women agricultural graduates translates into a limited pool of available women extensionists, agricultural technicians, researchers, planners and policy makers. More gender-sensitive women researchers could help agricultural research institutes to focus on women's crops and technologies appropriate to women. A critical mass of women agriculturists might be able to open doors to greater opportunity for women in the field, especially at the planning and policy-making levels.
A larger number of women in higher agricultural education could also help shift attitudes and assumptions about women's roles in agriculture.
Box 6 - Contacting Rural Women
"A study in Tanzania found that extension workers assumed that all adult women are married and that their husbands would pass on advice to them. In fact, many women were single and heads of households and even when they were married, the husbands did not pass on the information".
"Some female farmers could be selected as contact farmers, and act as an effective link with other women farmers....To ensure that women are included as contact farmers, extension workers need to consider the criteria commonly used in the selection process. Some of these tend to indirectly exclude women: e.g. requirement of land ownership, literacy, and the ability to purchase inputs. Adding an emphasis on farming ability could result in an increase in women contact farmers".
Improving Extension Work with Rural Women, FAO, 1996.
Improving women's participation in extension and training
A number of approaches and interventions have been identified to increase women's participation in both extension and training. While these are being implemented in various places, they need to become more widely accepted and applied if women are to have equal opportunities to access and benefit from agricultural training and extension. These include:
· Data collection and awareness building on women's contributions to agriculture and food security: The growing collection and dissemination of gender-disaggregated data are contributing to an increasing knowledge and awareness of the important contributions of women to agricultural production and food security. Other measures contributing to this awareness are gender analysis and gender sensitivity training of development policy makers, planners and agents.
· Reorientation of extension and research policies and priorities: Greater knowledge of women's key roles in agriculture can help persuade agricultural development policy makers and planners of the need to reorient extension policies and priorities to include the needs of women food producers and of landless farmers. Mandates and guidelines are needed to implement this, as well as monitoring and evaluation mechanisms.
· Improving the linkages between extension and research: Gender-responsive extension services can channel information to research institutes on the needs of women farmers, and gender-responsive research institutes can channel gender appropriate information and technologies to farmers through extension services.
· Training extensionists to involve women in extension services: Both men and women extensionists need training on how to work with women farmers and promote their participation in extension work. Some of the efforts being made are: training extensionists on gender issues and how to carry out gender analysis; the preparation of specific instructional materials on improving extension work with rural women to be used in special training courses and/or inserted into the curriculum of extension courses and training institutes; and developing training materials appropriate for women.
· Training women as extensionists: Girls and women need to be encouraged to train as extension workers. Some efforts in this direction are the provision of special training courses for women farmers, and the reorientation of home economics curricula to emphasize the needs of women in agricultural production.
· Improving women's access to higher agricultural education and opportunities to benefit from this education: More women in higher agricultural studies means more potential women extensionists, researchers, and policy makers, and a critical mass of women to help push open the doors of greater opportunity for women.
Box 7 - Improving Extension Work with Rural Women: An Instructional Package (FAO 1996)
Divided into three major parts, The Trainer's Guide, Course Design and Learner's Workbook, this instructional package is intended to help fill the gap in the lack of gender-sensitive materials available for pre-service and in-service training in extension methodology for extension and community development workers. The modules are designed to be adapted and used at various levels and in a number of formal and non-formal educational settings: education at the intermediate (technical) and higher levels, induction training at the start of employment, in-service education or on-the-job-training and shorter refresher courses and workshops. The Instructional Package was prepared by and is available from: the Research, Extension and Training Division, Extension, Education and Communication Service, FAO, Rome.
<section>4</section>
Responsivenees of research institutes to the needs of women farmers
Responsivenees of research institutes to the needs of women farmers
Agricultural research has a key role to play in increasing food production, improving natural resource management and carrying out policy analysis. At the heart of the agricultural research system are the National Agricultural Research Systems (NARS) in both developed and developing countries and the 17 International Agricultural Research Centres (IARCs): five in Africa, five in Asia, including one in western Asia, three in Latin America and three in the developed regions. The Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) was established by 40 public and private donors to support these centres. These centres carry out scientific research and technological development in the fields of agriculture, forestry and fisheries with the aim of improving agricultural productivity in developing regions.
Most research to date has been oriented to cash crops and staple crops such as wheat, rice and maize, and has neglected food crops grown by small farmers and women farmers in particular, such as hardier grains, legumes, fruits and vegetables. Consequently, women farmers have not received full benefit of the investment in agricultural research. Moreover, the emphasis on cash crops over food crops for household consumption often means less land and labour available for food production.
Box 8 - Whose Criteria Matter?
The major technological thrust of the Green Revolution was the development by agricultural research centres of high-yielding varieties of rice and wheat which under favourable conditions increase grain yield considerably over indigenous varieties. But increase in grain yield is not the only desired criteria or preference for women farmers who also value biomass and other components of the crop or plant. To a small producer, rice is not just grain: it provides straw for thatching and mat-making, fodder for livestock, bran for fish ponds, and husks for fuel. These products not only have a role in the domestic economy but are often a valuable input to other income-generating enterprises which provide a livelihood for many of the rural poor, especially women.
Adapted from Janice Jiggins, Gender-Related Impacts and the Work of the International Agricultural Research Centres, World Bank, 1986 in FAO, Women and the Green Revolution, 1996.
The neglect of women farmers in the development of technologies has also had several negative effects:
· Without appropriate labour-saving technologies for food processing and other household tasks, women are overburdened with work and consequently their health and that of their families suffers as well as their agricultural productivity. This is increasing with the growing phenomenon of male outmigration to urban areas and the increasing number of female-headed households.
· Technologies designed to improve the productivity of men without taking into consideration women can negatively affect women. For instance, women are usually responsible for weeding and when technologies are developed for men to increase the amount of land prepared for planting without improving methods for weeding, women's work increases. Some aspect of farm production suffers as a consequence, often food production for the family. Women farmers may have to substitute easier to care for, but less nutritious, food crops that they grow to feed their families.
· Technologies designed with men in mind as the users may displace women from work and eliminate significant sources of women's income for supplying the basic needs of their households.
The lack of responsiveness of agricultural research institutes to the needs of small farmers, and especially women farmers, constitutes a constraint on the ability of these groups to improve food production and their contributions to food security, as well as abandons them to a cycle of poverty.
Is there a correlation between the lack of responsiveness of agricultural research institutes and women's participation in these institutes? It would appear, from data compiled by the CGIAR, that there may be. The great majority of the professionals trained in agricultural and biological sciences and forestry, engineering and chemistry, social sciences, math and statistics, and environmental sciences who staff these institutes are men. Table 4 shows the small percentage of women composing the staff of the seventeen IARCs and CGIAR. It is also significant that while there is a moderate participation of women in the non-scientific and trainee staff of the IARCs, only a small percentage of this number reach management and policy-making levels.
TABLE 4 - Women Staff in International Agricultural Research Centres, 1991
Total Staff
% Women
Seventeen centres
Scientific staff
Other international staff
Postdoctorates and trainees
Consultants
Board Members
Total in centres
Consultative Group (CGIAR)
Secretariat (at the World Bank)
Technical advisory committee
Total in Consultative Group
Total
Source: United Nations, The World's Women 1995, Trends and Statistics, Chart 4.12, using data from the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), 1992.
Data on women's participation in international cooperative service in agriculture is very scarce, but those which are available show a very low participation of women, except among overseas volunteers in agriculture where women's participation reaches 28 percent (see Table 5).
TABLE 5 - Women Staff in International Cooperative Services in Agriculture, 1991
Total staff
% Women
National development assistance institution UK Overseas Development Administration
Technical cooperation officers (agriculture)
Natural resource advisors
International non-governmental organization
Volunteer Services Organization (volunteers overseas in agricultural sector)
Int'l development assistance programme FAO technical cooperation officers (agriculture)
Source: United Nations, The World 's Women, Trends 1995 and Statistics, Chart 4.13, using data from the Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research (CGIAR), 1992.
The low participation of women in agricultural research institutes can be partly attributed to the low participation of women in scientific and higher agricultural studies. However, the percentage of women in agricultural research institutes does not even correspond to the percentage of women in higher agricultural education. This indicates that even qualified women have difficulty in benefiting from their education, and that there are other barriers that women face in moving into senior scientific and technical positions.
There is a growing awareness of the need for greater responsiveness of research institutes to the needs of women farmers. Recommendations from farmers' representative organizations, the World Food Summit and others have called upon agricultural research institutes to focus on the needs of landless farmers and women farmers. In particular, agricultural research institutes need to recognize women farmers as a key constituency and give attention to the multiple uses of plants for food and other products, and for household food processing, storage and preparation technologies.
FAO has recommended that:
· NARS should increase the participation of farmers and their organizations in setting research priorities and in putting research results to work in farmers' fields (FAO, Food Security and Agricultural Research, 1996).
· Research and extension strategies must be broadened to take into consideration the needs of the landless or near landless, including women, and thus should focus on creating synergies between on-farm and off-farm income-earning opportunities for the poor....There is also a need to focus technical advice on food crops as well as cash crops, on animal health for chickens, pigs and small ruminants, and on labour-saving devices for women's production, processing and household maintenance activities (FAO, Research and Extension. A Gender Perspective, 1996).
A number of agricultural research institutes are beginning to put such recommendations into practice, as the examples in Box 10 show. However, efforts need to be intensified and multiplied.
Box 9 - Responding to Women Farmers' Research Needs
"In Peru, the International Potato Centre(CIP) is testing and screening staple food crops grown by women in sub-Saharan Africa, such as the sweet potato, in order to find combinations of early maturity and high yields with some degree of drought tolerance. These crops are often used by women during periods of famine and shortage, and are eaten before the main harvest or when harvest is poor".
"In the Côte d'Ivoire, the West Africa Rice Development Association (WARDA) has been conducting surveys to identify preferences of women and men farmers in adopting improved rice varieties. While men prefer short-statured high-yielding varieties, women will be reluctant to grow these varieties due to the difficulties of harvesting them while carrying infants on their back. As the constraint may lead women farmers to reject such varieties, WARDA has increasingly shifted its emphasis toward the development of medium to short-statured varieties".
FAO, Research and Extension. A Gender Perspective, 1996.
<section>5</section>
Women and agro-biodiversity
Women and agro-biodiversity
Women's key roles as preservers of agro-biodiversity and plant and animal genetic resources are only beginning to be recognized. The risk of losing women's knowledge in this area is yet another negative effect of limiting women's access to educational opportunities and the failure of research institutes to focus on the roles and needs of women in agricultural production and food security.
Because of their multiple roles and responsibilities as providers of food, fodder, fuel, health care, and other household needs, rural women generally have a knowledge of the various uses of a great many plants, animals and forest products. Their management of ecosystems and plant and animal resources is often based on knowledge preserved by women over the centuries. This is not static, as women farmers are continually experimenting with and improving upon plant and animal resources. Women's choices of plant and animal resources are based on adaptation to local environmental conditions, the multiple uses of these resources for fuel, fodder, clothing, household items, medicinal purposes, sources of income and the creation of complementary systems of mixed farming.
Box 10 - Women's Knowledge of Plant and Animal Diversity
"...homegardens often provide a wide variety of vegetables, relishes and condiments. These homegardens are also experimental plots where women try out and adapt diverse wild plants and indigenous species. Research on 60 homegardens in Thailand revealed 230 different species' many of which had been rescued from a neighbouring forest before it was cleared".
FAO, Women - Users, Preservers and Managers of Agro-Biodiversity, 1996.
Women in south-east Mexico keep as many as nine breeds of local hen, as well as local breeds of turkey, duck and broilers in their solares (back gardens). In selecting for the best breeds, they consider 11 different characteristics. These include egg production, ease of sale, broodiness, appearance, heat and cold tolerance, growth rate and eating qualities. The women can easily distinguish the breeds and species on each of the characteristics. Using this ranking, the most preferred birds are indigenous turkeys and ducks.
S. Anderson, Domestic Animal Diversity. Genetic Resources, Rural People 's Knowledge and Biodiversity, 1995.
Women are the main producers of cassava in Africa, Asia and Latin America, and are almost entirely responsible for its processing. In the Amazon, for example, their knowledge was found to have spread over hundreds of kilometres, through an informal system for conservation and expansion of the biodiversity of cassava which they had developed. In this system, when a woman had married, she took her mother's cassava varieties with her. She continued to test and experiment with old and new varieties and discuss their qualities, planting or cooking potential with her new family.
H. Zwiefel, "Modern Biotechnologies in Agriculture: Impact on Women in the South", Biotechnology and Development Monitor, 1995.
Lack of awareness by agricultural researchers of the multiple uses and advantages of local varieties has contributed to the development of genetically uniform varieties which is resulting in the rapidly diminishing number of plant and animal varieties. There is a real danger of losing important agricultural knowledge by failing to pay attention to women farmers' practices.
Improving women's access to agricultural education would not by itself guarantee that such knowledge is preserved. It is also necessary to:
· recognize the value of women farmers' knowledge and skills;
· establish linkages between women farmers and agricultural research institutes to enable these institutes to better understand and focus on the priorities of women farmers;
· ensure that women's knowledge of agro-biodiversity is preserved and guarantee their rights to use plant genetic resources; and
· improve women's participation in setting research priorities.
Box 11 - Women's Indigenous Knowledge
"Women have been particularly excluded from research programmes, despite the fact that in most cultures they are the principal food providers and important custodians of agricultural biodiversity, and that their knowledge is based on sophisticated cultural and scientific practices. There are important gender differences in the skills and knowledge that men and women have for the conservation and utilization of biodiversity. In many societies women hold primary responsibility for household food provision and other household tasks such as repairs. They therefore focus more than men on maintaining the complex web of relationships of diverse food production systems and the multiple uses of crops which ensure balance and sustainability".
Vandana Shiva, "Farmers Safeguarding Biodiversity through their Crop Production", Dynamic Diversity, intermediate Technology Development Group, 1996.
<section>6</section>
Women and participation in agricultural policy-making and development bodies
Women and participation in agricultural policy-making and development bodies
Greater participation of women in decision and policy making is essential on every level if women are to participate more fully and equally in agricultural extension services and training, in setting an agricultural research agenda responsive to their needs, and in preserving women's knowledge of agro-biodiversity.
Education and participation in decision making are closely linked. The greater access women have to education, the greater will be their ability to participate in policy-making bodies. As UNICEF states: "...education increases women's status in the community and leads to greater input into family and community decision making" (UNICEF 1992).
Education is but one factor, however, in increasing women's participation in decision making and in policy-making bodies. Education alone does not guarantee women's access to positions of power in society. This is evidenced by a look at the statistics on women's participation in agricultural research institutes (see Table 4) and at the data on women's participation in parliaments, at the ministerial level of governments, and in the United Nations system (see Tables 7 and 8). Nowhere do women hold decision-making positions in numbers anywhere near the percentage of school enrolment that is female in the 18-23 age group (see Table 6).
While women make up from 34 to 51 percent of those between the ages of 18 and 23 enrolled in school, the age group associated with tertiary education, they make up a much smaller percentage of those in public life and professional positions in the UN system.
At the national level, women worldwide held only 10 percent of parliamentary seats and 6 percent of ministerial level positions in 1994. Most women in ministerial positions are responsible for health, welfare, education, culture or women's affairs, areas that are traditionally considered to be women's concerns. Economic, political and agricultural ministerial positions are almost exclusively a male preserve.
TABLE 6 - Female Enrolment in the 18-23 Age Group as Percentage of Male Enrolment, by Region, 1995*
Sub-Saharan Africa
Arab States
Latin America and Caribbean
Eastern Asia/Oceania
Southern Asia
Developed Countries
* Based on estimated net enrolment ratios for the age group 18-23 years, UNESCO, World Education Report, 1995.
TABLE 7 - Women's Political Participation, by Region, 1994
Share of parliamentary seats held by women (% as of 30/6/194)
Share of women at ministerial level (% as of 31/5/1994)
All developing countries
Industrialized countries
World
Arab States
East Asia
Latin America & the Caribb.
South Asia
Southeast Asia & the Pacific
Sub-Saharan Africa
Least developed countries
European Union
Nordic Countries
OECD
Source: UNDP, Human Development Report 1995, Annex Table 2.4.
In the United Nations system, women hold only 28.2 percent of all positions, 11.3 percent of senior management positions (D1 and above) and only 30.1 percent of professional positions at the P1 to P5 level. In a ranking of 18 major UN agencies, the three that are most directly concerned with food and agriculture, IFAD, WFP and FAO, occupy the 13th, 17th and 1 8th positions respectively in the percentage of women in all positions. At every level, the percentage of women is below the average for the entire UN system, sometimes considerably below:
· IFAD: the percentage of women at all levels is 26.6 percent, at the senior management level, 8.3 percent; and at the professional level, 29.4 percent.
· WFP: the percentage of women at all levels is 22.2 percent; at the senior management level, 21.4 percent; and at the professional level, 22.2 percent.
· FAO: the percentage of women at all levels is 15.3 percent; at the senior management level, 2.4 percent; and at the professional level, 17.5 percent.
TABLE 8 - Women Professionals in UN System - 31 December 1994)
Organization
All levels combine d (%)
Senior manage. (D1 and above) (%)
Professionals exclu. senior level (P-1 to P-5) (%)
UNFPA
UNICEF
UN Secretariat
UNDP
UNESCO
UNHCR
UNEP
WORLD BANK*
GATT
ILO
UNCTAD
WHO
IFAD
IMF
UNCHS (HABITAT)
UNIDO
WFP
FAO
Entire UN system
Source: UNDP, Human Development Report 1995, Table 2.7, based on figures from UN divisions of personnel.
* Only the total figure for female staff is given for the World Bank, as its staff grading system differs from the UN personnel classifications.
Breaking down the data for senior management and professional levels shows that at the junior professional level, women are found at the entry level in nearly equal numbers as men. As men and women climb the ladder to higher positions, the percentage of women declines. Since the pool of qualified women professionals at the junior professional level is nearly equal to that of men, other factors must be at work hindering women's advancement to higher decision-making positions.
TABLE 9 - Women at Different Professional Levels in the United Nations System, 1993
Level
Senior Management (D2 and above)
Senior professional (D1 and P5)
Mid-level professional (P4 and P3)
Junior professional (P2 and P1)
Source: UN, The World 's Women 1995, Trends and Statistics, Chart 6.9.
According to a study by the United Nations Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW), it takes a critical mass of at least 30 percent for women or other marginalized groups to have an impact on the policies of a government or organization:
"As a minority operating in a male domains most women public figures, to be accepted and to function on a basis of equality with men, have had to adapt to and adopt male priorities predominating in public life. Minorities, such as women who are successful in a male world, according to a classic theory of minority behaviour, absorb the dominant culture to such an extent that they tend to dissociate themselves from other women, to underrate their own success and to perceive any discrimination they meet as a result of their own shortcomings. It takes a minority of a certain minimum size, 30-35 percent, to be able to influence the culture of groups and to facilitate alliances between group members" (UN DAW 1992).
Although there have been and are a number of strong women's advocates at the higher levels of some UN agencies, the number of women in decision-making positions in governments, in agricultural research institutes and in the United Nations system is far below the 30 percent that is considered to be the critical mass necessary for women to make an impact on policy.
Box 12 - Women's Participation and Development Goals
"The participation of women is a means to achieve the goals of development through gender-aware, more efficient, economy-wide policies. It will contribute to achieving economic growth, but it will also help identify the social goals society is willing to pursue. indeed, an idea which is gaining momentum is that increased participation of women in decision making at all levels will help to 'adjust' the goals pursued through development".
United Nations, Report of the Secretary-General, United Nations General Assembly, Forty-sixth session.
<section>7</section>
Comparison of five studies on enrolment of women in higher agricultural education: Côte D'Ivoire, Jordan, Nigeria, The Philippines, and the university of the West Indies
Role of agriculture in the economy
Women's roles and contributions to agriculture
Access to extension and other services
Literacy and basic education
Women's enrolment in tertiary education
Higher agricultural education in Côte d'Ivoire
Higher agricultural education in Jordan
Higher agricultural education in Nigeria
Higher agricultural education in the Philippines
Higher agricultural education in the Caribbean community
Comparison of five studies on enrolment of women in higher agricultural education: Côte D'Ivoire, Jordan, Nigeria, The Philippines, and the university of the West Indies
This section examines and compares five case studies on the enrolment of women in higher agricultural education particularly in view of the possibilities of improving women's access to and benefits from higher agricultural education, extension services and training, agricultural research, and agricultural policy making. The case studies cover Côte d'Ivoire, Jordan, Nigeria, the Philippines and the University of the West Indies, which serves the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
Role of agriculture in the economy
Agriculture has an important place in the economy of each of the four countries and the CARICOM, although its importance varies considerably from country to country. Côte d'Ivoire, Nigeria and the Philippines are largely dependent upon agriculture as a source of livelihood for their populations, while agriculture plays a much smaller role in the economies of Jordan and the CARICOM countries, although it is estimated that many more people are dependent upon agriculture for their livelihood than is reflected in the percentage of the population in the agricultural labour force.
Classified among the least developed countries, Côte d'Ivoire is primarily an agricultural country, depending on agriculture for a great part of its exports, Gross Donation Product (GDP) and employment. A major problem is the decrease in arable land, upon which a majority of the population depends for their existence. Cash crops include coffee and cacao, while the main food crops are manioc, rice, yam and vegetables.
In Nigeria, agriculture is the mainstay of a majority of the population, many of whom work in subsistence food production. Agriculture still provides a large percentage of the GDP and employment, in spite of the importance of petroleum to the economy. The share of agricultural exports fell from 80 percent in 1960 to 1.5 percent in 1990, due both to the rise in oil exports and the poor performance of the agricultural sector. Major crops include millet, sorghum, palm, yam and rice.
The economy of the Philippines is still largely dependent on the agricultural sector which provides 22 percent of the GDP. Nearly half of the labour force is employed in agriculture, and it is estimated that as much as 67 percent of the population is dependent on agriculture either to migration to urban areas or abroad, more than half the population of the country still resides in rural areas. The major agricultural products are rice, corn, coconut, sugar, banana, livestock, poultry and fisheries.
Jordan, on the other hand, depends upon agriculture for less than 10 percent of its GDP, although the agricultural sector makes up more than 20 percent of its exports and employs 15 percent of its labour force. Jordan is situated in an area which is semi-arid and has little arable land available for the expansion of agriculture.
The population of the CARICOM countries is largely rural but there are few data on the importance of agriculture to GDP and exports. The percentage of the labour force employed in agriculture, in the countries for which data are available, ranges from 11 percent in Trinidad and Tobago to 75 percent in Antigua and Barbuda. Trinidad and Tobago is largely dependent upon petroleum as a source of revenue, and agriculture contributes only three percent of the GDP. It is estimated that the populations of the CARICOM countries are more dependent on agriculture than appears from official statistics. One reason is because much of women's unpaid labour in food production is not counted.
TABLE 10 - Agriculture in the Economies of Côte d'Ivoire, Jordan, Nigeria, the Philippines and the CARICOM Countries
Rural popul. as % of total 1993*
Agriculture as % of GDP 1993 *
Agriculture as % of Exports**
% of the Lab. Force in Agr. 1990*
Côte d'Ivoire
66 (no date)
Jordan
Nigeria
Philippines
CARICOM
Ant. & Barb.
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Guyana
Jamaica
St. Kit. & Nev.
Saint Lucia
Saint Vinc.
Trin. & Tob.
*Source: UNDP Human Development Report 1996, Tables 8, 13 and 16.
**Source: Country Case Studies.
Women's roles and contributions to agriculture
Women play important roles in agriculture in all of the countries studied.
In Côte d'Ivoire, women provide 80 percent of the labour for food production and are responsible for 60 percent of its marketing. Men are responsible for land clearing and preparation and for most of the work in the cash crops of cacao and coffee. Women are completely responsible for yams and vegetables, including sowing, weeding and harvesting, although in the south and eastern central areas, men help out with the sowing. Women do all of the work in rice production (sowing, weeding, harvesting and gathering), except in the west and southwest region, where men perform 75 percent of the harvesting. Women also assist with the cash crops, supplying 25 percent of the labour involved in weeding and drying, as well as all the labour in gathering and packing.
The roles of women farmers in Nigeria vary considerably by ethnic group. The Hausa Fulani women do little work in the fields because of the plough/grain culture and the restrictions on women of the Islamic religion. However, only the well-to-do urban Muslim women in seclusion do not engage in agricultural work of some kind. Poor Muslim women are heavily involved in food processing and preparation. The Yoruba women are becoming more and more involved in agricultural work with the increase of cash crop production and the expansion of food production and raw materials for industry. Among the Ibo, women play a dominant role in food production. In the traditional gender division of labour, men were responsible for land preparation while women engage in planting, weeding, harvesting, animal husbandry and food processing. With the involvement of men in cash crops, women are increasingly performing all the tasks involved in food production and processing, including those previously
done by men. Most women's work in agriculture is unpaid, but some women are employed as agricultural labourers.
In the Philippines, women play a major role in agriculture, mostly as unpaid family workers or self-employed farmers, although about 17 percent are wage and salary workers. The crops with the largest number of women workers are rice, coconut and banana. In most farm systems, men and women share the same tasks. While there is considerable overlap and flexibility in the division of labour, men tend to be involved more in land preparation, applying fertilizers, repair and maintenance of infrastructure and irrigation, while women are responsible for much of the planting, weeding, harvesting, threshing and processing. In livestock, men take most responsibility for carabao and cattle, while women care for pigs and poultry. In fisheries, men do the catching while women process and sell the catch. In agro-forestry, women plant the tree species and sell the produce, while men care for the crop and transport it to market. In addition, women cultivate family plots to produce vegetables
for their families (Illo 1995).
Women constitute only a small part of the agricultural labour force in Jordan, which employs only 15 percent of the entire labour force. A survey of women and agriculture in the Near East showed that most women engaged in agriculture in the region work on small subsistence farms in food production, care of small livestock and food processing(El-Fattal 1996).
Women in the Caribbean are responsible for more than 50 percent of food production and are also involved in food processing and marketing, including inter-island marketing. The percentage of female-headed of households is generally high, as much as one-third in Trinidad and Tobago. As these households are also among the poorest, the women cannot afford to hire labour and thus usually shoulder all agricultural tasks themselves.
Access to extension and other services
In Côte d'Ivoire, women's work in agricultural production is undervalued and largely unpaid. Even in the performance of essential tasks in cash crops, women are considered to be helping the male farmers, rather than as partners or as farmers in their own right. Consequently, women are largely ignored by the extension services and information programmes which have been developed for and are delivered almost exclusively to men.
In Jordan, cultural restrictions limit women's access to male extension workers, and since there are few women extensionists, women farmers have little access to extension.
Women in Nigeria also have little access to productive resources. A major constraint is their lack of land titles. Women have, at best, only usufructuary rights and not permanent land tenancy. Most women use a part of their husband's land and consequently their plots are generally very small. Less than ten percent of women have access to extension, improved seedlings, fertilizers, herbicides and training. Less than seven percent have access to credit.
Very few women in the Philippines have access to extension and other services. In 1993, only six percent of the participants attending activities conducted by the Agricultural Training Institute were women, ranging from three percent of the participants in on-farm research to 15 percent of those attending day training. The traditional assumption has been that women are housewives and therefore the major services extended to them have been through home management technicians and Rural Improvement Clubs. This perception is gradually changing and the home management technicians are now known as agricultural technicians and receive basic training in agriculture. Bank-managed credit programmes are out of the reach of most women, but small credit schemes run by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are making small loans available to women (Illo 1995).
In the CARICOM countries, women's access to land ownership varies. In the Cayman Islands and in St. Kitts and Nevis, there are relatively similar numbers of male and female landowners. In other countries, far fewer women own land than men, and in all cases, women's landholdings are smaller. While women have less access than men to public loans, there are a number of traditional rotating credit schemes where women predominate, such as the "sou-sou" in Trinidad and the "partner" scheme in Jamaica.
Literacy and basic education
Since literacy and access to basic education are the prerequisites for any type of higher education, it is important to note what percentage of women in these countries have this prerequisite for going into higher agricultural education. A look at the adult literacy rates and enrolment rates of men and women in the age groups for primary and secondary education reveals significant differences among the countries studied (see table 11).
Literacy rates and access to primary and secondary education in the CARICOM countries, for which data are available, are high and the data indicate that girls in the region have nearly equal, and sometimes greater, access to basic education than boys. While data are not available on male and female gross enrolment rates at primary and secondary school levels in the Philippines, the high adult literacy rate for both men and women indicates that basic education ratios are probably also high. In Jordan, both boys and girls have a high degree of access to first level education, but this drops sharply, although about equally, at the secondary level. Data from the Jordan case study indicate that in 1993/1994, 55 percent of the students enrolled in academic secondary education were female, as were 35 percent of those enrolled in vocational secondary schools.
TABLE 11 Literacy and Enrolment at Primary and Secondary School Age
Country
Adult Literacy Rates (%) Males, 1993*
Adult Literacy Rates (%) Females, 1993*
First Level Educ. Gross Enrolment Ratio (%) M- 1992**
First Level Educ. Gross Enrolment Ratio (%) F- 1992**
Second Level Education Gross Enrolment Ratio (%) M- 1992**
Second Level Education Gross Enrolment Ratio (%) F- 1992**
Côte d'Ivoire
Jordan
Nigeria
Philippines
CARICOM
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Guyana
Jamaica
Trinidad & Tobago
*Source: UNDP, Human Development Report 1996, Table 2.
**Source: UNESCO, World Education Report 1995, Tables 4 and 6.
It is in Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria where the greatest disparities between men and women can be seen. Adult literacy rates are low in general and far fewer women than men are literate. In Côte d'Ivoire access to primary and secondary education is low for both boys and girls, especially at the secondary level, with girls' enrolment ratio considerably lower than that for boys. Nigeria has a high gross enrolment ratio for boys at the primary level, but the gross enrolment ratio for girls is only 79 percent. Enrolment drops sharply for both boys and girls at secondary level, with a lower percentage of female enrolment as compared to males enrolment.
Thus, except for Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria, a high percentage of women in the countries studied have the basic requisites for tertiary education and should thus also have the same opportunities to participate in higher agricultural education as men.
Women's enrolment in tertiary education
In the countries in which women's enrolment is as high as or higher than that of men, the pattern varies considerably in tertiary education. In Barbados, the Bahamas and the Philippines, the enrolment of females in the age group 18 to 23 years as a percentage of male enrolment increases, whereas it decreases considerably in Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago. In the Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria, which have a low female enrolment ratio at the primary and secondary level, this decreases even more dramatically at the tertiary level. Two major factors for this are the greater or fewer educational opportunities for women in some countries, and greater need and/or opportunity for women or men of this age group to enter the labour force.
TABLE 12 - Female Enrolment at Tertiary School Age as Percentage of Male Enrolment, 1990
Country
Tertiary School Age (18 -23)
Côte d'Ivoire
Nigeria
Philippines
Barbados
Bahamas
Trinidad and Tobago
Jamaica
Source, UNDP, Human Development Report 1995, Annex Table A2. 1
Higher agricultural education in Côte d'Ivoire
The Ecole Nationale Supérieure Agronomique (ENSA) was established in Abidjan in 1965. In 1989, ENSA was transferred to Yamoussoukro. The purpose remained that of providing training to the agricultural and agro-industrial sectors, as well as research, expertise and advice in agricultural development in Côte d'Ivoire and the subregion. In addition to its academic and research facilities, ENSA maintains greenhouses irrigated practice farms and a palm plantation.
Entering students are required to have a good record in science studies. The course of study includes two preparatory years, followed by two years of basic agronomics which includes an eight week internship, and finally one or two years of specialization. Graduates obtain diplomas as Agricultural Engineers. The school also offers continuing education courses and carries out research.
The first admission of a woman to ENSA occurred in 1974. Out of 663 Agricultural Engineer diplomas delivered by ENSA, 52 (7.8 %) have been given to women. Women tend to specialize in Agricultural Economics (28.8 %), since this leads most often to administrative positions. Other preferred specializations include Plant Production, Plant Protection, Agro-Industry, Animal Production and Forestry. Of the 52 women graduates, 3 are employed in international bodies, including FAO; 9 in research and higher education; 2 in secondary education; 27 in government development bodies; and 9 in the private sector. Only two are unemployed, of which one is a recent graduate seeking her first job and the other is married and living abroad.
Established in 1996, l'Institut Agricole de Bouaké (JAB) is a public institution of higher agricultural education and research. Although it was moved to Yamoussoukro and is situated on the premises of ENSA, it remains independent. IAB trains students to work as civil engineers or in the fields of agricultural production, livestock, water and forestry, management, extension, planning, research, marketing and food processing. It also directs training to agricultural producers and their organizations, offering study possibilities and technical advice.
Students come to IAB following one preparatory year at ENSA or at a university and obtain a diploma in technical engineering after successfully completely the three-year course of studies. To date, IAB has awarded 804 diplomas, 31 of them to women (4 %). It has also given training to 950 interns and advice to 50 farms. In 1995/96, there were 124 students, including 12 women (9.7 %). All the graduates are working in the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources in the Côte d'Ivoire or Benin.
IAB places more emphasis on practical work than does ENSA, with 40 percent of the students' time spent in field work as interns. The continuing education department directs its training to agricultural and rural development agents and emphasizes management and communications in the rural environment. A unit on farm management is directed to graduates who are currently running farms. The emphasis of IAB's practice farm for interns is farm management rather than the demonstration of techniques.
Agronomic research is carried out in two institutes, the Institut des Savannes (IDESSA) and the Institut des Forêts (IDEFOR). In 1990, less than five percent of the 216 researchers were women. The Faculty of Science and Technology of ENSA also engages in research. Lack of funding, uncertainty regarding promotion, and low salaries act as disincentives in this Faculty.
There are very few female teachers at the university level. Out of 53 teachers at ENSA, only six are women (11 %). There are no women on the teaching staff of JAB. Women agronomists are more likely to find jobs in departments of the Ministry of Agriculture or related agencies. NGOs, such as INADES-FORMATION, and the private sector also employ women agricultural graduates.
Obstacles to improving women's access to higher agricultural education stem from two main sources: low educational levels of girls and the difficulties women encounter in pursuing careers in agriculture. Côte d'Ivoire has a generally low level of school enrolment with gross enrolment ratios of 69 percent at the primary level and 24 percent at secondary level. The disparities between males and females at both levels are great (see Table 11).
A major cause of the overall low school enrolment is the economic crisis affecting the country and the consequent lack of purchasing power of families. Enrolments rates vary considerably by region, however; the forested zones where cash groups are grown has a high rate of primary enrolment whereas the poorer Savannah zones have an extremely low rate. The reasons for the low rate of female enrolment are:
· Lack of infrastructure and great distances of schools from the homes.
· Reluctance to entrust girls to a tutor.
· Stereotypes of girls as being confined to household roles and of schools as being reserved for boys.
· The daily household tasks assigned to girls.
· Pregnancies which prevent girls from attending school regularly.
There are very small numbers of women, therefore, who have the basic educational prerequisites to enter higher agricultural education.
Given the importance of agriculture to the population of the country, opportunities for agricultural training at the secondary level are insufficient. There are two structures providing such training: The Centre de Formation Rural (CFR) with an intake of 59 pupils in 1995, including 9 girls; and the Lycée Agricole de Bingerville with a student body of 152 in 1995, including 42 girls.
At the level of the National University, only 10 percent of the female students chose to study science and technology in the years 1981 to 1992. This decreases the potential number of women who might take up agronomic sciences.
The reasons that few of the women who do have the basic education to enter higher agricultural studies choose to do so include:
· Low remuneration in the field of agriculture in comparison to other fields of specialization.
· Prejudices with regard to the ability of females to master scientific studies.
· Lack of information: Surveys show that little information is given to girls about careers in agriculture by schools or other sources. It is significant that the rural areas have the lowest rates of school enrolment.
· Obstacles to benefiting from agricultural education: Surveys have shown that many women have not been able to find jobs in which they can make optimal use of their agricultural studies. Moreover, women are far less likely than men with the same qualifications to occupy higher level positions in their fields. Only one woman was found to hold a position of director (in a private company) and only one to hold the position of sub-director.
Recommendations for improving women's access to higher agricultural education and career opportunities in agriculture include:
Increasing the-enrolment of girls and women at all levels through:
· Making universal education obligatory for all children, and government sensitization of parents to the importance of education.
· Provision of sex education with a view to reducing unwanted pregnancies among school-age girls.
· Campaigns to sensitize the population on the problems of young marriages.
· Economic assistance for the schooling of girls in areas with low rates of schooling.
· Improvement of educational materials and continuing education of teachers.
· Creation of special science classes for girls to prepare them better for high levels of science education.
· Recruitment of students for higher agricultural education, with particular emphasis on girls.
· Establishment of a greater number of agricultural secondary schools in order to increase the number of potential candidates for higher agricultural education. This presupposes that the secondary school programmes are revised and adapted to the needs of higher education.
Greater dissemination of information on careers in agriculture through:
· The formation of associations by women agronomists and engineers to undertake scientific and cultural activities, and organize training seminars for girls. This would be an encouragement to parents to recommend agronomy as a career for their daughters.
· Expanding and strengthening information services on agricultural careers.
· More forceful recruiting by ENSA and IAB of students in secondary schools.
· Encouraging girls to participate in agricultural fairs.
Financial support through:
· NGOs offering scholarships for agricultural studies to female secondary school graduates, as well as scholarships for regular short internships abroad which would open new perspectives to female graduates. Unmarried women researchers could be enabled to go abroad for training.
· The creation of an award for excellence to encourage girls to take up careers in agriculture.
Improvement of training through:
· Taking into consideration agricultural administration.
· Reinforcing practical training.
· Gender sensitization so that the roles of women in society, and especially in rural areas, are better understood. Men must learn to work with women at the professional level, and women must cease to be resigned, while still taking into
Greater employment opportunities through:
· Financing for women to set themselves up in agricultural enterprises.
· Projects to help women become established as farmers. This is especially important since women's lack of access to land ownership is a major obstacle to their taking up farming. Such farming projects should be supported by the -state and NGOs.
· Opening decision-making positions in administration to women.
· Involving women agronomists in politics and changing attitudes towards women and their role in society through:
· Going beyond symbolic actions, such as the creation of a Ministry on the Condition of Women and considering women in their totality.
· Improving the condition of women at all levels.
· Training women as managers.
The important roles of women in agriculture and in the economy of the country, the economic environment and natural resources which favour agricultural activities, an expanding private sector and the development of professional agricultural organizations all justify taking women into account in development and training programmes.
Higher agricultural education in Jordan
The main focus of the case study on women and higher agricultural education in Jordan was the Faculty of Agriculture at the University of Jordan, the oldest institution offering degrees in agriculture in the country. In addition to the University of Jordan, three public community colleges and one private and three public universities offer agricultural diplomas or degrees.
Founded in 1962, the University of Jordan established its Faculty of Agriculture in 1972. In the 1995/96 academic year, the percentage of women in the total enrolment in the university was higher than that of men at the undergraduate level (57.4%). The percentage of female enrolment at the MSc level dropped to 30.6 and at the PhD level to 16.8.
The percentage of female enrolment in the Faculty of Agriculture was 60.6 percent at the BSc level and 23.9 percent at the MSc level. There were no women enrolled in the PhD programme in agriculture. The reasons for the sharp decline of women students at the higher levels
The reasons for the sharp decline of women students at the higher levels are reported to be: marriage, moving to another city or country with the husband, pregnancy, and lack of interest in continuing.
More women specialized in Nutrition and Technology, Plant Production, Agricultural Economics, and Extension than in the departments of Plant Protection, Animal Production and Soil and Irrigation. The choice of specialization appears to be strongly influenced by the opportunities women have to benefit from their agricultural education through employment. Most women graduates in Nutrition and Food Technology work in related public sectors, hospitals, schools and bakeries, while graduates in Plant Production work in flower shops, plant nurseries and shops dealing in agricultural inputs.
A survey of 163 randomly-selected female graduates from 1978 to 1995 found that 73 had worked immediately after graduation and another 63 had worked at sometime since, while 27 had not worked at all. Most of those surveyed were working in the public sector, a significant number in the private sector and a very few on their own. Most of the women were working in their field of specialization and almost all were working full time. Some 85 percent of the women surveyed responded that they had found no difficulties in getting jobs because they were female and 93 percent said that they did not encounter difficulties as females in their most recent jobs.
A significant finding, however, was that most of the working women were working morning shifts and not in field work. The reasons for this are the social restrictions on women which do not permit women to work outside the home in the evenings, to have contact with male farmers or to ride in vehicles driven by men. These social restrictions prevent women from working in extension services and benefiting equally with men from their education.
Although the University is an equal opportunity employer, women make up only 13.3 percent of the staff of the Faculty of Agriculture, and only 2.9 percent of the PhD holders on the staff are women. The low percentage of PhD holders on the staff is due to the very low number of women agricultural graduates with PhDs.
Box 13 - Wasted Investment
If we do not enable female graduates to make use of their education and capabilities, we will be wasting the resources, money and time invested. (Snobar, Jordan Cave Study, 1996)
Higher agricultural education in Nigeria
Since Nigeria is still primarily an agricultural country, it is not surprising that the majority of its universities offer agriculture as a field of study. Since more than 60 percent of the labour force in agricultural production are women, it would also make sense to find a similar proportion in agricultural studies. This, however, is not the case. In fact less than 25 percent of those studying agriculture are women.
The Nigeria case study focuses on agricultural studies at Obafemi Awolowo University (OAU) in Ile-Ife, founded in 1962, and its two affiliated institutions: the Federal College of Agriculture, Ibadan and the Federal College of Agriculture, Akure. All three institutions require good preparation in sciences and mathematics for admission of students.
The OAU offers degrees in a wide range of agricultural subjects, while the Federal Colleges have traditionally been oriented more towards training middle-level agricultural extension workers and other junior, middle and high-level professionals in the agriculture sector. At present, the Federal College of Agriculture, Ibadan, offers two-year programmes: the Higher National Diploma Programme in Agricultural Engineering (Farm Power and Machinery Option) and the Higher National Diploma Programme Agriculture (Crop Production Technology Option), while the Federal College of Agriculture, Akure, now offers a one-year National Diploma Programme in Agricultural Technology.
Only 14.7 percent of the staff of the Faculty of Agriculture of OAU are women, and the majority of these are in the home economics department. The same is true of the affiliated institutions where women hold lower-level positions as instructors and demonstrators.
Data on enrolment at the three institutions are scanty due to poor record keeping and insufficient gender-disaggregated data on the student body. Data from the graduation records of the OAU show the percentage of female graduates ranging from 8.5 to 16.7 percent. The majority of women were in the Agricultural Economics Department, followed by Soil Science, Animal Science, Agricultural Extension and Plant Science. Female enrolment at the Federal College of Agriculture, Ibadan, reached a high of 20 percent in 1994. At the Federal College of Plant Science. Female enrolment at the Federal College of Agriculture, Ibadan, reached a high of 20 percent in 1994. At the Federal College of Agriculture, Akure, 16.2 percent of the student body was female in 1993.
A survey on what motivated women to enrol in agricultural found that 42.8 percent of the students had taken up agricultural out of interest. The second most cited reason (]6.3 %) was patriotism and desire to improve the national economy. This was followed by the desire to go into private practice of farming (9.8 %) and the hope that it would afford them independence (6.8 %). Only 4.7 percent said that they had no other choice open to them. Other reasons given included encouragement by friends and family members, to earn a living, the admissions policy, and the desire for gender equality and to break men's monopoly of the field of study.
Significantly, the perception of the teachers (the vast majority of whom are male) was quite different. They were of the opinion that female students enrol in agriculture simply to have a degree and rarely to practice farming. In spite of the positive motivations of the majority of women to study agriculture, paradoxically, 44.7 percent said that they would have chosen another course of study had it been offered to them. interestingly, many of the alternative choices cited were in fields stereotyped as women's work and where more jobs are open to women (e.g., pharmacy, medicine, food science and accounting).
Constraints on women students in agriculture were cited by both the teaching staff and the women themselves. It is interesting to note that a major constraint on women was considered to be the physical work and stress involved in agriculture: "Policy makers and administrators pointed out that it was not the norm for women to carry out the heavy duties. As employees, they are not allocated stressful jobs such as operating a tractor or driving a truck or working in forestry which is very hazardous. At the initial stages of produce marketing women were not given a place in the subsector because they were regarded as not being physically fit to stand the stress of produce management which demands quality" (Afonja and Olusi, 1995).
It would be interesting to consider the reasoning of policy makers and administrators as to why operating a tractor or driving a truck is more physically taxing to women than hauling large loads of fuel, water, crops and produce on their backs and heads for long distances -which is the lot of an immense number of women farmers throughout the world, and particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Why, too, is marketing quality produce considered more stressful than having to manage a multitude of daily tasks including farming, fetching fuel.
Box 14 - Breaking the Myth of Agriculture as a Man's Occupation
"Although in reality women perform agricultural duties on a regular basis, agricultural occupations are regarded as male occupations and development strategies continue to target them. Women's restriction to the subsistence sector and the definition of what they do as part of household chores are disincentives to the choice of the agricultural sector for employment.
'`African men project a pragmatic approach to the gender division of labour in agriculture. The argument has been that women play dominant roles in agriculture because their duties are light and that men usually take on the heavy duties....disregarding the fact that women are now performing a wide range of tasks and are breaking down this myth of the pragmatic African male. It is not surprising then that the proportion of female graduates in rural areas is very low".
(Afonja and Olusi, 1995)
Other constraints cited were:
· The perception of agriculture as a male profession.
· Lack of sufficient finances, books, facilities and infrastructure.
· Inadequate physical resources for training women and the lack of boarding facilities for female postgraduate students.
· Cultural norms which require married women to devote more time to taking care of husbands and children, leaving them with insufficient time to handle the study load.
However, 73 percent of the women students interviewed said that they encountered no problems with the programme of study. Only 3.3 percent complained that there was too much practical work. A number of female students even complained that the practical work was not thorough enough and that there was insufficient materials for the practicals. Other complaints were lack of finances for study, and transportation problems.
At the policy level, there is a gap between policy and practice in the area of female education. While the policy is to facilitate the education of girls and women at all levels, no special measures have been taken or sufficient funding allocated for this purpose. Insufficient encouragement of science studies among girls also lowers the potential number of qualified women for higher agricultural studies.
Opportunities for women agricultural graduates appear to be limited. Surveys of work prospects as perceived by women undergraduates as well as their aspirations revealed that the aspirations
Opportunities for women agricultural graduates appear to be limited. Surveys of work prospects as perceived by women undergraduates as well as their aspirations revealed that the aspirations of the undergraduates corresponded with what they perceived to be their job prospects. Heading the list of career paths were banks and financial institutions, followed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Agro-Allied and oil companies, research institutes and the Ministry of Education. Less often cited were teaching, private practice and government farms. Most of the jobs cited were office jobs rather than work in the field.
Several factors influence these perceptions and aspirations. On the one hand, women appear to have few opportunities to benefit from their agricultural education; on the other hand, the economic crisis in Nigeria makes the financial sector very attractive because of high salaries. On the policy level, there appears to be too few women agriculturists to make any significant impact on agricultural policy, or to overcome the obstacles facing women in agriculture and rural development.
Box 15 - A Vicious Circle
The fact that a small proportion of skilled manpower in agriculture are women further makes it difficult for women farmers to derive the benefits of new technologies since women's problems and needs are usually not well understood by male policy makers and implementors. (Afonja and Olusi, 1995)
Recommendations to improve women's access to higher agricultural education and their opportunities to use and benefit from this education include:
· Imparting a new set of social values about the work of men and women to avoid job stereotyping, which presently discourages women from taking up agriculture. Such reorientation needs to start at the primary level to popularize agriculture as an appropriate profession for women.
· A more liberal admissions policy oriented towards a gender balance in enrolment.
· More vigorous implementation of the government policy of promoting science education for girls and women.
· Career counselling at the secondary level to motivate females to take up higher agricultural education.
· Professionalization of agricultural occupations to make them more attractive.
· The reorganization of agricultural education to create courses that will attract women and for which they have an aptitude. For instance, specialized aspects of agriculture such as forestry and wood technology can be introduced early into the course content to stimulate the students', especially female students', interest in such specializations.
· Organization of programmes to allow women to cope with domestic responsibilities including allowing more flexibility in choosing the place of one's internship, part-time study, and the possibility of stretching the course over several years.
· Improvement of accommodation facilities for female postgraduate students.
· Provision of fellowships, scholarships, loans and other types of financial support.
· Improvement of infrastructure in rural areas to attract women to work in rural areas.
· Payment of higher salaries and emoluments to those working in rural areas.
· Facilitation of the work of female agricultural workers by providing farm inputs to their clients, mechanizing agriculture, providing logistics support, forming associations and clubs to articulate the interests of women in agriculture and rural development, and developing appropriate technology in food storage and processing to reduce the drudgery of women's work.
· The organization of female graduates of agriculture into professional associations that can act as a pressure group, promote increased enrolment of women in agricultural education, liaise with government and other professional bodies and organize public information programmes.
The implementation of these recommendations should also lead towards a larger number of women policy makers and implementors in agriculture.
Higher agricultural education in the Philippines
The University of the Philippines (UPLB) was established in 1909 as a College of Agriculture. Over the years, a number of other colleges evolved from the College of Agriculture, transforming it into a full-fledged university with seven colleges. In addition to the College of Agriculture, there are at present Colleges of Forestry, Engineering and Agricultural Technology, Arts and Sciences, Human Ecology,
Veterinary Medicine, and Economics and Management. Today, the University offers 25 undergraduate programmes, 49 masters, 20 doctoral and five diploma or certificate programmes. The College of Agriculture offers Bachelors of Science degrees in Agriculture, Development Communication and Food Technology as well as a Diploma in Agriculture.
Research priorities of the of the are:
· Promotion of sustainable agricultural productivity and efficient use of resources.
· Development and promotion of appropriate technologies for processing industries and/or efficient utilization of resources.
· Promotion of an ecological balance through conservation and efficient management of natural resources.
· Recommendation of programmed and policies for rural development, especially for promoting equitable socioeconomic systems and strengthening rural institutions.
· Study and promotion of the enrichment of Philippine culture, particularly in the Southern Catalog region.
More than half of the research projects in 1994 were conducted by women, but most of these were in fields traditionally dominated by women. Only a few women carried out research in animal sciences, forestry and environmental sciences or engineering and physical sciences.
TABLE 13 - Research Conducted by UPLB Faculty and Researchers in 1994 by Gender and Field
Field
Male
Female
Total
Percent
% Fem
Plant Sciences
Socio-Economics and Arts
Food and Nutrition
Farming Systems
Forestry & Enviro. Sciences
Animal Sciences
Engin. & Physical Sciences
Total
Source: Mancebo et al 1995, Table 17.
The University also carries out programmes with extension components which enable faculty and staff to work directly with rural people in testing innovations, techniques, strategies and approaches before they are recommended for wider application. These extension services include training programmes, projects, information dissemination and publications, university-community relations programmes, volunteer work and technical assistance.
UPLB has long had a high percentage of women on its faculty. In 1985, 43 percent of the faculty were women, and this had risen to 47 percent in 1994. Men dominate the highest ranks of the faculty, however. Women constitute two thirds of the Research, Extension and Professional staff(e.g., guidance counsellors, librarians, etc.).
The University has been implementing the Socialized Tuition and Financial Assistance Programme (STFAP) since 1989, which is designed to democratize student admissions and provide increased subsidies for poor and disadvantaged students.
Women constituted 58 percent of the undergraduate student enrolment of some 17,000 students at UPLB in 1994-1995. Men predominated in those colleges traditionally considered the domain of males: Colleges of Engineering and Agricultural Technology, Forestry and Veterinary Medicine, while women dominated the traditional female career preferences which are more related to home and family responsibilities: Human Ecology, Arts and Science and Economics and Management. Interestingly, women also predominate in the College of Agriculture, a traditionally male-dominated field.
At the graduate level, men slightly outnumbered women. While the breakdown by faculty generally reflects the traditional male-female domains, it is interesting to note that at the PhD level, there were more women than men in the Physical Sciences.
TABLE 14 - UPLB Graduate School Enrolment by Field and Gender, 1994- 1995
Field
MA/MSc Total
% Female
PhD Total
% Female
Arts and Social Sciences
Plant Sciences
Animal Sciences
Biological Sciences
Forestry & Environmental
Sciences
Physical Sciences
Total
Source: UPLB Graduate School, Mancebo et al, 1995, Table 22.
A study of student profiles in the Colleges of Agriculture, Forestry and Veterinary Medicine showed that, regardless of gender, more than half the students came from urban areas and the majority were from developing as opposed to economically depressed parts of the country. Most of them had attended public primary schools and private secondary schools and had graduated in the top 25 percent of their class. The majority of the students also came from small families and their parents were mostly college degree holders and employed as professionals and businessmen.
Financial considerations and educational background of the families affect the opportunities of both men and women to study agricultural subjects. Much of the rural population lives in poverty and has fewer means and aspirations to take up agriculture as a career.
A survey of students revealed that most of them, regardless of gender, had made their own decisions on pursuing a career in agriculture and that they chose to study at UPLB because they believed it to be the best university in the country. Their main reasons for pursing college education were to have a better life in the future with a decent and stable job. The majority of students agreed that the university admissions test was a good method to screen the most qualified students. Some, however, felt it favoured the rich who had the means to get a higher quality secondary education than the poor. The payment policy of the university was also considered to be unfair to poorer students.
Attitudes towards gender issues were measured in a survey of 14 faculty members and 377 students. The results showed that overall both male and female faculty and students held positive attitudes about the equality of men and women. Among the faculty, while men agreed, women felt more strongly about the following propositions: 1) wives should be allowed to work; 2) women are equally capable leaders and managers as men; and 3) women should not face discrimination in entering male-dominated jobs.
The major employer of the UPLB graduates has traditionally been the government. In the past three decades, 48 percent of the women graduates and 35 percent of the men were employed in government service, particularly the Department of Agriculture, although the private sector is increasingly employing agricultural graduates. Other employers include educational institutions, financial institutions, non-governmental organizations and international institutions.
The division of jobs follows the typical traditional roles of men and women. The research and management jobs were dominated by men, while women were found mainly in extension services, teachings and sales. There are wide income-earning disparities between men and women. More men than women belong to the highest income earning bracket, whereas 60 percent of the women and only 34 percent of the men fall into the lowest income bracket. Overall, women earn about half of what men earn.
Women's high literacy rates and equal access to basic education, which is both guaranteed by law and culturally accepted, gives them the basic requisites for higher agricultural education. This is reflected in the high enrolment rates for women in all fields of higher agricultural education, although there is still a tendency for men and women to follow traditional male and female fields of study.
Higher agricultural education, however, attracts fewer students than other fields of study, probably due to perceptions of agriculture as a less prestigious and profitable profession. These attitudes are more prevalent in rural areas where farming has been the mainstay of the population and where much of the population still lives in poverty.
Women's equal access to education does not guarantee them equal opportunity to use and benefit from their education. Women still remain concentrated in farm, sales, service and production work. Even in government service where women dominate the "feeders" to the top, only one-third of the top level positions are filled by women.
A number of important measures and legislative acts have been passed to encourage the greater participation of women in public life and to guarantee them equality before the law. These include:
· Creation in 1975 of the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW) with a mandate to work towards the full integration of women in social, economic, political and cultural development on the basis of equality with men.
· In 1980, the Philippines signed the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
· The 1987 Constitution states that: "The State recognizes the role of women in nation-building and shall ensure the fundamental equality of women and men before the law" (Section 14, Article II).
· The Philippine Development Plan for Women, formulated in 1986 under the coordination of the NCRFW, includes policies, strategies, programmes, projects and mechanisms to ensure the mainstreaming of women in the planning and implementation of government programmes and services across all sectors.
· In the area of employment, legislation passed in 1989 prohibits discrimination against women in terms and implementation of government programmes and services across all sectors.
· In the area of employment, legislation passed in 1989 prohibits discrimination against women in terms and conditions of employment, promotion, training opportunities? and study and scholarship grants.
· The Civil Service Commission has taken measures to allow government employees to work flexible hours, adopted a policy programme on equal opportunities and treatment of men and women, and established the EQUADS (Equality Advocates) Programmes to look into complaints of discrimination in the public sector on account of gender, political and sexual harassment.
· The Women in Nation Building Act of 1992 strengthens the government's commitment to mainstream women's issues and concerns in development. Among its provisions are the equal opportunities accorded to women in entering all kinds of contracts, applying for credit, and joining social and cultural clubs.
· The Anti-Sexual Harassment Law of 1995 declares sexual harassment to be unlawful in the employment, education or training environment.
In spite of these measures, a situation of inequality of opportunity persists, particularly in decision-making and policy-level positions, in employment and in public life. This is not to disparage the importance of positive measures and laws to promote equal opportunities for women. Undoubtedly these measures are helping to gradually break down the social and structural barriers to the empowerment of women. It takes time, however, to change long-engrained attitudes and habits, as well as the political will to ensure that laws are enforced and other measures are effectively implemented.
Box 16 - Male-Dominated Social Structure
"There are still factors that limit women to rise to the top positions and to develop their full potentials. Despite their large numbers in some fields such as agriculture, they are unrecognized and thus do not enjoy the benefits of their training and their acquired technology. This could probably be traced to the centuries-old discriminatory attitudes, laws and traditions which, consciously or unconsciously, still prevail in the male-dominated social structure".
Mancebo, et al, 1995
Most of the students come from the CARICOM countries and in the total registration of the University females outnumber males. At the St. Augustine campus, there are nearly equal numbers of men and access to higher agricultural education of women from the disadvantaged regions of the country, improving career advancement, and changing the socio-cultural climate which maintains a male-dominated social structure. These recommendations, addressed mainly to government but also to NGOs, are:
· Promoting education and training in modernizing agriculture with preferential attention given to women coming from the disadvantaged regions of the country who desire to pursue higher education in agricultural sciences and technologies offered under the National Agricultural Education System (NAES). This should include proportionately allocating places based on the population of the province and facilitating financial assistance and services through implementation of the Electronic Voucher System that has been proposed in the longer-term higher education development plan (1996-2005).
· Incorporating Gender and Development concerns and programmes for students, academic and non-academic personnel of the NAES institutions and their training centres.
· Establishing a network of Community Education and Occupational Development Centres in strategic locations to provide, among other things, training in entrepreneurial skills to rural women and women managers of agricultural enterprises. This should contribute to the development of self-employment opportunities for women' as well as women's career advancement.
· Promotion and/or expansion of government and non-government agencies and corporations which are providing financing to women entrepreneurs to include those engaged in agricultural enterprises.
· Creating and strengthening a network of village women's organizations to promote women's welfare.
International organizations could support these measures through the provision of technical assistance in the overall process of capacity building and global networking in resource exchange and utilization. Specifically, international organizations could:
· Provide technical assistance to NAES institutions in developing standardized selection instruments for the admission and mainstreaming of women in agriculture; the development of the Electronic Voucher System; and the
· Provide technical assistance to NAES institutions in developing standardized selection instruments for the admission and mainstreaming of women in agriculture; the development of the Electronic Voucher System; and the feasibility of establishing a network of Community Education and Occupational Development Centres.
· Provide in-country training of trainers for the promotion of gender equity.
· Develop training materials, agricultural tools and machineries appropriate for women's use in increasing labour productivity.
· Organize exchanges of resource persons and experts in various aspects of gender development.
· Facilitate the participation of women farmers? field staff, scientists, academic personnel and policy makers in conferences, workshops and exchange visits.
· Facilitate information exchange and networking through Internet, E-mail and other means of computerized access to knowledge and materials addressing the various aspects of women and development, gender issues and sustainable and entrepreneurial development under a modernizing Philippine agriculture.
Higher agricultural education in the Caribbean community
The University of the West Indies is a regional university serving 14 Caribbean territories, members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM): Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Jamaica, Montserrat, St. Christopher and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago. Its three semi-autonomous campuses are located in Barbados, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago. Founded in 1948 in Jamaica as the University College of the West Indies, it incorporated the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture in Trinidad and Tobago in 1960, while a third campus in Barbados was opened in 1963. In addition, the University has a Centre of Hotel and Tourism management in the Bahamas and university centres in 11 Caribbean countries. The system is served by a network of satellite communications: The University of the West Indies Distance Education Facility (UWIDITE).
TABLE 15 - Student Registration, University of the West Indies, 1993/94
Males
Females
% Female
Entire University
St. Augustine Campus
Undergraduate degrees
Higher degrees
Diplomas
Advanced diplomas
Source: Reddock and Deare, 1996.
The Centre for Gender and Development Studies was established in 1993 with units on each of the three campuses and a regional coordinating unit in Jamaica. This Centre was established as a result of eleven years of efforts on the part of women staff on all three campuses through the Women and Development Studies Group. Its undergraduate courses include a course in Gender Issues in Agriculture.
The Faculty of Agriculture emerged from the Imperial College of Tropical Agriculture in 1960. In 1975, most of the research staff moved to the newly formed Caribbean Agricultural Research and Development Unit (CARDI). Today, CARDI is engaged in applied research and development while the Faculty of Agriculture is responsible for teaching and training agricultural scientists and technicians with a view to addressing the problems of agricultural and rural development in the Caribbean region. The Faculty offers undergraduate training, postgraduate training, continuing education training, and international exchanges. It also undertakes research and development, outreach activities, and conferences and publications.
At the undergraduate level, the Faculty offers BSc degrees in Agronomy, Crop Production, Agribusiness Management, Livestock Production and Human Ecology (Home Economics, Nutrition and Dietetics). The graduate programme offers MSc degrees in Agricultural Economics, Crop Protection, Tropical Commodity Utilization, and Livestock Science and Production. The M. Phil and PhD degrees are awarded for two to three years of research.
Initiated in 1989, the Continuing Education Programme in Agricultural Technology (CEPAT) offers short courses of one to three weeks that aim to meet the training needs of farmers, managers, agro-processors, extensionists, traders and associated technical and managerial staff. More recently, the External Programme in Agriculture (EPA) was established in 1994 with a post-graduate programme for advanced training in Agricultural and Rural Development in collaboration with Wye College, University of London. This distance processors, extensionists, traders and associated technical and managerial staff. More recently, the External Programme in Agriculture (EPA) was established in 1994 with a post-graduate programme for advanced training in Agricultural and Rural Development in collaboration with Wye College, University of London. This distance learning programme offers a post-graduate diploma, course certificates and MSc degrees.
The International Student Exchange between the Faculty of Agriculture and the University of Wisconsin began in 1987 and offers students from each university the opportunity to spend a semester of study at the other.
TABLE 16 - Enrolment in the Faculty of Agriculture, University of the West Indies 1995/1996
Male
Female
Percentage Female
Undergraduate Programme
Masters Degrees
PhD
External Programme in Agriculture
Exchange Programme
Source: Reddock and Deare, 1996.
As the University has no gender policy on admissions in the Faculty of Agriculture, the high intake of females is probably related to the large number of qualified women graduates at the secondary level. The percentage of women drops to 25 percent at the PhD level, however, and 24 percent in the External Programme in Agriculture. The latter situation is a matter of serious concern since women constitute the majority of food producers in the region. More study is needed to explore the reasons for this low participation of women and to formulate policy to correct it.
Problems reported by women students included sexual harassment. No services exist to deal with complaints of harassment or to assist women victims of violence. The lack of support facilities and child care centres were also cited as problems for parents of young children.
Although the University Charter explicitly prohibits discrimination in employment on the basis of sex, men far outnumber women in senior academic and administrative positions. In the Faculty of Agriculture there were 35 men on the staff and 6 women in 1992/93. All professors, readers and senior lecturers were male.
Caribbean has lessened the demand for agricultural graduates in many countries. Jamaica is an exception where the demand for agricultural graduates is still high. Unlike other countries in the region, Jamaica has a significant number of women in key management positions. Grenada is also exceptional in having two women in positions of permanent secretaries in agriculture. In a 1990 survey of women graduates in managerial positions, many women indicated that managerial training courses and internship programmes during the degree programme would have prepared them more adequately for their jobs. Additional training to upgrade skills was also seen to be important.
The survey noted that only 29 percent of the women graduates were involved in policy or decision making at the organizational level and only 2 percent at national level. Nevertheless, the majority of women respondents felt that they did not encounter unequal treatment in the workplace. They did, however, perceive a lack of support for working mothers and pregnant women.
Box 17 - Women's Organizations Can Play a Role
"Despite the recognition by the government of the obstacles to the progress of women, women's organizations play a key role in making women's issues public and lobbying for the government to implement necessary changes. For example, in Trinidad and Tobago there is no maternity leave law....
'Rural women in particular are least reached by the activities of women's organizations although women's groups organize outreach programmes to rural communities. Some women farmers' groups have been formed to assist women in their productive work. Such groups include the Paramin Women's Group, the Arena Women's Group and the organization of Women in Rice. Professional women agriculturists have also formed themselves into an organization -The Organizations of Professional Women in Agriculture (OPWA)".
Reddock and Deare, 1996
<section>8</section>
Conclusions
Improving women's access to higher agricultural education
Improving women's opportunities to benefit from higher agricultural education
Conclusions
Improving women's access to higher agricultural education
The case studies of women in higher agricultural education confirm that high literacy rates and enrolment in primary and secondary education are basic requisites for access to higher education. Those countries with the highest female literacy and secondary enrolment rates also have the highest female enrolment rates in higher agricultural education, sometimes exceeding that of males. The converse is also true: the countries with low female literacy and secondary enrolment rates also have the lowest percentages of women in higher agricultural education. Efforts to improve women's access to higher agricultural education must, therefore, be part of the larger effort to improve the literacy and school enrolment of girls and women in basic education.
The percentage of women agricultural producers in a country does not necessarily affect the number of women entering higher agricultural education. The two countries studied with the highest percentage of women farmers (Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria) also had the lowest number of women studying agriculture. Major obstacles to women's access to agricultural education, in addition to low literacy and low levels of primary and secondary enrolment, are the undervaluing of women's contributions to agriculture and the perception of agriculture as a male domain. In these countries, a number of strongly-held traditions and customs hinder women tanners from having secure land title, access to agricultural extension and support services, and mobility.
On the other hand, the legal and other measures taken in a country like the Philippines to remove discriminatory practices and to promote the participation of women in public life have had a positive effect on women's educational and occupational opportunities. It is significant that the Philippines has had a long history of feminism, and that the feminist women's movement in the country has been particularly active since the early 1980s in lobbying for positive legislative changes to remove discrimination and other barriers to women's advancement. Strong alliances have been formed between women's NGOs and women's units in government and academia in lobbying for legislation and measures promoting the empowerment of women and in gender sensitization efforts in governmental and non-governmental bodies.
Greater awareness of women's contributions to agriculture, changing long-held perceptions that undervalue women's work, and breaking down discriminatory practices and attitudes are essential elements in the overall effort to improve women's access to higher agricultural education. A larger number of gender-sensitive women in policy and decision-making positions can make a positive impact towards these goals, especially if they are working in a supportive environment both within the institutions and in the larger society.
This does not mean, however, that improving women's access to higher agricultural education must wait for major changes in increasing women's literacy and basic education, in attitudes and perceptions of women's work, in customs and traditions. Effecting such changes is a long-term effort which may not produce the desired outcomes for the immediate future.
The case studies resulted in a number of recommendations that can be implemented in the short- and medium-term to improve women's access to higher agricultural education, to attract women to take up agriculture as a field of study, and to overcome the obstacles that stand in the way of women in agricultural studies. The cumulative effect of small changes can contribute to changing the overall socio-cultural environment in a positive direction for women.
While many of the recommendations of the case studies are country specific, most of them can be applied and adapted to other situations. Many can be implemented without great investments of time and money. Others, require greater efforts and investments on the part of governments and educational and agricultural policy makers and planners. The various recommendations can be grouped under four major categories:
1. Measures to encourage young women and better prepare them to take up agricultural studies.
· Promote and provide special science courses for girls. As well as providing girls with the science qualifications necessary for higher agricultural education, this could help dispel negative assumptions about the ability of girls to master science studies.
· Giving attention to the process of education, i.e. to the treatment of girls and boys during their schooling at the primary and secondary levels, in an effort to eliminate stereotyping which may close doors to future educational opportunities.
· Career counselling at the secondary level which presents agriculture as a possible field of further study and as a profession.
· Organizing information and cultural activities for girls to disseminate information on careers in agriculture.
· Recruiting girls, particularly from rural areas and families engaged in agriculture, and giving value to their on-farm experience and agricultural knowledge in considering their qualifications for higher education.
· Establishment of agricultural secondary schools, or agricultural courses in regular secondary schools, which can feed into higher studies in agriculture.
· Reviewing and revising admissions policies that may discriminate against, or discourage, girls from entering higher agricultural schools.
· Creation of special awards for women in higher agricultural studies.
2. Measures to improve conditions and opportunities for women students in higher agricultural education institutions.
· Establishing infrastructure suitable for women and married students (e.g. proper accommodation, child-care facilities).
· Provision of financial aid and scholarships for women.
· Provision of training opportunities abroad for women.
· Allowing flexibility in stretching out study courses, part time study and choice of internships to accommodate students with family obligations.
3. Measures to ensure a non-discriminatory environment for women staff and students in higher agricultural institutions.
· Gender sensitization courses for teachers and other staff.
· Policies to prevent discrimination or harassment on the basis of gender and the establishment of services to deal with complaints in these areas.
· Elimination of stereotyping of male and female capacities, courses and domains in the field of agricultural studies.
4. Measures to ensure that higher agricultural education is attuned to and appropriate to the realities and needs of both men and women farmers.
· Reviewing and revising curricula and courses in higher education to ensure that these cover the areas of particular importance to women farmers.
· Provision of curriculum units and courses on the importance of women's roles and contributions to agriculture, and on working with rural women.
· Provision of teaching materials directed specifically to the needs of women farmers.
· Opening up traditional male courses of study to women and vice versa.
Improving women's opportunities to benefit from higher agricultural education
As the case studies confirm, where there are a greater number of women agricultural graduates there are also a larger number of women in agricultural careers. However, it is also clear from the case studies that access to higher agricultural studies does not necessarily translate into equal opportunities to benefit from this education. Even in a country such as the Philippines, with a host of legislative and other measures designed to prevent discrimination against women in employment and public life, few women are found in the top level positions in agricultural institutions, whether in teaching staff, in government positions, NGOs or the private sector.
Access to higher agricultural education is a basic requisite to provide potential women agriculturists careers at all levels from the field level, to research and academia, to national and international agricultural policy-making and developmental bodies. Other conditions are also required, however, if women are to be able to make the most of their education and to enjoy equal occupational opportunities with men. This situation is not unique to the field of agriculture. In almost all areas of employment and public life, women have yet to break through barriers which prevent them from fully participating on an equal basis with men, particularly at policy and decision-making levels.
Changing deeply-engrained and centuries-old attitudes, perceptions and customs? which are the foundations supporting male-dominated structures and culture, is a long-term effort. In spite of great strides that have been taken for the empowerment of women in the past decades, the barriers that hinder women from using and benefiting from their full potential are still firmly standing. A look at the statistics on women in decision-making positions in national and international development bodies and research institutes is sufficient to prove this claim.
Improving opportunities for women to benefit from their agricultural education is even more of a challenge than improving women's access to agricultural education. Nevertheless, the case studies suggest a number of measures that can be taken. These can be categorized as follows:
1. Measures to better prepare women students for agricultural careers at all levels. These would include increasing practical work and skills training in areas such as management, research, extension, specializations for which there is a job market in the country, and nontraditional agricultural occupations for women. There also needs to be more opportunities for women to take part in post-graduate and in-service training in skills necessary for career advancement.
2. Legislative measures to prevent discrimination in hiring and employment and to prohibit harassment on the basis of gender.
3. Measures to improve working conditions for women, taking into consideration family responsibilities. These could include flexible working hours, provision of child-care facilities, maternity and paternity leave, and flexibility in posting women with family responsibilities in the field.
4. Measures to provide financial aid and services to women to set themselves up in agricultural enterprises or to become established as farmers. These could also include assistance to women agriculturists and extensionists to provide their clients with inputs, credit and other services.
5. Measures to professionalize agricultural occupations to make them more attractive; improve salaries and emoluments especially for those working in rural areas; and eliminate disparities in salaries of men and women.
6. Organization of women agriculturists in professional associations that can act as pressure groups to promote women's access to agricultural education and occupational opportunities.
7. Gender sensitization at all levels of national and international governmental and non-governmental bodies dealing with agricultural development policies and planning, including research institutes.
How can international institutions such as FAO assist governments and NGOs in their efforts to implement such measures? The case study on the Philippines makes a number of suggestions for the provision of technical assistance by international organizations in:
· capacity building in establishing measures to promote women's opportunities in agriculture;
· training of trainers in promotion of gender equity;
· preparation of training materials for increasing gender awareness at all levels;
· facilitating the participation of women farmers, field staff, scientists, academic personnel and policy makers in conferences, workshops and exchange visits;
· facilitating information exchange and networking on women and development and gender issues.
Some areas which were not explored in depth, but which warrant further examination, are the causes for the extremely low numbers of women professionals at the highest levels of agricultural research institutes and in the highest management and decision-making positions in those agencies in the UN system which are dealing most directly with agriculture.
The agencies in the UN system most directly concerned with agriculture have units and officers dealing with women and development and gender issues. These agencies have mandates to promote women in development and have carried out gender training programmes for their staff and/or produced materials and guidelines on gender issues and agriculture. Yet among all the bodies in the UN system, they rank among the lowest in women in the highest professional and management positions.
Another avenue which might warrant further exploration is the role that women's organizations could play, in collaboration with gender officers and units within international agricultural organizations and institutions, to lobby for a greater number of women in top level positions within these institutions. Could not women's NGOs play a supportive role in pressuring agricultural institutions to become more gender sensitive and to mainstream women throughout their programmes?
Women's organizations, on the whole, have been less involved with the concerns of rural women than with those of urban women. During recent years, especially, the women's movement has mobilized globally to influence the policies of a number of United Nations agencies. This can be seen in the large number of women participating and lobbying off the UN world conferences on environment, human rights, population and social development. In the process, strong networks and alliances have been built between women's NGOs and professionals within many United National agencies.
Lobbying and building of alliances between women's organizations and the agencies in the UN system dealing with agriculture exists, but to a lesser extent than in the urban context. At the World Food Summit, the percentage of women's NGOs and female delegates to both the Summit and the NGO Forum was perceived by some to be relatively low in comparison to their participation in previous UN world conferences and summits. This being so in of the crucial importance of food security issues to women, both as providers of food to their families and as the world's major food producers. Sensitization and awareness building of women's roles and contributions to agriculture are just as crucial for women as for men and may also contribute to overcoming the obstacles to women's access to and benefit from higher agricultural education.
This would help promote advocacy and networking strategies which have proven crucial in making break-throughs for women in other areas of development, and in the monitoring and implementation of agreements and declarations which have come out of United Nations world conferences. The World Food Summit Plan of Action recognizes the need for cooperation and action by all sectors of society to achieve its goals, and this includes the improvement of women's access to and benefits from agricultural education.
<section>9</section>
Case studies
Case studies
Côte D'Ivoire
Acces des Femmes à L 'Enseignement Supérieur Agricole. Le cas d'ENSA et de l'IAB de Yamoussoukro, by Bamba Gue and Kama Berte, 1995.
Jordan
Enrollment of Women in Higher Agricultural Education in Jordan, by Bassam Snobar, 1996.
Nigeria
Enrolment Figures and Causal Factors of Women in Agricultural Studies at the Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria, by Simi Afonja and Omolara Olusi, 1995.
The Philippines
Women in Higher Education in Agriculture in the Philippines: the Case of the University of the Philippines Los Banos, by Samuel T. Mancebo, Evangeline C. Sulabo, Lorna P. Domingo, and Francisca O. Tan, 1995.
University of the West Indies
Enrolment Patterns of Women in Higher Agricultural Education, the Case of the University of the West Indies, by Rhoda Reddock and Fredericka Deare, 1996.
References
Anderson, S. (1995) Domestic Animal Diversity: Genetic Resources, Rural People's Knowledge and Biodiversity (in press).
El-Fattal, Lamia (1996) Rural Women and Food Security in the Near East Region. Current Status and Perspectives. Cairo, FAO Regional Office for the Near East.
FAO (1996) Food Security and Agricultural Research, Fact Sheet.. Rome, FAO.
FAO (1996) Improving Extension Work with Rural Women. Rome, FAO.
FAO (1996) Research and Extension: A Gender Perspective, Fact Sheet. Rome, FAO.
FAO (1996) Rome Declaration on World Food Security and World Food Summit Plan of Action. Rome, FAO.
FAO (1996) Women and the Green Revolution, Fact Sheet. Rome, FAO.
FAO (1996) Women Feed the World, Fact Sheet. Rome, FAO.
FAO (1996) Women - Users, Preservers and Managers of Agro-Biodiversity, Fact Sheet. Rome, FAO.
Griffen, Vanessa (ed.) (1987) Women, Development and Empowerment. A Pacific Feminist Perspective. Kuala Lumpur, Asian and Pacific Development Centre.
Illo Jeanne Frances I. (1995) Women, Agriculture and Rural Development National Sectoral Report for the Philippines. Rome, FAO.
Karl, Marilee (1995) Women and Empowerment - Participation and Decision Making. London, ZED Press.
Shiva, Vandana (1996) "Farmers Safeguarding Biodiversity through their Crop Production"? Dynamic Diversity, Intermediate Technology Group.
UNDP (1995) Human Development Report 1995. New York, Oxford University Press.
UNDP (1996) Human Development Report 1996. New York, Oxford University Press
UNESCO (1995) World Education Report 1995. Oxford, UNESCO Publishing.
UNICEF (1992) Strategies to Promote Girls ' Education. New York, UNICEF.
United Nations (1995) The World 's Women 1995, Trends and Statistics. New York, United Nations.
United Nations, Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW) (1992) "Public Life: Women Make a Difference", Women 2000, No. 2.
Zwiefel, H. (1995) "Modern Biotechnologies in Agriculture: Impact on Women in the South", Biotechnology and Development Monitor, No. 23.
