<title>Thirty-Eighth Session: Proceedings of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products, 38th Session, Proceedings</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
The Forestry Department of FAO, through its Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper, has been receiving valuable, practical advice on issues related to pulp and paper and also on other economic and social aspects of forestry since 1960. FAO has benefited from this advice in the collection, analysis and validation of statistical information and also in the preparation of outlook studies.
The 111th Session of the FAO Council broadened the mandate of the Committee and renamed it the "Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products (ACPWP)" in order to reflect the emerging trends in world forestry and to cover other sectors of the primary industry, such as sawmilling and wood-based panel manufacturing.
The enlarged Committee met, for the first time, at the 38th Session of this important advisory body, which took place in Rome from 23 to 25 April 1997 and which brought together 15 members and 35 advisers from 27 developing and developed countries, as well as countries with economies in transition. The attendance of observers from various international institutions and organizations, such as ATIBT, CEPI, UN-ECE, European Commission, European Investment Bank, International Finance Corporation, UNIDO and the Unión de Selvicultores del Sur de Europa, demonstrated the interest in the event. Together with industry representatives, they provided a balanced and diversified group of participants.
The Committee continues to serve as a global policy and technical forum for the forest industry and as an advisory body for the work of FAO related to forest and forest products development.
These proceedings, prepared by the Secretariat for the first time, consist of a summary of the conclusions and recommendations that emerged from the discussions, as well as the most important documents presented at the meeting. This document is particularly important to members and observers who were unable to attend the meeting, and it should also encourage participants to continuously provide professional advice to FAO.
The ACPWP Chairman, Mr M'hammed Mezzour, and the Secretariat wish to thank all the participants for attending and actively participating in the meeting and for offering their valuable experience that contributed to the success of the presentations and discussions.
Karl-Hermann Schmincke
Director Forest Products Division
<section>2</section>
KEYNOTE ADDRESS
David A. Harcharik
Forestry Department, FAO, Rome
Let me first welcome you on behalf of our Director-General, but also on behalf of everyone in the Forestry Department. We are very pleased that you are able to participate in this first Session of the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. You represent a good cross-section of the private industry community, with backgrounds in pulp and paper, sawmilling, and wood-based panels, and coming from forest industries associations, landowners associations, governments and international organizations from all over the world.
This Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products builds on the successful "Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper", which had been meeting annually since 1960. This particular meeting is special as it is the first with the Committee having a broadened mandate, comprising all sectors of the forest industry.
I would like to express my own view of what I think the Advisory Committee's role is. First, I think it is very important that there be some high-level policy forum for forest industry at the global level which can address emerging issues, such as certification and labelling, development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management at the national level and at the forest management unit level, and the very concept of sustainable forest management itself. These are important policy and technical issues that affect private industry. Other important issues for private industry and private land-owners are the merits of a legally-binding convention on forests at the global level, trends in supply and demand for forest products, the forest resource situation and economic development in general. FAO provides a policy forum on these subjects where industry leaders can exchange views and identify programmes and solutions to problems that you yourself can implement.
I note that other global forestry fora are not always as effective as they might be because they seldom have good participation from the private sector - for example, the Commission on Sustainable Development, which is meeting in New York right now, and the ad hoc Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests that was created by the CSD. I could also mention our own COFO (the Committee on Forestry), the Inter-Governmental Committee that advises FAO on our forestry programme that was held just a month ago, where there were few individuals with private industry background and private sector experience. In these global international fora, the voice of private industry is muted.
I hope that you will take advantage of this Committee to discuss some of these global issues that impact on private forest management and to become individually active by speaking out and following up on these global issues. You may also wish to share your views with governments, as many of the final decisions on negotiated events will be taken by governments. It is important that government representatives to international meetings have the benefit of your points of view.
A second important role of this Advisory Committee is to advise FAO, and in particular our Forestry Department. This Committee offers an opportunity to us to pick the brains of the private industry and the private sector at large and to benefit from your advice on our programmes. The type of advice that we get from the private sector is sometimes different than what we get from governments. Your advice is often much more practical, straightforward, and down-to-earth - it comes from the real world, and we need it.
We will be asking for your advice, in particular, on the Global Fibre Supply Study, in which we are actively involved right now. Recall that the Advisory Committee on Pulp and Paper identified this important issue and asked FAO to undertake the study. I hope that you will discuss the progress that we are making and advise us on how we can move forward faster and better.
A number of our other products have already benefited from your advice, for example, the FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practices. This has become a very important and useful document. In fact, Southeast Asian countries are trying to use it as a model for developing more specific codes of practices for their region. Also, our work on statistics and outlook studies, supply and demand for wood products and non-wood forest products, are important to the industry and benefit substantially from your advice.
Chairman, I would like to mention a few other things that we are trying to do in the Forestry Department. Last year, for example, we began a strategic planning process. We went back to our roots in 1945 to understand clearly why we were created. Then we reviewed the many global issues and the increasing number of organizations that are addressing them. In order to understand clearly where we fit in and what our priorities are, we needed to think through in a very deliberate way, what the problems and issues are, what are the opportunities, and what institutions are addressing them. We needed to identify what FAO's niche is, to avoid duplicating the work of others, and to know what our comparative advantages are and how we can add to the work that is being done in a cost-effective way.
When we look at our own roots and strengths, it is very illuminating. There are some unique strengths of this Organization that do not appear in other organizations. For example, we are indeed global, there is no other international organization that addresses the forestry issues on a truly global basis like FAO. We are interdisciplinary. Being part of FAO, we have opportunities to link with agriculture, fisheries, statistics and sustainable development. Our staff are not only foresters; we also have people with backgrounds in public administration, watershed management, wildlife, anthropology, economics, etc. This gives us an opportunity to address some of the world's most important forestry issues on an interdisciplinary basis. Our staff is large or small, depending on your point of view. It is small if you think of all the issues that we would like to address, but it is large when you compare us to the other organizations. We have 75 professionals working full-time in the
forestry programme, here in Rome, in our Regional Offices and our Sub-Regional Offices, as well as up to 200 contractors per year. That is far more talent than exists anywhere else. We also have a regional and global structure that I think is a real asset of FAO. We have a global committee, the Committee on Forestry, that is a primary, senior-level, policy advisory body on forestry. We also have this Committee on Paper and Wood Products that advises us specifically on global matters affecting the private sector. In addition, FAO has six regional forestry commissions (Europe, Africa, Near East, Asia, Latin America and North America) that offer an opportunity to discuss issues that are important regionally. Another asset of FAO is that we undertake both conceptual, or normative work - statistics, outlook studies, forest resources assessment, methodologies on better practices, etc., - in addition to operational work. We provide direct assistance to many countries to help put in
place practices that will help those countries better manage their forests.
Next, we developed a very specific mission statement and clear objectives, and subsequently a framework for implementation. One can ask "Since FAO does not own any land, does not manage any forest, does not sell any timber, what is its role?" In forestry, we have three primary roles. The first, is to serve as a neutral policy forum to identify issues and seek solutions. The second, is to serve as a source of information on forests and the forestry sector globally and on forest methodologies and practices. I call your attention to the 1997 State of the World's Forests, one of our most recent products. Our third main role is to provide direct assistance to countries.
In addition, we have identified priorities for our programme of work, giving increased emphasis to global forest resource assessment, strategic sector and outlook studies, capacity building, assisting countries with national plans and programmes, community forestry and development of criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management.
Finally, I would mention that a very important part of implementing our work is the development and the maintenance of very strong partnerships. It is absolutely vital for FAO as an intergovernmental organization to have a very close dialogue with its member governments. We are governmental, first and foremost. Thus, we are trying to ensure that we have an open, transparent and constructive dialogue with our member governments, but also with other international organizations, with the environmental community and with the private sector.
When I travel, one of the questions I am frequently asked is "Is there any progress being made? We read the newspapers and we hear about deforestation and excessive logging, climate change and other problems. We hear about the CSD and the possibility of a forest convention. Is it all talk, or is any real progress being made?" Personally, I think that there is a lot of progress being made, especially in the Nordic countries, in North America and in some tropical countries like Indonesia, where you can see better forestry being practised on the ground. If you look at the reason for that, it is usually because of strong partnerships between the government, land-owners, the private industry and the environmental community. Partnerships are extremely vital today and I think some of the best forestry success stories stem very directly from good partnerships. Thus, one of the things that we are trying to do in FAO is to stimulate better partnerships between ourselves, governments,
NGOs, international organizations and industries and that is why I think this meeting is so important to us.
I thank you again for coming, and I encourage you to stay involved in the issues, provide some very direct and frank advice to us, and help us find more success stories.
<section>3</section>
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS^1
^1 The entire proceedings are also available in the electronic form on the Web at: «HTTP://WWW.FAO.ORG/WAICENT/faoinfo/forestry/ACPWP/ACPWPhom.htm»
The 38th Session of the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products (ACPWP) was held in Rome, from 23 to 25 April 1997. This was the first meeting since the Committee's mandate had been broadened to include all segments of primary forest industries. The main role of the Committee is to serve as a forum for the paper and wood products industry, in matters related to the international forestry debate, and to give advice on the current and future activities of the FAO Forestry Department.
Mr M'hammed Mezzour opened the meeting as the ACPWP Chairman, followed by the keynote address presented by Mr David A. Harcharik, Assistant Director-General of the FAO Forestry Department.
The main topics for discussion and presentations were the socio-economic role of the forest industry and sustainable forest management issues with examples given from developing and developed countries. Additional presentations described the state of the forest products industry in Brazil, Finland, New Zealand and Poland. Finally, FAO staff provided a progress report on the Global Fibre Supply Study, an activity initiated on the recommendation of the ACPWP.
The following recommendations emerged from the different discussions.
FAO should:
· validate data in the Global Fibre Supply Study in regional workshops, particularly in areas where the information is either very poor or controversial;
· make efforts to continuously involve the ACPWP in the implementation of the FAO Global and Regional Forestry Sector Outlook Studies;
· continue publishing "Projected Pulp and Paper Mills in the World" and "Recovered Paper Data";
· promote forest inventory projects in countries such as Brazil and the Congo;
· assist developing countries in forest plantation establishment and in improved wood utilization;
· promote sustainable (responsible) forest management practices;
· further investigate the social and economic costs of sustainable forest management;
· provide a forum for discussions on a baseline to protect the environment, such as the issue on sustainable forest management and certification;
· make special efforts for the training of marketing and trade experts in tropical countries.
In addition, it was recommended that the ACPWP should act as a facilitator to the forest industry, to enable the sector to take a more visible part in the international forestry debate.
The FAO Forestry Department highly values the inputs provided by this important forum of forest industry executives and, subject to the availability of funds from its regular programme, activities will be initiated to implement the recommendations.
<section>4</section>
Brazil
Gabriel Gasparetto
Association of Lumber/Plywood Exporters from Pará, Belém
Introduction
AIMEX is the Association of the Timber Industries Exporters in the State of Pará, in Brazil, concentrating, mostly, producers of plywood and sawn lumber.
The State of Pará represents about 30 percent of the Brazilian timber products exports, and 70 percent of the exports from the Amazon region, which comprises nine States.
Due to the complexity of a huge country as Brazil, considering that AIMEX is a regional Association, and also the limitation of the size for the presentation of this paper, we will give an overview of some aspects, and focus on issues related to the native Brazilian tropical forest. Naturally, none of these issues will be analysed in depth.
In July 1994 a new Economic Plan, named Real, the same as the country's currency, was launched in Brazil. Since then, for the first time in more than 15 years, an acceptable stability in the inflation rate has been achieved, which stayed at a level of 10 percent in 1996.
However, this stability was conquered sacrificing some sectors of the economy, especially the export one, and also generating a concerning level of unemployment.
Special attention has to be given to the main anchor of this Plan, which is the exchange rate of the US Dollar vis-à-vis the Brazilian Real.
The evaluation of the Brazilian Foreign Trade Association (AEB) is that the appreciation of the Real facing the Dollar could have reached around 50 percent.
Estimates from other institutions, including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund vary from 19 percent to 30 percent.
The fact is that there is indeed an artificial appreciation of our currency, that stimulates imports and makes export products less competitive, which was also responsible for the negative value in our trade balance in 1996 being around US$ 5.5 billions.
Measures taken by the government to present do not seem to be sufficient. A great amount of time was lost in 1996 trying to change the Constitution in order to allow the inclusion of right for re-election of the President, that was finally approved by the Congress last January in the first voting of four.
The following issues have yet to be implemented by the government:
· reformulation of the social security system;
· reformulation of the taxes system to simplify it and reduce duties, as the existence of more than 50 different types of taxation lead to a high level of illegal withholdment and increased the informal economy estimated at 50 percent of the GNP;
· privatization of State companies;
· reduction of the so-called "Cost Brazil", to diminish the bureaucracy, the insane complexity of many procedures, the recomposition of infrastructure (roads, ports, communications) and so on;
· reformulation of the government administration, related to the public employees;
· unemployment.
Perspectives as a whole are very good, but the task to overcome the above issues is very difficult.
Performance of the forest industry
More than 60 percent of the Brazilian territory is covered by forests, representing around 400 million ha. Natural tropical rain forest in the Amazon is the most important forest formation, but there are also temperate softwood species in the south and large plantations spread all over the country.
In spite of the fact that the participation of Brazil in the international trade of forest is relatively small, the country is the largest producer and exporter of wood products in Latin America. Having a population of almost 150 million inhabitants, Brazil is also the largest market for wood products of the region. In fact, for at least one product Brazil is the largest world consumer - the domestic consumption of tropical sawn lumber is around 16 million m^3 per year.
Extensive resources, large and growing domestic market, as well as favourable macro-economic conditions, make Brazil an excellent alternative for investments in the forest industry.
Composed by the sectors of sawn lumber, veneer, plywood, fibre boards, particleboards and pulp and paper, the forest industry in Brazil intends to invest around US$ 10 billions till the year 2000.
Up to the end of the 1960s, the sector was not expressive within the Brazilian economy. Regular plantations covered no more than 30 000 ha; wood exports, mainly sawn lumber from the State of Paraná, did not reach US$ 70 million.
In recent years, the picture has been changing. Plantations now cover an area of about 6 million ha. The contribution of the forest industry represents more than 2.5 percent of the GNP; employment, direct and indirect represents 3.5 percent of the economically active population in rural areas, and the activity generates an annual income of US$ 11 billion, being US$ 2.3 billion in exports.
These figures do not include furniture plants, and several other segments which use wood in some form, such as charcoal and chemical products, nor machinery and equipment manufacturers.
A profile of the forest production could be designed as follows:
Products
Production (m^3)
Income (US$)
Sawn Lumber
Veneer
Plywood
Fibreboards
Particleboard
Pulp and Paper
Others
Total
Source: ABIMCI.
Brazilian production of wood panels in 1995 achieved approximately 3.1 million m^3, representing 2.2 percent of the world production, being plywood 1.6 million m^3.
Plywood
In 1996 plywood production reached 1.7 million m^3.
Brazilian plywood production (thousand m^3)
Year
Installed capacity
Production
Unused
Source: ABIMCI.
Evolution of the Brazilian plywood exports
US$ 8 971 000
US$ 48 410 000
US$ 274 122 000
US$ 259 992 728
US$ 247 669 877
Source: DECEX-Brazilian Department of Foreign Trade.
Sawn lumber
Brazilian sawn lumber exports
US$ 379 816 218
US$ 344 745 905
Source: DECEX-Brazilian Company Department of Foreign Trade.
It is interesting to note the efforts being made to increase new species in the international market. In the State of Pará, where precise figures for exports are available, while in 1973 only ten species were exported, in 1996 around 70 species have been exported, with about 50 percent in volumes above 1 000 m^3. However, a higher concentration is observed in about 15 species (see attached table).
Another significant point is that, individually speaking, mahogany (Swietenia macrophylla) that was the most exported species in Pará till 1993, fell to the third place in 1994, being surpassed by Tauari (Couratari spp.) and Jatoba (Hymenaea courbaril) (see attached table).
Consumption
Historic series of consumption of logs from native forests in Brazil (thousand m^3)
Year
Sawn lumber
Plywood and veneer
Charcoal
Industrial firewood
Total
Source: IBAMA, FUNATURA, ITTO.
Investments
In any country, in any language, money is a must, and actual possibilities, many times, a mystery!
Due to the complexity of this matter, especially when related to the native tropical forest, we do not dare deal with this item under such a small space.
However, the figures presented by the Brazilian Government, during the Council Session of the International Tropical Timber Organization, held in Yokohama in November of 1995, just to reach the so called Target 2000: US$ 7 billions.
In addition, it is important to notice that there are absolutely no lines of credit available for plantations or sustainable forest management in Brazil, compatible with the time requirements of the growing of tropical species, which can vary from 10-15 to 50-80 years.
Issues of particular interest
Sustainable forest management (SFM)
Difficulties to prepare and implement SFM in Brazil:
· Lack of a forest policy considering the several regional characteristics of the Amazon Forest.
· Inadequate land policy and high taxation.
· Non-existence of credit lines.
· Heterogeneity of the forest:
The SFM facing the great amount of species in the Amazon (more than 3 000 types of trees, while, at most, around 80 are presently commercially traded) leads to the huge extensions of land. As an example, a plywood mill that consumes yearly 120 000 m^3 of soft logs (low density), and located in an area where the forest produces an average of 20 m^3/ha of suitable species. There will be a need of exploring 6 000 ha per year. The present accepted rotation cycle by IBAMA (Portaria 48/95) is 30 years requiring therefore a total area of 180 000 ha.
To the ones that are not aware, there are social problems generated by the land issue in Brazil, especially with the invasions promoted by the Landless Movement, who simply will not tolerate the possession of such huge areas. So, it is easy to imagine the pressure the timber industry will suffer, and in fact is already suffering, from the society.
On the other hand, SFM areas are difficult to reach (mostly in the Amazon region) due to lack of roads, or bad conserved ones, and costs will, therefore, skyrocket, making the utilization of the less valuable species not feasible.
· Lack of sufficient research.
A positive point is the implementation of the AIMEX Laboratory of Seeds and Seedlings, being built in Belém in an area of 21 ha, the first private initiative in the region, which will be ready by July 1997. It is expected to produce high quality seeds and seedlings, to allow good reforestation programmes.
AIMEX believes that the solution comprises two basic points:
· The SFM rules should be simplified, accepting for instance just low impact logging techniques as enough to fulfil its requirements, and the ones under implementation by the Tropical Forest Foundation in the State of Pará seem very encouraging; and
· Plantations should be given the same level of importance to reach sustainability, basically for low-density species, and naturally, not destroying the natural forest, but recuperating in particular the already degraded areas.
Certification
Certification is an extremely polemic issue as regards trade. It is rather seen as a non-tariff barrier to be imposed on tropical forest products, and also a new industry to be created, generating jobs to hundreds of people, rather than an actual and sincere concern for the environment.
It is obvious that if the market wishes any kind of certification, it will have to pay for it, and costs will have to be added to the price. When consulted, importing countries generally inform they are willing to pay an extra price to receive certified products. However, there is a big distance between willing to pay and actually paying, and also paying the full cost of such certification.
Even so, CERFLOR, a joint system conducted by the SBS, Brazilian Silviculture Society, and ABNT, Brazilian Association of Technical Rules, is having its Technical Committee established on 17 March. This system is almost ready to certify timber from plantations, but nothing yet has been discussed, in terms of principles and criteria, for the native Brazilian tropical forest.
Public forest concessions
The Brazilian Government, through the Ministry of Environment and IBAMA, is intensifying the studies to simplify and extend the access to the public forest concessions, which could be an interesting alternative to the private forests, presently the only feasible possibility.
IBAMA's absurd increases on taxes
We would like to give some special attention to this issue, due to its important impact on the costs of trade.
IBAMA is the Brazilian Department of Environment and Renewable Natural Resources, responsible for the legislation of several activities, including the timber industry, as regards the conservation and (management) operation of forests.
In September 1996, the President of IBAMA, Dr Eduardo Martins, requested, through a direct phone call to the President of AIMEX, Mr Danilo Remor, to start conversations and jointly search for mechanisms to overcome the existing problems resulting in proposing a policy on the tropical forest, as well as evaluating the present level of taxes being charged by IBAMA.
Four meetings were held, two in Belém, one in Brasilia and one in Manaus. During the last meeting, we were surprised by the publication of Portaria Nr. 89/96, on 25 October, which increased all taxes of IBAMA, some of them up to 2 841 percent (two thousand, eight hundred and forty-one percent) and the creation of others which did not exist before, such as the imposition of a tax of R$ 100.00 (roughly US$ 100) per each cubic metre of mahogany, virola, Paraná pine and imbuia exported.
Considering a market price of US$ 200/m^3 for virola the tax in this case would represent about 50 percent of the sale. Simply a nonsense!
Due to the political pressure from all timber associations in Brazil, among them AIMEX, IBAMA issued a new Portaria Nr. 118/96 on 27 December, reducing some taxes, but not yet to reasonable levels, and reducing the R$ 100/m^3 tax to R$ 6/m^3, but now including all species of wood in Brazil, and also from plantations!
The pressure was then made by the pulp and paper industry, and on 8 January Portaria No. 118/96 was issued again, excluding plantations, but maintaining all species if thickness was above 4 inches.
To better understand these acts of pure madness, it is important to observe that the accumulated inflation since July 1994 is of the order of 50 percent and that government is creating mechanisms to stimulate exports and is pressing any economy sector that increases prices beyond 10-20 percent, and not accepting even automatic transfer of inflation, as it was common in the past. So, how can IBAMA allow itself to make such tax increases going against a national government policy?
In fact, IBAMA does not consider sufficient its budget and therefore is trying to impose higher taxes to compensate for that, acting against the legislation, which requires a law to permit a tax increase or duties on export products, and not only an internal Portaria.
Not accepting this procedure, 30 timber associations from all over Brazil have taken out a court injunction against Portaria Nos. 89 and 118/96, for which a decision is awaited.
After sending five faxes to the President of IBAMA, without any response, AIMEX sent a letter to the Governor of Pará, signed also by seven Unions of Timber Workers, protesting and requesting the Governor's help, who immediately phoned the President of IBAMA, who finally decided to come to Belém, on 20 February to talk with us.
As a result of this meeting, IBAMA decided to:
· Immediately suspend the taxation of R$ 6/m^3 on exports;
· Immediately reduce the cost of each ATPF (authorization to transport logs) to R$ 5.00/each, what previously was R$ 0.34/each, and was increased to R$ 10.00/each (2 841 percent) (please, note that some companies use up to 1 000 ATPFs per month);
· Proposed a creation of a Working Group with eight members, four from IBAMA, and four from the trade, of which, one from AIMEX, to re-evaluate all taxes.
Though this seems a progress, and in fact it is, we are still concerned with the lack of criteria that IBAMA used to create and modify all these Portarias.
III International Congress on Plywood and Tropical Timber
II Machinery and Wood Products Fair
The above issues will be discussed during the III International Congress on Plywood and Tropical Timber, which will be held in Belém, State of Pará, Brazil, from 4 to 9 November 1997, in a joint venture of AIMEX and ABIMCI (Brazilian Plywood Association). We would be pleased to count on your participation!
Bibliography
· AIMEX statistics and documents
· The Socio-Economic Importance of the Forest Industry - ABIMCI
· Wood-Based Panels in Brazil - STCP/Dr Ivan Tomaselli
· Partnership Program Forest Industry x Ministry of Environment - SBS-Brazilian Silviculture Society
Evolution of total timber products exports from the State of Pará (1992-1996)
Others
Total
Total
Harmonized System
Sawn lumber
Reference (NBM/SH)
Veneer
Position 44.00 = Timber
Wood flooring/panel
Plywood
Others
44.01; 44.02; 44.03; 44.04; 44.05; 44.06; 44.10; 44.11; 44.13; 44.14; 44.15; 44.16; 44.17; 44.18; 44.19; 44.20 E 44.21
Source:
DECEX - Department of Foreign Trade Operations
Prepared by:
AIMEX / SINDIMAD
Forester:
GUILHERME DOS SANTOS CARVALHO
Comparison of mahogany actually exported with the quota allowances, from 1990 (year when quota system began) to 1996
Volumes (m^3)
Quota allowance
Actually exported
Balance
Total
Source: Department of Foreign Trade Operations - DECEX
Prepared by: AIMEX
Forester: GUILHERME DOS SANTOS CARVALHO
NOTE:
* Higher exported volumes in 1993 and 1994 are due to the old system of exports control of SISCOMEX permitting valid date of the issuance of authorization for 60 days from the date of its liberation. Thus, authorisations issued for exports by SISCOMEX in December were valid until February of the next year. If exports authorized in December for any reason were not placed on board, they were transferred for shipping the next year.
** It is important to also note additional liberation of the volume of permitted technical reserve in the quota system decree.
MAHOGANY EXPORTS
Brazilian timber exports: Chapter 44 of Harmonized System (NBM/SH), 1996 (Jan.-Dec.) - Amazon region comparison (US$ FOB)
States
Others
Total
% Amazonia
% Brazil
A
M
A
Z
N
I
A
ACRE
Amapá
Amazonas
Maranhão
Mato grosso
Pará
Rondonia
Roraima
Tocantins
Sub-total
Rest of Brazil
Total
Harmonized System Reference
Sawn lumber
(NBM/SH)
Veneer
Position 44.00 = Timber
Wood flooring/panel
Particle board
Plywood
Others
44.01; 44.02; 44.03; 44.04; 44.05; 44.06; 44.11; 44.13; 44.14; 44.15; 44.16; 44.17; 44.18; 44.19; 44.20 E 44.21
Source:
DECEX - Department of Foreign Trade Operations
Prepared by:
AIMEX / SINDIMAD
Forester:
GUILHERME DOS SANTOS CARVALHO
<section>5</section>
Brazil
Mario Higino N.M. Leonel
Brazilian National Association of Paper and Celulose, Sao Paulo
General economic conditions
The performance of the Brazilian economy in 1996, though characterized by an irregular behaviour, achieved positive results.
Among these results we would like to point out the reduction in the inflation rate which, in 1994, was of 1000 percent and dropped to about 10 percent and the reduction of the primary interest to 16 percent. Both indexes are still rather high for a stabilized economy, the high interest rates are helping the government to control the consumption level.
The evolution of the fiscal policies adjustment, that occurred at a slower rhythm than it was expected, reinforced the dependency on the exchange and currency policies, with a consequent loss of the economy growth.
The fiscal policy during 1996 had a deficit in the current transactions of approximately 3.3 percent of the GNP, it was compensated by the inflow investments, that increased the international reserves to US$ 60 billion. This poor performance shows that the reforms that are necessary to improve the efficiency of the public sector, did not take place during the year.
Preliminary data on the commercial balance for 1996 indicated a negative result of US$ 5.5 billion, which was 65 percent more than that of the previous year. With regard to the commercial opening process and to the value of the Real compared to the US Dollar, the imports have grown 6.9 percent thus reaching US$ 53.2 billion. A significant part of these amounts corresponds not only to machinery and equipment which shows the refurbishing of several sectors, but also to raw material from other countries with better financing conditions. Exports presented a small increase of 2.7 percent, thus reaching US$ 47.7 billion. The small increase was due to the lack of a macro-economic adaptation and on this matter the Congress has still to vote to make the necessary Constitutional amendments which enable equivalent conditions of competitiveness in comparison with international competitors.
The government has set as its main objective the increase of exports and therefore is trying to strengthen its support to the activities by means of a wide and coherent set of measures, which aim at facilitating and dynamizing external trade. The elimination of the "Imposto de Circulação de Mercadorias" (tax on goods transactions) upon export of primary and semi-elaborated products as well as on capital goods will start showing the results as from 1997.
Preliminary data from the Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE) forecast for 1996 a growth of GNP of about 3.2 percent, thus maintaining the decreasing trend that began in 1994, when the growth rate reached 5.7 percent. This result is the consequence of the 3 percent growth in the agricultural and cattle breeding sector, 2.6 percent growth in the industry and 3.5 percent growth in services.
Regarding FTAA and the Business Forum of the Americas, the position of the several industrial working groups is being discussed and it will probably identify a common position of the four members of Mercosur. It is believed that the commercial opening and integration is not only desirable but also unavoidable. However, the validity of the rules must have a common position in order not to jeopardize the development - mainly the agro-industrial one - in several countries. This understanding is expanding in several countries after the creation of regional entities such as Mercosur, Pacto Andino, G-3 and others.
The economic analysts agree in relation to the estimates for the year, therefore this fact shows that the decision of the House of Representatives to permit the re-election of the President was well accepted by both the population and the financial sector; these believe that the possibility of the President to be re-elected is a guarantee that the economical plan will be maintained as well as the low inflation rate, the stability and the privatization process.
The favourable current social, political and economical conditions permit to carry out the structural modifications that are necessary for developing the economy in a healthy and moderate manner.
Pulp, paper and forest performance
Pulp and paper production and capacity utilization
In the last quarter of 1995 the quick growth of the offer and the consequent increase of stocks dropped the prices which remained at a low level until the end of the second quarter of 1996, when the prices showed a slight recovery which unfortunately could not be maintained.
The pulp sector operated at a rate of about 91 percent of its installed capacity and produced 6.2 million tons/year, which was 4.9 percent above that of 1995.
In 1996, the pulp consumption of the verticalized companies was approximately 3.1 million tons which was 2.4 percent below that of the previous year.
The internal sales were of 798 000 tons which, when compared to those of 1995, show a growth of 6.7 percent.
The paper sector operated at a rate of about 83 percent of the installed capacity and produced 5.9 million tons, a production that was 1.1 percent higher than that of 1995.
The production of wrapping paper was of 2.6 million tons and that of printing and writing paper was of 1.8 million tons. These amounts represent 44 percent and 31 percent, respectively, of the total production.
The consumption of the integrated companies was of 1.1 million tons, representing 9 percent above that of the previous year. It should be pointed out that about 95 percent of that consumption refers to the wrapping paper furnished for the manufacturing of corrugated boxes and multiwall bags.
Internal sales grew 4.4 percent, thus reaching 3.5 million tons, partially due to the stagnation of the exported amounts. In total, both wrapping paper, and printing and writing papers represent 62 percent of the internal sales.
As a consequence of the drop in the performance of the paper sector, the consumption of recycled fibres shows a reduction in volumes and prices. The rate of recovery of papers is of about 35 percent of the paper consumption and the production of the recycled paper represents about 26 percent of the total production.
Foreign trade of pulp and paper
The drop in international prices of pulp and paper, that began at the end of 1995, continued until the second quarter of the following year.
The small recuperation of prices that took place during the second half of 1996 was not enough to compensate for the losses of the export companies. It is also necessary to emphasize the loss of competitiveness which results from what has been called "Brazilian Cost Factor". This is the most proper way to define the existing difficulties which range from port infrastructure to transportation and communication, to financing problems and to the fiscal organization.
Preliminary 1996 data show that the exports of pulp and paper amounted to US$ 1.9 billion which represents a drop of 28.5 percent. The volume of pulp exports increased 12.9 percent and that of paper 0.4 percent. However, the financial results for both sectors show drops of 32.3 percent and 24.0 percent, respectively.
The imports were positively affected by the extremely favourable conditions of terms and external financing interests. The imports, mainly those of long-fibre bleached pulp and printing paper, amounted to US$ 990 million which represented a decrease of 9.8 percent when compared to that of 1996.
The commercial balance of the sector, which reflected the low prices of 1996, presented a positive result of US$ 950 million while that of 1995 was of US$ 1.6 billion.
Apparent consumption of pulp and paper
In 1996, the apparent consumption of pulp was of 4.3 million ton/year and that of paper of 5.5 million ton/year. Both represent a growth of 3.1 percent and 3.4 percent, respectively. The per caput consumption of paper, of about 35 kg/year remained at the same level of that of the previous year.
The increase in the apparent consumption of paper in 1996 was mainly due to the growth of imports which was 12.8 percent.
The Institute Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística forecasts for 1996 that the Brazilian population would be of 158 million, this amount would represent a population increase of 1.3 percent when compared to the population in 1995.
Forest
The Brazilian pulp and paper sector moves in a scenario of increasing competition, where the institutional mechanisms to stimulate forestry are determinant to investors' decision.
As in Brazil there are no promotional instruments similar to those existing in other countries, the increase of the forest base will be performed in accordance to some expansion of the maintenance working areas and by means of participation of small and medium size producers and also by the optimization of the forest areas already existent. The implementation of new reforestry areas requires private capital for the creation of infrastructure (roads, housing, schools, communications, hospitals, water supply and so on) of about 20 percent of the total investment.
The sector increased its forest basis to a total of 1.5 million ha by means of programmes of planting and reorganizing 118 000 ha during 1996. The consumption of wood by the pulp and paper sector during this year was calculated at 34 million m^3, of which 88 percent where devoted to cellulose and pulp production and 12 percent to energy production.
The Brazilian pulp industry uses exclusively wood extracted from planted forests where sustainable management criteria is followed.
The reforestation programmes implemented by the sector use modern silviculture techniques and forestry management mainly in biotechnology. Its average productivity was of 46 m^3 wood/ha/year of eucalyptus and 34 m^3 wood/ha/year of pinus tree. Efforts are being made to double these figures by the end of the decade.
In the industrial and forest activities, the companies of the sector have adopted standards that are higher than those required by the forest and environment legislation.
Outlook for the coming years
In 1997, the economical policy will be more steady without any sudden changes taking place. In general this policy will be characterized by the following factors:
· a gradual reduction of the nominal interest rates due to the drop in the inflation rate and to the present currency restrictions;
· the fiscal policy will be more severe than in 1996, aiming at reducing the need of further financing by the government;
· the exchange policy will remain, accompanying the devaluation of the Real, following an expected average inflation rate aiming at avoiding the valuation of the currency;
· some public prices will be readjusted to allow better profitability prior to privatization of certain public services.
The combination of the different economic policies, together with the general situation influenced by internal and external factors, anticipate a scenario of a moderate economic growth.
Future expansions in capacity
The consolidation of the Real Plan, which reflects upon the stabilization of prices and the increase of the income of the lower classes, together with Social and Educational Programmes, will contribute to increase the Brazilian paper consumption to an average growth rates of about 5 percent for the 1996-2000 period and 6 percent for the 2001-2005 one.
To assure that consumption increases and that the growth of exports is maintained, the Brazilian pulp and paper industry will require additional investments of about US$ 10.1 billion during 1996-2005, excluding US$ 3.1 billion which have already been invested.
To make this Investment Programme feasible, it is necessary to create conditions such as: consolidation of the economic stabilization; reduction of the so-called "Brazilian Cost Factor", affecting investments, production, exports and infrastructure; re-establish financing costs from BNDES to make it coherent to the long-term investments in the pulp and paper sector, including its forests.
<section>6</section>
Canada
Lise Lachapelle
Canadian Pulp and Paper Association, Quebec
Summary
As expected, the inventory correction that began in the fall of 1995 continued to depress world demand for pulp and paper products well into 1996. Demand conditions began to improve during the second quarter; however, for Canadian producers, destocking by US consumers of newsprint and other wood-containing papers continued to impact shipments through the third quarter. For the year, overall, Canadian shipments of pulp and products fell by 1.8 percent to 28.0 million tonnes.
Inventories have now returned to more normal levels and economic conditions remain very favourable. Consequently, it is expected that Canadian shipments will increase by 3.7 percent in 1997. Supporting the recovery will be increased shipments of newsprint and printing and writing papers to customers in the US and higher deliveries of containerboard to the North American and offshore markets.
Industry performance in 1996
Canadian pulp and paper producers ended last year on a strong note with an 11 percent rise in fourth quarter deliveries. On the whole, though, 1996 was a disappointing year for most producers, particularly given the favourable economic conditions and strong performance in 1995.
In volume terms, total shipments slipped by 1.8 percent. A healthy rebound in sales during the second half failed to make up for the 7.3 percent drop during the first six months of the year. A sharp decline in product prices further eroded revenues, cutting earnings on pulp and paper by approximately 80 percent.
For integrated producers, the earnings drop was partially offset by slightly better results from solid wood products. Still, it is estimated that net earnings from all forest products operations fell by more than 60 percent - from a record US$ 5.6 billion in 1995 to US$ 1.9 billion in 1996 (before unusual items).
The weak market conditions during the early part of the year were caused by an inventory adjustment. As product prices peaked in the fall of 1995, consumers began drawing down the inventories they had accumulated in the event of shortages and as a hedge against rising prices. For market pulp and fine papers (white papers) the draw-down was largely over by April of this year; in fact, some offshore pulp consumers began restocking during the second quarter. In the case of newsprint, the destocking by consumers only began in April, which depressed North American demand right into the fourth quarter.
One segment that managed to post a year-over-year gain in spite of a weak first half was fine papers (+6.3 percent), helped by an 8.6 percent increase in shipments of uncoated freesheet papers, mostly to the US market. Another was paperboard. Shipments of boxboard, used in packaging, rose 5.2 percent as a result of improved demand from US and Asian customers. Deliveries of linerboard and medium, used to manufacture corrugated containers, grew by 7.0 percent. A modest increase in sales to the US combined with a 36 percent rise in shipments to offshore customers in Asia, Latin America and Europe sustained the strong performance by these grades.
On a regional basis, there was a significant decline in sales to the domestic market (-4.7 percent). Shipments to the US also fell (-5.0 percent), mostly due to lower deliveries of newsprint and market pulp during the first half of the year. As expected, it was the offshore markets which yielded the best results. Overall, shipments rose 5.0 percent. Those to China more than doubled and those to other Asian markets (excluding Japan) rose by nearly 16 percent as a result of increased deliveries of market pulp, paperboard and newsprint.
The reduction in total pulp and paper shipments of almost 2 percent, combined with a 2.5 percent increase in manufacturing capacity, resulted in a four point decline in the industry's overall operating rate to 88 percent, from 92 percent in 1995 (measured as shipments as a percent of capacity). The industry operating rate last peaked in 1994 at 95 percent.
The outlook for 1997
Although growth in the domestic economy slowed, and the economies of continental Europe struggled, 1996 was a relatively good year in terms of economic conditions. This year looks even better. Growth in North America should match or surpass 1996, the economy of Western Europe should expand by 2.5 percent, and the developing economies of Latin America and Asia are expected to remain buoyant. Japan is the only major economy likely to slow down in 1997. This suggests very good growth in world paper and board consumption.
Based on this economic outlook and expected market developments (e.g. capacity additions, stock movements, etc.), Canadian shipments of pulp, paper and paperboard are forecast to recover in 1997, rising 3.7 percent to 29.0 million tonnes.
Supporting the growth will be increased shipments of newsprint and printing and writing papers to customers in the US, and higher deliveries of containerboard to the North American and offshore markets.
On a regional basis, shipments to the US should post a gain of just over 7 percent, more than reversing the decline in 1996, while those to Canada are forecast to rise by 3.8 percent. Deliveries to offshore markets are expected to decrease by 1.6 percent as a result of lower overseas exports of newsprint.
The advance in shipments this year should outpace the growth in Canada's capacity to manufacture pulp, paper and paperboard. Based on CPPA's latest capacity survey (released January 27, 1997), it is estimated that incremental additions and speed ups will add only 1.1 percent to total industry capacity in 1997. Therefore, the overall operating rate should edge back up to 90 percent, from 88 percent last year.
Performance by sector
Newsprint
The US consumers (dailies and commercial printers) continued accumulating stocks through the first quarter of 1996. As a consequence, newsprint was among the last grades to feel the impact of the inventory adjustment. The destocking that did finally take place, and the conservation measures that continued to depress consumption during the early part of 1996, resulted in a sharp reduction in demand for newsprint, most evident in the North American market. This had been forecast; however, the severity of the adjustment was somewhat greater than anticipated.
By the fourth quarter, though, consumer stocks were back to normal or below normal levels, and consumption by US consumers had rebounded above the 11.2 million tonne mark on an SAAR (seasonally adjusted annual rate) basis, and North American mill stocks were down 25 percent from the peak in July. Canadian producers saw fourth quarter shipments rise almost 3 percent. Despite this turnaround and record offshore sales, for the year overall Canadian shipments were down 4.7 percent due to the slump earlier in the year.
In 1997, newsprint should be one of the strongest segments of the industry: US consumption is expected to grow by 3 percent (to achieve this requires only modest growth from the seasonally adjusted level in the 1996/Q4); the absence of consumer destocking as we saw in 1996 will mean actual US demand should grow by 7 percent or more; and in the offshore markets, the supply/demand balance should remain favourable in spite of the new Asian capacity.
For Canadian producers, this is expected to result in an increase in shipments of 4.9 percent over 1996. Since domestic capacity will decline slightly, this should increase the shipment-to-capacity ratio by 6 percent to 96 percent.
Printing and writing papers
Results for the printing and writing sector were mixed. Demand for the uncoated woodfree grades remained depressed during the first quarter due to destocking, but rebounded as expected, posting a solid 8.6 percent gain for the year. Demand for coated woodfree and lightweight coated papers began to improve in the third quarter allowing for a 2.9 percent advance for the year. For producers of uncoated mechanical papers, the destocking by consumers only became significant during the second quarter, so signs of recovery were late in coming. The result was a 12 percent drop in 1996 shipments.
The decrease in deliveries of uncoated mechanical printing papers was responsible for the overall decline in shipments of printing and writing papers of close to 4 percent last year.
This year, printing and writing papers are projected to show the strongest growth of all the sectors. Solid economic growth in North America, some additional capacity to produce coated papers, and the absence of destocking which hurt demand in 1996, should contribute to an overall increase in shipments of 6.4 percent and a 4 point increase in the operating rate to 91 percent. The wood-containing grades will account for most of the additional tonnage.
Other papers and boards
A buoyant US economy and a strong Asian market resulted in healthy demand growth for packaging papers and boards. Shipments of boxboard rose by 5.2 percent, while deliveries of linerboard and medium climbed by 5.2 and 10.0 percent, respectively. Kraft papers registered the only decline. For most grades, however, average transaction prices were below 1995 levels.
In 1997, a 3.8 percent increase in deliveries is forecast based on improved demand in North America and offshore markets. Linerboard and medium should account for most of the growth.
Woodpulp exports
As expected, 1996 was a tumultuous year for pulp producers world-wide. During the first quarter, the destocking by consumers (of both pulp and paper) sent world-wide shipments plunging. On a year-over-year basis, world shipments of chemical paper grade market pulp dropped nearly 20 percent during the first three months of 1996 and the world shipment-to-capacity fell to only 73 percent. During the April-June period, offshore consumers began restocking and paper production recovered, pushing the world shipment-to-capacity ratio above 100 percent. For the year overall, world demand grew by just over 2.5 percent, and the shipment-to-capacity ratio averaged 88 percent for the chemical grades.
Demand in the US and Japan, two of Canada's main markets, fell last year. And demand for softwood pulps in Western Europe was held back due to weakness in demand for lightweight coated and supercalendered papers (important end uses for softwood kraft pulp from Canada). As a result, Canadian exports of pulp slipped by 0.7 percent in 1996.
For 1997, it is expected that Canadian deliveries of chemical market pulp will rise by about 1 percent, and total market pulp shipments will increase by 1.2 percent, helped by improved demand in the US and Japan. Since it is expected that there will not be any growth in domestic capacity, this should push operating levels upwards by close to one percentage point although, when rounded, the projected shipment-to-capacity rate appears unchanged.
<section>7</section>
Chile
Eladio Susaeta
Corporación Chilena de la Madera, Santiago
General state of the economy in Chile
The Chilean economy posted a good performance in 1996 as it grew by 6.8 percent from 1995, when GDP increased by 8.5 percent. The sectors performing best were construction, mining, transport and financial services, while industry, fisheries, and agriculture did poorly.
One of Chile's principal achievements in recent years has been to bring inflation under control, down to 6.6 percent in 1996 against 8.2 percent in similar circumstances in 1995.
The private sector had to live with prolonged economic adjustment to bring inflation under control. This was basically accomplished by raising interest rates to reduce private expenditure, though this also curbed potential growth.
This policy has led to a reduction in the real dollar exchange rate by about 4 percent in 12 months, which is affecting private sector competitiveness.
The number of persons employed rose by 76 600 in 1996 and unemployment stood at 5.9 percent.
External trade was affected by the price drop for some of the country's main exports, including forest products, which produced a trade deficit of US$ 12 326.8 million, in contrast to the surplus of US$ 1 384.1 million in 1995.
The forestry sector
Chile's primary forestry sector accounts for 3 percent of GDP which, although still modest, should increase significantly in subsequent years as large areas of plantation reach maturity and heavy investment in pulp, sawmills, manufactures and other sectors comes on stream.
The forestry sector was hit by the sharp, extensive fall in international prices of significant products which seriously eroded corporate profitability (down 45 percent). This fall in international prices, particularly of pulp, newsprint and sawnwood impacted heavily on exports which fell by 23.7 percent, earning US$ 1 808 million in 1996 against US$ 2 369 million in 1995. Investment has nevertheless remained high, testifying to continued confidence in future performance.
An average of 116 000 ha have been planted annually in the last five years, mainly with Monterey pine and to a lesser extent eucalyptus. A further 80 000 ha are scheduled for planting in 1997.
Investments to the year 2000 are expected to total US$ 3 280 million allocated as follows: forest plantations - US$ 130 million; pulp and paper - US$ 2 500 million; sawmills and manufactures - US$ 300 million; wood panels - US$ 200 million; and other - US$ 150 million.
International prices are expected to rise in 1997 so exports should increase by 9 percent, reaching a value of US$ 1 970 million.
The year 1997 will be very important for the forestry sector as the amended law on forest promotion (DL 701) should be approved, encouraging planting on degraded land and small properties. Moreover, the proceedings for draft legislation establishing a legal framework for the indigenous forest should enter their second stage.
<section>8</section>
Colombia
Roberta Silva Salamanca
Smurfit Cartón de Colombia, Cali
General economic conditions
Colombia has been through political and economic uncertainty in the last two years, which has undermined the vitality of non-extractive activities and caused a sharp drop in investment.
Demand had far outstripped supply in previous years, which caused the authorities to introduce deflationary monetary policy which, although successful, impacted negatively on growth and employment. Even though the GDP rose by 3 percent in 1996, this was lower than the 5.2 percent recorded in 1995. The extractive industry, particularly petroleum production, has increased on account of new discoveries and heavy investment in fields discovered since 1991 coming on stream. The manufacturing industry sector, however, declined by 3.4 percent.
The main economic problem for 1996 was the growing fiscal deficit, caused basically by the central government deficit, with expenditures rising to 6.4 percent of GDP but revenues amounting to only 3.9 percent of GDP. Though the overall deficit is only 1.1 percent of GDP, it will increase rapidly if this trend continues.
Inflation rose from 19.5 percent in 1995 to 21.6 percent in 1996. However, with the accumulation of foreign exchange from credit and privatization, the rate of devaluation dropped from 18.8 percent in 1995 to 1.5 percent in 1996, which translated into real revaluation and undermined competitiveness of the production sectors. The revaluation of the peso and high domestic interest rates attracted foreign investment, especially in the private sector, which further boosted international reserves.
The balance of trade continued to be in deficit despite a lower rise in imports than exports. The highest growth in exports were from the extractive sector, where activities have little impact on the economy, while coffee and industrial exports fell. This, coupled with the loss of competitiveness of local production in relation to imports helped push up unemployment.
The manufacturing industry sector declined, with only a few sectors - such as oil and tobacco - giving a good performance. One of the sectors with lower production was the paper industry but the fall was only a very modest 0.5 percent.
The Colombian economy will remain uncertain in the near future as long as there is a possibility of the US applying sanctions following the withdrawal of certification.
Consumption, production, trade, financial situation and investments in 1995 and 1996
Paper and paperboard consumption in 1995 amounted to 893 000 tons, while apparent consumption in the first half of 1996 amounted to 416 000 tons, which is 7.6 percent lower than in the same period in 1995. Apparent consumption for the year as a whole is estimated at 923 000 tons - down 2 percent from 1995.
Paper and paperboard production increased by 0.6 percent in 1995 reaching 677 000 tons, but fell by 10.9 percent in the first half of 1996. However, the upturn in the second semester produced an overall reduction for the year of only 0.5 percent, with a production of some 674 000 tons.
Exports in 1995 had risen by 46.8 percent over the previous year, totalling 80 000 tons. They fell by 28.9 percent as of June 1996 but improved somewhat to 15 percent as of December reaching a total of some 68 000 tons.
Imports in 1995, amounting to 296 000 tons, were 12.2 percent down from the previous year. This downward trend was maintained in the first half of 1996, falling 5.5 percent. The market recovered in the second half of the year giving an overall growth of 4 percent with a total import volume of 308 000 tons.
The paper industry which consumes little imported raw material lost competitiveness and, with it, its export and duty-free import substitution market on account of low external prices, the revalued peso and the increase in domestic inflation.
This and growing domestic competition in sectors such as tissues, linerboard and corrugated medium had a marked negative impact on corporate profitability. The sector with greatest growth was tissues, but demand turned increasingly towards the cheaper and less profitable qualities. The sectors most affected were linerboard and corrugated medium because of market loss and fall in demand because of zero or low growth in the industries using such packaging.
Political and economic uncertainty in the country has delayed investment projects although this year work will begin on a new tissues production plant by Papeles Nacionales, with an initial capacity of 30 000 tons.
Aspects of particular interest
Progress in sustainable forest management and certification
The Ministry of the Environment issued a new law on the felling of forests which are now designated strategic resources that require sustainable management.
The law aims to provide a regulatory framework for production, protection and mixed forests, whatever the form of ownership. Such clear-cut policy is vital for a country like Colombia which has comparative advantages in the form of rapid tree growth and extensive land availability.
All the wood used in Colombia for paper manufacture comes from plantations or sawmill waste. Of the 310 000 tons of wood used last year to produce paper, 57 percent came from land managed by the large corporations; 31 percent from small landowners and 12 percent from sawmill waste.
Most of Colombia's plantations are located on eroded land in the Andean mountains with forest potential. Pests are controlled with biological methods. The plantations grow much faster than counterparts in temperate zones and are good at protecting the soil, water and other natural resources.
Forest certification is not yet a concern as forest exports are still very limited. What little is exported goes to neighbouring countries that have no interest in the certification systems presently under discussion. Most countries in the region have adopted a "wait and see" attitude until the certification issue becomes clearer and the cost/benefit implications have been worked out.
The socio-economic dimension of the forestry sector and timber processing
Forest plantations generate over 10 000 - mostly local - jobs in Colombia, raising levels of income and quality of life. They therefore help curb migration to urban areas in search for better work opportunities, this being one of the major problems of developing countries.
The forest industry based on man-made forests has set up rural schools near plantation sites, laid over 1 000 km of roads and helped provide rural public infrastructure.
The 174 000 tons of wood pulp produced in the country have saved US$ 740 million in foreign exchange. The pulp and paper industry accounts for about 4 percent of the country's GDP.
Sustainability of fibre supply
Fibre supply in 1995 for the Colombian paper industry was as follows:
Domestic
Imported
Total
Wood pulp
Bagasse and other pulp
Recycled paper
Total
Colombia's timber harvest is estimated at 23.3 million m^3 per year, of which 77.3 percent is used as fuelwood, 18.9 percent for solid wood products and only 3.8 percent for the manufacture of paper and paperboard. All the wood used for paper production comes from plantations under corporate or small private ownership, with sawmill waste accounting for a small proportion. The preferred species are pine and eucalyptus. The country now has 80 000 ha under pine, 35 000 ha under eucalyptus and 25 000 ha under other species. Of the 72 000 ha belonging to the paper industry, 67 percent are planted while the remaining 33 percent comprise natural protection forest.
Research to enhance forest plantation focuses mainly on forestry practices, vegetative reproduction, eucalyptus genetic mapping and micro-propagation. The aim is to obtain trees that will produce wood that is ideally suited to the production of pulp and paper. The resulting benefits extend beyond production and include lower use of chemicals in the pulp plant, less energy and less effluent to be treated before release, making it therefore an increasingly eco-efficient production cycle.
<section>9</section>
Finland
Claes Von Ungern-Sternberg
Finnish Forest Industries Federation, Helsinki
General economic development in Finland
In 1995 Finland's GDP growth continued on the same 4.5 percent level as in 1994. Industrial production increased by almost 10 percent encouraged by the good export demand in the metal and electronics sectors. The entire exports grew by 8 percent in volume. The growth of exports, however, weakened markedly towards the end of the year, as the economic situation worsened rapidly in Finland's main markets.
The private investment had also a clear positive influence on the economic growth. However, construction of residential buildings continued to decline, and thus weakened sawn timber demand.
Unemployment rate was still high, on average 17.2 percent, in spite of brisk economic growth. Inflation remained low, year-on-year rise in the consumer price index was only 1 percent, lowest of the EU countries. Current account showed a surplus of over 23 billion FIM, i.e. 4.2 percent of GDP.
The general slowdown of economic growth in the main European countries at the end of 1995 was also seen in Finland. This weak development continued during the first half of 1996 especially in the exports and investments reflecting also to GDP.
In the second half the economic growth accelerated again as private consumption increased remarkably and exports began to revive. Construction turned upwards and manufacturing output started to show a stronger growth.
Although the growth remained slower in 1996 than the previous year, with a 3.2 percent growth of GDP Finland was clearly above the European average. In spite of a slight improvement, the unemployment rate was still high, 16.3 percent. Current account showed continuously strong surplus, 3.4 percent of GDP and the inflation rate was still low, only 0.6 percent rise in the consumer price index. The long-term interest rates are well below the EMU-criteria.
Performance of forest and paper industries in 1995-1996
During the first three quarters of 1995 the development of the Finnish forest industry was favourable with a rapid growth in the production and exports. In the last quarter, however, the European paper market, especially in the woodfree grades, collapsed, cutting the demand of pulp and paper drastically. As a result, the paper industry production in Finland decreased by 12 percent in the fourth quarter of 1995 compared to the same period of the previous year. Thus, in spite of a good start, in 1995 the paper and paperboard production remained on the same level as in 1994, i.e. 10.9 million tons. Pulp production increased only by 1 percent up to 10 million tons.
The production of sawn timber was cut by 3 percent to 9.4 million m^3 due to the low level of domestic construction. However, the production of wood panels peaked, driven by favourable export demand.
As a whole, in 1995 the forest industry production increased by only 2 percent. The average operating rate of the industry was 92 percent.
The volume of the Finnish forest industry exports decreased by 1 percent on average, and showed therefore a slightly weaker development than that of production. The export tonnage of pulp, paper and paperboard altogether decreased by 3 percent while sawn timber and wood panels experienced a slight increase in the exports.
The prices of sawn timber decreased from the beginning of the year. The woodfree paper grades showed a similar trend during the second half. In 1995 the average export prices were some 13 percent higher than in 1994.
As a result the export revenue of the Finnish forest industry increased by 12 percent to 59 billion FIM in 1995.
The total turnover of the Finnish forest industry companies (with some 30 percent of their paper capacity outside of Finland) rose to the record level of 95 billion FIM and the net result of the companies doubled from 6 billion FIM in 1994 to 12 billion FIM in 1995. The total investments of the forest industry in Finland were 8.5 billion FIM.
In 1996 the situation worsened with the weak economic development of the main European countries affecting almost all branches of the industry. Weak demand led to production curtailments of 7-8 weeks, which dropped the average operating rate to 85 percent. On average, the Finnish forest industry production decreased by almost 3 percent.
Paper and paperboard production decreased by 5 percent to 10.4 million tons, which was 0.5 million tons less than in 1995, the biggest drop since the recession of 1975. Respectively, total pulp production dropped by 4 percent.
The sawn timber production decreased to 9.2 million m^3 (-2 percent) because of a recession in the construction sector both domestically and in the export markets. An exception was the plywood production which increased by 11 percent partly because of the new capacity.
The total export volume decreased by 2.5 percent. Paper exports decreased by 8 percent, and exports of sawn timber by 5 percent. On the other hand, exports of wood panels, pulp and paperboard increased.
In 1996 the price level for most products dropped. On average, the export prices were 8 percent lower than in the previous year. Pulp prices decreased by 35 percent, woodfree papers by 20 percent and sawn timber by 10 percent. The average prices of mechanical paper grades in 1996 still remained slightly above those of 1995.
Because of the lower export volumes and lower prices, the Finnish forest industry export revenue was cut by 10 percent to 53 billion FIM in 1996. The profitability of the industry also weakened remarkably. The investments, however, rose to 12 billion FIM. During the year several projects came on stream, Metsä-Serla's new 300 000 tons paper machine at Kirkniemi, UPM-Kymmene's 100 000 tons release paper machine and the 500 000 tons pulp mill of Metsä-Rauma.
Finnish forest certification standards project is well under way. A national board of timber certification system was formed in April 1996, on the initiative of the government. Its working committee is addressing organizational matters concerning forest certification. In August 1996, a special working group was formed in which the forest sector, environmental organizations, and social organizations are cooperating to develop standards for sustainable forestry in Finland. FSC's international principles and the EMAS's Environmental Auditing scheme provide the foundation for the work. The proposal is planned to be presented in April 1997.
The broad-based standards working group has progressed swiftly and is well on schedule. The group is continuing its committed efforts to create minimum requirements or standards, taking domestic conditions into account.
The target of forest certification is to guide forest management and utilisation towards sustainability, economically and ecologically, observing social and cultural aspects, and thus promote marketing of forest products. Finland's commitment to international agreements, legislation on forestry and nature conservation, and the environmental programme for forestry adopted in 1994 form the basis of this project.
Voluntary commitment of each forest owner will most obviously be included in the certification system. Regional or farm levels and their combination have been studied as alternative levels for certification. The regional basis will be more applicable to the Finnish circumstances.
The participation of a forest owner in the system should be made as easy as possible, regardless of the earlier forest management practices. The new Finnish legislation on forestry and nature conservation, which came into effect on 1 January 1997 offers a steady ground.
The forthcoming proposal of the working group is intended to be applicable both to international certification system of forest management (FSC) and environmental management systems (ISO and EU/EMAS). Rather than being mutually exclusive, they can be combined and thereby they can complement each other.
<section>a</section>
Germany
Peter Otzen
German Pulp and Paper Association, Bonn
Introduction
Since last spring, the German economy has begun to recover from the break in growth into which it slipped in mid-1995. The GDP rose 1.4 percent in real terms on average in 1996 as compared with the preceding year. Although the growth rate was slightly lower than in the previous year (+1.9 percent), it picked up appreciably in the second and third quarters, due initially to the effect of pent-up demand following the cold winter of 1995/96, as well as other factors. By the end of the year, however, the expansion continued at a somewhat slower pace.
The economic recovery of 1996 was due, among other things, to the more moderate course pursued where wages were concerned and also to the fact that the currency was no longer so highly overvalued. Moreover, the world economy also picked up, thus considerably improving German industry's overall export chances. With a real increase of 5 percent, exports once again proved to be the main pillar of support for economic growth in 1996. Since imports rose at the distinctly lower rate of 2.0 percent due to the continuing low level of domestic demand, foreign trade had a tangible stimulating effect on overall economic performance. The investment activity which has such a decisive impact on new jobs remained generally weak in 1995. Private consumption increased at the same rate as overall economic performance in 1996. Further expansion was prevented by higher social security contributions and a lower rise in income, as well as the distinct drop in employment.
The economic process of catching up in the new German States continued at a distinctly slower pace in 1996. Although GDP still grew slightly more strongly at +2.0 percent than in Western Germany, it remained far short of the high rates achieved in previous years, such as 9.9 percent in 1994 and 5.3 percent in 1995.
The problem of unemployment in Germany also intensified towards the end of 1996 and the number of people out of work rose to 4.15 million at the end of the year. That was 360 000 more than one year earlier and corresponded to an unemployment quota of 10.8 percent.
Performance of the forest and paper industries in 1995-96
Production of sulphite pulp by German pulp mills remained at the previous year's level of 683 000 tonnes in 1996. Imported pulp amounted to 3.2 million tonnes, while exported pulp was only 350 000 tonnes.
The signs of a revival in the German paper industry have become stronger since mid-1996. Companies slowly began to assess the situation more favourably again as the industry bottomed out of a phase of uncertainty. Sales of most paper grades proved to be better than expected in the last months of the year. In October 1996, the new orders received for paper and board even reached their highest level since March 1995. The prospects for an improvement in exports are not bad. The expected expansion of world trade and the end of a period of overvaluation of the Deutsche Mark should have a positive effect.
However, when considering this revival on the paper markets, it must be borne in mind that the industry faced hard times in the first half of 1996, following the slump of autumn 1995. Paper prices in particular have still to pick up strongly again. At DM 18.4 billion, the value of sales in 1996 was almost 11 percent lower than in the previous year. The price index for paper and board is almost 20 percent below the record level reached in August 1995.
All in all, the German paper industry's output declined 1 percent to 14.6 million tonnes of paper and board in 1996. Exports were the sole source of moderate growth. Paper consumption dropped 3 percent to 15.4 million tonnes and domestic sales declined accordingly. Per caput consumption in 1996 totalled only 188 kg (1995 - 193 kg). Since imports simultaneously dropped 3 percent to 6.9 million tonnes, this meant that imports now accounted for only 45.1 percent of consumption.
Planned investments by the pulp and paper industry in Western Germany were roughly 5 percent lower at DM 0.9 billion in 1996. After the major commitment displayed by some companies in Eastern Germany in the period 1992-94, with investments of up to DM 850 million in the record-breaking year 1993, the scheduled capital expenditure for 1995 and 1996 was no more than DM 160 million and DM 130 million, respectively.
Fibres for the production of paper and board in Germany^a (thousand tons)
1996^b
Chemical Pulp for Paper Production
Production
./.Exports
+ Imports
= App. consumption
Mechanical Pulp
Production
./. Exports
+ Imports
= App. consumption
Waste Paper
Collections
./. Exports
+ Imports
= App. consumption
Fibres in total
App. consumption
^aTotal figures for West and East Germany.
^bEstimated.
Paper and boards in Germany^a (thousand tons)
1996^b
Production
- West Germany
- East Germany
Exports
Imports
App. consumption
Export quota
Import quota
^aTotal figures for West and East Germany.
^bEstimated.
Sustainable forest management/certification
The equivalence and sustainability of the forest's useful, protective and recreational functions are rooted in the Federal Forests Act and in the forestry laws of the individual German States. Sustaining the various functions of the forest eco-system also formed the central tenet of the United Nations Environment Conference in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and the subsequent processes (Helsinki Resolutions, Montreal Process, UNCSD-IPF (United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development - Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests)).
The German Forestry Council (DFWR) representing the German forestry industry introduced a mark of origin for "wood from Sustainable forest management - grown in German forests" in 1996. The German pulp and paper industry has welcomed this resolution as a first step towards the development of an independent world-wide and voluntary system of certification. At the same time, however, national certification projects must not become a barrier to trade and thus violate the WTO rules.
The German pulp and paper industry welcomes the introduction of a certification system within the context of eco-management systems to ISO 14001 which should simultaneously include the work of the FSC. The German pulp and paper industry also considers important that representatives of the German forestry industry take part in the working group ISO TC 207 WG 2 set up by ISO in June 1996.
Together with the European Newsprint manufacturers, the Association of German Magazine Publishers (VDZ) and the manufacturers newsprint and magazine papers operating in Germany, as members of the German Pulp and Paper Association have adopted a voluntary agreement on "Printing products and ecology". In a statement on "Forest management and harvesting" these associations and manufacturers have undertaken only to use wood from sustainably managed forests for timber production and to assure the variety of species when producing newsprint and magazine paper for publishers.
Socio-economic dimension of sustainable forest management and timber production
Sustainable management of our forests is essential in order to preserve the forest's manifold functions for future generations. The method of forest management should be in accordance with the prevailing conditions and thus take into account the variety of forest communities world-wide. Regular care and maintenance are essential in order to obtain stable, natural and economically efficient forest stands as the objective of sustainable modern forest management. The small-dimensioned wood found particularly in young forest stands with their high growth rates is largely purchased and processed by the pulp and paper industry. In this way, small-dimensioned wood accounts for more than one-half of the timber required by the German pulp and paper industry. Through the sustainable use of timber as a raw material, the industry makes a significant contribution towards preserving the stability of the forest ecosystem and its manifold functions.
Sustainable supply of timber
Statutory sustainability of the forest's useful function in Germany means that the amount of timber felled must be no more than can regrow. This minimum objective is clearly exceeded in German forests, for around 58 million m^3 of timber grow up on 10.7 million ha of forest land every year, although only two-thirds of this timber are actually used.
A study by the Federal Forestry and Timber Research Institute investigating the potential supply of raw timber in Germany up to the year 2020 found that the German forests contain sufficient resources to assure the supply of raw timber at present or even higher levels until at least the year 2020.
Even if the potential volume of roughly 58 million m^3 of raw timber that could be utilized through sustainable forest management were to be exploited in full, this would still yield an average increase in resources of 16 million m^3 of timber per year in the coming years (1.5 overbark/a/ha).
Roughly one-third of the 37 million m^3 (1995) of timber felled in Germany every year are sold on the market as timber for industrial use. Together with the by-products accumulated in saw mills (chips, shavings), a total of 9.5 million stacked m^3 (7.6 million m^3) pulpwood were processed altogether by the German pulp and paper industry in 1995.
<section>b</section>
Hungary
Zoltán Szikla
Dunapack Ltd., Budapest
General economic conditions
In 1995, government launched an economy-stabilizing policy introducing very strict measures. These measures continued in 1996, with the following effects on the economy:
· The balance of the central budget looks more favourable. The deficit dropped substantially; in December it was only 40 percent of the 1995 amount.
· The deficit of the current account has diminished to US$ 1.7 billion, which is US$ 800 million less than in the previous year.
· Economic growth picked up in the second half of the year. Industrial output increased by 2 percent. The slow recovery was possible because of a 14 percent rise in exports. Domestic sales were slightly below the 1995 level.
Privatization in 1996 can be outlined as consolidated. The essential feature of the privatization in 1996 was that the decrease in the net worth of the companies before change in ownership ceased and signs of stabilisation were noticeable. The sales of banks and large companies stabilized during the year and this trend will be continued in 1997, too. The proportion of the private industry property reached 60 percent.
Since the beginning of the privatization process, German investors showed interest in the country. Their participation amounts to 34.5 percent, while that of USA amounts to 20 percent and that of France is of the order of 12 percent.
Consumer prices rose by 23.6 percent. Wage increases did not keep pace with the inflation rate. Real income reduced by 3.6 percent. Unemployment decreased by 50 000, reaching 477 000, or 10.5 percent of the economically active population. For 1997 a modest growth of 2 percent can be expected.
Performance of the pulp and paper industries in 1995-96
Paper consumption increased by 4 percent compared to that of last year which is in harmony with the economic growth and general stage of development of the country.
Paper and paperboard consumption (thousand tons)
Consumption
529^a
Production
Export
132^a
Import
298^a
^aEstimate.
Although official data are not yet available, it can be noted that there was no considerable change in the structure of the consumption. The restructuring period that followed the political and economic change seems to be over and the structure of the consumption consolidated as follows:
Newsprint
18 percent
Other printing and writing paper
30 percent
Household and sanitary paper
9 percent
Linerboard and fluting medium
24 percent
Other wrapping and packaging paper and board
5 percent
Other paper and board
14 percent
In Hungary there is only one pulp mill and it is also a straw pulp mill of a small capacity (max. 30 thousand tons/year). In 1996 it produced 16 000 tons of straw pulp. The biggest part of the fibres used came from waste paper and imported market pulp. The estimated breakdown of the raw materials used in Hungary in 1996 is as follows:
Bleached straw pulp
4 percent
Bleached market pulp
23 percent
Unbleached market pulp
7 percent
Waste paper - domestic
46 percent
Waste paper - imported
20 percent
Paper production increased from 321 000 tons to 363 000 tons in 1996 which corresponds to 13 percent. The growth was realized in the uncoated woodfree sector as a result of the restart of Szolnok Paper Mill (new name: Neusiedler Ltd). In the other fields production volume remained approximately at the same level.
Paper and paperboard production (thousand tons)
Total paper and board
Newsprint
Coated p-w. paper
Uncoated p-w. paper
Household and sanitary
Linerboard
Fluting medium
Kraft wrapping and packaging
Folding boxboard
Other paper and board
In 1997, consumption and production are expected to increase at a similar rate than in 1996. Consumption may probably reach some 550 000 tons and production some 400 000 tons. Production will grow as a consequence of more intensive utilization of the existing capacities and the smaller investments in removing bottlenecks.
Performance of the forest industries
The most important structural changes in the last few years in the forest industry sector in Hungary can be summarised as follows:
· significant decrease in fellings, first of all in industrial timber;
· decline of timber consumption;
· exportation of forest products decreased in total, however the export volumes of industrial timber increased;
· a decline of demand for timber is also demonstrated by the fact that import volumes of industrial timber decreased;
· the proportion of imported wood raw material in the country decreased, at the same time that of processed and final wood products (such as furniture) increased disproportionately;
· losing the former East European markets not only resulted in a fall of exports, but also the imports have been significantly shifted towards the developed western countries.
Forestry
The managed forest area in Hungary amounts to 1 719 699 ha, i.e. 18.6 percent of the total land area (as at 31 December 1995). By major functions, this forest area is divided as below:
Exploitable (wood production)
80 percent
Unexploitable
- protection
15 percent
- recreation
5 percent
The growing stock is 303 million m^3 overbark, the average growing stock per unit area being 192 m^3/ha. The gross annual increment is 11.4 million m^3, i.e. 7.1 m^3/ha. Differently from the European picture, broad-leaved stands account for 85 percent of the total forest area, 15 percent being coniferous stands.
The composition of species of trees with their respective share of forest lands is as follows:
Oak
22 percent
Turkey oak
11 percent
Beech
6 percent
Black locust
20 percent
Other hard broad-leaved
10 percent
Poplar
10 percent
Other soft broad-leaved
6 percent
Conifers
15 percent
The total area of forest regeneration completed in 1995 was over 21 000 ha, 79 percent of which (about 16 000 ha) accounted for reforestation and 21 percent for afforestation. By target tree species, this area is distributed as below:
Oak
14.3 percent
Turkey oak and other hard b.l.
9.4 percent
Beech
2.1 percent
Black locust
41.1 percent
Poplar and other soft b.l.
23.6 percent
Conifers
9.5 percent
Fellings amounted to 6 049 000 m^3 in 1995, which is 84 percent of the potential of sustainable forest management.
Wood-processing industry
Sawmilling industry processes mainly domestically removed broad-leaved (hard and soft) timbers and also coniferous sawlogs mainly from import. Further processing of sawn timber is partially performed in sawmills and products such as flooring and siding material, pallets, packaging, barrel staves, etc., are being manufactured. There are currently some 2000 individual mills in the country.
Production of sawn timber in 1995 decreased by 6 percent as compared to the previous year, and that of flooring and siding material by 10 percent. At the same time, there was an important increase in the production of pallet and packaging elements (14 percent) and other sawnwood products (26 percent).
The wood-based panel industry mainly processes broad-leaved veneer logs (for veneer and plywood) and low-diameter industrial wood (for particleboard and fibreboard). There exists no manufacturing capacity for OSB and MDF.
Sustainable forest management
The Hungarian forest management has met the most important criteria of sustainable development for quite sometime. Considering the obligations accepted in international agreements and the intention to harmonize the Hungarian rules with those of the EU, in 1996 Parliament passed a new act on forest and forest protection (Act LIV, 1996). During the preparation of this law, the decisions of Rio de Janeiro, Strasbourg and Helsinki were followed. Concerning the environment and nature protection, the law contains all requirements spelled out in the principles of sustainable development and conservation of biodiversity.
Fibre supply
Regarding fibre supply, the country still has considerable unutilized capacities:
· Fellings reach some 84 percent of the quantity which would be permissible as per criteria of sustainable forest management (the unutilized potential amounts to approximately 1.2 million m^3/year);
· Although the fibre recovery rate is continuously growing, at the moment it only reaches 43-44 percent.
<section>c</section>
India
N.S. Sadawarte
Aptech Consultants Ltd., Pune
Political and economic scenario
This year, India celebrates the Golden Jubilee Year of Indian Independence, a proud moment of ifs history. In spite of its vast size, ever increasing population, diverse religious beliefs, different languages, infrastructure difficulties, substantial number of people living below the poverty line, India has withstood the taste of time by preserving democracy in the country.
During 1996, the Indian National Congress, the largest and oldest political party in the country, was in power until June 1996, when it completed its five-year term of office. However, in spite of fairly good political and economic performance, the party did not reach the majority to form the new government. Although the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) emerged as the single largest party, neither managed to reach the majority to form their own government. The President of India gave this party the opportunity to establish a majority, but the party failed to do so, surviving barely for thirteen days. The second largest majority, Congress party, instead of risking to prove majority with the support of other parties, preferred to support a third force from outside.
Thus, in June 1996, the third force, a conglomeration of thirteen parties with various faith principles and ideologies was formed. This party, named United Front, came into power with the external support of the Congress party. Apparently, for the last eight months, they have continued with the basic policies set out by the previous government. This indicates that the country is not deviating substantially from the earlier chartered path of liberalization set by the previous government.
As regards liberalization and free trade, it appears that this has become a universally-accepted policy from which nobody will turn back, but rather would like to move forward only. It is now to be seen whether a polarization takes place to form two stronger groups of political ideologies.
The current outlook for the Indian economy looks good. The experts expect the GDP growth rate to be more than 6.7 percent as against 6 percent in the previous year. The foreign currency reserves have gone up to US$ 19.5 billion as against US$ 16.3 billion in the previous year. The current account deficit is expected to be lower than 2.0 percent of GDP as against 1.5 percent in the previous year. The inflation rate has gone up to 7.48 percent as against 5 percent in the previous year.
Indian paper industry
As compared to 1995's production - 2.7 million tons - a growth of 5 percent can be reported for 1996. In this year the government made radical changes in the import tariffs by reducing the duty on paper. A few years ago newsprint was imported at a zero percent duty, but the accompanying rider specified that only actual users would be permitted to import newsprint, under the condition that for each ton of newsprint imported the user had to consume at least 2 tons of Indian newsprint. Further, the ministry slashed down customs duty on other papers from 60 to 20 percent and newsprint was allowed to be imported under open general license (OGL) at zero percent duty.
As a result, under the garb of newsprint, traders started importing writing, printing and coated varieties of paper in huge quantities at zero percent duty. Due to prevailing depressed international trade, imported material was much cheaper as compared to the Indian material and also availability was an additional benefit of credit which ran into months at a significant low rate of interest. Indian manufacturers, on the other hand, could extend their credit just up to one month. Thus prices took a downward trend and inventories started piling up.
To illustrate
The current newsprint demand is approximately 630 000 tons. The domestic production during 1995-96 was approximately 412 000 tons (i.e. 65 percent of the demand), thus leaving a gap of 218 000 tons to be filled up by imports. However, due to cheaper imports of imported newsprint, the volume of imports have gone up to some 345 000 tons in the same year.
Result
The producer performance for the first half of 1996-97 are way down as compared to the same period in the previous year. Stocks have piled up heavily. Tamil Nadu Newsprint Ltd. (TNPL), the Indian newsprint giant, posted its bottom line as almost half for the first half of the current fiscal year, as compared to the first half in the previous year. As a result, most of the machines dedicated to producing newsprint in the country have ceased their operations or conveniently gone into an extended repair-and-modernization period. TNPL has also reportedly not made any newsprint for the last three months and still nurses huge stocks, Aurangabad Paper has for the first time in its history been closed for the last quarter. Another giant, Hindustan Newsprint and Papers Ltd. (HNPL) reduced its output from 9 000 to 5 000 tons per month and still carries 10 000 tons in stocks. However, the demand growth for paper and paperboard is stable. The above demand is expected to grow at a rate
of 7.8 percent. The growth rate for the different varieties of paper and paperboard is expected to be as below:
Cultural paper
6.7 percent
Industrial paper
8.2 percent
Speciality paper
7.0 percent
After understanding the problems, the Government of India has recently imposed 10 percent custom duty on newsprint and has excluded newsprint from the OGL list. A few more steps are being considered during this year's budget proposal, due on 28 February 1997.
New investments/expansions
In the wake of international competition and reduced tariffs on imported paper, most of the companies are reconsidering announced expansion plans and slowing down their implementation until they arrive at the economic scale of operation, appropriate technology and indication of market trends.
The ongoing schemes will be completed. Four-to-five major large-sized production units are expected to come into the market viz: Rama Newsprint and Papers Ltd. (RNPL) 150 000 tpy (newsprint and writing/printing - by using waste paper de-inking technology); Sinar Mas 115 000 tpy (writing/printing and coated paper - based on 100 percent imported pulp from Indonesia); ITC Bhadrachalam 120 000 tpy (coated board - based on waste paper and own pulp); Serveall 70 000 tpy (coated board - based on waste paper and purchased pulp); Sterlite 125 000 tpy (writing/printing, coated paper and newsprint - based on imported pulp and waste paper), besides marginal expansions planned in the existing units. Most of these units are aiming at exports for part of their production. However, some temporary excess production seems unavoidable in the industry for some period which might take the toll of weaker units.
Major issues
Indian paper industry will continue to face the following major issues:
Raw material
The industry cannot have its own land for captive plantation and has to make its own arrangements on scanty areas. A few mills have taken progressive steps in social forestry, but this arrangement is not adequate for the capacity they want to grow. Another option is agricultural residues where bagasse is the only source and this has to have some linkage with sugar mills. There has been a tendency to use more wastepaper (mainly imported). Mills will have to rely on large scale imports of wood pulp.
Energy
With rapid industrialization, demand for power is going up at a faster rate than the growth of supply. Paper industry will have to generate their own power to avoid interruptions in production due to power cuts.
Environment
The old method to treat environmental issues is no longer effective, therefore, overall strategy needs to be adopted to select proper process and equipment, and maximum segregation of effluents which should be treated selectively. The environment regulations and the enforcing agencies are becoming stricter every day. Also, the High Court and the Supreme Court insist on better environment practices, often passing strict orders. Thus, it has become necessary for the paper industry to improve its environment technologies.
Finance
In order to make the size of operations internationally competitive, investments are becoming very high. The industry will have to take recourse to international funds and overseas joint venture partnerships.
Outlook
The IMF report on India's economy is encouraging. Joint ventures with overseas partners are being put into practice. There has been a continuous improvement in the flow of foreign investment. In a survey conducted by a Japanese company, it was reported that India stood second on the list of countries preferred by Japanese companies for making new investments.
In a recent interview, the Finance Minister of India, Mr P. Chidambaram, stated that the economy will become stronger as more sectors are opened to foreign competition. The large scale of capital goods in the first three years after the reform had caused apprehension that the domestic industry would suffer. Instead, the opening of the sector has resulted in its faster growth and has enhanced its competitiveness. The Minister believes that the same would be true for the still unopened and unreformed sectors.
<section>d</section>
Indonesia
H.M. Mansur
Indonesian Pulp and Paper Association, Jakarta
General economic condition
Population
200 million (4 February 1997)
Life expectancy
48 years (1970s), 62 years (1994)
Poverty rate
60 percent (1970s), 14 percent (1995)
Literacy
77 percent (1995)
Birth rate
2.32 percent (1970s), 1.66 percent (1993), 1 percent (2000), 0 percent (2020)
GDP
US$ 8 billion (1969), US$ 198.2 billion (1995)
GDP growth
8.07 percent (1995), 7.75-8 percent (1996)
Income per caput
US$ 75 (1970s) US$ 1 023 (1995)
Minimum wage
US$ 2.20 per day
Inflation
8.64 percent (1995), 6.47 percent (1996)
Foreign investment
US$ 8.1 billion (1993), US$ 23.7 billion (1994), US$ 39.9 billion (1995)
Paper consumption
13 kg/caput (1994), 14 kg/caput (1995), 15.5 kg/caput (1996)
Indonesia's pulp and paper industry (1995-1996)
Pulp, waste paper and paper production, import, export and consumption, 1995-1996 (metric tons)
Production
Imports
Exports
Consumption
Pulp
Waste paper
Paper
- Newsprint
- Writing and printing
- Sack kraft
- Liner and fluting
- Boards
- Cigarette paper
- Wrapping paper
- Household paper
- Other paper
Production
Imports
Exports
Consumption
Pulp
Waste paper
Paper
- Newsprint
- Writing and printing
- Sack kraft
- Liner and fluting
- Boards
- Cigarette paper
- Wrapping paper
- Household paper
- Other paper
The years 1995-96 were marked by low and depressed prices, causing companies low profits and losses.
Based on the completion of new projects and renovations and expansions, it is estimated that 1995-96 investment in the pulp and paper industry was about US$ 5 billion. Sales-wise, the Indonesian pulp and paper industry is now a US$ 5 billion business.
Issues
As officially stated, the government has divided the Indonesian forests into the following categories.
For protection forest
30.3 million ha
For conservation and national parks
18.7 million ha
For production and industrial
64.4 million ha
For production and conversion
30.5 million ha
Total
143.9 million ha
As FAO Forestry Statistics 1995 indicated, the area has decreased to 115.7 million ha, therefore the government has stressed the effort to recover the 143.9 million ha by introducing among others HTI project.
The development of HTI is encouraging and quite in progress. The government also stresses the stricter implementation of sustainable forest development, stricter implementation of each category's purpose, to reach a forest development and conservation, and subsequently to conform with accepted standards of environment and operation and certification.
The harvesting of wood from natural forest is continuously reduced, from 27 million m^3 per year to 22.5 million m^3 per year in 1993-98 and will be reduced further to 18 million m^3 per year in 1998-2003.
The Indonesian forests cover 70 percent of Indonesia's land mass. Therefore, their role and impact to the well-being of Indonesia and its people is great and enormously significant. At the same time, Indonesia has to safeguard the role of Indonesia's tropical forests as part of the life lungs of the world. The Government of Indonesia is confident and is striving that the Indonesian forests can be maintained as a sustainable resource for economic development. The active work of HTI, such as for cellulose-based trees and for palm oil trees, has given life support to a great number of people as well as the socio-economic growth of the areas involved.
As has been explained, from the industry's point of view, the most important result of the HTI programme is the sustainability of fibre and wood source for the industry. Although there will be a slight fibre and wood shortage within these few years for the industry, the shortage is filled by imports and will ease when the trees planted begin to mature. Many areas are now already having matured trees, which are ready for harvesting and/or are already harvested.
<section>e</section>
Japan
Kiyoshi Sakai
Japan Paper Association, Tokyo
Economy
The Japanese economy has been stagnant during the past several years with real GDP growing only marginally as follows:
Growth
3.0% (preliminary)
Real GDP for 1996 is expected to have grown by 3 percent, but it lacks momentum. Growth for 1997 is also expected to be slow for the following reasons:
· Increase in consumption tax from 3 percent to 5 percent as from 1 April 1997, repealing of income-tax reduction enacted in 1995 and hike in social security payment will slow down consumer spending;
· Corporate capital expenditure will be flagging due to weakening profitability.
As to the real GDP for the fiscal 1997 year (ending March 1998), the government projected a 1.9 percent growth, while private think-tanks forecast 1.4 percent on average.
Pulp and paper industry
Production and shipment in 1996
Production of paper and paperboard in 1996 increased by 1.2 percent over 1995 to 30 014 thousand tons and shipment was up 0.8 percent to 29 894 thousand tons.
Demand for newsprint and printing/communication papers was fairly strong. Shipment of newsprint increased to 3.6 percent thanks to the Olympic Games and Lower House Election. Commercial printing for fliers/catalogues and copy paper were also favourable and boosted demand for printing/communication papers.
Operating rate for paper machines was roughly 95 percent and 90 percent for paperboard with overall operating rate for paper and paperboard machines standing at about 93 percent.
Production and shipment of paper and paperboard in 1996 (thousand tons)
Grade
Production
Shipment
Export
Newsprint
Pr. & communication
Wrapping
Hygienic
Other
Total paper
Containerboard
Folding carton
Others
Total paperboard
Total paper and board
Shipment includes export.
( ) denotes decreases.
Import and export of paper and paperboard in 1996
Import grew sharply while export declined, making a sharp contrast. During the first half of the year, import increased greatly due to strong demand and yen appreciation, but export dropped. As a result of import increase, imports shared about 5 percent of the total demand.
Import and export of paper and paperboard in 1996 (Jan.-Nov.)
Import
Export
Tonnage (thousand tons)
Tonnage (thousand tons)
Paper
Paperboard
Total
Raw materials
Wastepaper
The Japan Paper Association set up a target to boost the utilization rate of wastepaper up to 56 percent in the year 2000, however, the rate remained around 53.3 percent in 1996. Responsible for the rather low rate was an increase in production of such a high grade printing paper, which does not accept higher mix of wastepaper.
Consumption of wastepaper in 1996 (Jan.-Nov.)
Tonnage (thousand tons)
Paper
Paperboard
Total paper and paperboard
Woodpulp
Production of woodpulp in 1996
Tonnage (thousand tons)
Softwood bleached kraft
Hardwood bleached kraft
Unbleached kraft
Total (include others)
Import of woodpulp in 1996 (Jan.-Nov.)
Tonnage (thousand tons)
Softwood bleached kraft
Hardwood bleached kraft
Unbleached kraft
Total (include others)
Pulpwood
Tonnage (thousand m^3)
% of domestic and import
Softwood, domestic
Import
Import 65%
Total
Domestic 35%
Hardwood, domestic
Total 100%
Import
Total
Total softwood and hardwood
Corporate profitability
Sales of seven major paper companies in the fiscal 1996 year ending March 1997 is expected to increase by 2 percent over fiscal 1995 to 2 755 billion yen (US$ 23 billion) and pre-tax earnings will be down 9.7 percent to 147 billion yen (US$ 123 million).
The new Oji Paper and the Honshu Paper merged on 1 October 1996 to become Oji Paper, the largest paper company in Japan, with annual revenues reaching 1 155 billion yen (US$ 9.6 billion). In October this year, Nihon Shigyo and Jujo Paperboard are going to merge to become the second largest seller of paperboard in Japan.
From the latter half of this year to next year, there will be new capacity additions of 1 million tons of printing/communication paper, 600 000 tons of newsprint and 100 000 tons of containerboard. It is thought that the domestic market will absorb them.
Environment
The Japan Paper Association adopted the "Voluntary Action Program for the Environment", which will be honoured by all member companies. The gist of the programme is:
· to make utmost efforts, including international cooperation, directed towards a solution of the global warming issue;
· to aim at establishing a recycle-oriented society through environmental protection and efficient use of resources on a sustainable basis;
· to further promote the environmental management system.
To be specific, each company will set up targets for the reduction of carbon dioxide emission and energy consumption, promotion of tree plantation and recycling, cutback on waste, etc.
Sustainable forest management
Two-thirds of Japan's land is covered with forests and stock of trees is steadily increasing. The majority of them are plantations which are not yet mature as trees were planted after the World War. The trend of forest areas and their stock are as follows:
Forest areas (million ha)
Plantation (million ha)
Stock of trees (billion m^3)
Plantation (billion m^3)
(Figures of plantations are included in total Forest Area and Stock)
The Japanese forest policy is aiming at promoting improvement of forest resources in consideration of diversified ecological property of the forests, and establishing a sustainable forest management system that makes it possible to fully utilize the forest's multi-functions. However, certification concern in Japan is rather low as the size of forest ownership is small and forest products are hardly exported.
The share of imported pulpwood has been increasing every year and it currently accounts for 65 percent of the total pulpwood consumption. However, the rate of increase is slowing down. The government recently predicted that its demand would reach 40 million m^3 in 2010, taking into consideration an increase in wastepaper utilization. Since supply is anticipated to remain unchanged, demand increase will have to be covered with imports.
The Japanese pulp and paper industry has been developing tree plantations in offshore countries such as Australia, New Zealand, Chile, Papua New Guinea and Viet Nam and is planning to further expand its plantations. In the "Voluntary Action Program for the Environment" mentioned earlier, the Japan Paper Association set a target to expand the industrial plantations, at home or overseas, to 550 000 ha by 2010 in order to secure stable supply of raw materials and assure the contribution to the environment. We recognize the importance of industrial plantations which absorb and fixate carbon dioxide, and we believe our plantations, domestic or external, need to enhance international recognition.
<section>f</section>
Mexico
Carlos Sacal
Cámara Nacional de las Industrias de la Celulosa y del Papel, Mexico
General economic information
The economic activity picked up in 1996, indicating the start of recovery from the crisis, for which various emergency programmes were implemented to deal with the serious devaluation of December 1994.
Everything suggests that the groundwork has been laid for initiation of sustained economic recovery on condition that there are no political or social surprises, or external contingencies - 1997 should be a year of economic consolidation if present trends continue. In contrast to previous crises, the economic cycle in this latest crisis took the form of a sweeping rapid fall followed by a relatively quicker sustained rebound, which even averted high inflation from the devaluation - inflation in 1996 amounted to 27.7 percent as compared to 52 percent in 1994.
The response of the economy reflected the structural economic and financial reforms that had been introduced and bolstered during the previous six-year term, reinforcing the national economy and streamlining mechanisms of adjustment to external and domestic disruption. There was therefore no need for restructuring on the account of the external debt, for re-energizing the export sector or for shaping new external relations.
However, the process of recovery initiated in 1996 is not yet general as certain activities are clearly moving forward, while others have failed to take off. Similarly, the domestic economy is weak while the export economy is strong, reflecting monetary constraint and the resulting tight money supply and weak purchasing power.
The government strategy in 1996 has been the following:
· recovery of production and employment;
· macro-economic stabilization;
· refocusing of public expenditure; and
· continuity of the financial system.
The GDP for 1996 was 5.1 percent higher than in 1995. Inflation stood at 27.7 percent while public expenditure showed a minimal preliminary deficit of 0.2 percent of GDP.
Macro-economic results
Variables
GDP
Inflation
Financial surplus or deficit (pesos)
(0.2)% GDP
0.05% GDP
Monetary reserves (million US$)
Trade balance (million US$)
The pulp and paper industry (third quarter real terms annualized to 1997)
The pulp and paper industry accounted for 2.7 percent of manufacturing GDP and 1.9 percent to industrial GDP. Pulp and paper GDP fell 0.1 percent from 1995. As regards industrial and manufacturing GDP, these were up 10.4 percent and 10.9 percent, respectively, from 1995.
Pulp production in 1996 rose by 67 000 tons which is a 16 percent increase compared to 1995. This increase virtually covered all types of pulp produced in the country: short- and long-fibre sulphate pulp, unbleached sulphate pulp, bleached other fibre pulp and chemical thermo-mechanical pulp.
The increase in pulp production was essentially due to the continued activity of plants that had been closed until 1994 and to the start up of others, despite the fluctuations in international prices which remained below historical levels.
As regards the paper sector and fibre consumption, it continued to use a mix of predominantly secondary fibres (72.3 percent of the total) and virgin fibres (remaining 27.7 percent).
The paper industry has introduced a number of measures to minimize environmental impact. The fact that the total paper production of 3 162 000 tons in 1996 used 2 887 000 tons of secondary fibres (72.3 percent) is particularly noteworthy. The remaining 27.7 percent of virgin fibres were made up as follows: 14 percent chemical wood pulp; 4.6 percent chemical other fibre pulp; and 1.4 percent chemical pulp.
The use of secondary fibres in paper manufacture places Mexico among world leaders in the recycling of paper.
The paper production total of 3 162 000 tons in 1996 represents a 3.8 percent increase over 1995 and was due to higher export sales and a slight recovery of the domestic market. Imports increased by 86 000 tons over 1995 representing a 13.3 percent growth. Apparent consumption showed an increase of 9.8 percent.
Paper production for the various grades was as follows:
· Newsprint increased by 1.1 percent to a total of 267 600 tons; other printing and writing paper also increased by 1.1 percent, reaching 514 700 tons.
· Total production of printing and writing paper, including newsprint, therefore amounted to 782 300 tons - equivalent to a 1.1 percent increase over 1995.
· Packaging increased by 5.9 percent to 1 876 000 tons. The items with the greatest growth were bag paper and containerboard.
· Sanitary and facial tissues and household paper registered a total production level of 475 900 tons, which represents a drop of 0.3 percent. Finally, speciality papers closed the year at 25 500 tons, posting a 14.9 percent growth.
There is no doubt that Mexico's pulp and paper industry is particularly sensitive to changes in international markets and there have been signs that the paper industry has recently lost ground on the domestic market. Furthermore, the sector is affected by political circumstances which make it difficult for the government to establish monetary parity in line with external economic realities.
<section>g</section>
New Zealand
James Griffiths
New Zealand Forest Industries Council, Wellington
Background
The New Zealand economy - A decade of change
Since 1984 New Zealand has transformed its economy to a point where, according to the Geneva-based World Competitiveness League (IMD), it is now ranked as the tenth most competitive economy amongst the world's 50 most significant developed and developing countries.
New Zealand has an open economy that has averaged almost 3 percent GDP growth annually since 1990, with inflation under control at around 2 percent. A decade-long programme of government reform has produced an environment favourable for the development of internationally competitive businesses, viz:
· deregulation of finance, labour, transportation and energy markets;
· corporatisation and privatisation of State sector assets and services;
· elimination of State subsidies, removal of import controls and reducing tariff levels;
· creation of an open foreign investment regime;
· a firm government stand against inflation.
An integral part of this reform programme has been the internationalisation of the New Zealand forest industry.
Global Competitiveness Scoreboard - Top 20 Countries
New Zealand forest industry - Historical development
Starting in the early part of this century, the New Zealand Government purposely set out to develop a planted production forest estate to provide a new source of timber and protect New Zealand's remaining natural forests which had been cleared for farm land, urban settlement and timber needs.
During the period 1910-1930 the government provided the research drive that selected radiata pine as the ideal plantation species, undertook extensive production forests planting activity and implemented forest management and species improvement programmes.
By the late 1930s the New Zealand Government's vision for production forestry had expanded to foster the development of a new economic sector - a forest industry that would generate new employment opportunities and service not only domestic market needs but also earn foreign exchange from forest product exports.
From the 1940s through to the early 1980s the government undertook additional plantings but increasingly encouraged private sector participation through a range of incentive and support mechanisms. Starting in the 1950s the government facilitated the development of the processing sector - saw milling and large-scale pulp and paper operations in particular - and undertook local and international market development for radiata sawn timber and logs. The government also entered into a number of joint ventures forestry developments with Maori interests (New Zealand's indigenous people).
Rates of New Planting Since 1921
Internationalisation of the New Zealand forest industry
During 1987-90 the New Zealand Government reorganized its involvement in forestry by formally separating its natural and production forestry assets, viz.
· a government agency - the Department of Conservation - was established to manage New Zealand's remaining natural forests for conservation purposes - some 6.5 million ha, covering 24 percent of New Zealand's total land area;
· a State-owned company - the New Zealand Forestry Corporation - was established to commercially manage the government's production forests and, in 1989-90, was used as a vehicle for the government to privatise its production forest assets (the State's exit from the forest industry was completed in late 1996);
· corporatised its research efforts by establishing the NZ Forest Research Institute Ltd as a State-owned enterprise;
· established a smaller Ministry of Forestry to manage the Maori forest joint ventures, provide policy advice and a range of border control and sector development services.
Purchasers of the government's production forest assets included local interests as well as international forestry interests from the US, Japan, China, Malaysia, Hong Kong and Indonesia. Since entry these interests have driven the development of the industry's processing capabilities - both through the expansion of existing plants as well as new "greenfield" developments.
As part of this reformation process, the New Zealand Government put in place mechanisms to equitably address successful Maori claims on land area that the government had developed as production forests (a similar settlement process is being undertaken in other resource areas as well).
New Zealand forest industry - Key features
Today New Zealand's forest industry is an expanding sector, based on a 1.5 million ha production forest resource (covering 5 percent of land area), converting 17 million m^3 of material into a wide range of softwood fibre and timber products worth in excess of NZ$ 6 billion in annual sales. The industry operates on a 25-30 year rotational cycle with an annual average wood growth rates of around 22 m^3 per ha. Radiata pine is the main commercial species at around 90 percent of forest area. Private sector interests now control 92 percent of the production forest resource.
The industry has a significant number of vertical and international market integrated companies, largely as a result of the government's forest asset sale process. Export values have increased by 325 percent since 1986 and doubled since 1990. It is now New Zealand's second largest export sector and in 1996 earned NZ$ 2.4 billion from sales to customers in Asian-Pacific markets.
Employing some 31 000 persons, the industry is a major driver of New Zealand's overall economic growth and accounts for 7 percent of GDP.
Consumption
The New Zealand market for wood fibre and timber products is mature and annual per caput consumption - estimated at 3 m^3 - is amongst the highest in the world. The construction and agriculture industries make extensive use of timber products. Paper and packaging consumption is also high reflecting a well developed, modern consumer society with high literacy rates as well as the use of packaging materials by other industrial sectors in New Zealand which are also highly export-orientated, such as the food and beverage industry.
Domestic consumption, in roundwood equivalents, is static at around 10 million m^3 annually. As indicated by high and expanding export levels, a combination of the well developed local market and marginal domestic population growth means the increasing harvest being processed by the forest industry is for its global customer base.
Growing and harvesting
The New Zealand forest industry actively replants all harvested areas. In addition, new plantings of production forests is an important industry feature. Planting takes place on marginal farmland and since 1992 new planting rates have been significant - reaching a peak of 98 000 ha in 1994. New Zealand has an estimated 3 million ha of additional farmland potentially available for conversion into production forestry.
This level of development does not come at the expense of New Zealand's natural forests. The forest industry has negotiated two agreements with local environment groups and the government which acknowledges the conservation benefits of production forestry and precludes industry clearing natural forest areas for plantation development.
Harvest rates have also increased significantly as the wood from forests planted in the 1970s comes on stream.
Annual harvest
Processing and marketing
The processing and marketing sector has undergone significant changes over the past decade as a result of the deregulation and internationalisation process and expanding harvest levels.
Pulp and paper companies have faced increasing local market competition from imports and have consolidated product ranges while maintaining steady export growth. Product customisation has also been a feature.
The panels industry has expanded significantly with a number of "greenfield" MDF facilities coming on stream and being further expanded during this period. To illustrate the level of development, between 1986 and 1996 the value of panel exports increased by nearly 1000 percent.
New Zealand's sawmilling output has continued to grow while undergoing quite significant structural change, which has seen a reduction in the overall number of sawmilling companies operating and extensive mill consolidation by larger firms. Sawn timber export values increased by 330 percent during this same period.
Logs are an important part of New Zealand's export mix. Historically, log trading has created "beach head" markets for further development with higher value products. New Zealand's log exports has expanded dramatically during this ten-year period and over the past five years log exports have averaged around 28 percent of total forest product export value. In volume terms logs exports account for over 50 percent total shipments, clearly illustrating the opportunity for expansion by forest product processors.
New Zealand has a timber remanufacturing and engineering sector which continues to expand from its small base. Internationally competitive downstream wooden furniture and kitset housing sectors are evident and New Zealand's forestry services sector is actively expanding into Asian-Pacific markets.
Exports of forestry products from New Zealand - Growth 1986 to 1996
Quantity
Value (NZ$ thousand)
Quantity
Value (NZ$ thousand)
Value (% Change)
Forestry products
Logs and wood chips (thousand m^3)
Sawn timber (thousand m^3)
Wood pulp (tonnes)
Paper and paper board (tonnes)
Panel products (m^3)
Other forestry products (m^3)
All forestry products
Estimated roundwood equivalent (thousand m^3)
Total value
New Zealand forest industry performance - 1995-96
Over the past two years the New Zealand forest industry has faced very tough international trading conditions - a mix of low commodity prices in key products including pulp, newsprint, logs and timber; weak demand in some key product markets - such as the Australian housing market for sawn timber; and the ongoing appreciation of the New Zealand dollar against the US dollar squeezing margins and company profitability (the New Zealand dollar strengthened by nearly 11 percent during 1995-96).
Despite this, reflecting medium-long term confidence in its ability to compete internationally as a supplier of increasing significance to rapidly expanding Asia-Pacific forest product markets, the following key performance features were apparent:
· Annual harvest expanded to 16.4 million m^3 in 1995 (up 9 percent from 1994) and grew by a further 3 percent to 16.9 million m^3 in 1996.
· In 1995 new plantings where 71 000 ha, with a 14 percent increase to 81 000 ha in 1996 (last four-year average has been 75 000 ha annually).
· The New Zealand Government completed its exit from the industry through the sale of the State-owned Forestry Corporation to a Fletcher Challenge Ltd led consortium for NZ$ 2 billion covering cutting rights for 170 000 ha of established production forests and two solid wood processing facilities.
· Processing investments throughout the industry, in both new and upgrading existing facilities, totalled NZ$ 448 million, including a new 145 000 m^3 MDF facility (overall processing investment commitments from 1995 through to 2005 currently total NZ$ 1.4 billion).
· Total export value contracted to NZ$ 2.45 billion in 1996 for the first time since 1983. This was 7 percent down from 1995 exports worth NZ$ 2.66 billion with retractions in returns from sawn timber, wood pulp, and panel products, not able to off-set gains from log, wood chip, paper and paper board values.
· In terms of roundwood equivalents, export volumes were 10.5 million m^3 in 1995 (or 64 percent of total harvest volume) and 11.1 million m^3 in 1996 (66 percent of harvest). In terms of major product categories, decreases in the volume of sawn timber and panel products was off-set by increases in the quantity of log, wood pulp and paper and paperboard shipments.
· In 1995 the New Zealand forest industry emerged as New Zealand's second largest export earning sector, surpassed the meat industry and, despite trading conditions, retained this position in 1996 accounting for 13 percent of New Zealand's total export value (dairy products are the largest export category). New Zealand exported to a broad mix of Asian-Pacific markets and has an increasing focus on industrialising Asian economies which are experiencing the world's fastest growth in demand for wood fibre and timber products.
Exports of forestry products from New Zealand - Growth 1995 to 1996
Quantity
Value (NZ$ thousand)
Quantity
Value (NZ$ thousand)
Value (% Change)
Forestry products
Logs and wood chips (thousand m^3)
Sawn timber (thousand m^3)
Wood pulp (tonnes)
Paper and paper board (tonnes)
Panel products (m^3)
Other forestry products (m^3)
All forestry products
Estimated roundwood equivalent (thousand m^3)
Total value
Total New Zealand merchandise trade - re-exports
Export Destinations of Forestry Products by Value for Year Ended 31 December 1996 (provisional)
Future potential
New Zealand's annual wood harvest will at least double over the next 15 years to over 30 million m^3. Depending on planting rates future potential beyond 2010 could increase significantly and by the year 2035 New Zealand's total annual harvest could be in excess of 50 million m^3. Given this level of supply potential from its planted production forest resource base, the New Zealand forest industry clearly has a strategic interest in the sustainable forestry management debate and the policy outcomes of this debate in terms of impact on forest product trade flows.
Future Potential - New Zealand Projected Annual Harvest (millions m^3)
Sustainable forestry management
Since the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio, the New Zealand forest industry has become increasingly involved in international environment issues relating to sustainable forestry management (SFM). This involvement has ranged from:
· participation with the New Zealand Government in various UN processes - such as the Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests (IPF) and FAO's Committee on Forestry (COFO);
· leadership in the development by ISO of standards for Environmental Management Systems for use by the forest industry, and
· involvement with international forest industry networks, such as the International Forestry Roundtable.
As a result of this, the New Zealand forest industry has some well developed views on SFM and the role of certification and product labelling.
It also has a firm objective underlying its participation in international forestry fora, such as this Advisory Committee, that is to ensure that the international community - including customers, government regulators, environmental groups and other forestry nations - understand, recognise and acknowledge the positive role that planted production forestry systems can play in achieving SFM through the provision of a wide range of social, environment and economic benefits.
The New Zealand forest industry supports the international concept of SFM but appreciates that SFM solutions cannot be global in nature and must be pragmatic in terms of applications at the regional and local levels. New Zealand is mindful that its own vision to achieve SFM took some 100 years to evolve.
The world's forestry systems are extremely diverse and dynamic, both in biological terms and the social, environmental and economic development objectives for which they are managed. This extreme diversity makes a unitary approach to SFM and certification and labelling inappropriate and unachievable.
This diversity means the New Zealand forest industry does not support any attempts to develop and implement singular or prescriptive solutions that seek to achieve SFM on a global basis - either through an international, legally-binding forestry convention (such as appears to be the recommendation emerging from IPF) or a monopolistic certification and labelling system (as is being attempted by the environmental movement via the Forest Stewardship Council).
New Zealand is mindful that northern hemisphere countries have dominated SFM and certification developments and the global "solutions" proposed to date are based on managed natural forestry principles, which discriminate against planted production forestry systems and potentially create trade barriers for New Zealand's forest product exports, as well as other countries, such as Malaysia and Chile, which are using planted production forests systems as part of their SFM solution.
The New Zealand forest industry feels that the most appropriate level at which to address sustainability issues is at the national level, as the forestry management and forest product processing practices which occur take place within a framework of local laws and regulations, ownership and processing arrangements, and environment, social and economic development objectives which are unique to each and every country.
National and local governments, working in partnership with forest owners, processors, communities and other stakeholders, have the capacity to achieve SFM solutions that meet their particular environment, economic and social needs at the country level.
While the UN and regional inter-governmental initiatives (such as the Helsinki and Montreal Processes) have usefully focused attention on SFM issues post the Rio Earth Summit, their future role should be aimed to assisting individual countries develop relevant SFM solutions - including the integrated forestry estate model when appropriate - through information sharing and technology transfer.
The forest industry has a major role to play in developing SFM solutions. The Third International Forestry Roundtable (Concepción, Chile, 14-17 October 1996) has led to the development of a shared vision on SFM involving resource stewardship, best practice, continuous improvement, enhancing soil, water and ecological values and compliance at the national level with local laws and regulations governing social, environmental and economic activity.
Certification and labelling
The New Zealand forest industry feels that products certification and labelling, per se, is a commercial issue involving buyers and suppliers. From a forest products marketing perspective, sustainability is a product attribute which customers may or may not value and seek in the wood fibre and timber products they buy from industry.
Certification and labelling systems should be compatible with WTO rules and should not create barriers to trade between nations. Certification and labelling systems should therefore be performance based (i.e. not prescriptive) or management system based, be voluntary and designed to provide industry a methodology to measure, demonstrate and verify forestry management systems and practices in order to satisfy customer requirements - whatever these requirements may be. All criteria and indicators relating to SFM must be scientifically based.
The New Zealand forest industry believes that the monopolistic approach to global certification and labelling system as currently proposed by the Forest Stewardship Council is inappropriate as it attempts to impose a particular definition of sustainable forestry management on global consumers and suppliers alike and will impact on forest product trade flows, in particular planted production forest sourced goods.
The ISO provides a more appropriate consultative, participatory, multi-stakeholder framework within which relevant certification and labelling tools can be developed for use by industry. The TC207 Forestry Working Group, which New Zealand is chairing, is developing a technical resource document for the forest industry that will enable certification of forestry management systems at the company level - potentially against whatever standard specific customers might set, including FSC definitions.
While third party auditing clearly improves certification credibility, the level of auditing is best determined by customers, and should not be prescribed by industry, regulators or environmental groups.
Achieving SFM - The New Zealand model
New Zealand has achieved SFM by developing complementary forestry estates and separating commercial from non-commercial management values and objectives, i.e.:
· natural forests, protected and largely managed by government for conservation-related values (accounting for 24 percent of land area, 6.4 million ha);
· highly productive, sustainably managed production forests owned by private sector interests for commercial purposes (at present covering 5 percent land area at 1.5 million ha).
The purposeful development of the production forests has:
· preserved the natural forests by providing an alternative, more specialised and productive source of wood fibre and timber products;
· established a new industry - the forest products industry - the development of which provides a wide range of social, economic and environmental benefits to New Zealand.
These benefits include:
· wealth creation and increasing contribution to GDP and foreign exchange growth;
· new regional development opportunities, including stability for rural communities;
· increasing employment and enhanced skill levels;
· improvements in soil, water and air values.
The additional key components that have enabled New Zealand to achieve its SFM solution are:
· a legislative framework that establishes land ownership rights ensures compliance with company, taxation, employee safety and training requirements;
· an effects based environment law - the Resource Management Act - which is based on the concept of using all natural resources on a sustainably managed basis and mitigation of the impacts on the environment of all industrial processes;
· open dialogue with local communities and environmental groups on the activities of the forest industry, including the use of codes of conduct (i.e. covering harvesting and transportation) and voluntary agreements that preclude the development of production forests on natural forest areas;
· a robust settlements resolution process by government with the indigenous population that actively seeks to address historic natural resource claims including natural and production forestry resources;
· an open market economy that recognises that private sector interests are better placed than government to carry out commercial activities, such as forest product growing and processing activities.
<section>h</section>
Poland
Wiktorian Tarnawski
Association of Polish Papermakers, Lodz
Paper industry structure
The proprietary structure, capacities, and paper and board production in 1995 are shown in Table 1.
In comparison with the capacity in 1989, the production of large mills in 1995 was higher almost by 19 percent. Their total participation in the domestic production was 67 percent. Within the same period of time medium and small mills reached a production amounting to about 60 percent of their capacity. The participation of medium and small mills in the total domestic production is 19.5 percent and 13.5 percent, respectively. Such a situation in medium and small mills was mainly caused by the liquidation of uneconomic technological lines and their high debts, long and difficult debt liquidation procedures, and privatisation processes. Despite the lapse of seven years since the beginning of economic reforms in Poland, the privatisation of small and medium paper mills is still a live issue. At the end of 1996, the proprietary status of the paper industry and paper converting was as follows:
· 11 mills have been privatised with the participation of foreign capital;
· 6 mills are being privatised within the National Investment Funds;
· 5 mills are considered as the Oneman Ownership of the Treasury;
· 17 mills have established creditors' companies and others;
· 16 mills still remain State-owned enterprises.
The participation of the particular mills by their ownership status in the domestic paper and board production is as follows:
· Mills privatised by means of capital
53 percent
· Mills being Oneman Ownership of the Treasury
40 percent
· State-owned enterprises
5 percent
· Other forms of ownership
2 percent
Production, exports and imports
At present the market situation of the paper industry in Poland is affected by the same fluctuations that occur in developed countries. In 1996, considerable paper price decreases took place causing dissatisfaction among both the manufacturers and distributors. This brought about a limitation of production and deterioration of profitability. The most important information about the paper industry in Poland in 1994 and 1995 is given in Tables 2 and 3. As can be seen from these figures, the Polish paper industry reached good production and economic parameters in 1995. The utilisation of capacity was high, which resulted in an increase in production as compared with that of 1994.
The increase in wastepaper use and the indicators of wastepaper collection and utilisation are given in Table 4. From the comparison of data given in Tables 3 and 4, it can be noted that the consumption structure of fibre raw materials by the paper industry has been improving for several years due to the increase in wastepaper use. For instance, in 1995 the use of virgin fibres in the paper and board production was 59 percent and that of secondary fibres 41 percent.
In 1995, the Polish paper industry used about 4.1 million m^3 of wood, including about 2.87 million m^3 of soft wood, gaining about 3.9 million m^3 of this raw material from the State-owned woodlands and the remaining being imported. This amount of raw material allowed manufactures to produce 671.2 thousand tons of chemical pulps, including 625.6 thousand tons of paper grade pulp, 45.6 thousand tons of cellulose for viscose fibres, 96.3 thousand tons of semi-chemical pulp and 112.2 thousand tons of mechanical and thermomechanical pulps. Taking into account the production, exports and imports balance, the use of virgin pulps last year in Poland was: 655 thousand tons of chemical pulps, 105.9 thousand tons of semi-chemical pulps and 118.3 thousand tons of groundwood pulps. The paper industry used 20.7 percent of the total amount of wood being on the market in Poland which was 18.8 million tons (large timber). In Poland, the grade composition of wood is dominated by pine: 69.4
percent, while the other grades include: spruce 6 percent, oak 6 percent, beech 4.1 percent, birch 5.8 percent, alder 5.3 percent, fir 2.5 percent; hence soft pulpwood amounted to 66.5 percent of the total acquisition of woodpulp.
The results of foreign trade in 1995 are given in Table 5. It can be seen that in 1995 the increase in imports, compared to 1994, was as follows: chemical woodpulp by 44.4 percent, paper by 26.7 percent, paper products by 29.1 percent, books and newspapers by 6 percent. In the case of exports, the increase was as follows: paper by 13.8 percent, paper products by 74.7 percent, books and newspapers by 51.3 percent; there was a drop in exported cellulose by 9.2 percent. Generally, imports exceed exports by 147.7 thousand tons in 1994 and by 205.6 thousand tons in 1995.
The paper consumption in Poland in recent years is shown in Table 6. It can be seen that, starting from 1992, there has been a systematic high increase in paper consumption. However, the paper consumption per caput index in Poland is still several times lower than those in developed European countries (see Figure 1).
By the end of the year 2000 the increase in GDP in Poland is foreseen to be still high (5-6 percent) and therefore the paper and board consumption is likely to grow also at a high rate.
Table 7 shows data on the production of the paper industry in 1996 compared to that in 1995. It can be seen that total paper production increased by 1.4 percent, for printing and writing about 10 percent, but for board over 27 percent. The most substantial drop took place in the manufacture of newsprint and packaging paper. The increase in the board production resulted from the starting up of the MPIV paperboard machine at the International Paper Kwidzyn.
The results of foreign trade in the first half of 1996 are shown in Table 8. In comparison with the first six months of 1995, imports in the first half of 1996 increased by 53.8 thousand tons and exports by 27.4 thousand tons.
In the first half of 1996 considerable decreases in pulp and paper prices were observed in Western Europe compared to the first six months of 1995, namely, the drops in particular grades were as follows: chemical pulps by 43 percent, uncoated woodfree offset paper (80 g/m^2), coated offset paper by 6 percent, printing offset paper (81 g/m^2) by 19 percent, facing board (175 g/m^2) by 31 percent, fluting (114 g/m^2) by 44 percent, boxboard GC2 by 11 percent and boxboard GD2 by 21 percent.
Such a considerable price drop and the limitation of production have brought about a decrease in the profitability of net pulp and paper production in Poland from on average 12.7 percent in 1995 down to 2.2 percent in the first six months of 1996.
Development of the paper industry in Poland
The major difficulties in the Polish paper industry include:
· a considerable delay in privatisation processes;
· debts in mills and long-lasting procedures of debt liquidation;
· a growing deficit of raw materials (chemical and wastepaper pulps);
· the lack of financial means for modernisation to increase capacities and to improve product quality and production profitability.
These difficulties, however, have no influence on the year-by-year growing absorptive power of the Polish market for paper goods. The increase in paper product consumption, being faster than that of production capacity, causes imports to increase. The import increase is also facilitated by the accelerated process of tariff walls elimination in Poland, thus creating problems in mills under restructuring. This makes Polish mills to look for new markets and to increase exports. However, to succeed in foreign markets, one has to offer a good paper quality at low manufacturing costs, and this forces the Polish papermakers to invest in paper quality.
Within the last five years the paper mills in Poland have invested the following amounts in quality, production increase and environmental protection:
· US$ 116 million - Pulp and Paper Mill "Celuloza" S.A. This manufacturer received ISO 9002 certificate being the first one given to the Polish paper industry;
· over US$ 200 million - International Paper - KWIDZYN S.A. This mill implemented the alkaline process of paper production on two machines in mid-July 1995 and therefore improved the paper quality, including several properties of interest for customers such as: an increased paper resistance to ageing, a higher web strength, better printability, whiteness, sheet formation and dusting reduction. The mill has also launched a production of coated boards;
· US$ 75 million - "INTERCELL" S.A., Ostroleka, to modernise paper machines and paper converting lines;
· US$ 50 million - Kostrzyn Paper Mill S.A., to modernise PM II and to construct paper converting lines;
· US$ 2 million - "SILESIANPAP" S.A., to erect waste water treatment plant and paper machines;
· US$ 1.5 million - Warsaw Paper Mill S.A., to modernise stock preparation departments, to computerise PM 3 and to modernise steam boilers;
· US$ 530 thousand - Krapkowice Paper Mill S.A., mainly to modernise their heat and power generating plant and waste water treatment plant.
Modernisation work was also carried out or still is in progress in many other mills such as: Paper Factory "Szczecin-Skolwin" S.A., Glucholazy Paper Mill, Bydgoszcz Paper Mill, Paper Factory - Dabrowica, "Maltadecor" Paper Mill. The latter factory has recently received ISO 9001 certificate as the second paper mill in Poland.
The investments in the paper industry are very capital-intensive, hence the paper mills urgently search for strategic investors who would accelerate the modernisation processes by using an appropriate capital, which in turn would make it possible for the paper mills to adapt faster to the market economy. Taking into account the currently performed modernisation processes, the production capacities of the pulp and paper industry can be evaluated as follows:
· Wood pulps
700 thousand tons
· Other virgin pulps
220 thousand tons
· Pulped wastepaper
630 thousand tons
· Total pulps
1 550 thousand tons
· Paper and board
1 700 thousand tons
Considering the capacity utilisation index in the manufacture of paper and board, which amounts to 90 percent, one has to expect a production at a level of 1.53 million tons, which with the foreseen paper consumption in Poland amounting to 1 700 thousand tons will force a credit balance (imports minus exports) at a level of about 170 thousand tons of paper and paper products. The results of the first half of 1996 seem to confirm this prognosis.
From the balance of pulps given above it can be foreseen that in the near future, to produce 1.7 million tons of paper with a 54.4 percent consumption of virgin pulps, there will be a lack of 145 thousand tons of pulp.
In order to maintain a proper proportion between virgin pulps and wastepaper pulps, the missing amount of pulp should be looked for in an increased recovery and processing of domestic wastepaper.
The Association of the Polish Papermakers, in the past two years, has brought to the attention of government bodies the situation connected with the collection and processing of wastepaper in Poland. On the one hand, the collection of wastepaper in Poland is too low compared to those western countries leading in the collection of wastepaper, and on the other hand, the processing of wastepaper in the paper industry is insufficient, mainly due to the lack of wastepaper deinking installations, allowing the use of pulped wastepaper to produce white papers.
The efforts of the Association in this regard yielded in the form of financial means granted by PHARE with the support of the Ministry of Industry and Trade to develop a restructuring programme of fibrous raw material consumption by the pulp and paper industry in Poland, i.e. the "Waste Paper Programme".
It is hoped that in 1997 the selected consultant will start to develop this programme on the basis of experiences of the countries where the collection of wastepaper is very high, determining legal, organizational and technical conditions, as well as an educational programme for the society, necessary to increase the collection and processing of wastepaper. This should bring about improvements in environmental protection and in the structure of fibrous raw material consumption by the paper industry.
It is expected that the programme will result in:
· Determination of the conditions for effective wastepaper collection from industrial and municipal sources in such a way as to avoid the wastepaper disposal on dumping grounds, which would make it possible to reach a collection index of about 40 percent by the year 2000, about 45 percent by 2005 and about 50 percent by the year 2010.
· Determination of organizational, educational, technological, economic, legal and ecological conditions to meet the increased Polish papermakers' needs for suitable ranges of wastepaper.
· Indication of the best solutions to cope with quantitatively increased and qualitatively differentiated wastepaper processing.
Conclusions
· Over 50 percent of the paper industry capacity in Poland has been privatised with the use of foreign capital.
· The best production and economic results are now obtained by large paper mills, their participation in the domestic production being 67 percent.
· Despite the lapse of seven years since the beginning of the economic reforms in Poland, the privatisation of medium and small paper mills is still a live issue.
· As from 1992, there has been a systematic increase in the paper production and consumption in Poland. In 1995 this increase was 11 percent and 13 percent respectively. Nevertheless, the paper consumption per caput (41 kg) is still several times lower than that in the EU countries. As the high economic growth (GDP 5 to 6 percent) is foreseen to be maintained to the end of year 2000, it should be expected that the paper consumption will also increase.
· The paper consumption rate in Poland has grown faster for several years than that of paper production. This has resulted in a systematic increase in paper imports.
· In the light of these facts, there are activities being carried out in Poland aiming at establishing incentives for foreign investors to invest in the production capacity of the paper industry.
References
· "Rocznik statystyczny 1995 and 1996" (Year book in Polish), ISSN 0079-2780, Warsaw, Poland.
· Pulp and Paper International, Annual Review on World Pulp and Paper, PPI, July and September, 1996.
· Information Bulletin (in Polish) of the Association of the Polish Papermakers, 1996.
· CEPI Documents on General Assembly in 1996.
Table 1: Pulp and paper mills in Poland according to 1995 data
No.
Current name
Ownership status
Paper and board capacity in 1989
Paper and board production in 1995
4 to 3 ratio
(thousand tons)
(thousand tons)
ZCiP "Celuloza" S.A w Swieciu n. Wisla
JSSP^a
IP - Kwidzyn S.A.
Foreign capital
332.4^b
123.1^b
Intercell S.A Ostroleka
Foreign and domestic capital
Total
FP "Szczecin-Skolwin" S.A.
JSSP^a
ZP w Krapkowicach S.A.
Creditors' type company
Kostrzynskie ZP S.A.
Foreign capital
86.0^c
58.8^c
FP S.A. w Myszkowie
JSSP^a
Warszawskie ZP S.A.
NFI^d
Total
About 30 mills with an annual paper and board production of below 20 thousand tons
1. State-owned enterprises
2. NFI^d
3. Employers' company^e
4. Ltd type company^f
5. Foreign capital
Total
^aOneman ownership of the State Treasury.
^bWithout board production (modernisation of PM 4).
^cCurrent capacities should be higher, but the figures are not available from the mill.
^dNational Investment Fund.
^eLeasing from the State Treasury.
^fPrivate company Ltd.
Table 2: Economic results of the Polish paper industry
Specification
I-VI 1996
Average employment
Average payment without profit (zl)
Receipts from sales (million zl)
Sale results (million zl)
Net sale results (million zl)
Net profitability index (%)
Participation of mills with net profit (%)
Participation of mills with net receipts (%)
Sold production price index (%)
Investment outlays (million zl)
Table 3: Pulp and paper production in Poland
Product
Groundwood (thousand tons)
Semi-chemical pulps (thousand tons)
Pulps: (thousand tons)
- sulfite pulp (thousand tons)
- kraft pulp (thousand tons)
- textile viscose pulp (thousand tons)
Papers up to 250 g/m^2: (thousand tons)
- newsprint (thousand tons)
-printing, writing and drawing paper (thousand tons)
- printing paper (thousand tons)
- packaging paper (thousand tons)
- technical paper: (thousand tons)
- backing paper (thousand tons)
- cigarette paper (thousand tons)
-absorbent, filtration and hyg. papers (thousand tons)
Board: (thousand tons)
- binder and box-board (thousand tons)
- building board (thousand tons)
Corrugate board (thousand tons)
Cardboard box products (thousand tons)
Paper bags (million pieces)
Copy books (million sheets)
Table 4: Waste paper management in Poland
Specification
Waste paper used (thousand tons)
Imports (thousand tons)
Exports (thousand tons)
Domestic wastepaper (thousand tons)
Use index (%)
Collection index (%)
Table 5: Foreign trade of paper products in Poland (thousand tons)
Product (according to PCN)
Imports
Exports
Wood pulp
Paper, board, cigarette paper
Paper and board products
Books, newspapers, maps
Total
Table 6: Paper and board production and consumption in Poland
Specification
Production (thousand tons)
Total consumption (thousand tons)
Paper consumption in kg per caput
Table 7: Production of the paper industry in Poland in 1996
No.
Specification
Production (thousand tons)
Rate 1996/1995
Woodpulps
Papers-total
Newspapers
Printing, writing and drawing papers
Packing papers
Board
Paper bags in million pieces
Copy books in million sheets
Table 8: Foreign Trade of paper products in Poland in the first half of 1996
Product (according to PCN)
Imports (thousand tons)
Exports (thousand tons)
first half 1995
first half 1996
first half 1995
first half 1996
Wood pulp
Paper, board, cigarette paper,
Paper and board products
Books, newspapers, maps
Total
Supplement
Table A: Paper and board consumption and production in countries of Central and Eastern Europe in 1995
No.
Countries
GDP
Consumption
Production
US$ per caput
million tons
kg per caput
million tons
million tons
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Estonia
Lithuania
Latvia
Poland
Russia
Romania
Slovak Republic
Ukraine
Hungary
Total
Table B: Paper and board demand and supply on the markets in countries neighbouring with those mentioned in Table A
No.
Country
GDP
Consumption
Production
US$ per caput
million tons
kg per caput
million tons
million tons
Austria
Finland
Germany
Sweden
Total
Fig. 1: Gross domestic product (GDP) and paper consumption (PC) in selected countries in 1995
<section>i</section>
Portugal
Luis Deslandes
Sociedade Portuguesa de Celusose S.A., Lisbon
Introduction
The Portuguese economy continued its gradual recovery throughout 1995 and 1996 and some improvements were noted in terms of budget consolidation, a fall in the rate of inflation and a decrease in the current account deficit.
The Portuguese economy has been and continues to be guided by the need to meet the EU convergence criteria, so that it is forecast that fresh effort will be made in 1997 to reduce the budget deficit to levels of less than 3 percent of GDP.
Economic growth, measured in terms of the growth in GDP, was 1.8 percent in 1995 and roughly 2.6 percent in 1996. OECD forecasts for 1997 predict a growth rate of 2.9 percent.
Private consumption grew by only 1 percent in 1995, although growth rates of close to 2 percent are forecast for 1996 and 1997.
The growth in government consumption, which grew faster than private consumption in 1995 (1.5 percent), will, however, not exceed 1.8 percent in 1996 and 1997.
The inflation rate continues to fall, having been 4.1 percent and 3.1 percent in 1995 and 1996, respectively. The rate forecast for 1997 is 2.7 percent.
Interest rates have kept pace with the evolution in the inflation rate and are showing a downward trend, which should continue throughout 1997.
The unemployment rate rose from 7.2 percent in 1995 to 7.4 percent in 1996 and it is expected to stabilise at between 7.2 percent and 7.5 percent in 1997.
Investment grew by 4 percent in 1995, and OECD estimates that the figure for 1996 is in the region of 5.8 percent. The growth in investment forecast for 1997 is approximately 6.1 percent.
The value of Portuguese exports in 1995 was 22.8 x 10^9 US$ (26.6 percent more than in the previous year). The estimated growth in this figure for 1996 is more than 8 percent.
The total value of Portuguese imports in 1995 was 26.9 x 10^9 US$ (20.5 percent more than in 1994). The estimated growth in imports for 1996 is only 1 percent.
Forest and forest products
Afforestation operations are continuing, both through private investment and as a result of the application of European Union Regulations (as is the case with the afforestation of farming land provided for in the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy). It is estimated that the forested area is currently growing by more than 20 000 ha per year, and the current structure of the Portuguese forest is as follows:
Maritime pine
1 047 thousand ha
Eucalyptus
550 thousand ha
Cork-oak
660 thousand ha
Holm-oak
464 thousand ha
Others
379 thousand ha
Total
3 100 thousand ha
This forest is composed of two distinct parts: a planted area (maritime pine and eucalyptus) and a part comprising indigenous species (cork-oak and holm-oak). The first part produces roughly 8.5 million m^3 per year (50 percent pine and 50 percent eucalyptus), whilst the second part produces roughly 150 000 tonnes of cork (the bark of the cork-oak tree) per year. The holm-oak plays a most important role in stabilising dry agrosilvopastoral ecosystems, and the felling of these trees is forbidden.
In 1996, less severe climatic conditions were decisive in there being a smaller area of forest stands burnt (28 724 ha as against 69 812 ha in 1995). The number of fires, however, continues to be the most disturbing statistic, since the fact that there were more than 29 000 fires recorded in 1996 (as against 31 200 in 1995) places Portugal far ahead of all other countries in European and world statistics. (In the same period, the number of fires in Spain and France together did not even amount to the total number in Portugal.)
The overall value of exports of forest products in 1995 was 2 669.8 x 10^6 US$ (17.9 percent more than in 1994). It is estimated that exports of forest products for 1996 have fallen by approximately 5 percent in relation to 1995.
The overall value of imports of forest products in 1995 was 1 350.8 x 10^6 US$ (23.2 percent more than in 1994). It is estimated that imports of forest products for 1996 have stabilised in comparison with 1995.
In percentage terms, the structure of the foreign trade in forest products in June 1996 was as follows:
Exports (%)
Imports (%)
Wood
Cork
Pulp
Paper
Others
Total
The sawnwood industry (coniferous sawnwood) continues to record successive falls in the overall volume produced, with it being estimated that production in 1996 will be little over 1 million m^3, of which 45 percent is destined for the foreign market.
The wood panel industry recorded a high level of production in 1996, with the manufacture of approximately 730 000 m^3 of particle boards, 310 000 m^3 of medium density (MDF) boards, 72 000 m^3 of fibre boards and 24 000 m^3 of plywood.
The main indicators for the pulp and paper industry in 1996 are summarised in the following table:
Pulp
Paper
Number of mills
7^a
Number of workers
Eucalyptus consumption
4.2 million m^3
Pine consumption
1.2 million m^3
Pulp consumption
743 000 tonnes
Recovered paper
300 000 tonnes
Total production of eucalyptus pulp
1.33 million ton.
Eucalyptus pulp produced for market
1.05 million ton.
Total paper production
977 000 tonnes
Total production for use in printing
438 000 tonnes
Production of paper for packaging and wrapping purposes
471 000 tonnes
^aTwo mills are also paper producers.
This industry has continued to make great efforts in recent years to import eucalyptus (between 400 000 and 900 000 m^3 per year), with the aim of reducing the demand pressure on the Portuguese eucalyptus forest and increasing the standing volume and average age of plantations.
Amongst the most important aspects of the forthcoming investments planned for the Portuguese paper industry are the increase in capacity by INAPA (from 180 000 tonnes of printing and writing paper in 1996 to 300 000 tonnes in 1999) and the planned installation of a PM2 at SOPORCEL (from 290 000 tonnes of uncoated printing and writing paper in 1996 to 650 000 tonnes in 1999).
Other important subjects
As a follow-up to the Second Interministerial Conference on Forestry held in Helsinki, the Portuguese Government offered to hold the third conference in Lisbon in 1998. Since then, there has been a committed involvement on the part of the Portuguese forest authorities in choosing the subjects and taking part in the debates about sustainable forest management and biodiversity.
As a result of this involvement and as a consequence of this new reality, the Portuguese Parliament unanimously approved a new Basic Law governing Forestry Policy in 1996, which is currently undergoing the necessary process for the publication of its regulations.
Forest industries and owners have taken part in this work, so that there is now a broad consensus on a variety of subjects, especially on the possible introduction of sustainable forest management certification.
It is practically the unanimous position of the Portuguese forestry sector that:
· any certification procedure or system must be transparent, voluntary and non-discriminatory;
· any certification procedure or system must be based on objective criteria and make use of indicators that are suitably adapted to the species and the region;
· at the end of the day, any certification procedure or system must result in a positive demonstrative effect leading to an increase in the forested area and an improvement in the quality of its management;
· no certification procedure or system may result in a lowering of the price paid to the forest producer or in loss of competitiveness of products manufactured with certified wood.
It is this set of positions which has resulted in the national support given to ISO's initiative of setting up a Working Party with a view to adapting the ISO 14000 standards to sustainable forest management.
Until such time as the process is completed and as an interim measure, the large-scale forest owners have made the recommendation that a Forestry Code of Conduct should be adopted and generally publicised. This code is designed to guarantee that a form of sustainable management is carried out which can be checked by public opinion.
This series of procedures has been discussed in conjunction with the Spanish Forestry Sector and with USSE (Southern European Foresters' Union), which represents more than 10 million ha of planted forest. Their joint work has resulted in the creation of IBUSUS (Iberian Initiative for Forest Sustainability), which approved the Declaration of Sustainability on 29 January this year. The Declaration has been adhered to by an extremely wide range of those parties that have an interest in the Iberian forest.
<section>j</section>
South Africa
André Vlok
SAPPI Ltd., Braamfontein
South African economy
The South African economy expanded by about 3 percent in 1996 after having achieved a real GDP growth of 3.4 percent in the previous year. This may not be completely satisfactory given the 2.1 percent annual population growth, but is a marked improvement on the annual average growth of 1.5 percent for the period 1980 to 1994. The growth rate is expected to stabilize in 1997, but is certainly expected to remain well above the long-run average of the last decade or so.
There are several factors that could stimulate optimism about the long-run growth prospects of the South African economy.
Political stability since the new government came into power in 1994 has created a climate of confidence where local business is committing to expansion of capacity; meeting the changing demands of the domestic market and to compete more aggressively on world markets.
Inflow of foreign capital has raised the capacity for growth of the South African economy and the economy is benefiting from opening up to the rest of the world in trade and finance.
The government is gradually dismantling controls and establishing markets that operate more freely. Though this has opened up import competition, it is also improving the efficiency of the economy.
Furthermore, income redistribution is leading to the emergence of new markets and, although there has been a slow start, new investment in infrastructure such as housing, water reticulation and electricity will stimulate growth.
On the negative side, unemployment is likely to remain high for the foreseeable future and crime rate remains high although it is declining. The international community has obviously not yet developed complete confidence in the consistency of South African Government policy.
Inflation averaged 7.3 percent in 1996 after the 8.6 percent of 1995. This compares most favourably with the annual average of about 14 percent during the period 1980 to 1994.
The South African Rand currency is now about 10 percent weaker than a year ago after a spurt that took it down 20 percent. The main reason is probably uncertainty by foreign investors in the economic policy of the South African authorities. Should these fears subside, as now appears to be the case, the Rand should be relatively stable in 1997. Inflation could be expected to rise during 1997 due to the Rand depreciation and food inflation; as farmers rebuild live stock herds following good rains after a devastating drought. It is however unlikely to reach double digit figures again.
Prime overdraft interest rate is currently 20.25 percent compared to 18.5 percent a year ago. The rise was due to Rand depreciation and growth in private sector credit demand. These factors should ease during 1997 and interest rates could decline during the year.
Performance of the forest and paper industry
Financial
After the short-lived survival in the world industry during 1994 and 1995, the industry was hit by a dramatic reversal in demand and price levels. This resulted in commercial downtime being taken and a slump in profitability. In line with the world industry, there are now signs of a hesitant recovery, but margins remain under pressure and a recovery to the peaks of 1994/95 is not in sight.
Production capacity - Paper and board
Total production capacity is about 2.4 million tons per year with the main players being:
· Sappi
48 percent
· Mondi
45 percent
· Nampak
4 percent
· Carlton
2 percent
Production capacity per main product lines are distributed as follows:
· Linerboard, corrugating medium, sack paper, boxboard and other packaging and industrial grades
55 percent
· Newsprint and mechanical printings
21 percent
· Coated and uncoated printing and writing paper
19 percent
· Tissue
5 percent
Production capacity - Pulp
Total production capacity is about 2.4 million tons, distributed as follows:
· Bleached and unbleached paper grade chemical and semi-chemical pulp
62 percent
· Dissolving pulp
23 percent
· Mechanical pulp
15 percent
Waste recycling
This is steadily increasing and is approaching 40 percent of domestic consumption. Recycling is mainly into packaging products but a second de-inking plant is currently under construction.
Consumption and trade
Apparent domestic consumption of paper has been growing steadily in line with population growth and GDP to a level of around 2 million tons. Domestic capacity utilization for pulp and paper stayed above 90 percent.
Exports of paper and board ran at 22 percent of production with main exports being linerboard and newsprint. Exports of pulp represented 32 percent of production.
Imports of paper and board was equivalent to 17 percent of apparent consumption with the main items being coated paper and paper board.
Raw material
Sustainable plantation grown timber is the main raw material source. The pulp and paper industry is the main driver for the Forest industry, utilizing over 60 percent of domestic wood production. Chip exports, mainly to Japan, run in excess of 1 million tons per year.
The industry focus is on sustainable management of forests with voluntary audit programmes gradually being converted to ISO standards.
The industry has also successfully introduced woodlot projects that enables entrepreneurs to enter the timber growing business through financial and technical assistance with small-scale tree planting.
Since South Africa has scarce water resources, afforestation is being controlled by a permit system. This system is currently being reviewed by the government. Whilst the country is currently more than self-sufficient in timber resources, the long-term future will largely be influenced by government policy. Afforestation in neighbouring countries, notably Mozambique, is currently receiving serious consideration.
Pulp from sugar cane fibre represents about 6 percent of chemical pulping capacity. Future expansion of this resource is limited by transport cost and energy replacement value.
Investment
Recent significant investments related mainly to capacity enhancements through machine rebuilds; plant modernization and environmental projects. Except for one small bleached bagasse pulp mill, all bleached pulp production is ECF.
Outlook
The long-term future of the industry will be largely determined by afforestation policy. The short- to medium-term outlook will depend on the behaviour of the world cycle; which seems to be precariously poised. However, the South African industry is well-positioned to capitalize on improved market conditions.
<section>k</section>
Sweden
Jan Remröd
Swedish Forest Industries Association, Stockholm
General economic situation
The weakening of the economic activity, that started during the second half of 1995, continued in 1996. Stocks were reduced in the industry and in the distribution chain, and stock reduction seems to have contributed negatively to GDP with one percentage point. Industry production slowed down considerably, from an increase of 10 percent in 1995 to 1 percent in 1996. Investments showed a strong increase for the whole year, 7 percent, but slowed down during the course of the year, as a three-year investment cycle is nearing its end.
The inflation rate continued to decrease to a record low and is one of the lowest in Europe. Both long- and short-term interest rates continued to decrease. The unemployment continues to be a major problem, and the unemployment rate is considered to be only marginally reduced during the next few years. The budget deficit in the public sector has been considerably reduced.
Key indicators, percentage change
1997 prognosis
GDP
Consumer prices
Open unemployment
Current account balance, in percentage of GDP
Performance of the pulp and paper industry
The Swedish production of paper and board decreased in 1996 for the second consecutive year and amounted to 9 million tonnes, a decrease by 125 000 tonnes or 1 percent. The capacity utilisation fell to 90 percent. Exports decreased marginally, by 0.5 percent and amounted to 7.3 million tonnes. Deliveries to the EU countries fell by 2 percent and reached 5.7 million tonnes. Deliveries to Eastern European countries increased strongly but are still at low levels, and also exports to Asia increased. Deliveries to the home market decreased by 3 percent. For further details see the statistics attached.
The Swedish exports of pulp increased by 2 percent. Producers' inventories were reduced in the first half year, but showed again an increase towards the end of the year. See also the statistics attached.
Recovered paper
The consumption of recovered paper at paper and board mills increased by 5 percent to 1.5 million tonnes in 1996. This resulted in an increase of the utilization rate to 16.7 percent compared to 15.6 percent the year before. The collection of recovered paper has been calculated to 1.1 million tonnes corresponding to a recovery rate of about 55 percent. The availability of recovered paper was good during the year.
A new de-inking line with a yearly capacity of 140 000 tonnes of newspapers and magazines started up in May 1996.
Raw material availability 1996-1997
Both the sawmill industry and the pulp and paper industry experienced high raw material availability during most of 1996. The situation for the sawmills, however, changed during the third quarter, when sawmills in some regions started to experience timber shortage. Price raises during the fourth quarter for saw timber have improved the situation, and at present there is a good availability for raw material for both sawmills and pulpmills.
Investment and capacity in the pulp and paper industry
Investments in the pulp and paper industry in Sweden reached 12 billion SEK in 1996 and are predicted to reach 9 billion SEK in 1997.
According to preliminary figures in the most recent capacity survey, paper and board capacity will increase by 500 000 tonnes to 10.5 million tonnes in 1997. A new machine for the production of liquid board has recently started up, and the capacity figures also reflects the new machines for LWC and newsprint that started up in 1996. Investments also concern improved quality standard of pulp and paper, rebuilds of wood-handling and of the bleaching process in the pulp mills and other environmental measures. Market pulp capacity will increase by 100 000 tonnes to 3.9 million tonnes in 1997.
Issues of particular interest
Progress in sustainable forest management (SFM) also in relation to certification
Swedish forestry has gone through some major changes during the last decade. All forest companies have introduced ambitious environmental programmes to be able to practise forestry without jeopardising the biological diversity. Sustainable forest management is today not only a question of sustainable yield, but also of ecological sustainability. Some steps towards sustainability that have been taken are: site-adaptation, day-to-day conservation and ecological landscape planning.
The Swedish forest industry looks upon certification as a way to verify, and get credit for, the environmentally friendly methods that already have been, and will be, introduced.
The Swedish forest industry is involved in the certification issue at three different levels:
International
The industry participates in the ISO Working Group (ISO/TC207/WG2 on Forestry). The groups mission is to create a linkage between national certification standards and ISO 14000. The Swedish forest industry believes that a nationally-developed certification standard within the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) framework could be very well linked to the ISO environmental management system. Therefore, FSC and ISO are complementary, and do not exclude each other.
Nordic
The Nordic Certification Project is a cooperation between the forest industry and the forest owners in Sweden, Finland and Norway. The aim of the project is to share information and experiences from the national certification initiatives which now take place in the Nordic countries, and to harmonise the national work as much as possible.
National
A Swedish FSC Working Group was formed in February 1996. Economic, environmental and social interests participate in the work. All relevant stakeholders have decided to take part in the work. The Swedish forest industry is also an active part in the discussion. The Working Group plans to propose a national standard during the spring of 1997. The proposals should be developed in consensus.
The socio-economic dimension of SFM and wood processing
Sweden has a long tradition of a good relations between employers, employees and indigenous people. Most potential conflicts have been settled a long time ago. In some cases, the parties have opposing interests, such as wages, etc. These questions are, however, settled in regular negotiations each year.
The remaining questions regarding the socio-economic dimension of SFM will be discussed and handled within the Swedish FSC Working Group.
Sustainability of fibre supply
The annual timber harvest has, throughout the whole century, been far below the annual increment. At present, only 70 percent of the yield will be harvested. The Swedish fibre supply is therefore sustainable indeed.
Paper and board statistics, 1996
Production
Change in
Change in
thousand tonnes
Q4
Q4
Acc
Acc
Newsprint
Woodfree printing and writing
Wood-containing printing and writing
Tissue
Wrapping papers
Kraft paper
Folding boxboards
Case materials
Kraft liner
Others
Total paper and board
Total deliveries
Change in
Change in
thousand tonnes
Q4
Q4
Acc
Acc
Newsprint
Woodfree printing and writing
Wood-containing printing and writing
Tissue
Wrapping papers
Kraft paper
Folding boxboards
Case materials
Kraft liner
Others
Total paper and board
Exports
Change in
Change in
thousand tonnes
Q4
Q4
Acc
Acc
Newsprint
Woodfree printing and writing
Wood-containing printing and writing
Tissue
Wrapping papers
Kraft paper
Folding boxboards
Case materials
Kraft liner
Others
Total paper and board
Domestic deliveries
Change in
Change in
thousand tonnes
Q4
Q4
Acc
Acc
Newsprint
Woodfree printing and writing
Wood-containing printing and writing
Tissue
Wrapping papers
Kraft paper
Folding boxboards
Case materials
Kraft liner
Others
Total paper and board
Deliveries per destination
Change in
Change in
thousand tonnes
Q4
Q4
Acc
Acc
EC, excl. Sweden
United Kingdom
Germany
France
Italy
Other West Europe
North America
Asia
Other countries
Total exports
Domestic
Total Deliveries
Swedish Forest Industries Association, March 1996.
Exports of Paper and Board
Deliveries by destination-change in per cent 96/95
Deliveries by grade
Market pulp statistics, 1996
Market pulp
PRODUCTION
Q4
Q4
Change
Cumul.
Cumul.
Change
thousand tonnes
TOTAL
of which
Mechanical pulp
White pulp
EXPORTS
Q4
Q4
Change
Cumul.
Cumul.
Change
thousand tonnes
TOTAL
of which
Mechanical pulp
White pulp
DELIVERIES OF WHITE PULP
Q4
Q4
Change
Cumul.
Cumul.
Change
thousand tonnes
EU excl. Nordic
of which
Germany
France
Netherlands
Italy
W. Europe excl. Nordic
Finland+Norway
E. Europe
Asia
North America
Other countries
TOTAL EXPORTS
Domestic
TOTAL DELIVERIES
White pulp = bleached sulphate, unbleached and bleached sulphite.
Swedish Forest Industries Association, March 1996.
EXPORTS OF PULP, Q4 1996
DELIVERIES OF WHITE PULP BY DESTINATION - Percentage change 96/95
DELIVERIES BY GRADE - Percentage change 96/95
PRODUCTION OF WHITE PULP
EXPORTS OF PULP, Q4 1996
<section>l</section>
Thailand
Adul Udol
Siamkraft Industry Co., Ltd., Bangkok
Economic growth
The GDP growth rate in Thailand continually expanded from that of 1993, 1994 and 1995 which were 8.3 percent, 8.7 percent and 8.6 percent, respectively. Until the end of 1995, the government policy intended to slow down the GDP growth rate at the suitable situation and also reduce the pressure of both inflation and loss in current account, particularly, the strictness in financial policy from 1995 running to 1996.
In 1996, the GDP growth rate of Thailand was approximately 6.8 percent, slowing down from 1995 as a result of the sluggishness in domestic consumption and private investment. The growth of the manufacturing sector grew by 7.8 percent in 1996, reduced from 11.0 percent in 1995 while the growth of an export sector decreased from 23.6 percent in 1995 to only 0.2 percent in 1996.
Growth rate (%)
Average 1987-1991^a
Actual^b
Est. 1996
GDP
Agriculture
Manufacturing
Export
Pulp and paper industry
^a6th National Economic Plan.
^b7th National Economic Plan.
The growth rate of pulp and paper industry increased from 7.2 percent in 1995 to 9.0 percent in 1996. The growth rate of pulp and paper industry in Thailand is usually two digits except for 1995 and 1996 as a result of the change in world pulp and paper prices as well as the economic slow down in Thailand in 1996 so that the growth rate of pulp and paper industry was only 1.3 times the GDP growth rate.
Pulp and paper industry's performance
Domestic capacity
Pulp
In 1996, total annual production capacity for short fibre pulp increased by 86 percent from 331 000 to 615 000 air dry tons per year. The additional capacities were from two new pulp producers, namely, Advance Agro Public Company Limited with 175 000 air dry tons per year and Panjapol Paper Industry Public Company Limited with 99 000 air dry tons per year. While Phoenix Pulp and Paper Public Company Limited has increased to its full production capacity of 210 000 air dry tons. The existing three pulp mills, namely, the Siam Pulp and Paper Public Company Limited, Siam Cellulose Co. Ltd., and Bang Pa-in Pulp and Paper Mill still maintained their capacities of 68 000, 60 000 and 3 000 air dry tons per year, respectively.
Company
Pulp production capacity (thousand tons)
Phoenix Pulp and Paper
Advance Agro
Panjapol Pulp Industry
Siam Pulp and Paper
Siam Cellulose
Bang Pa-in Pulp and Paper Mill
Total
Paper
In 1996 there were 47 paper mills with a combined annual capacity of 2 842 000 tons, 16.3 percent increase as compared to 2 444 500 tons in 1995 including the new pulp and paper mill, namely, Advance Agro Public Company Limited with 217 200 tons per year.
The total paper capacities in 1996 can be categorized into 1 625 000 tons for kraft paper, 631 000 tons for printing and writing paper, 264 000 tons for paperboard, 110 000 tons for newsprint paper, 132 000 tons for household and sanitary paper and 80 000 tons for gypsum plaster board liner (other papers).
Paper capacity (thousand tons)
Kraft paper
Printing and writing paper
Paperboard
Household and sanitary paper
Newsprint paper
Other papers
Total
Consumption, import and export
Pulp and Wastepaper
In 1996, total demand of fibre raw materials in Thailand were 2 253 000 tons, 11.3 percent increased from 1995. Of this amount, 11 percent or 249 500 tons were long fibre pulp, 19 percent or 444 000 tons were short fibre pulp and the rest of 1 559 600 tons were wastepaper.
The prices of world pulp market, both short and long fibres, have decreased since the end of 1995. In mid-1996, pulp prices have slightly increased and continued until the end of 1996.
From the first quarter to the third quarter of 1996, Thailand imported 282 000 tons of short fibre and long fibre pulp, mainly from USA, Canada, Chile, Brazil, New Zealand, Sweden, Indonesia and Swaziland. The major import were coniferous bleached chemical wood pulp, non-coniferous bleached chemical wood pulp and coniferous unbleached chemical wood pulp which account for 29 percent, 28 percent and 27 percent of total imported pulp, respectively. Thailand also imported 464 000 tons of wastepaper during the same period from USA, Singapore, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Kuwait. The major kinds of imported wastepaper were old corrugated containers (OCC), representing 65 percent of the total imported amount.
In the same period, 88 000 tons of pulp were exported. The main destinations were mostly in Asia, in particular, India, China, South Korea, Indonesia, Taiwan and Japan, and also Italy.
1995 (thousand tons)
1996 (thousand tons)
Short fibre pulp
- Demand
- Import
95^a
- Export
Long fibre pulp
- Demand
- Import
187^a
- Export
Wastepaper
- Demand
- Import
- Export
^aQ1-Q3/1996.
Paper
In 1996, the demand for paper in Thailand increased by 5.6 percent from 2 248 200 tons in 1995 to 2 374 500 tons. The domestic consumption of paper could be categorized as follows: 47 percent for kraft paper, 18 percent for printing and writing paper, 16 percent for newsprint paper, 11 percent for paperboard, 3 percent for household and sanitary paper and the rest for other papers.
Paper consumption in Thailand in 1996 was approximately US$ 2 087 million (US$ 1 = Baht 25.5), a decrease of 5 percent from those in 1995 due mainly to price decrease since the end of 1995.
From the first quarter to the third quarter of 1996, Thailand imported 344 700 tons of paper and paperboard. The major import was newsprint paper which accounted for 45 percent, followed by 15 percent for paperboard, 14 percent for printing and writing paper, 6 percent for kraft paper, 2 percent for household and sanitary paper and the rest 18 percent for others.
In the same period, Thailand also exported 155 800 tons of paper, of which 38 percent was kraft paper, 21 percent was printing and writing paper, 18 percent was paperboard, 8 percent was household and sanitary paper, 7 percent was newsprint paper and the rest 8 percent for others.
Demand
Import
Export
(thousand tons)
(thousand tons)
(thousand tons)
1996^a
1996^a
Kraft paper
Printing and writing paper
Paperboard
Newsprint paper
Household and sanitary paper
Other papers
Total
^aQ1-Q3/1996.
Outlook for the future
Trend in the pulp industry during 1997-2001
Domestic pulp consumption is expected to increase from 694 000 tons in 1996 to 1 151 000 tons in 2001, an average growth rate of 11 percent per year. The consumption of short fibre pulp will rise from 444 000 tons in 1996 to 737 000 tons in 2001 while production capacity is expected to expand from 606 000 tons in 1996 to 656 000 tons in 1997, and remain constant onwards, given no confirmation news about capacity expansion during that period for now. The additional capacities in 1997 will be from the Siam Pulp and Paper Public Company Limited with the capacity expansion of 50 000 tons per year. Moreover, we expected another new-comer, Asia Tech Pulp and Paper Public Company Limited, with the annual production capacity of 150 000 tons. As a result, Thailand will have surplus of short fibre pulp for exporting.
(thousand tons/year)
Demand
- Short fibre pulp
- Long fibre pulp
Capacity
- Short fibre pulp
- Long fibre pulp
Surplus (shortage)
- Short fibre pulp
- Long fibre pulp
Trend in the paper industry during 1997-2001
Total annual demand for paper and paperboard in Thailand is expected to increase from 2.4 million tons in 1996 to 3.9 million tons in 2001, an average growth rate of 9-11 percent per year. Thailand will also have surplus of paper from 1996 to 2001. During the next five years, kraft paper will be account for 48 percent, 19 percent for printing and writing paper, 14 percent for newsprint paper, 11 percent for paperboard, 3 percent for household and sanitary paper and the rest for miscellaneous minority of total paper consumption.
Project demand and supply of paper in Thailand during 1996-2001 is shown in the following table:
(thousand tons/year)
Kraft paper
-Demand
-Capacity
Surplus (shortage)
Printing and writing paper
-Demand
-Capacity
Surplus (shortage)
Paperboard
-Demand
-Capacity
Surplus (shortage)
Household and sanitary paper
-Demand
-Capacity
Surplus (shortage)
Newsprint paper
-Demand
-Capacity
Surplus (shortage)
Others
-Demand
-Capacity
Surplus (shortage)
Total
-Demand
-Capacity
Surplus (shortage)
Population (million)
Per caput consumption (kg./head)
<section>m</section>
United States of America
Henson W. Moore
American Pulp and Paper Association, Washington D.C.
The business environment
The current US economic expansion is six years old and already the third longest since the end of the second world war. The duration of this expansion has some analysts concerned that the risk of a recession has increased. However, all prior post-war US recessions have been associated with rising inflation or external shocks to the economy such as the OPEC oil embargo and the Persian Gulf War.
The US inflation is currently running at about 3 percent a year with few signs of a pickup. Commodity prices have remained restrained and, although wages have accelerated during the past year or so, the impact has been muted by a slowing rate of increase in fringe benefit costs, largely as the result of the spread of managed health care services. The strong dollar and excess manufacturing capacity overseas are also restraining domestic inflation pressures.
Current risks to the US economy include record high levels of consumer debt, which could become particularly problematic if the stock market were to decline sharply.
The US economic outlook
The consensus view among US economists is that GDP will increase approximately 2-2.5 percent in 1997, or about in line with last year's performance. However, the uncertainties associated with such a forecast are higher than they were a year ago.
Pulp and paper industry's performance
The US paper and paperboard production rose for the eleventh consecutive year in 1996 to 81.8 million tonnes. However, the gains of the past two years - 0.5 percent in 1995 and 0.8 percent in 1996 - ranged below long-term historical norms as mills and customers worked off excess inventories. Paper and paperboard production growth averaged 2.9 percent a year in the ten-year period from 1985 to 1995.
Paperboard production, which advanced 2.3 percent in 1996, has rebounded more appreciably than paper sector production, which was down nearly 1 percent last year. Still, production of both these major grade categories significantly exceeded year-ago levels in the fourth quarter of 1996 and in January of 1997.
Exports have been an important growth engine for the US paper industry during recent years. In particular, US exports of paper and paperboard rose 10.8 percent (1.1 million tonnes) in 1996 to reach 11 million tonnes. Imports, on the other hand, contracted 8.2 percent (1.2 million tonnes) to a level of 12.9 million tonnes. Taking a longer-term perspective, exports of paper and paperboard rose at a 10 percent average annual rate from 1990 to 1996, while imports trended up 1.5 percent a year.
The US newsprint shipments eased 0.8 percent in 1996 to 6.2 million tonnes, as weak domestic demand was partly offset by an export surge. Shipments of newsprint from US mills to the domestic market declined 6.2 percent last year, while overseas demand for US newsprint jumped 35 percent. Exports accounted for 15.1 percent of US newsprint shipments in 1996. Total newsprint shipments to domestic customers - from US, Canadian, and overseas mills - declined 7.8 percent in 1996 to 10.7 million metric tonnes. Inventory trimming by publishers contributed to lower domestic shipments.
Long-term printing-writing paper growth patterns have been highly positive, with shipments expanding at an average annual rate of 3.6 percent a year from 1985 to 1995. In 1996, however, shipments of printing-writing papers declined 2.1 percent, while domestic purchases (US shipments plus imports less exports) were off 4.8 percent. Market indicators, such as white collar employment growth, commercial printing activity, and mail volume, suggest that printing-writing paper consumption probably held its own in 1996, implying that buyer inventories were being drawn down.
While the year-over-year performance was negative, printing-writing paper shipments finished 1996 on a high note, with the fourth quarter seasonally adjusted level averaging 3.6 percent above the full-year average. Trade developed as a highly positive factor for the US printing-writing paper sector in 1996, with exports posting a 10.6 percent advance and imports falling 8.6 percent.
Unbleached kraft paper shipments declined 3.5 percent in 1996, to 1.77 million tonnes, with most of the slippage attributable to a reduction in multiwall sack demand. Long subject to competition from plastics, the grocers bag and sack category reversed course in 1996 to score a solid gain following a sharp contraction in 1995. Bleached kraft paper shipments fell 2.7 percent in 1996.
Tissue paper production advanced 0.9 percent in 1996 to 5.7 million tonnes, after rising 1.8 percent in 1995. These increases compare favourably with US population growth of about 0.9 percent a year, but range below long-term growth trends for tissue paper production of 2.2 percent a year (1986-95).
Containerboard production rose a brisk 3.9 percent in 1996, as export-related production surged 35 percent, with much of the gain coming from increased kraft linerboard exports. Domestic demand for containerboard registered less momentum, however, rising just 0.4 percent. The fractional increase reflected a 1.4 percent increase in fibre box shipments in conjunction with a partially offsetting decline in inventories.
Boxboard production declined 1.1 percent to 13.1 million tonnes in 1996 following a 3.4 percent increase in 1995. The decline was rooted in three broad product categories: milk carton stock for domestic use, set-up board, and export-related production. Folding boxboard production for domestic use - the largest of the major boxboard categories - rose 1.6 percent in 1996.
The US production of chemical paper grade market pulp declined 8.2 percent in 1996 as mills worked off inventory. Shipments of chemical paper grade market pulp declined by 2.4 percent in 1996, with US mill shipments to the domestic market down 14.3 percent and exports up 3.3 percent.
Paper recovery
Preliminary data indicate that the US recovery rate for paper and paperboard measured 44.8 percent (38.4 million tonnes) in 1996, up from 33.5 percent in 1990 and from a revised 44.3 percent in 1995. The US mill consumption of recovered paper rose a vigorous 9.2 percent in 1996, bringing average annual growth for the six-year period since 1990 to 7.9 percent.
Exports of recovered paper, which absorbed 17 percent of total US recovered paper last year, have traditionally been characterized by sharp volatility. Recently, for instance, US recovered paper exports surged from 7.0 million tonnes in 1994 to 9.4 million tonnes in 1995 and then retrenched to 6.5 million tonnes last year. Leading importers of US recovered paper include Canada, South Korea, Mexico, and China.
Pulp and paper capacity growth
The paper industry's commitment to meeting its customers' needs for high quality products is demonstrated by its continuing investment in capacity modernization and expansion. AF&PA's most recent Capacity Survey, released in December, indicates that US paper and paperboard capacity rose 3.5 percent in 1996 and is slated to expanded at a 1.5 percent average annual rate during the next three years. More than half - 55 percent - of the capacity expansions anticipated by the survey will derive from efficiency improvements from existing machines. On a tonnage basis, capacity is expected to rise from 89.9 million tonnes in 1996 to 94.1 million tonnes in 1999. The survey found that market wood pulp capacity will remain essentially stable during the next three years, while recovered paper market pulp capacity will register strong gains averaging 12.6 percent a year, albeit from a small base.
Outlook for paper and paperboard
After lagging behind the economy in 1995 and 1996, US production of paper and paperboard is projected to grow more rapidly than the economy in 1997. The anticipated quickening reflects the winding down of buyer inventory liquidation, particularly with respect to printing-writing papers and corrugated containers. In particular, US production of paper and paperboard is projected to rise in the 3.5-4.0 percent range in 1997, with strong momentum from both the paper and paperboard sectors.
Wood products
Strong US construction activity in 1996 boosted demand for lumber and wood products, matching the previous record set in 1987. Softwood lumber consumption for the year was estimated at 119.6 million m^3. Housing starts totalled 1.433 million units, up over 8 percent compared with 1995. Repair and remodelling projects also accounted for significant increases in wood products demand.
For 1997, most analysts expect housing starts to decline modestly consistent with a view that the economic expansion may soon peak, if it has not done so already. However, there appears little risk of a significant downturn in construction activity and resultant wood demand. The US housing starts continued very strong during the first two months of 1997.
After several years of declining production, the US lumber sector boosted output last year by about 5 percent. In western US, an area of the country most impacted in recent years by reductions in government timber sales, an increase in salvage logging helped contribute to greater raw material supply in the region. The volume of softwood lumber imports into the US - mostly from Canada - increased nearly 5 percent in 1996 while exports were down 2.6 percent (exports represent about one-tenth the level of US softwood lumber imports).
Significant new plant manufacturing capacity in panels, particularly Oriented Strand Board (OSB), has made for a difficult market in North America as industrial supply seems to have outpaced demand for panel products, at least temporarily. OSB continues to displace plywood commonly used for sheathing in the US. Also making significant advances are engineered wood products such as I-Joists, LVL, finger-jointed lumber and glue-laminated lumber, all of which are gaining increasing market acceptance. North American timber supply constraints are such that the market is likely to increasingly turn to these and other wood and non-wood substitutes. Product innovation is one solution to the timber supply problem, but a more rationale strategy to increase productivity from both public and private forest land will be necessary to continue to produce affordable wood products.
AF&PA's sustainable forestry initiative
After two years of development, AF&PA implemented the Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) in 1995. During the development of the SFI, AF&PA reached out to, and incorporated ideas from, its members, the public, State and federal agencies, conservation groups, academicians and others. As a result, the initiative includes an ambitious set of principles and detailed guidelines that require our member companies to reforest harvested land promptly, provide for wildlife habitat, improve water quality and ecosystem diversity, and protect forest land with special ecological significance.
The SFI is the most comprehensive approach to good forest stewardship ever devised and is designed to protect the nation's forests for future generations. This programme applies not only to lands owned by companies, but extends to all US forest lands. Under the SFI our members have committed to promoting sustainable forestry practices on all forests of all sizes - from the National Forests to small, family-owned woodlands that comprise most of the nation's forest lands.
A key component to SFI is full public disclosure as to how our collective membership performs each year. In April 1996 the AF&PA issued the first SFI report to document the industry's progress in meeting its sustainable forestry objectives. The report was reviewed by an independent panel of experts. Panel members include conservationists, foresters and academicians who examine the industry's performance on an annual basis.
The report showed that member companies spent more than US$ 52 million on forest-related research, reforested 1.2 million acres, using natural reforestation on nearly one-third of the acres that were reforested; limited the average size of clear-cuts nation-wide on AF&PA members' lands to 66 acres; and reforested acres harvested by planting or seeding within two years on 97 percent of the acres.
To underscore the importance of the SFI, AF&PA members made compliance a condition of continued membership - and they have strongly enforced this by-law. During 1996, 15 member companies failed to meet by-law requirements for committing to the SFI and their memberships were terminated.
The forest products industry acknowledges that it needs a social license to operate profitably. We understand that we must retain the public's trust to maintain this license and can only do so by demonstrating through our actions that we are committed to continuous improvement. The SFI is our members' action plan for improving forestry.
<section>n</section>
FORESTRY HIGHLIGHTS AND FOREST INDUSTRY
Outcome of the 13th session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO 1997)
FAO - State of the World's Forests
Outcome of the First World Conference on Finance and Marketing for the Pulp and Paper Industries
Outcome of the 13th session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO 1997)
Mafa E. Chipeta
Forestry Policy and Planning Division, FAO, Rome
The FAO Committee on Forestry (COFO) - the highest statutory body of the Organization dealing with forestry matters - held its 13th session between 10 and 13 March of this year; it was attended by nearly 100 member countries, many represented at head of forestry administration level. In spite of its inter-governmental nature, COFO reaffirmed its desire to see a more active role for the private sector and other non-governmental interest groups in the work of FAO in forestry. The private sector can only benefit from interacting with COFO and other statutory bodies because the views exchanged among governments in these fora can influence the regulatory or supportive interventions which governments adopt in their countries.
Issues arising out of COFO that could be of interest to the private sector can be listed under three headings:
· FAO programme and its priorities;
· criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management; and
· private sector involvement or participation in the activities of COFO or FAO Regional Forestry Commissions.
FAO programme and its priorities
The 12th session of COFO in 1995 was preceded by a meeting of the private sector which contributed to preparations for the main session of COFO and that of Ministers responsible for forestry. The report of that private sector meeting makes it very clear that the private sector shares society's general commitment to achieving sustainable forest management. The entire FAO programme of work proposals discussed at the 1997 session is directed at this objective and, therefore, should be of interest to you; FAO would welcome your views on it. In March of this year, COFO itself made specific suggestions for FAO's work and proposed definite priorities, of which the following are highlights for your attention:
· Forest resources assessment is essential in monitoring availability of forest raw materials;
· Outlook studies and statistics can provide the private sector with a basis for identifying future development opportunities and in drawing attention to issues that can effect their realization; (The GFSS launched at the behest of your Committee is an integral part of the FAO outlook analysis work.)
· National forest programmes originally started as Tropical Forest Action Programmes and now exist in many countries as a framework for forestry development activities, including those with investment potential;
· Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management provide an internationally agreed basis for assessing progress towards sustainability goals.
Among other activities of interest to the private sector which COFO also highlighted are non-wood forest products, plantations and fuelwood. In certain other fields, COFO considered that other international organizations had comparative advantage over FAO; included among these is the field of trade and marketing. FAO is nevertheless requested to maintain some activity in this area.
Criteria and indicators
Many initiatives have been going since UNCED to develop criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. Inter-governmental dialogue has focused on agreeing upon criteria and indicators at the national level which can be applied to all types of forests. In parallel with these inter-governmental initiatives there has been a process driven more by environmental NGOs and the private sector to apply criteria and indicators at the management unit level and use them in certifying internationally-traded forest products for sustainability of origin. At its 1997 session, COFO focused on the inter-governmental processes but did not lose sight on issues and opportunities related to management-site application of criteria and indicators and associated trade certification.
Setting standards and procedures for assessing progress towards sustainable forestry will remain on the sector agenda for a long time and the private sector will be affected by decisions on this topic. The private sector can only gain from making its views based on practical experience adequately heard in fora where decisions or proposals are made. Its most important role would be to contribute to consensus-building around balanced standards which recognize conservation as well as economic and social objectives for forestry development.
Private sector participation in COFO and other FAO statutory fora
Officials who attend COFO and related FAO committees appreciate the importance of all interest groups being involved in forestry dialogue and activities. Paragraph 19 of the COFO report, contains the Committee's recommendation that its own meetings, programmes and activities, as well as those of Regional Forestry Commissions, should be open to and involve representatives of NGOs and the private sector. Furthermore, the Committee has, in paragraph 34, asked that contacts with the private sector through this Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products be enhanced.
The Advisory Committee may wish to propose ways for this to take effect, for example, to consider several approaches:
· to hold ACPWP meetings back-to-back with sessions of COFO or of Regional Forestry Commission sessions; (For example, the next session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, in February 1998, will discuss the outlook for forestry in that region - a subject like this needs a private sector perspective.)
· to be included in the official member delegations to FAO committee sessions (a practice some NGOs already benefit from); and
· to fully brief government delegations on private sector views where the expected agenda of statutory-body meetings are of particular interest to it.
FAO - State of the World's Forests
Ian J. Bourke
FOREST PRODUCTS DIVISION, FAO, ROME
The following article is a reproduction of the executive summary of the "State of the World's Forests 1997" report, a publication of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations which was released in March 1997. SOFO is a biennial publication, which seeks to provide accurate, up-to-date and accessible information on the world's forests and on developments in the forestry sector. SOFO presents policy-relevant information on the status and trends of forests and forest products and services, new developments and emerging issues of significance in the sector, and external forces influencing forestry. It is written for a varied audience, including people working in governmental and non-governmental organizations concerned with forestry policy and/or programmes, forestry enterprises and trade associations, research and educational institutions, and regional and international financial or development organizations.
SOFO 1997 is available in English, French, Spanish, Chinese and Arabic. The electronic version of SOFO 1997 may be accessed on Internet through the home page of the FAO Forestry Department at http://www.FAO.ORG/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/forestry.htm. Readers wishing to order a printed copy may contact the FAO Information Division, Sales and Marketing Group, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy (e-mail: Publications-Sales@FAO.org).
The State of the World's Forests 1997 (SOFO 1997) presents information on the current status of the world's forests, major developments over the reporting period (1995-97), and recent trends and future directions in the forestry sector. The demands on forestry today are complex and challenging, and the debate on the role of forests in society - their purpose, their benefits and their beneficiaries - is as vigorous as ever.
Onwards from Rio
The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992 provided impetus and commitment to international activity focused on the world's forests. It led to the establishment, in April 1995, of the Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests (IPF) by the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development. The role of the IPF is to follow up UNCED recommendations on sustainable forest management and to encourage international consensus on key issues related to forests. The work of the IPF, together with that of international organizations, national governments, non-governmental organizations and the private sector, represents an unprecedented level of international forestry activity.
External impacts on forestry
Economic, political, demographic and social trends are shaping the management of forests and influencing national forest policy formulation and institutional arrangements. Demographic changes - both the growing size and increasing urbanization of the world's population - have had, and will continue to have, major impacts on forest cover and condition, demand for wood and non-wood forest products, and the ability of forests to fulfil essential environmental functions. Political and economic trends affecting the forestry sector include: decentralization; privatization; trade liberalization and globalization of the world economy; and overall economic growth, tempered by a widening gap between rich and poor in many countries.
Forest lands
The SOFO 1997 presents new information on global forest cover, including: the area of forests in 1995; change since 1990; and revised estimates for forest cover change between 1980 and 1990, all derived from the FAO Forest Resources Assessment (FRA) programme. The area of the world's forests, including natural forests and plantations, is estimated to have been 3 454 million ha in 1995, slightly more than half of which was in developing countries. Between 1990 and 1995, there was an estimated net loss of 56.3 million ha of forests worldwide, representing a decrease of 65.1 million ha in developing countries which was partly offset by an increase of 8.8 million ha in developed countries.
Considering only natural forests in developing countries, which is where most deforestation is occurring, the new estimates indicate that:
· the annual loss of natural forests between 1980 and 1990 was lower than the estimate made earlier by FRA 1990 (15.5 million ha vs. 16.3 million ha); and
· the annual loss of natural forests was lower during the 1990-1995 than the 1980-1990 period (13.7 million ha vs. 15.5 million ha).
In short, although deforestation continues to be significant in developing countries, the rate of loss of natural forests between 1980 and 1990 appears to have been slower than previously estimated, and to have decreased since then.
Deforestation and forest degradation are occurring in dryland and upland areas which already have limited forest cover and are fragile environments susceptible to soil erosion and other forms of degradation, and where poor communities are highly dependent on forests for food, fuel and income. Tropical rainforests and moist tropical forests, which are of local social and economic importance and of global significance for biological diversity conservation and climate regulation, are also undergoing rapid change.
Recent information on the nature and causes of change in forest cover in the tropics suggests that expansion of subsistence agriculture in Africa and Asia, and large economic development programmes involving resettlement, agriculture and infrastructure in Latin America and Asia, are key factors behind forest cover change. Although, in general, timber harvesting is not a direct cause of deforestation, it has been a facilitating factor in some areas through the construction of roads which make previously remote areas accessible to agricultural colonizers. Causes of forest degradation include excessive collection of fuelwood, overgrazing, fire, overharvesting of timber and poor harvesting practices.
In the coming decades, pressures for increased food production are expected to lead to continued conversion of forest land to agriculture in many developing countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America where other options to meet food needs are limited.
Forest products
While the world's forest area has been steadily decreasing, there has been a continued increase in demand for wood products. The latest FAO forest products statistics, which provide figures through 1994, indicate that global consumption of wood increased by 36 percent between 1970 and 1994.
Demand for fuelwood, which is the main or sole source of domestic energy for two-fifths of the world's population, continues to grow by 1.2 percent per year. About 90 percent of the world's fuelwood is produced and used in developing countries. By contrast, developed countries account for 72 percent of the total world production and consumption of industrial wood products. While the rate of consumption in developed countries has levelled off, however, it continues to rise in developing countries.
Many countries are relying more on plantations and, in some places, on farm forestry and agroforestry, to supply their wood needs. The availability of wood from plantations in Asia, Oceania, and South America is increasing rapidly. The area of plantations in developing countries alone more than doubled from 40 million ha in 1980 to 81 million ha in 1995.
More efficient processing, increased recycling, and greater use of residues have enabled forest industries to raise the output of processed products significantly with a proportionally smaller increase of raw material. Other important recent trends include: diversifying raw material inputs, expanding product lines, and developing more environmentally-friendly processing technologies.
International trade in forest products, currently accounting for 6-8 percent of world roundwood production and an estimated value of US$ 114 000 million, continues to increase in economic importance. The developed countries dominate world trade in forest products, accounting for about 80 percent of the value of both exports and imports, but developing country regions, particularly Asia and Latin America, are becoming increasingly important. Recent regional trade agreements have helped diversify trade and increase infra-regional trade.
Concern has been raised over whether future demand for forest products can be met sustainably, given the world-wide increase in demand and decrease in forest area. Provisional results of an FAO global outlook study on trends to the year 2010 suggest that there should be sufficient wood to meet global demand until that time. Long-term adequacy of supply will depend upon sustainable management of forest resources. Trade in forest products is expected to increase, and will be necessary to offset major wood deficits projected for Asia and to ease a tight softwood supply expected in the US. Some developing countries, however, will have difficulty supplying their needs for industrial wood products because of a lack of capacity to import, and will have deficits of non-traded goods such as fuelwood. The global projections assume increasing recovery and recycling of paper and paperboard, and a higher reliance on plantations for wood production. FAO studies now under way on fibre
supply projections complement the outlook study; together, they will provide a clearer picture of the future wood demand and supply situation.
While wood is the predominant commercial product from forests, recently increased attention has been paid to the actual and potential economic role of non-wood forest products (NWFPs). Although their use is poorly quantified and their value is generally underestimated in national accounts, the importance of NWFPs to household and local economies, particularly among the poor in developing countries, is increasingly recognized, as is their potential for greater commercialization. Currently at least 150 NWFPs are significant in international trade, for a total estimated value of US$ 11 100 million. Expanding trade in NWFPs would favour developing countries, which are the main suppliers to international markets. Consistent policies and governmental support needed for sustainable commercial development of NWFPs, however, are still lacking in most countries.
The environmental functions of forests
The increased importance ascribed to the environmental functions of forests and their integral role in sustainable forest management was highlighted by Chapter 11 of Agenda 21 (Combating Deforestation) and the "Forest Principles" adopted at UNCED. It is also reflected in recently enacted international conventions, including: the International Convention to Combat Desertification; the Convention on Biological Diversity; and the Framework Convention on Global Climate Change. These conventions are expected to reinforce ongoing national, regional and international activities in these areas. Follow-up to the UN Conference on Human Settlements (Istanbul, 1996) and other efforts to improve the urban environment are likely to heighten the focus on urban and peri-urban forestry. Most recently, the World Food Summit (FAO, Rome, 1996) drew international attention to the role of forests and trees in food security, particularly in supporting agricultural production systems, but also in
supplementing food supplies and providing fuel for cooking, and in generating income.
Recent developments in forest management which reflect the increased emphasis on environmental services of forests include: efforts to manage forests as ecological systems (taking into consideration forests' protective functions and their role in the conservation of biological diversity); adoption of reduced-impact logging systems and development of codes of harvesting practice; and restrictions placed on timber harvesting in forests in North America and some tropical Asian and Pacific countries. Environmental concerns have also led to certification schemes and export controls for forest products. The trend towards increased involvement of nearby communities in forest management, particularly in developing countries, allows for greater consideration to be given to local environmental concerns and to the social benefits derived locally from forests.
Evolving institutional framework
Rapidly evolving institutional arrangements for forest planning and management reflect changing priorities and approaches within the sector, and external economic and political trends. Current areas of focus in many developing countries are: the development and institutionalization of participatory forest management systems; recognition of access rights of local communities to forest resources; and issues related to forest-dependent indigenous peoples. Increased emphasis on environmental functions of forests has led several developing countries to shift some of the responsibilities of forestry departments to recently-established departments of environment or natural resources. In countries in transition, changes in ownership of forest land and forest enterprises have had a significant impact on forest management. There is a general trend in many countries, towards privatization of public forest enterprises and of research and extension functions. World-wide developments
affecting forestry institutions include: reductions in budgets and staff of forestry departments; decentralization of forest administrations; and continued efforts to develop mechanisms to involve a wide range of interest groups in forestry policy formulation and planning.
Sustainable forest management
Many efforts, governmental and non-governmental, national and international, have been made to promote sustainable forest management. Major international initiatives include: the International Tropical Timber Organization's "Year 2000 Objective", in which producer member countries have committed themselves to having all their internationally-traded tropical timber come from sustainably-managed forests by the year 2000; and national and regional efforts to define criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management and to determine means of assessing progress towards achieving it. The latter involves a number of regional initiatives, most of which have been launched since 1995, focusing on: humid tropical forests in ITTO producer countries; boreal, temperate and Mediterranean forests in Europe (the "Helsinki Process"); temperate and boreal forests outside Europe (the "Montreal Process"); Amazon basin forests (the "Tarapoto Proposal"); and forests in dry-zone sub-Saharan
Africa (the UNEP/FAO Dry-Zone Africa Initiative); in the Near East region (FAO/UNEP Expert Meeting for the Near East); and in Central America (FAO/CCAD Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Central America).
Continued progress towards more widespread sustainable forest management will depend on: improved information on the world's forest resources; strengthened sector planning based upon improved methods of forest valuation; better intersectoral linkages and continued constructive dialogue between various interest groups; strengthened forestry institutions; and improved coordination among the various entities involved in forest management and resource use. Most important, implementing sustainable forest management will depend on local, national and international commitment to achieving it.
Outcome of the First World Conference on Finance and Marketing for the Pulp and Paper Industries
Bernard E. Majani
Papercast, Paris
I would just like to give you a brief presentation on the outcome of the First World Conference on Finance and Marketing (for the Pulp and Paper Industries), held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from 7 to 9 April 1997. It was organized jointly by Papercast, the Brazilian Association of Pulp Exporters (ABECEL), and also the Brazilian Association of Pulp and Paper Producers (ANFPC). In fact, if you will allow me, I will take this opportunity to thank Mr Mario Leonel, the Managing Director of the ANFPC, who contributed so much to the conference's success. We had about 450 personalities from over 30 countries around the world. Bankers, financial analysts and investors were numerous, as were the companies supplying equipment, products and services to the pulp and paper industry. Consequently, participants benefited from a truly global view of the pulp and paper industry, covering financial and marketing topics, and in many instances, companies' strategies.
I would also like to mention that Mr Luis Deslandes of SOPORCEL gave an excellent speech at the conference on the analysis of the world supply and demand of pulp and paper. A presentation was also made by Mr Jeremy Wall of the European Commission, whose presence in Brazil clearly showed the interest of the European Union for sustainable forestry as well as their interest in emerging countries.
Mr John W. (Jack) Creighton, President, Weyerhaeuser Company, USA, gave the keynote address. According to him, the first imperative is to be profitable. This is the only way to raise the large required equity capital from shareholders, to guarantee supply, to devote research to improving products and to maintain mills and plants in first-class operating condition, in order to ensure consistent supplies of high quality products to customers. Excellent financial performance is also critically important to employees as it is required for training, job security and competitive wages for all. It is, also a requirement for developing the civic and cultural amenities of the community where the companies are implanted. Jack Creighton also stressed the imperative to perform well environmentally. First of all, we cannot afford to spoil the planet where we live. And secondly, because all stakeholders are environmentalists to one degree or another.
In a most enlightening presentation in Manaus, Mr Roberta Samanez-Mercado, Chief Technical Adviser to the FAO project in support of the Amazon Cooperation Treaty, stressed the immensity of the Amazon basin with its more than 1000 tributaries and its extremely large diversity be it geological, hydrological, ecological, climatic, social, economic or political.
Roberta Samanez took upon himself to destroy the many myths associated with this great region. Of course, it has never been the El Dorado promised to the early Conquistadores. However, other myths subsist such as that of the region's homogeneity; the myth of the great emptiness or virginity of the Amazon, although it is inhabited by some 20 million human beings, including one million of indigenous descent; the myth of the Amazon's immense riches or poverty; the myth that Amazonia is the "lungs of the earth" although it emits as much CO[2] as it removes from the atmosphere; the myth of the Indian peoples as an obstacle to development or that of the Indian model as the only solution to development. The truth is that the Amazon generates global environmental services and has economic values. If a large part of Amazonia is to be maintained in the form of protected areas which contain optionally useful resources, the respective countries which abstain from using them should be
compensated: "If collecting domestic refuse has a cost and provides environmental services, then conserving a natural area also has a value of non-use. Unless this is admitted, protecting the Amazon will not progress adequately as there is no way to block the exploitation of certain resources which are urgently necessary for the countries of the Amazon basin, without proposing compensation for their non-utilization".
Several speakers talked about the growth of pulp and paper production and consumption in the main regions of the world: Europe, North America and Latin America, China and Southeast Asian countries. Mr Karl-Hermann Schmincke, Director, Forest Products Division, FAO, Italy, described the growth potential and fibre requirements to meet pulp, paper and paperboard demand to 2010. It is clear that new sources of industrial roundwood will have to be found, besides the natural and semi-natural forest, to meet the consumption forecast of a 1.7 percent yearly growth over the 1994 consumption of 3.2 billion m^3. This can be accomplished by increasing the amount of recovered paper, non-wood fibre and industrial plantation forests.
This is what is being done in Brazil with a US$ 13 billion investment programme in new pulp and paper mills which will allow to nearly double production by 2005. Major growth is also expected in Southeast Asia and particularly in Indonesia.
As stated by Mr Sukanto Tanoto, Chairman, RGM International Corporation, Indonesia: "The era when Asia had to rely solely on pulp and paper produced from slow-growing trees, by highly paid workers and then shipped halfway around the world, is changing."
The First World Conference on Finance and Marketing brought together, perhaps for the first time, high ranking executives from many of the world's regions, including from emerging and developing countries. It was clear to all that this was a great occasion to listen to and to meet responsible people from far away lands with different cultures, different problems and different objectives. To the surprise of many who are often ready to accuse others for the industry's financial plights, newcomers from the emerging countries appear just as anxious and capable of earning a just return on their major investments. "Successful market penetration strategies are not necessarily confrontational" said Sukanto Tanoto. They can be pursued in ways that benefit the market as a whole, offering existing players something more than a zero sum game.
To conclude this brief summary of the First World Conference on Finance and Marketing, it is good to give as an example of deep concern for the environment Klabin's forest operations at their mill in the State of Paraná. As many other Brazilian companies, Klabin owns large plantations of pine and eucalyptus forests (208 000 ha). In addition, it owns 100 000 ha of permanently preserved native forests - an unusually large area - in order to maintain the region's rich biodiversity. The company also runs educational environmental programmes for the local community through its Nature Interpretation Centre which was visited by a sizeable group of the conference participants. This very large centre offers learning and scientific activities, ecological trails in the woods and a park for breeding wild animals. Every year, about 20 000 people visit this ecological centre, many of whom are school children from the region and many other places in Brazil. Teaching young people to love
and care for nature is certainly the most apt answer to promote the protection of the environment - far more efficient than any laws. It is a good example to be followed everywhere.
<section>o</section>
THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC ROLE OF THE FOREST INDUSTRY
An example from a developed country - Sweden
An example from a developing country - Congo
An example from a developed country - Sweden
Jan Remröd
Swedish Forest Industries Association, Stockholm
Originally, Sweden was a poor and small country up in the north which has in nowadays grown to a rather wealthy country. Forests are an important part of the cause of Sweden's prosperity.
The forest is important for all Swedes. When they grow up, they are fed with sagas and legends where the forest very often plays an important role. The trolls are living in the forests, the children are playing in the forests, the artists are painting in the forests, week-ends are spent in the forests, going mushrooming or hiking and so on.
This is also an environment, in which almost all Swedes want to live - in a red cottage close to the forest. The cottage is of course made of wood - this is the typical building material in Sweden, and, therefore, Sweden is more or less built of wood.
When the first inhabitants came to Sweden around 10 000 years ago, this was about the same time as the forests started to grow. As you may know, Sweden, like the rest of northern Europe, was covered with ice in the earlier days. Thus, the history of people in Sweden and the history of the forests in Sweden are of the same age.
The first Swedes were hunters and fishermen, today very few Swedes earn their living in that way. During the millennia they became farmers, they cultivated the land, but they also started to cultivate the forests: they increased their farming acreage by bum-beating, the cattle were grazing also in the forests and so on in a similar way as what today is happening in many tropical areas of the world.
The wealth of today's Swedes is also due to their ancestors that were pretty few - they were too few to be able to devastate the forests, as what has happened in many other parts of the world.
Ship-building was perhaps, with the exception of house-building, the most important part of wood utilisation in Sweden's medieval period, but its use for the mining industry was also vital: both for heating the ores and blast furnaces.
In the fifteenth century the first sawmill started in Sweden and the role of the forests for the development of the society had a real take-off. At that time the forests in Sweden were around 50 percent deciduous and 50 percent coniferous, but the coniferous part was steadily increasing, because of natural migration, and because oak, birch and other deciduous species were commercially more attractive.
At about the same time Sweden started to export some forest products - another important take-off. At that time the export was rather modest. The products were tar, charcoal, timber and later also potash. Production of potash, which increased to be one of the main export products in the eighteenth century, consumed large amounts of wood - mainly birch and beech, and was one of the reasons to the decline of these species.
The nineteenth century was also for Sweden the industrialisation era. The steam-engine made the sawmills more productive, the mechanical pulping methods were developed and later also the chemical pulping ones. The increased prosperity also increased the number of Swedes from 2 million in the beginning of the nineteenth century to 9 million today.
But this increase of the population also consumed the forests: 100 years ago we had much less forests than today, but since then the forests have been increasing: the growing stock is 3 billion m^3 today and is still increasing. There has probably never been in Sweden more trees than today.
At the end of the twentieth century, forestry and forest industry have obviously played important roles in building today's society in Sweden, but, what is the situation today and how do we look upon the future?
The forest industry is still one of the basic industries in Sweden - when an industry is as large as the Swedish forest industry, it is a basic need for many activities, it is the hub in a much larger industry sector than the industry itself.
The mechanical industry is a major supplier to the forest industry: Kværner and Sunds Defibrator are developing and producing new machinery for mechanical and chemical pulping, Valmet in Karlstad is building new paper machines, BTG in Säffle new coating equipment, and these companies have reached their global positions as they have had the Swedish forest industry as a demanding home market.
The chemical industry is growing in importance as a supplier to the forest industry: they have made large contributions in solving many problems in the industry. Eka Chemicals is a leading supplier of both bleaching chemicals and paper chemicals. Kemira and Bim Kemi are other major chemical suppliers.
A modern paper machine is supplied with the same amount of computer power as a jumbo jet. Investments in the control and instrumentation parts are steadily increasing and for companies such as ABB, the pulp and paper industry is a major customer.
Investments in new pulp and paper mills are the largest industrial investments in Sweden, thus they are a main base also for construction and building companies.
Trade of forest products is also a basic factor, as export of forest industry products has been a main issue since the fifteenth century and today it is valued at 85 billion kronor or 15 percent of the total Swedish export.
Service industries, such as different types of consulting firms are also benefiting from the large forest industry in Sweden.
The forest industry is a sector that has the highest rate of transported volumes in Sweden. As a matter of fact, 22 percent of all road transport, 32 percent of all sea transport abroad and 33 percent of all rail transport are for the forest industry. This gives jobs to a large number of transport companies, from the national railway company to numerous haulage contractors, but has also been a major thrust for the truck producers Volvo and Scania, giving them a world leading position.
100 000 employed in the Swedish Forestry Sector
There are around 100 000 people directly employed in the industry and about the same number indirectly employed, which means they are involved in transportation or other activities connected to the industry.
In this respect, the location of the mills is also of great importance. The pulp and paper mills are located far away from the urban areas, and are, in most cases, the dominating employers at each location. The sawmills are mostly located in small villages close to the forests - in many cases the only employer in the village.
The number of employed people in the industry has decreased over the years and at the same time productivity has increased. Mechanisation of the forestry operations and computer control of the production processes are the main driving forces behind this development.
The structure of the forest owners is also of importance. Half of the productive forest land in Sweden is owned by private individuals or families. Just under 400 000 people own 250 000 holdings, giving them their major income.
But the forestry and forest industry are not the only that give the forest owners their major income, there is also Sweden as a country that does the same.
When the first figures on export values were reported in the middle of the sixteenth century, tar, charcoal and timber accounted for 12 percent of the total exports from Sweden. Since then this share has increased to 15 percent, but with another product range.
The forest industry products give the biggest export surplus
But even if the car industry has an export value which is double that of the forest industry, its export surplus (exports less imports) is only half. This export surplus pays for instance for the import of oil, petrol, food, clothes, computers and much more. In Sweden's export-based economy, the forest industry is the main motor.
The forest industry believes in the future. Investments have been of a high level during the past years: three large paper machines have been started since last summer. New sawmills are also under discussion. The research sector is backing up the activities with investments in new equipment for pressing, drying and surface treatment and a new programme for fundamental research in the printing and surface treatment sector.
Investments in the Forest Industry, mills in Sweden, 1980-97
Another important factor is that Sweden is a small country with a homogeneous population; consensus can often be reached in different issues; politicians, bureaucrats and people in the industry are traditionally acting in a rational, pragmatic way. One example is the environmental issues - the Swedish forest industry is one of the world leaders in this area. This position has not been reached because the legislators and the authorities have pushed the industry, but because industry, research institutes and authorities have together identified the problems and discussed how to solve them. Of course, the development is not totally idyllic! The environmental groups have sometimes disagreed and there are pressing demands from critical consumers. However, also this debate has developed from confrontation towards dialogue and consensus. The forest industry is no longer the main focus of the environmental debate.
Even if Sweden's situation seems bright, there are also clouds in the sky and they are mainly of a political nature. There are examples of how the traditional rational way of thinking and decision-making is replaced by a very loosely founded eco-fundamentalism. One example is the energy sector - the Swedish paper industry is consuming 13 percent of all the electric power in the country and they are therefore very critical to the plans to phase out the nuclear power plants and starting already next year with the first one. Some other areas could be mentioned where the paper industry has a different opinion than the government, but no other issue is as important as that one.
The basis for controversies is perhaps that the politicians claim that they have built this country and the forest industry claims that they have built it. However, it can be agreed that Sweden is built of wood.
An example from a developing country - Congo
Otto Schlumbohm
SOCOBOIS, Hannover
Introduction
Dolisie, a town of 60 000 inhabitants
Development of Dolisie between 1974 and 1996
The town of Dolisie is the administrative centre of the Niari region. It is situated about 200 km by road (poor driving conditions) to the north-east of the port of Pointe Noire.
Until 1972/73, Dolisie was the most important logging town in the Congo. It was an eldorado for forest enterprises and wood buyers at that time. The best year was 1971 when more than 500 000 m^3 of logs were loaded at Dolisie's small railway station. Many companies were represented there and the town and the 25 000 inhabitants at that time enjoyed a real boom.
From 1974 onward, forestry activities began to stagnate. Little by little, one company after another closed its gates. The agents, the representatives of Caterpillar and Mercedez-Benz and a large number of forestry enterprises and carriers left the town.
Since then the town has been dying economically but experiencing an increase in the population which has now reached more than 60 000 inhabitants, being 2.6 times higher than in 1974.
Four of the five sawmills are closed, only one is working.
SOCOBOIS, situated at 6 km from Dolisie, is the only company that developed in this area.
The socio-economic problems that exist in Dolisie can also be found in the rest of the country, as well as in most parts of the neighbouring countries.
From a maximum of about 4 400 regular employment contracts 10 to 15 years ago, there are now only about 2 600 to 2 700.
In 1983, for example, a new 250-bed hospital was opened, equipped with the most up-to-date technology at a cost of US$ 25 million. Unfortunately, no plans had been made for a revolving fund or to train the technical and medical staff. The present state of the hospital can be imagined.
It should be noted that the town of Dolisie or the Niari region have no regular income since all taxes, dues and duties go to the capital, Brazzaville. Only with difficulty a small share returns to Dolisie. As a result, the people and the town live on the workers' wages and it is hardly surprising that a SOCOBOIS employee may be financially responsible for more than 20 people.
Except from SOCOBOIS, there are no major industrial or other activities and opportunities for employment.
Dolisie is the third largest town in the Congo with 60 000 inhabitants, after the capital Brazzaville with 950 000, and the economic and port town Pointe Noire with 500 000 inhabitants, all three together have 60 percent of the national population which is 2.5 million people. Considering the other small towns, the Congolese urbanisation, with more than 70 percent, is the highest in Africa reflecting the very poor rural development.
Some figures may give a better understanding of the national situation:
Congo area:
342 000 km^2, of which 62 percent is covered by forests, mostly dense.
Population:
2.52 million in 1994 which is 2.6 times more than 20 years ago, and certainly 4.0 million in 2014.
GDP:
Approximately US$ 580 against a global dept of US$ 2 100 per capita.
Employment:
105 000 productive jobs and 22 000 officials in 1974, but 78 000 productive jobs and 80 000 officials in 1994.
In 1974 there were 111 productive job contracts for every 1 000 inhabitants but only 31 jobs in 1994.
Other problems related to the socio-economic situation of the country, and also of Dolisie, are: poverty; malnutrition; hygiene; drinking water; health service; pharmaceutics; basic education and vocational schools; degradation of all kinds of infrastructures like water, electricity, telephone, roads (only 560 km of the existing 12 000 km are tarred); railway; and the Congo river waterways including harbours.
Eighty percent of the food is imported at a cost of US$ 130 million per year, whereas during the 1960s Congo was a food exporter.
Presentation of SOCOBOIS
The Société Congolaise des Bois SARL, Dolisie, Republic of the Congo, was created in 1964.
Wood processing factory
· over 800 workers (650 in the factory, 180 on the forest site);
· processing of 70 000 m^3 logs/year, of which 30 000 m^3 is bought from more than 20 other forest enterprises in the region, into sliced and peeled veneers, plywood and sawnwood.
SOCOBOIS does not export logs, it processes all the logs produced by the company in its forest concessions and purchased from others in the region.
SOCOBOIS investments
Creation of the Company, Shareholder: Gerhard Wonnemann, a German company in Westphalia
Installation of the first peeling line
Installation of the second peeling line
Logging
Installation of a sawmill
Installation of the first slicing line
Large expansion of the veneer jointing section
Panel wood drying shed
Installation of the second slicing line
Installation of the plywood production line
Large-scale modernization of the peeling lines
Replacement of forest material
All investments were realised step-by-step when the previous problems had been solved, such as staff training, product quality and quantity improvement, productivity and cost coverage. Not to mention the many problems related to local administration and transportation on road and railway which have delayed and hampered enormously our ambitious investment programme.
Activities
SOCOBOIS output, 1995
Export
Output
Logs (m^3)
Sawn timber (m^3)
Peeled veneer (m^3)
Sliced veneer (m^2)
Plywood (m^3)
Total log processing (m^3)
One socio-economic activity with high relevance to environment protection is the production of charcoal from wood processing residues and firewood from bark. The wood residues are given free of charge to the workers and the population of the town. The annual amount of firewood and charcoal used in households is estimated at 4 000 m^3 what is the equivalent of 50 000 savannah trees which would normally be cut every year by the population for their energy needs.
SOCOBOIS brings know-how, technology and money to the country and the region.
Staff, training, qualified workers/technicians
It took a long time for SOCOBOIS to have well trained technical staff and qualified workers as there are no vocational training schools for the woodworking sector. As a result, SOCOBOIS has to employ a large number of expatriates working as foremen and section chiefs in the production and as trainers at the factory, in the workshops and at the forest sites.
The ratio between expatriates and nationals has fallen from 1 : 23 in 1965 to 1 : 60 in 1996.
Increase in staff numbers
SOCOBOIS workers
Services
Total
SOCOBOIS-related services are charcoal burners, guards, artisans, school teachers, health services, etc.
In Africa, the family still plays a very important role in social life. Anyone with a regular salary, for reasons of tradition and customary solidarity, is obliged to share it with family members.
And in Africa, the family is very "elastic" and numerous especially when poverty calls for support from more wealthy family members.
I am not a sociologist, but I have always carried out and commissioned surveys amongst the workers on their problems and their daily priorities. Given the financial and salary situation in the country in general, it is not surprising to see that each of our employees is, on average, supporting 21 people, taking care of medical costs, children's school expenses, etc.
The increase in this burden reflects the country's population and poverty growth.
SOCOBOIS workers
Dependants per worker
Dependent on SOCOBOIS
The increasingly high dependency rate of people from one earner in the family is typical of poverty in Africa and of course in the Dolisie region.
In conclusion: at least a third of the population of Dolisie depends on SOCOBOIS' industrial activity.
Income-generation in Dolisie
The following table shows the high share of income generated by SOCOBOIS workers which is more than 64 percent compared to the total income of all those employed in the town of Dolisie.
Employment contracts
US$/year/ worker
Total US$/year
SOCOBOIS
SOCOBOIS-related services
Administration, State and Town
Other services
Total
Contribution to public finances in US dollars
Year
Industry
Forest
Total
SOCOBOIS
SOCOBOIS
SOCOBOIS
Assessment of the impact of wood processing
A brief summary of the important socio-economic role of forest industry in Dolisie, the region and the country as a whole, allows us to appreciate the general impact of log processing in the country.
But, more than 50 percent of the 600 000 m^3 of logs produced annually are still exported in the rough form. Their processing in the country would provide more employment and general income as demonstrated by the following example.
Employment
To each forest worker, 1.5 to 3.5 factory workers must be added, depending on the type of processing. In the case of SOCOBOIS, the factor is 3.6 in the factory (180 on the forest site, 650 in the factory).
Logging in the Congo:
600 000 m^3 / year divided by 150 m^3 / year / man
= 4 000 jobs
100 percent processing in the Congo:
4 000 x 2.5 men per logging worker
= 10 000 jobs
If all processing were to be done in the country, instead of the present 8 000 jobs, the Congo would immediately have 14 000 jobs without counting any jobs which are secondary to industrial activity, this means 6 000 more jobs.
Added-value contribution to the country
Year
Percent
Added-value US$
Financial results by m^3 of logs
These results depend on the level of processing, yield, wood quality and also staff quality, species and market.
The value-added by processing, per m^3 logs equivalent, is higher than that earned by simply exporting the logs.
In the case of SOCOBOIS, we can demonstrate that 1 m^3 of processed logs earns, on average, US$ 100 per m^3 more.
Processing = greater added-value. Higher currency earnings
Direct and indirect taxes, dues, customs duties, etc.
The tax department profits directly and indirectly from industrial activity. In the case of SOCOBOIS, only as regards industry, it takes over 20 percent of the turnover.
What would Dolisie's socio-economic situation be like without SOCOBOIS?
If, for reasons beyond SOCOBOIS' control, the factory had to close, what would happen in Dolisie?
The list below answers this question:
· About 1 000 more unemployed people;
· people in Dolisie without financial assistance;
· About US$ 10 million = CFA 6 000 000 per year less in the region;
· Felling of a greater number of trees for firewood around Dolisie;
· Trade, the hospital, pharmacies, artisans, etc., would see their turnover halved;
· Taxes on turnover would fall proportionately.
In short, the closure of the company would be a disaster for the region and for the whole national economy.
On the other hand, the example of SOCOBOIS should encourage other companies to abandon log export in favour of local processing.
It seems to me that these facts are convincing evidence of the positive and important socio-economic role of a forest industry.
Forest activities
Our principle is rational management and sustainable use of the forest, respecting the laws in force and the regulations for Forest Code implementation. The case study carried out by FAO two years ago on environmentally friendly logging practices provided us with some useful recommendations on how to improve our forest operations.
SOCOBOIS has signed a contract with the government to establish a Pilot Development, Reforestation and Agroforestry Programme. But sustainability in forestry can only be achieved if we have the full long-term rights on the forest area. This is why we have requested a lease on the land for 99 years or the length of the company's life. Without land rights there can never be sustainable development.
Certification and sustainable development
In principle, we are interested in a strict certification system as long as this does not imply costly formalities and bureaucracy and it improves our sales (prices) on the world market.
How can we certify the products when the logs which are purchased from other companies are not coming from certified forests?
Is certification a mode?
Is certification a must, and with what result?
Is certification a means of creating jobs for the "experts"?
Certification is chancy in that it will force forestry enterprises and forest administrations to accept the rules of sustainable development.
But let us not forget that it took Europe and the other continents a very long time to reach today's standard, a standard which is still being questioned by some experts.
On the basis of my experience in Africa, everything takes twice as long and, in practice, it will be a long, hard job to train and convince people in the field.
Therefore, the principles, criteria and indicators to be established and applied must take into account the people who work in the field. It is them who must be convinced to work better today so as to pave the way for the future of their grandchildren.
Recommendations
A world inventory of tropical forest resources with the assistance of the World Bank, using modern systems.
Coordination and monitoring of all activities at world level to achieve sustainable forest management.
Coordination of criteria, practicable in Africa, for the certification of forest products at world level.
Incentivation of industrialization and privatization which, in the long term, mean:
Employment - added-value - development
On the occasion of the Conference on the Ecosystems of Central African Dense Rain Forests, I proposed that, while taking into account the regional differences, not only minimum diameters but also maximum diameters should be respected. We must protect trees of large diameter and list them as "national monuments".
Summary
Forest industry creates jobs through processing and this confirms its socio-economic role. Industrialization, above all in the rural areas of developing countries, is an indispensable support to the infrastructure and counters poverty and malnutrition.
Industrialists are making long-term plans and investments for 20 to 50 years. In many cases, an industrialist may be a better partner for a developing country than a good number of bilateral cooperation projects, which are very often short-term projects.
We are an industrial company and we must realise that we cannot perform miracles, nor reduce poverty in general.
Our work must be coordinated with the efforts of governments, international institutions such as the World Bank, international cooperation, GTZ, potential investors, university researchers, etc.
It would be desirable that there were many more contacts in the future between the above-mentioned institutions, because it is only through joint efforts that the developing countries can hope to see a substantial improvement in their socio-economic, employment and infrastructure situation.
<section>p</section>
UPDATE ON SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT (SFM) AND CERTIFICATION
Progress achieved world-wide and FAO's contribution
An example from a developed country - USA
An example from a developing country - Ghana
Progress achieved world-wide and FAO's contribution
Gary Bull
Forest Products Division, FAO, Rome
Introduction
Since the 1992 UNCED meeting, which produced a set of international forest principles and agenda for action (Agenda 21), five years have elapsed and sceptics argue that little has happened to improve the situation of the world's forests. While there is merit to this argument, it clearly does a disservice to the forest products companies, NGOs, research institutes, universities, international organizations and governments attempting to take the principles of sustainable forest management (SFM) and translate them into concrete action.
This paper gives a brief overview of the global forest policy environment and the initiatives FAO and others are taking at the policy level. It also provides a description and discussion of the more technical aspects of SFM and how it is being implemented at the management level in forest operational trials. It concludes with a discussion of the major challenges ahead for converting the concept of SFM into measurable results.
SFM at the policy level
Criteria and indicators for implementation, monitoring and reporting
Since UNCED, criteria and indicators have been formulated and refined through several international and national, governmental and non-governmental processes. The intergovernmental processes have been conducted mainly within the framework of a number of major international initiatives which are summarized in Table 1. These initiatives are described more fully in the 1997 State of the World's Forests report (FAO 1997a).
Table 1: Ongoing international initiatives by geographic region
Ecological region
Initiative
Number of countries
Forest area (thousand ha)
Temperate and boreal forest
Helsinki Process^1
Montreal Process
Tropical forest
ITTO Producer Countries
Tarapoto Proposal
Dry-zone sub-Saharan forest
FAO/UNEP Dry Zone Africa
Dry-zone Near East
FAO/UNEP
All types of forests
FAO: Central American / Lepaterique Process
^1CIS was included in both the Helsinki and Montreal processes.
These international initiatives are now being tested in operational sustainable forest management systems in several countries. The Center for International Forest Research, for example, has been field testing Criteria and Indicators for three years in different location world-wide (Prabhu 1996).
Improvement of forest legislation and policy reform
Many countries have recently introduced new forest policies and laws protecting their resources through improved management. Table 2 presents selected examples of the kinds of reform currently under way. It is not intended to be an exhaustive list but rather indicative of the extent and nature of the reform under way. These reforms are indicators of how the concept of SFM is being interpreted in the policy and legislative arena.
Table 2: Selected examples of legislative and policy reform
Country
Types of reform recently introduced
Canada
British Columbia forest practices code ISO based wood certification scheme by Canadian Standard Association
Cameroon
Reform of forest law
Ghana
National timber certification scheme Log export ban
Cambodia
Forest policy reform process Logging control and log verification
Indonesia
National timber certification scheme Criteria and indicators of natural production forest sustainability at the national level Sustainable management on natural production forest on management unit level Technical guidance on criteria and indicators at the management unit level
Malaysia
Regional code of practice for timber harvesting in Asia-Pacific National timber certification scheme Guidelines on logging practice in Peninsular Malaysia
New Zealand
Forest code of practice
Papua New Guinea
PNG logging code of practice National forest plan
Congo
Log export controls
South Africa
South African harvesting code of practice
USA
Codes of best management practice Oregon Forest Practice Act
SFM at the management unit level
To forest companies reforms at the management unit level are equally if not more important to their operations since this will have direct impacts on their operating practices, legal agreements for timber cutting, and ultimately on their profitability.
However, before discussing the more specific impacts of SFM, it is useful to describe and assess the differences of SFM from the older concept of sustained yield. This is one way to articulate the shift in management emphasis in forest operations.
Sustained yield and SFM
The SFM is primarily a systematic approach to sustaining each component of the forest ecosystem and their interactions. In forests available for wood supply, this means combining wood production with other management objectives, above all, the conservation of plant and animal biological diversity and soil and water conservation. Similar intentions were not as clear in the classic management concept of sustained yield but it is now agreed that forest management must systematically address a fuller range of environmental, social and economic issues (Lanly 1995). Table 3 is a summary of major differences in management approach between the two concepts.
Table 3: Comparison of SFM and sustained yield forestry objectives for temperate forests
SFM
Sustained yield forestry
Maintain the productivity of the forest, by avoiding erosion, soil degradation, and impoverishment of the soil ecosystem.
Emphasizes productivity but the tendency is to use agricultural techniques to establish plantations or to use the least cost regeneration technique.
Use practices which mimic natural disturbances to the extent that is feasible.
No emphasis on the mimicking of natural disturbance. Aesthetic impacts are considered, as well as silvicultural characteristics of species and economics. Where feasible, convert stands of species with low commercial value to high valued species.
Search for harvesting methods which reduce the level of disturbance in the forest, which primarily has meant that the size of clear-cut areas is being reduced and partial harvesting systems are being used more widely.
Increasing utilization and reducing cost are the primary motivators, subject to social constraints on clear-cut size.
Maintain wildlife populations and maintain species.
Maintaining wildlife and non-timber species was generally considered outside the purview of forest managers and applied biologists were primarily concerned about maintaining populations of game species.
Maintain structural and biological diversity in managed forests.
The agro-industrial ideal was to have uniform rows of same sized, single species trees-Aesthetic considerations and economic costs were primary constraints.
Source: Bull, Williams and Duinker 1996, Williams 1997.
Conveying the differences is critical to forest management and some forest companies are already changing their plans and operational procedures to SFM.
Field application of SFM
The international community has had numerous, some might call it a plethora, of discussions at the national and international level on the subjects of biological diversity, SFM, ecosystem management, wood certification, and, criteria and indicators. At the same time, field managers have been trying to interpret the implications of these initiatives into their operations. The concerns of industry, and in many cases government and communities relate to three major elements:
· Yield regulation
· Silvicultural system
· Harvesting system
Since it is imperative that both forest policy actors and field practitioners understand the implications of their decisions, each of these elements warrant more discussion on their specific mechanics.
Yield regulation
In practical terms, SFM has to be incorporated into timber yield regulations. The many formulas for yield calculation contain three basic elements: the biological rotation period or the felling cycle, the forest volume increment or growth and, existing growing stock of the forest. Changing to SFM means a change in the way we calculate the forest harvest level. The first change is applied to the rotation age or felling cycle; it is frequently being made longer. This means that the interventions in the forest are less and the total volume removed from the total forest has to be less in each felling cycle. So, for example, if the felling cycle is extended from 30 to 50 years for the same forest area then the total average removal per year would necessarily be less.
The forest increment statistic being applied is also changing. Traditionally, the increment was calculated use the mean average growth with insufficient integration of losses dues to mortality. In the tropics for example, where yield calculation are conducted, the regulations are applying a reduction factor of up to 0.5 to account for these losses (FAO 1975). This has enormous implications for sustainable yields, particularly for forests which are already converted to semi-natural forest (FAO 1997b).
The growing stock number is also being carefully scrutinized. Is the reported number the total growing stock, the productive growing stock or the commercial growing stock? As fibre supply is being more restricted in many regions this takes on a growing importance. For example, FAO now has estimates that while the total growing stock in Indonesia is 8.0 billion m^3, the current commercial growing stock could be 3.0 billion m^3. Obviously the number chosen for yield calculations will have a dramatic effect on the estimate of sustainable fibre yield. In the future, particularly with the advent of technical tools such as geographic information systems, there will be an increasing emphasis on defining the commercial growing stock on the area available for wood supply. It is on this area that you will see the application of SFM principles to forest harvesting.
Finally, the traditional formula variables described above will likely have to be further modified to allow for the application of an additional reduction factor. This factor will allow for the inclusion of, for example, riparian areas and biological diversity in some regions.
Yield regulation can also be analyzed by examining case studies which indicate reduction in various regions at an operational scale. Table 4 indicates that the range of reduction in volumes can be minor to very significant. This has important implications for fibre supply planning. Discussion will therefore have to begin amongst the policy actors as to the appropriate distribution of the costs as a result of forest volume harvest reductions.
Table 4: Forest volumes impacts of SFM
Region/Country
Case study
Forest volume impact
West Coast North America
Clayoquot Sound
30-40% reduction
Nordic Europe
A. Berklund
6-8% reduction
Boreal North America
White River
15% reduction
Boreal North America
Seine River
24% reduction
Sabah, Malaysia
Dermakot
up to 100% reduction
East Kalimantan, Indonesia
STREK Project
9% reduction
Bolivia
Chimanes Forest
24-57% reduction
Eastern Amazonia, Brazil
Paragominas Region
61% reduction
Harvesting and silvicultural system
The harvesting and silvicultural systems will increasingly be blended into one overall system management under the concept of SFM. At the operational level, increasingly the person(s) responsible for harvesting operations must also plan for all the necessary pre- and post-harvesting silvicultural actions as an integral part of the harvesting system. Table 5 summarizes some of the changes in the major silvicultural and harvesting systems. Notice how countries like Indonesia and Malaysia seem to be reversing the systems in opposite directions in their attempts to apply SFM. It is now fairly widely accepted that there is no one "perfect" system which will definitely express SFM; rather, the appropriate system must match the biological and physical factors of the forest area.
A central question for any forest operation is of course the cost impact of adapting to new harvesting and silvicultural systems. Unfortunately, many studies either do not present the cost impacts, and when they do, it is frequently expressed using different terminology. Table 6 presents the information as increase in cost per m^3, loss of profits to loggers, and increase in cost per hectare. The financial impacts are due to a number of factors including: increase in planning costs, pre-harvest inventories, extra efforts to reduce logging damage, changing log utilization standards use of new logging equipment to meet environmental standards, and increased costs of combining silviculture techniques with harvesting techniques, mills have to operate at below capacity. In many cases the cost are rising and unfortunately, the revenue from forest products is not. This creates great difficulties for an industry which is not performing particularly well in comparison with some of
the other industrial sectors.
Table 5: Silvicultural and harvesting systems used in tropical forests
Country
Other countries where variants applied
Old system
Principle characteristics
Emerging systems
Principle characteristics
Brazil
>45 cm DBH
30 year felling cycle
Indonesia
Nepal
Pakistan
Myanmar
Viet Nam
Sri Lanka
India
Malaysia
Philippines
Selective
Felling System
>50 cm DBH partially removed
35 year felling cycle polycyclic
Shelterwood / Enrichment Planting in Dipterocarps
monocyclic 60-70 year felling cycle/15 years for the planted species
Malaysia
India
Pakistan
Uganda
Malaysian Uniform System
> 45 cm DBH monocyclic
Selective Management System
>45 cm DBH polycyclic 25-30 year cuts lower volume removed
Nigeria
Ghana
Trinidad
Côte d'Ivoire
Tropical Shelterwood System
sampling 6 years before final fellings.
60-80% of commercial basal area frequently removed
Suriname
Regular Management
>35 cm DBH monocyclic
CELOS harvesting and silvicultural system
>35 cm DBH polycyclic 20-25 year cuts
The financial impacts of SFM are real but they do vary greatly from study to study as indicated below. While the financial impact shown in Table 6 are based on the analysis of individual case studies, there seems to be a general consensus that commercial delivered wood costs are rising.
Table 6: Summary of financial impacts of SFM
Region/Country
Case study
Financial impacts (short term)
North America-West Coast
Clayoquot Sound
8-25% cost increase per m^3
Asia-Malaysia
Innoprize Corporation
5% cost increase per m^3
Latin America-Bolivia
Chimanes
35-67% loss in profits to logging contractors
Latin America - Eastern Amazonia, Brazil
Paragominas Region
US$ 72/ha increase
Latin America - Suriname
CELOS
10-20% cost savings
Latin America - Brazil
Precious Woods
0% cost increase per m^3 but assumes more trees as commercial species
Private sector response to SFM
Responsible forest management is becoming part of forest concession agreements and companies are increasingly equipping themselves with qualified personnel and scientific support in order to meet the requirements of modern forest management including pre-harvesting prescriptions, pre-harvesting treatments, best harvesting practices guidelines, and management audits.
Increasingly forest products companies are accepting that SFM is a condition of doing business. The challenge is to ensure that all companies have accepted the concept at the operational scale to ensure that the rules are the same for everyone. Otherwise, there is a distinct risk that poor environmental practice will be used as a competitive tool by irresponsible companies.
In adopting an SFM strategy there are still serious challenges for the wood products industry. First, many forest concession agreements are too short in terms of time, frequently incomplete and contain too many risk factors. Second, there is a serious lack of studies to determine the appropriate fiscal incentives necessary to change to new harvesting and silvicultural systems. Third, there is insufficient discussion between governments, industry, communities and NGOs on the appropriate sharing of the social costs of adopting SFM.
FAO's contribution to the debate
Law, policy and technical information
FAO has been very active in forest and conservation law reform in many developing and transition countries. Since 1992 FAO has been advising member countries on reforms to their forest laws that also promote SFM principles (see Table 7).
Table 7: Countries where FAO has provided assistance in law reform
Africa
Asia/Middle East
Latin America
Europe
Benin
Indonesia
Bolivia
Armenia
Burkina Faso
Jordan/Syria
Trinidad/Tobago
Cyprus
Cape Verde
Fiji
Cuba
Romania
Congo
Laos
Suriname
Latvia
Guinea
Cambodia
Mali
Myanmar
Morocco
Nepal
Mauritania
Tonga
Mozambique
Yemen
Namibia
Bhutan
Tanzania
Uganda
Policy dialogue is a major role of the FAO and there are a number of means to facilitate it. At the global level, every two years the FAO Committee on Forestry (COFO) brings together the heads of forest services and other senior government officials to identify emerging issues and to advise FAO on a course of action. FAO also convenes Regional Forestry Commission meetings, international meetings of ministers responsible for forestry and representatives of non-governmental, environmental and development organizations and leaders of the private forest industries to follow up on the UNCED process.
Wood certification
FAO is closely associated with certification issues, both in relation to forest management and to trade. In particular FAO has been involved in efforts to determine how forest management standards may be assessed; what should be evaluated; and what the market effects of certification may be. It also has been closely involved with the development of national-level criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management, a subject that some see as having linkages to certification.
FAO will continue to monitor activities and provide technical input into certification efforts in order to ensure that schemes are soundly based and that their implications are carefully considered. Where appropriate it will carry out studies, and provide information and advice on both forest management and trade aspects of the subject. It will encourage the development of well considered, technically-sound, effective, certification schemes.
Further work is needed before effective, acceptable system(s), which are mutually compatible, are available. Some of the areas needing increased attention are:
· further analysis of all aspects (from in-forest to in-market), including the evaluation of certification schemes that have been in place for a period of time in order to learn from their experience and to ensure that mis-use does not occur;
· increased analysis of the likely benefits and limitations of certification, and greater clarity on what its likely impacts may be, including its impacts on trade;
· continuation of trials to determine what factors should be assessed in order to evaluate forest management and how they can be reliably measured;
· development of effective and accurate procedures for tracking wood from the forest to the market (i.e. chain of custody);
· agreement on such issues as who should carry out certification; what the basis of the certification should be; who should issue certificates; who should assess certifiers competence;
· evaluation of the role of the various groups, in particular the role of governments;
· analysis of the degree to which there are linkages between national and management unit level criteria and indicators, and between the latter and forest product certification;
· further efforts to develop stronger linkages between the certification systems that are being developed, and to reach broad agreement and where possible mutual recognition, of alternative schemes in order to limit conflicts. A basic need is to achieve a degree of international and regional agreement on sound approaches to sustainable forestry.
Technical information
FAO is organizing the XI World Forestry Congress. The general theme is "Forestry for Sustainable Development: Towards the Twenty-first Century". It is expected that the Congress will have a broad participation and outreach, considering the current debate on forests within the follow-up to UNCED. The timing of the Congress, just after the conclusion of the tasks of CSD's Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests and the comprehensive review of Agenda 21 by a special session of the UN General Assembly, makes the Congress the logical venue to look at the follow-up in sustainable forestry development.
FAO also seeks specialized technical advice on policy through various standing committees on forest gene resources, forest products and through ad hoc working groups on priority issues. Examples are the Advisory Committee and Paper and Wood Products and the very recent Working Group on Forest Sector Outlook Studies.
In late 1995, the FAO Forestry Department initiated the Global Fibre Supply Study with an outlook to the year 2050. The general objective of the study is to contribute reliable data, information and analysis of industrial fibre sources. The study includes a compilation of the latest available inventory data, including recovered and non-wood fibre, focusing primarily on the sources of industrial fibre as raw material for the sawmilling, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper industries. It will also include a projection and analysis of future developments in fibre supply, based on explicit consideration of the major factors affecting supply.
The Organization undertakes a global forest assessment every 10 years, highlighting forest cover, deforestation and forest degradation. The next assessment will be published in the year 2000 and will be known as FRA 2000. FAO also regularly provided information on wood products production, trade, regional and world forest outlook studies and forest sector studies. The Yearbook of Forest Products is a well-known example of statistics on products and trade, the Asia-Pacific study is the current regional forest outlook study and the Provisional Outlook Study for global forest products consumption, production and trade is an example of model development for world outlook studies.
One of the key elements of non-wood forest products is the gathering, analysis and dissemination of key technical information on non-wood forest products. The overall aim is to enhance the sustainable utilization of non-wood forest products in order to contribute to the management of the world's forest and the conservation of their biodiversity, and to improve food and income security for rural people.
Technical assistance at the management unit level
FAO offers technical assistance to developing countries to help create and implement policies and technologies on SFM. Currently, the FAO is active in some 250 forestry technical assistance projects in 90 countries. Technical projects level assistance covers most dimensions of SFM (Harcharik 1995).
In addition, FAO also develops practical field manuals, analyses sustainable utilization of forest resources and assists in ongoing wood-worker training programmes. These activities are in some respects the most important since SFM has to be translated into the operational setting. This means that resources such as trees and non-wood products will be utilized but at a sustainable level.
FAO is also attempting to offer more practical guidance in SFM. Following are a few examples of projects which attempt to provide such guidance.
Environmentally sound harvesting practices - Congo
This is a case study on forest harvesting in natural forests of the south Congo has just been completed. The study report is part of a series of case studies published by FAO in the field of forest harvesting. The study was carried out in cooperation with a private contractor operating a concession. It is the first one carried out by the FAO in collaboration with a private industrial enterprise. The objective of the study was the establishment of reliable data on a ground harvesting system in the tropics, using power saws, crawler tractors and wheeled skidders. The case study consisted of a study inventory, a harvesting recovery analysis, and a harvesting impact assessment.
Environmentally sound harvesting practices - Brazil
The objective of the Brazilian study was to thoroughly document and establish data on environmentally sound forest harvesting associated with careful planning of every phase of the harvesting operations in the tropical natural forest of the Amazon in Brazil. This type of harvesting was compared with the traditional harvesting system used in the region. Another aim was to establish the applicability of the FAO Model Code for each phase of harvesting. In conducting the study FAO worked with a forest products company whose aim is to demonstrate the economic viability of SFM integrated with a wood processing industry.
Model code of forest harvesting
FAO has just recently developed a Model code of forest harvesting practices with the aim to assist FAO member countries to consider the adoption or revision of their own codes of practice and promote environmentally sound forest operations world-wide. The practical means to achieve is by adopting low impact felling systems, new wood harvesting systems and appropriate road development.
Handbook on tropical forest management
Currently the FAO is in the process of developing a handbook for tropical forest management. The objective is to provide practitioners with a manual which will take the principles of SFM and translate them into practical methods for field practice. This will include suggestions on issues such as regulating harvest or sustainable yield, maintaining a continuous forest inventory, and road and skidtrail construction.
Major challenges ahead
Law, policy and technical information
Most reports still concur that population growth will continue, albeit at a slower rate in richer countries, and that there is a shortage of productive land in the poorer countries for agriculture and wood production. Also there is still a frequent lack of land use planning, for example of converting land from forest to agricultural production and finally, poor enforcement of forest laws.
For the policy-maker, there is still a serious lack of reliable up-to-date information on forest resources. Frequently, for example, forest inventories are old or of poor quality. Therefore planning for the future still requires policy-makers to make many dubious assumptions until there are significant steps taken, such as those by Indonesia, to create a reliable inventory system.
Technical assistance at the management unit level
At the management unit level there continues to be irresponsible forest practices which can only be explained by weak regulatory control, corruption or lack of long-term guarantees for forest supply. In many regions there continues to be ineffective market mechanisms in log distribution which can lead to monopolistic pricing, unfair distribution of economic rents and poor forest management practices.
Changes are and will have to continue to take place in how the forest products industry defines its role in the communities in which it operates. For example, a major forest products company announced on April 9, 1997 a joint venture forest company with an indigenous group in western Canada in which the indigenous group will own 51 percent of the shares. Many more arrangements of this nature will likely happen in the future. Likewise, rural communities will also be much more involved with forest products firms in decision-making, particularly in single industry towns. Building new arrangements will take time and mutual trust of the stakeholders.
Finally, there is a lack of field data and field demonstrations of the impact of SFM and how it can be achieved in practical terms. To address this weakness closer cooperation is required between the industry, government, local people and NGOs. It also means information will have to be more freely shared which can only happen in an atmosphere of mutual trust and cooperation.
Conclusions
Given the preponderance of legal and policy initiatives that include SFM, it is likely that international institutions, such as the World Bank, FAO and UNDP, and country aid agencies, such as the ODA, SIDA, FINNIDA, CIDA, GTZ and many others, will become even more involved in supporting SFM at the management unit level.
The FAO Forest Department is actively trying to contribute to the discussion of SFM but with increasing budgetary constraints it needs to work in stronger partnerships with other institutions, public agencies and most certainly the private sector. Cooperation is not an option, it is a necessity.
By examining case studies, the impacts of SFM at the management unit level produces different results under different conditions. While it is clear that in most cases there is an impact, each forest company will have to determine for their own particular circumstance what change, if any, in timber volume harvested can be anticipated, and what the change in the many financial costs will be under SFM. It will then be necessary to have discussions with governments, aid agencies, NGOs and international institutions on how to distribute the impact of these changes. Private sector companies should not have to bear all the immediate impacts. In the long run, everyone benefits from the application of SFM.
It is also clear from the information presented that some countries are seriously engaged in efforts to ensure that the forest are managed sustainably and that practical progress is being achieved. By giving recognition to this progress, hopefully more forest companies and forest landowners (governments, investors, individuals and communities) will take up the challenge to implement the concept of SFM in all forest operations. The FAO will continue to play a vital role in translating the SFM vision into a reality.
References
Bull G., Williams J. and Duinker P. 1996. The future contribution of the global temperate and boreal forests to the sustainable paper cycle. Report prepared for the International Institute of Environment and Development: Sustainable Paper Cycle Project. London, UK.
FAO. 1997a. State of the World's Forests Report. Rome, Italy (Draft).
FAO. 1997b. Handbook for the Management of Tropical Forest Management. Rome, Italy (Draft).
FAO. 1975. Management Possibilities of Tropical High Forest in Africa. FO/75, Rome, Italy.
Harcharik, D. 1995. Promoting Sustainable Forest Management: Journal of Forestry 93(10): 18-20.
Lanly, J.P. 1995. Sustainable Forest Management: Lessons of History and Recent Developments. Unasylva 46(182): 38-45.
Prabhu R. et al. 1996. Testing Criteria and Indicators for the Sustainable Management of Forests: phase 1. Final report. Centre for International Forest Research. Indonesia.
Williams, J. 1997. Impacts of Sustainable Forest Management on Global Fibre Supply. Background Report. Prepared for the Global Fibre Supply Study. FAO Forestry Department (Draft).
An example from a developed country - USA
Henson W. Moore
American Pulp and Paper Association, Washington D.C.
Introduction
AF&PA is about to issue the second Annual Progress Report. For the first time it has been possible to compare data and the results are quite positive:
The number of loggers trained more than doubled - from 3 300 to 7 800.
Trained loggers delivered over 60 percent of the raw material used to make paper and wood products, compared to 34 percent in 1995.
The number of non-industrial private foresters receiving information on sustainable forestry grew from 35 300 in 1995 to over 40 000 in 1996.
Member companies spent US$ 61.9 million on research related to forestry, wildlife and the environment - a 17.6 percent increase over the 1995 figure.
The average size of clear-cuts declined from 66 acres in 1995 to 61 acres in 1996.
Total acres reforested in 1996 equalled 1.2 million. This was about the same level as 1995, so a trend is not yet seen.
This is the first time this type of data have been collected in the US. More information will enable AF&PA to continually improve its programme and measure the progress.
Market pressures
Public expectations regarding the management of US forests has grown dramatically. A more educated and aware public now demands that industry be better stewards of the forest resource. Forest management is no longer simply cutting trees - rather, it is essential to manage for multiple societal values such as wildlife, biodiversity, aesthetics, and water quality protection. In other words, the power of the American public to withdraw AF&PA's social license to continue managing forests is not underestimated. Therefore, their demands must be met.
Growing consumer awareness is now impacting the market. A growing number of contractors, architects and retailers are looking for supplies of "sustainably produced" forest products. Government procurement policies are written to favour "environmentally preferable" products. The inter-governmental dialogue is focusing on "market based incentives" to encourage sustainable forest management. Not only is caring for the environment the right thing to do, there is mounting pressure by government and businesses to address the issue.
Through the SFI, AF&PA is working to respond to public concerns, and the response has been positive. However, the global market place will demand that other producers take similar steps as well. If the American public demands accountability and responsibility from its own industry, foreign suppliers will face similar pressures.
International cooperation
As industry is globally changing, new and better ways of cooperation are continuously being sought even though there is the need sometimes to operate under very different cultural, political and social systems - this means that all concerned cannot and should not approach sustainability in the same way. Although the destination is a common one, the paths to take to get there will necessarily be different.
The forest products industry has now participated in three meetings of the International Forestry Roundtable process. Last year in Chile, ten countries met to discuss industry's vision and principles of sustainable forestry. Just as the chemical industry globally came to agreement on a set of environment and health and safety standards through the Responsible Care programme, the forest products industry also needs to agree on the basic vision and principle behind sustainable forestry. AF&PA will continue to work with its counterparts globally to ensure this happens.
An example from a developing country - Ghana
Fosuaba A. Mensah Banahene
Ghana Timber Millers Organization, Kumasi
Introduction
Forest resources of Ghana
The High Forest Zone, which is virtually natural forest, covers an area of 8.2 million ha, approximately one-third of the total land area of Ghana. The High Forest occurs in the south-west portion of Ghana, extending northwards to reach the upland evergreen areas of Ashanti region and western parts of Brong Ahafo region. The High Forest in Ghana consists of the wet evergreen rainforest and the moist semi-deciduous forest.
Available studies indicate that 1 634 100 ha of the high forest are under reserves. Of this, 352 500 ha (21.5 percent) are under permanent protection while 762 400 ha are designated timber production area. Information about off-reserve areas is sparse but it is generally accepted that there are about 400 000 ha of forest in off-reserves.
The present state of the forests requires that an intensive management plan be put in place to reduce the high rate of degradation. Of the 352 000 ha of protected forests, as much as 32 percent degradation has occurred and efforts are being made to rehabilitate 122 000 ha of that. On the whole, the forest of Ghana contains a standing volume of 188 million m^3 of wood and it has a natural growth rate of 4.6 million m^3 at an increment rate of 4 m^3/ha/year.
Plantations
Plantation forestry is relatively new in Ghana. Currently, there are some 40 000 ha of plantation consisting of about 15 000 ha planted by the Forestry Department and the rest by forest industry firms and a large numbers of small holdings with teak as the main species. The annual yield from these is 50 000 m^3 but this is expected to increase with the years as more companies and individuals have intensified activities in commercial planting.
Land ownership patterns
In Ghana, all the land belongs to the traditional stools (chieftaincy) but they have been vested in the President of Ghana to be managed on their behalf. Legally, this means that land owners have lost the right to allocated the resource but do retain the right to benefit from the resource. The system, therefore, allows for traditional landholding authorities (stools) to hold allodial title to land on behalf of the people. Members of the landholding group have usufruct rights and may permanently appropriate a portion of land. Migrants in a particular traditional area may, however, acquire land by outright purchase or by leasing, usually under customary law.
There is a great difficulty in coming up with a system of land use acceptable to all. However, the Ministry of Lands and Forestry has over the last five years been working on land use policy. The policy is expected to be announced soon.
Contribution of forests to economy of Ghana
The importance of the timber industry can be examined from several angles but for the moment, we may consider the employment benefits and contribution to GDP.
About 75 000 adults/household heads were employed in the industry as at 1994 while 2 million people lived off the industry (TEDB 95). This situation has changed since 1996 with the industry now employing 100 000 household heads and not less than 3 million people depend upon the industry for their livelihood.
In a country where the level of unemployment is as high as 20 percent, the industry's ability to maintain such a level of employment is very significant.
Foreign earnings from the sector have also been rising over the years. For instance, in 1994 timber exports contributed 18 percent to total external earnings of Ghana. In 1990, the overall contribution of the forestry sector to GDP was 5.1 percent. In 1995, timber exports alone contributed US$ 230 million which was 11 percent total export earnings. Export earnings from Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) are rising steadily and constitute a new area of employment for Ghanaians.
Without doubt, the forest industry has the potential to increase its contribution to the country's economy but this can be realised only when more enabling policies are put in place and industry also moves rapidly into further processing.
Sustainable forest management
Historical background on sylvicultural and harvesting practice
Forest management has been practised in Ghana since the closing decade of the twentieth century but it was not until 1927 that the legal power to enforce reservation was secured. Since then, a consistent policy of selection, demarcation and reservation has been vigorously pursued. By the end of 1978, about 3 267 250 ha of forests had been placed under permanent forest estate.
From 1900, the granting of concessions to companies for timber exploitation began. Game production reserves and wildlife sanctuaries were created. There exist five national parks, two of which are located in the tropical forest zone. In all these areas, timber exploitation is forbidden by law.
Various sylvicultural systems have been practised including the normal logging effects on silviculture in selected areas. In the 1950s the Tropical Shelterwood System was experimentally tried but it was abandoned because it was not cost-effective. It consisted in eliminating the uneconomic trees while allowing the rest to grow into maturity. Various methods, including poisoning of the trees, were used to reach the goal. Taungya system which was copied from Southeast Asia at the beginning of the century is also used but mainly for plantation programmes. Almost all the plantations set up by the Forestry Department were through the taungya system. Farmers were encouraged to farm at the selected areas, especially hillsides, and while their foodcrops were growing, planting of trees was also carried out. This practice is randomly performed even today by individuals and most rural communities and it is expected that the Forestry Department would revive the system as it gears up its
activities to increasingly improve Ghana's forest. It may be necessary to recommend this practice to the companies that have begun to set up plantations.
Financial and other incentives for SFM
Incentives have long been thought of by the government as a way of motivating forest exploiters and others to respond favourably to the needs of forest protection and conservation. In 1993, the government commissioned IIED to conduct a study into this area and the results re-emphasised the need to inject varied forms of incentive systems into the quest for a more efficient system for sustainable management of the forest.
In addition to royalty payments and other forest fees, there is the need to actively engage the rural people, the forest dwellers, to participate in forest protection and improvement systems. To be able to achieve this, the Forestry Department has embarked upon a number of approaches including programmes such as Collaborative Forestry, Social Responsibility Systems, etc. It is most important to recognise that without bringing in the rural people on whose land the forest grows, any effort to significantly improve the forest will not succeed.
Involving the local people means making them see the forest as an economic asset which they owe in partnership with others and that, if they took good care of the forest along the lines of sustainability, as put forward by the government, they would reap financial gains. This is what has been called the "joint-forest system". Already, one of the leading timber companies in Ghana, Ghana Primewood, has undertaken a "joint-forest management" project with the people Gwira Banso in the western region of Ghana. The Project is supported by DANIDA and already there are verifiable indications that the local people's interest will crystallise in improved sustainable forest management in that area.
Incentives need not only be given to the rural people alone. All other actors on the forest scene must be considered. If industry will need to accept a far greater responsibility for the resource, it is obvious that it will also need to have some incentives. Incentives such as deregulation, participation in policy formulation and financial allowances in the form of investment packages of low interest rates are recommended. There are indications that the government is evolving a system, though slowly and not-transparent enough, towards benefits in direct proportion to responsibility and for this, industry looks forward to its attainment in reality.
Above all, there is the need to adequately equip the Forestry Department and for this the government has been very slow in doing it. The Department lacks logistics which will enable them to put into practice the many action plans it has designed. Vehicles, buildings and tools, are in great demand for the successful implementation of management plans.
New harvesting practices
Responsible harvesting has become a necessary ingredient in sustainable forest management in Ghana. To the extent that proper procedures would be adopted by both District/Technical Officers of the Forestry Department, as well as concessionaires for operators in the forest, the Planning Branch of the Forestry Department provided a "Handbook of Harvesting Rules for Sustainable Management of Tropical High Forest in Ghana" in 1992. The book serves as a guide to all forest exploiters to enable them bring their practices in keeping with the sustainable forest management plans. Issues discussed in the book range from planning considerations through operational considerations to environmental considerations. In line with recent studies, the policy document of the Ministry of Lands and Forestry places a maximum limit on an annual harvesting volume of timber. The Master Plan directs that only 500 000 m^3 and between 300 000 m^3 and 500 000 m^3 of the resource can be harvested annually
from the reserves and off-reserves, respectively. Even though studies are incomplete especially with the Off-Reserves, the Forestry Department has already begun implementation of an interim measures which set the Annual Allowable Cut (AAC) at 1.0 million m^3. This AAC figure is, indeed, a recommendation by the UK Forestry Commission to the Forestry Department. As a matter of fact, the Forestry Department had set 807 000 m^3 for the AAC. It is the considered opinion of the Forestry Department that any level of harvesting beyond this will not make management of Ghana's forests sustainable. Within one year of the implementation of this policy (1995-1996), export volume dropped by 34 percent.
The "Harvesting Rules" sets standards for harvesting and the schedule requires the concessionaire to produce a Logging Plan which ensures that the expected operation is in line with the management plans. Yield is also regulated according to the trend in a stock survey which is carried out prior to the allocation of the concession. The operational plan of the concessionaire should contain schedules of construction of logging roads, bridges, culverts, skidding tracks and also the felling activity. All these will have to be approved by the District Forestry Office (DFO) and then by the Regional Forestry Officer (RFO) before permit to fell can be issued to the concessionaire. In addition, the concessionaire must comply with environmental standards set by the Forestry Department. These include the use of environment-friendly equipment, felling of specified species, respecting protected areas such as sanctuaries and headwaters. Lastly, the concessionaire must practise safety
standards in his operations and there are rules that must be followed. Recently, the Forestry Department introduced further measures to ensure effective management of the forest, especially when illegal fellings intensified.
Without doubt, the management plans for the sustainable development of Ghana's forests cannot fail to succeed conservation-wise if these plans are carried through. However, it is the view of the private sector (industry) that sustainability programmes should also ensure that forest industry is enhanced. It is important that the views of those who are the real implementers of the plans are incorporated in the plans. The timber industry association's critical objection to certain aspects of the measures were addressed to the Forestry Department but action towards them are either in piecemeal or are moving at very slow pace or in some areas totally ignored.
Future wood supply to industry
Future supply of wood to industry is very precarious. The implementation of the maximum AAC of 1 million m^3 is obviously going to affect the supply of logs to the mills because the capacity of the processing plants far exceeds what the AAC allows. In recent times, the Ministry of Lands and Forestry has indicated that there would be the need to reduce the capacity of the processing plants by a minimum of 33 percent. It was indicated in 1993 that the installed capacity of the mills was in the order of 2 000 000 m^3 year and that this was well in excess of what can be sustained by the resource.
But the demand for timber has increased over the past five years, especially for domestic consumption. With increasing demand from housing industry which is receiving a boom, timber and wood supply has become a brisk business. It is estimated that domestic needs of timber is in the region of 1 500 000 m^3 as at 1995 (excluding what is used directly in the villages). Some analysts even believe higher figures are involved. Wood exports in 1995 amounted to 547 000 m^3.
It needs, therefore, no imagination to realise that supply of timber or wood will experience an acute shortfall in the wake of the implementation of the new AAC. Some have opined that it is the intention of the Ministry of Lands and Forestry to force skewed supply system so that some companies will naturally fall out in order to reduce the capacity. But the point is that the demand will not abate and this will lead to increased illegal activities to deplete the forest. The issue is a big one and it is important that all parties be involved in designing an effective strategy to counteract it.
Forest depletion
Ghana experiences deforestation like most countries in Africa. The Sahara desert is said to be advancing southwards at a threatening rate and this translates into increased savanisation of the forest areas.
Deforestation is, indeed, a phenomenon occasioned by the increase in the number of human beings. There are more mouths to feed than 50 years ago when the population of Ghana was less than 6 million. Fanning activities have increased and demand for energy has also increased. It is estimated that farming and woodfuel (including charcoal) procurement accounts for 79 percent of all the removals from the forest. Indeed, the Ministry of Mines and Energy has it on official record that the charcoal industry and woodfuel account for 15 million m^3 of trees removed annually from the forest. At the per caput consumption rate of about 1 m^3 of fuelwood and 0.2 m^3 of charcoal, the production in 1980 can be estimated at 11 500 000 m^3. Probably, if measures were to be taken to curtail this unacceptable level of woodfuel and charcoal consumption, the rate of forest destruction would be reduced to manageable levels.
Social aspects of sustainable forest management
The Government of Ghana envisages that as management plans are implemented, social needs would emerge and they would need to be addressed since the government policy seeks also to see "all segments of society benefit from the sustainable development" of the forest resources.
The rationale behind the government policy is that when others are removed from the management system, their actions, wilful or otherwise, will adversely affect the sustainable forest management plans. Therefore, as it has been pointed out earlier, it is necessary to get all parties, especially local people, involved in the process. But for local people, it is only when the forests have real value to them will they see the need to cooperate in efforts to protect and manage the forest. The 1994 Forest and Wildlife Policy makes adequate provision to attract the local people to participate in forest management. Looking at the thrust of the emerging policies in the forest sector, local people will in future be offered the opportunity to share in the financial wealth of trees in their own farm. Currently, farmers are compensated financially when commercial trees on their farms are felled. There is now a growing propensity among local people to strive to provide ingenuous ideas
towards forest protection. In addition to this, timber firms operating in the forests provide a lot of social needs for the people. Indeed, a "social responsibility" performance requirement is to be part of the new concession law being prepared.
Forest certification in Ghana
What is forest certification?
Forest certification has engaged the attention of the government of Ghana for the past three years. Several consultations have been made both inside and outside the country and there are already measures under way to address the issue. Ghana's approaches have been guided by its understanding of what certification means. Forest certification is the assessment of management quality of a specified forest by a single organization against an acceptable international standard. It is seen as an effort towards effective sustainability of the forest. In the view of industry, the purpose of forest certification is so crucial that its execution should not be left in the arena of marketing alone. As a marketing tool, certification risks failure if the efficiency of the market place declines. In other words, an environmental issue cannot be adequately addressed by relying on the dictates of market.
However, looking at the general movement and direction of certification, this view of industry in Ghana is less popular.
Ghanaian approaches
Ghana has adopted the approach of sensitising grassroots perceptions and with that build a consensus for national initiative. A national Workshop was held in June 1996 for all stakeholders. At this Workshop, an important initiative was adopted and that was the setting up of a National Certification Committee, comprising a wide spectrum of stakeholder representation. From the National Committee, a National Technical Committee was appointed to design standards for certification in Ghana.
The National Certification has held two meetings since and will soon meet to discuss the interim report of the National Technical Committee. The standards will be widely discussed before adopting a final set of standards and criteria. It is desired that those standards be in conformity with FSC Principles, ITTO Guidelines and ISO Format though they will maintain unique character reflecting the special circumstances of Ghana.
Issues that have been discussed
Some of the issues that have been and continue to be discussed are:
· voluntary, transparent and non-discriminatory nature of certification;
· cost-effectiveness, credibility and purposefulness;
· who pays for the certification cost;
· national and international standards conformity;
· need for chain of custody;
· accreditation and local bodies' readiness to certify;
· trade impacts and national economy;
· can certification adequately promote sustainability process.
All these are major issues and it takes time to reach acceptable solutions.
Regional workshop on certification
Owing to Ghana's critical approach to certification, it has been the focus of international interest in the subregion which culminated in the holding of a regional workshop in Accra in November 1996.
The workshop took a critical appraisal of forest certification and assessed individual country approaches, sharing strengths and discouraging weaknesses. Major conclusions were:
· certification should be a step-by-step approach in Africa;
· standards must cover both performance (operations) and process (policies);
· national peculiarities should be accommodated in the standards;
· local technical competence should be strengthened and increased;
· cost-sharing should be initially practised by both sellers and buyers;
· consuming North should be informed that "Africa is on its way";
· boycott-happy countries should back out;
· donor-agencies should offer financial packages to propel take-off;
· pilot projects should be set up to demonstrate practice;
· local people should be educated.
Conclusion
It is most important for all to recognise that the forest is a national heritage that must be protected in the interest of society but, at the same time, it is an economic resource that must be exploited for the good of the same society. This dual-quality of the forest creates tension and it is the expectation of posterity that the present generation will employ its immense knowledge and wisdom to carve a credible path for ensuring the sustained presence of the forest to serve mankind at all times.
Whether it is economic exploitation or species conservation, there is a responsibility to ensure that social and national needs are not unduly destroyed or even frustrated for the world and all that it contains is meant for the good of mankind.
<section>q</section>
THE GLOBAL FIBRE SUPPLY STUDY (GFSS)
Technical briefings
Olman Serrano
Forest Products Division, FAO, Rome
Technical briefings
The global wood shortage - Is there a way out?
Will there be a wood shortage? Several studies on global supply and demand on fibre and wood products have been produced within the last decade in order to address this question.
None of the studies, with the exception of the FAO Forest Resources Assessment, are based on inventory data. Instead, most use models based on past production and consumption to quantify fibre availability. Those studies which have emphasized the forest resource have generally concluded that there is a distinct possibility of a global wood shortage. Other studies, using an econometric approach, argue that price will always adjust supply sources to eliminate any possible shortfall.
Long-term trends and prospects in world supply and demand for wood
European Forest Institute (EFI)
"World forests are biologically capable of supplying the quantity and type of wood consistent with the highest demand projections."
The horns of the dilemma is well illustrated by the above box and the previous section "The global wood shortage". The message conveyed by previous studies varies from "no fibre crises" to "global shortage", depending on the underlying methodology.
"Fibre supply" has to be understood as the availability of wood, recovered paper and non-wood fibre for the production of sawn timber, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper.
In 1995, in order to obtain more reliable information on supply, the Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products (ACPWP) recommended that FAO carry out the Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS).
The first steps taken to implement this study were presented in the ACPWP meeting held in Marrakech, in April 1996.
The GFSS is guided by a Steering Committee, which is chaired by Mr Kevin Lyden (CEO Shotton Paper Company plc), co-chaired by Mrs Lise Lachapelle, President of the Canadian Pulp and Paper Association, and includes other industry representatives. Its main task is to advise and monitor the work in progress.
The GFSS forms an integral part of the FAO Forestry Department Outlook Studies. It will provide information on estimated commercial forest volumes, based on the most recent inventory reports and other primary data sources. Relevant data and trends on recovered paper and non-wood fibre have been addressed in the database.
The major phases are: the development of a database at a country level, the production of background documents on factors affecting fibre supply, and the production of future projections up to the year 2050 (with emphasis on likely developments up to the year 2010).
The GFSS and the FAO Global Forest Products Model, will be the background model and documentation for a Global Outlook on supply and demand. With this information, FAO will produce a final report on the implications for global forest policy.
Land Use under GFSS
The diagram above describes the underlying land classification scheme used in GFSS. The classification of "forest" has been broken down into area available and unavailable for wood supply.
The GFSS attempts to delineate between these two types of forest at the national level, by eliminating any forest land that is legally protected or inaccessible for any reason. All available literature has been reviewed to make estimates of the areas that are unavailable.
With this classification scheme, it is possible to make an initial estimate of volumes that are likely to be commercially available.
Progress
Preliminary GFSS estimates of commercial growing stock are currently in place for all countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. For countries in the CIS region, the area and volume information was obtained from the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). European data will come from primarily the ETTS V inventory project. North American inventories will be taken from previously compiled sources.
A Working Group meeting was organized in Rome, 24-25 February 1997, with the participation of a number of international experts on industrial fibre supply and outlook studies. A methodology for supply forecasting is under development. The model has been tested using sample data from three countries and it is expected to be completed early this summer.
Projected Future Fibre Supply - Indonesia under current trends
The example above is a preliminary projection of Indonesia's future fibre supply, following current trends, using data found in the GFSS database.
Several key points should be considered:
· Under current trends, the natural forest area available for wood supply will be at least partially harvested by the year 2030. Some of this area will be transformed into semi-natural forest, while the remainder will have been permanently turned to agricultural uses.
· By the year 2050, industrial plantations are expected to become the major source of wood fibre for Indonesia.
· Short-term projections cannot be considered sufficient for planning purposes. The projected fibre supply composition in 2010 using the GFSS model is not significantly different from that of 1996; however, by 2030, fibre supply composition changes dramatically.
Effects of Wood Type on Supply - Indonesia
The type of wood being considered can be related to the reference diameter class used in volume estimates. Here is an illustration of the dramatic impact that diameter class can have on forecasting fibre volume.
For Indonesia, the cumulative difference between fibre supply projections based at 10 cm and 50 cm is over 1.8 billion m^3.
The end uses of the wood will dictate the appropriate diameter class to use. In countries where industry is mostly concerned with large-diameter sawlogs, for example, the fibre supply projections should be based on the 50 cm diameter class. However, where industry can make use of pulpwood and small diameter sawlogs, the 10 cm diameter class is appropriate as a reference.
The choice of reference diameter class leads to differences in the estimating of available commercial fibre supply.
Background studies
Draft background studies have been completed on factors affecting fibre supply, such as sustainable forest management, material efficiency, tree improvement for industrial forest plantations and recovered and non-wood fibres.
Investigations into the relationship between reference diameter class and volume are continuing. We aim at developing equations to translate volumes at different diameter classes.
An analysis of the harvesting and logging residues statistics will be initiated in May. The logging residues statistics will be useful in filling the gap between commercial growing stock and the Forest Products Yearbook statistics.
A study on land use change will analyze the extent and rate of converting forest land into agricultural land. This work intends to act as a verification of our deforestation assumptions by analyzing the projection being made for agricultural land increases.
Issues
Several key issues have been identified by the GFSS team.
· Data validation. Input from governments, private sector, and NGOs is essential in order to improve the validity of GFSS. Each of these parties is invited to critique and improve upon supply estimates. To do this, a series of regional discussions in key countries is suggested.
· Policy development. It is important to sensitize governments to the importance of GFSS for policy development. The depth of the data search, in conjunction with the scope of the model, has made GFSS an invaluable tool in creating future forest policy.
· Forest resources information. The information provided by the GFSS model is only as good as the database behind the numbers. Continued efforts towards improving forest data will result in better future fibre supply projections.
<section>r</section>
XI WORLD FORESTRY CONGRESS
Jacques Lahaussois
World Forestry Congress Coordinating Unit, FAO, Rome
The XI World Forestry Congress will take place in Antalya, Turkey from 13 to 22 October 1997 at the invitation of the Government of Turkey.
The current state of the world's forests, water, soil and air resources is a vital issue to mankind. These issues are not confined within national borders. During the coming years, the well-being, the health and the quality of life of the people and nations of our planet will be depending on our understanding of these vital problems and of efficient international response in terms of cooperation and collaboration to solve them.
Increasing deforestation, desertification and related poverty as well as forest fires and pollution, result not only in land degradation of the natural resource base but also in the loss of biodiversity. Therefore, when forests are properly managed in a sustainable way they provide many benefits to the people, to national economies and to the environment such as timber, fuelwood, oxygen, protection of soil, water resources and habitat conservation. Failure to implement sustainable forest management programmes and practices will result in major negative consequences such as floods, climate change, pollution and acid rains as well as loss of biological diversity and destruction of landscape.
For these reasons, the general theme chosen for the Congress is "Forestry for Sustainable Development: Towards the Twenty-first Century". It is expected that the XI World Forestry Congress will have a broader participation and outreach, considering the current debate on forests within the follow-up to UNCED and the interest of people from many disciplines and backgrounds in forest issues, the opportunities for broader dissemination and for a dialogue provided by electronic communication and the fact that the venue for the Congress, Turkey, constitutes a bridge between not only two continents but also between North and South.
The technical programme for the Congress, after consultation with forestry administrations in all countries, as well as with international governmental and non-governmental organizations interested in forestry and related matters, has been structured in seven main programme areas which follow the seven basic criteria of sustainable forest management. As many of those consulted thought that, a combination of both approaches by subject-matter and by eco-region would be desirable, a number of sessions will be devoted to sustainable forest management in six different major types of forests.
The technical programme, therefore, is made up of 38 topics which cover those issues that have dominated the international debate since the last congress and which require a response and new directions from technical people, both in the forestry profession and in other disciplines, that can contribute to sustainable development in forestry.
<section>s</section>
APPENDIX 1 - LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
Austria
László Forgó
AUSTROPAPIER
Gumpendorferstr. 6
A-1060 Vienna
Tel: (+43 1) 58886216
Fax: (+43 1) 58886222
e-mail: austropapier@cso.co.at
Brazil
Gabriel Gasparetto (member)
Executive Director
Association of Lumber/Plywood Exporters from Pará
Tv. Quintino Bovaiuva 1588
Belém
Tel: (+55 91) 2244950
Fax: (+55 91) 2225419
e-mail: gabrielg@libnet.com.br
Mario Higino N.M. Leonel
Brazilian National Association of Paper and Celulose
Rua Afonso de Freitas, 499
04006-900 Sao Paulo
Tel: (+55 11) 8851845
Fax: (+55 11) 8893689
Claes Hall
ARACRUZ CELULOSE Services Ltd.
10 Cromwell Place
London SW7 2JN
United Kingdom
Tel: (+44 171) 2252102
Fax: (+44 171) 2253116
Canada
Lise Lachapelle (member)
Canadian Pulp and Paper Association
1155 Metcalfe Street, Sun Life Building
Montreal, Quebec H3B 4T6
Tel: (+1 514) 8666621
Fax: (+1 514) 8663035
David Barron
Canadian Pulp and Paper Association
1155 Metcalfe Street, Sun Life Building
Montreal, Quebec H3B 4T6
Tel: (+1 514) 8666621
Fax: (+1 514) 8663035
e-mail: CPPACDA@IBM.NET
Peter J. Murphy
Professor Emeritus
University of Alberta
Department of Renewable Resources
Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2H1
Tel: (1 403) 4591176
Fax: (1 403) 4924323
Chile
Roberto Delmastro
Corporación Chilena de la Madera (CORMA)
Agustinas 814, Of. 407 Santiago
Tel: (+56 2) 6335728
Fax: (+56 2) 6397485
Colombia
Roberto Silva Salamanca (member)
Smurfit Cartón de Colombia
Puerto Isaacs, Yumbo
P.O. Box 219
Cali
Tel: (+57 2) 6694070
Fax: (+57 2) 4425822
e-mail: rsilv02@ibm.net
Jaime A. Gomez Figari
President
Productora de Papeles S.A.
Antigua Carretera Yumbo (AA 4412)
Cali
Tel: (+57 2) 4425766
Fax: (+57 2) 6699244
Congo
Bertrand Poirier
Eucalyptus du Congo (ECO S.A.)
c/o Universal Express
B.P. 1120
Pointe Noire
Tel: (+871) 682081716
Fax: (+871) 682081718
Czech Republic
Frantisek Nemec
První Investicní A.S.
Belehradská 110
Praha 2
Tel: (+420 2) 6270156
Fax: (+420 2) 6270380
e-mail: nemec@PIAS.CZ
Denmark
Morten Bjorner
Danish Timber Trade Federation (UCBD)
Danks Træforening
P.O. Box 69
DK 2800 Lyngby
Tel: (+45 45) 875400
Fax: (+45 45) 871332
Finland
Claes von Ungern-Sternberg (member)
Finnish Forest Industries Federation
Etelãesplanadi 2
00130 Helsinki
Tel: (+358 9) 1326640
Fax: (+358 9) 174479
Torsten Nykopp
Vice-President
UPM-Kymmene
Snellmanink 13
00170 Helsinki
Tel: (+358 204) 150042
Fax: (+358 204) 150316
France
Jean-Paul Franiatte
Director General
COPACEL
21 avenue de Messine
75008 Paris
Tel: (+33 1) 53892404
Fax:
Jacques Sturm
French Pulp Association
154 Blvd Haussmann
75008 Paris
Tel: (+33 1) 53892430
Fax: (+33 1) 53892431
Bernard Majani
CCI Papercast
5, rue des Gravilliers
75003 Paris
Tel: (+33 1) 42728066
Fax: (+33 1) 42728118
Germany
Peter Otzen (member)
German Pulp and Paper Association
Adenauerallee 55
53113 Bonn
Tel: (+49 228) 2670563
Fax: (+49 228) 2670566
Otto Schlumbohm
SOCOBOIS
Hohenzollernstr. 42
30161 Hannover
Tel: (+49 511) 313665
Fax: (+49 511) 3884494
Ghana
Fosuaba Banahene (member)
Ghana Timber Millers Organization
P.O. Box 4991
Kumasi
Tel: (+233 51) 22983
Fax: (+233 51) 29750
Hungary
Zoltán Szikla (member)
Dunapack Ltd.
Duna u. 42
1215 Budapest
Tel: (+36 1) 2771435
Fax: (+36 1) 2770370
Zsuzsa Antal
Executive Assistant
Dunapack Ltd.
Duna u. 42
1215 Budapest
Tel: (+36 1) 2771435
Fax: (+36 1) 2770370
Italy
Paolo Vicentini
Senior Official
Ministry of Agricultural and Forest Resources
Via G. Carducci, 5
00187 Rome
Tel: (+39 6) 46657051/4818972
Fax: (+39 6) 6754060
Armando Cafiero
Associazione Italiana fra gli Industriali della Carta, Cartoni e Paste per Carta
ASSOCARTA
Roma
Tel: (+39 6) 5919131
Fax: (+39 6) 5910876
Paolo Mattei
Cartiere del GARDA S.p.A.
Viale Rovereto 15
38066 Riva del Garda
Tel: (+39 464) 579111
Fax: (+39 464) 579509
Nicola Malandrino
FEDERLEGNO-Arredo
Via Toscana 10
00187 Rome
Tel: (+39 6) 42828849
Fax: (+39 6) 42817391
Luisa Vicini
FEDERLEGNO-Arredo
Via Toscana 10
00187 Rome
Tel: (+39 6) 42903967
Fax: (+39 6) 42819391
Japan
Kiyoshi Sakai (member)
Japan Paper Association
3-chome, 9-11, Ginza, Chuo-ku
Tokyo 104
Tel: (+81 3) 32484802
Fax: (+81 3) 32484826
Yoshimasa Amari
Japan Paper Association
3-chome, 9-11, Ginza, Chuo-ku
Tokyo 104
Tel: (+81 3) 32484802
Fax: (+81 3) 32484826
Tadahiro Kondo
Japan Paper Association
3-chome, 9-11, Ginza, Chuo-ku
Tokyo 104
Tel: (+81 3) 32484802
Fax: (+81 3) 32484826
Michiko Peters-Sekino
Interpreter
Malaysia
Sheam Satkuru-Granzella
Malaysian Timber Council
24, Old Queen Street
London SW1H 9HQ
United Kingdom
Tel: (+44 171) 2228188
Fax: (+44 171) 2228884
Mas'ut Samah
Chief Executive Officer
Pascorp Paper Industries Sdn.Bhd.
Lot 1A, Bentong Industrial Estate
28700 Bentong, Pahang
Tel: (+60 9) 2223355
Fax: (+60 9) 2222266
Yahaya Ishak
Malaysia Pulp and Paper
Manufacturers Association
Lot 7, Jalan 51A/241
46100 Petaling Jaya
Selangor Darul Ehsan
Tel: (+60 3) 7759549
Fax: (+60 3) 7738435
Mexico
Oscar Alcántara
Director
Cámara Nacional de las Industrias de la Celulosa y del Papel (CNICP)
Privada de San Isidro 30
Col. Reforma Social
11650 México D.F.
Tel: (+52 5) 2028603
Fax: (+52 2) 2021349
Morocco
M'hammed Mezzour (Chairman)
Cellulose du Maroc
B.P. 68
Rabat
Tel: (+212 7) 708305
Fax: (+212 7) 706135
New Zealand
James Griffiths (member)
New Zealand Forest Industries Council
P.O. Box 2727
Wellington
Tel: (+64 4) 4739220
Fax: (+64 4) 4739330
Norway
Oistein Gulbrandsen
Norwegian Pulp and Paper Association
Stensberggf 27
0170 Oslo
Tel: (+47) 22961087
Fax: (+47) 22961089
e-mail: OG@pil.no
Poland
Wiktorian Tarnawski
Professor
Association of Polish Papermarkers
Plac Kamunyu Pariskiej 5a
90-950 Lodz
Tel: (+48 42) 300177
Fax: (+48 42) 324365
e-mail: spp-app@lodz.pdi.net
Portugal
Luis Deslandes (member)
Sociedade Portuguesa de Celulose S.A.
SOPORCEL S.A.
Av. Eng Duarte Pacheco, No. 19
1070 Lisbone
Tel: (+351 1) 3870696
Fax: (+351 1) 3855229
João Soares
Sociedade Portuguesa de Celulose S.A.
SOPORCEL S.A.
Av. Eng Duarte Pacheco, No. 19
1070 Lisbone
Tel: (+351 1) 3873868
Fax: (+351 1) 3855229
South Africa
André Vlok (member)
SAPPI Ltd.
P.O. Box 31560
Braamfontein 2017
Tel: (+27 11) 4078041
Fax: (+27 11) 4031493
Spain
Julio Molleda
Pulp and Paper Consultant
Ríos Rosas 5-56
28003 Madrid
Tel: (+34 1) 4412083
Fax: (+34 1) 4418247
Sweden
Jan Remröd (member)
Swedish Forest Industries Association
Box 5518
S-11485 Stockholm
Tel: (+46 8) 7838424
Fax: (+46 8) 6617306
Jonas Jacobson
ASSI Doman Ltd.
S-10522 Stockholm
Tel: (+46 8) 6559000
Fax: (+46 8) 6559425
United Kingdom
Kevin Lyden (member)
Shotton Paper Co. Pie.
Weighbridge Road, Shotton
Deeside
Tel: (+44 1244) 284112
Fax: (+44 1244) 285002
Bryan Bateman
The Paper Federation of Great Britain
Papermakers House
Rivenhall Road
Swindon, SN5 7BD
Tel: (+44 1793) 886086
Fax: (+44 1793) 886182
United States of America
Henson W. Moore (member)
American Pulp and Paper Association
Washington D.C.
Tel: (+1 202) 4632451
Fax: (+1 202) 4632787
Maureen Smith
Vice President, International
American Pulp and Paper Association
Washington D.C.
Tel: (+1 202) 4632451
Fax: (+1 202) 4632787
Irene Meister
Irene Meister and Associates
239 E 79th Street
New York, N.Y. 10021-0815
Tel: (+1 212) 6288165
Fax: (+1 212) 6288165
OBSERVERS FROM UN/INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
Association Technique International des Bois Tropicaux (ATIBT)
Paolo Gardino
Largo San Giuseppe 3/37
Genova
Italia
Tel: (+39 10) 5701111
Fax: (+39 10) 5701150
Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI)
Klaus W. Grewlich
Av. Louise 306
B-1050 Brussels
Tel: (+32 2) 6274911
Fax: (+32 2) 6274932
Un-Economic Commission for Europe-FAO
Ed Pepke
Timber Trade Section
390 Palais des Nations
CH-121 Geneva 10
Switzerland
Tel: (+41 22) 9172872
Fax: (+41 22) 9170041
e-mail: Edward.Pepke@unece.org
European Commission
Jeremy Wall
Acting Head
Unit DG III/C/5 Wood & Paper Industries
European Commission
Rond Point Schuman, 11 (6/36)
Brussels
Tel: (+32 2) 2953726/2953832
Fax: (+32 2) 2967015
e-mail: jeremy.wall@dg3.cec.be
European Investment Bank
Jean-Jacques Mertens
100 Boulevard Adenauer
L-2950 Luxembourg
Tel: (+352) 43798587
Fax: (+352) 43798827
e-mail: J.Mertens@EIB.ORG
Olli Haltia
100 Boulevard Adenauer
L-2950 Luxembourg
Luxembourg
Tel: (+352) 43798563
Fax: (+352) 43798827
International Finance Corporation
Sung Chung
Principal Engineer
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue
Washington D.C. 20433
USA
Tel: (+1 202) 4739294
Fax: (+1 202) 6761365
e-mail: schung@ifc.org
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
Rosely Maria Viegas Assumpçao
P.O. Box 300
A-1400 Vienna
Austria
Tel: (+43 1) 211313894
Fax: (+43 1) 211316819
e-mail: rviegas-assumpcao@unido.org
Robert Hallett
P.O. Box 300
A-1400 Vienna
Austria
Tel: (+43 1) 211315265
Fax: (+43 1) 2113173862
e-mail: rhallett@unido.org
Unión de Selvicultores del Sur de Europa (USSE)
Miguel Pérez Turrado
Avda Madariaga 1-1
48014 Bilbao
Spain
Tel: (+34 4) 4206990
Fax: (+34 4) 4763715
e-mail: usse@jet.es
Christian Pinaudeau
Maison de la Forêt
17 rue Esprit des Lois
33080 Bordeaux
France
Tel: (+33 5) 56909244
Fax: (+335) 56816595
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS (FAO)
David A. Harcharik
Assistant Director-General
Forestry Department
Tel: (+39 6) 52253550
Fax: (+39 6) 52252151
e-mail: dave.harcharik@fao.org
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Director
Forest Resources Division
Tel: (+39 6) 52255879
Fax: (+39 6) 52256661
e-mail: hosny.ellakany@fao.org
Lennart Ljungman
Director a.i.
Forestry Policy and Planning Division
Tel: (+39 6) 5225
Fax: (+39 6) 5225
e-mail: lennart.jungman@fao.org
K.H. Schmincke
Director
Forest Products Division
Tel: (+39 6) 52253221
Fax: (+39 6) 52255618
e-mail: hermann.schmincke@fao.org
Jean Clément
Coordinator
National Forestry Action Programme
Tel: (+39 6) 52253589
Fax: (+39 6) 52252151
e-mail: jean.clement@fao.org
Luis Botero
Associate Secretary General
World Forestry Congress Coordinating Unit
Tel: (+39 6) 52255088
Fax: (+39 6) 52252151
e-mail: luis.botero@fao.org
Ian J. Bourke
Senior Forestry Officer
Forest Products Division
Tel: (+39 6) 52254174
Fax: (+39 6) 52255618
e-mail: jim.bourke@fao.org
Gary Bull
Fibre Resource and Supply Officer
Forest Products Division
Tel: (+39 6) 52252717
Fax: (+39 6) 52255618
e-mail: gary.bull@fao.org
Mafa E. Chipeta
Senior Forestry Officer
Forestry Policy and Planning Division
Tel: (+39 6) 52253254
Fax: (+39 6) 52255514
e-mail: mafa.chipeta@fao.org
Jacques Lahaussois
Senior Programme Officer
World Forestry Congress Coordinating Unit
Tel: (+39 6) 52253943
Fax: (+39 6) 52252151
e-mail: jacques.lahaussois@fao.org
Olman Serrano
Chief, Wood and Non-Wood Products
Utilization Branch
Forest Products Division
Tel: (+39 6) 52254056
Fax: (+39 6) 52255618
e-mail: olman.serrano@fao.org
<section>t</section>
APPENDIX 2 - AGENDA
I. Opening of the session and welcoming address
II. Adoption of the Provisional Agenda
III. The role of ACPWP and introduction of members
IV. The State of the Industry - Oral presentations by:
A. Finland
B. New Zealand
C. Poland
D. Brazil
V. Forestry highlights and forest industry:
A. Outcome of the 13th Session of the Committee on Forestry (COFO 1997)
B. FAO's State of the World's Forests
C. Outcome of the First World Conference on Finance and Marketing for the Pulp and Paper Industries, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 7-9 April 1997
VI. The socio-economic role of the forest industry
A. An example from a developed country - Sweden
B. An example from a developing country - Congo
C. Discussions
VII. Update on Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) and Certification
A. Progress achieved world-wide and FAO's contribution
B. Example from a developed country: Forests and forestry in Canada
C. Example from a developed country: An American approach
D. Example from a developing country - Ghana
E. Discussions
VIII. The Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS)
Role of ACPWP in the international forest policy dialogue. What mechanisms should be developed for achieving this
IX. XI World Forestry Congress
X. Winding-up and recommendations by the Advisory Committee for the 1997-98 Programme
XI. Date and Place of the 39th Session of ACPWP
XII. Any other business
<section>u</section>
APPENDIX 3 - LIST OF DOCUMENTS
Agenda
FO:ACPWP 97/1
The State of the Industry
FO:ACPWP 97/2
The socio-economic role of the forest industry
· Example from a developed country - Sweden
FO:ACPWP 97/3
· Example from a developing country - Congo
FO:ACPWP 97/4
Update on sustainable forest management (SFM) and certification
· Progress achieved world-wide and FAO's contribution
FO:ACPWP 97/5
· Example from a developed country: Forests and Forest Industry in Canada
FO:ACPWP 97/6
· Example from a developed country - USA
FO:ACPWP 97/7
· Example from a developing country - Ghana
FO:ACPWP 97/8
The Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS)
FO:ACPWP 97/9
Timetable
FO:ACPWP 97/INF 1
Summary of the State of the World's Forests
FO:ACPWP 97/INF 2
List of Documents
FO:ACPWP 97/INF 3
List of Participants
FO:ACPWP 97/INF 4
Report of 13th Session of COFO
FO:ACPWP 97/INF 5
Information Bulletin on XI World Forestry Congress
FO:ACPWP 97/INF 6
