<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.1</title>
<section>1</section>
#ToC Next
Logo EDITORIAL
Why Forest Energy Forum? The motivations are many. First, we want to offer our readers and colleagues a new quick and direct source of information on wood energy. Second, we wish to establish a simple mechanism for dialogue (south-south and north-south), which is the reason why we have adopted the word "forum" for this newsletter. We hope that through Forest Energy Forum readers from different disciplines and sectors concerned with wood energy can express their views and disseminate their experiences for the benefit of their wood energy colleagues and also their community in general.
The materialization of these ideas has led us to forfeit our Energy Corner in Non-Wood News and to create a sister newsletter, Forest Energy Forum, with which we hope to achieve the above-mentioned objectives and through which we wish to reach all our readers and colleagues in the sector while building a multisectoral dialogue between the different actors from all the disciplines in the wood energy field.
The findings derived from our publications and studies, among which is Wood energy today for tomorrow (WETT), show that wood energy continues to make a large contribution to the energy sector and is a vital ingredient in meeting the energy needs of millions of people in developing countries. However, the most relevant factor is that there is increased interest in wood energy from the industrial and commercial sectors of developed countries because it is renewable, competitive and environmentally friendly.
In fact, nowadays there are different initiatives for new projects, offers of novel technologies and technical assistance within the forestry and agro-industrial sectors where wood fuels alone, and/or combined with by-products derived from their production processes, are becoming an attractive source of thermal and/or electrical energy, and any surpluses can be sold to the energy market as another commodity with benefits for all involved. The case of two Nicaraguan sugar mills (which will be described in detail in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum) is a good example of the changes occurring in the sector. Such is the importance of this subject that it was the main item discussed during the meeting of the national coordinators of the Latin American Technical Cooperation Network on Dendroenergy, held in Cuba from 4 to 7 November 1997.
The use of forest fuels offers interesting synergies which make them a competitive source of energy, even with the present oil prices. But the many interrelations, both within and outside the forestry and energy sectors, constitute a complex system (sometimes not properly known) which hampers its massive utilization. Forest Energy Forum wishes to clarify these important interrelations in order to promote sustainable forest management.
The development of wood energy initiatives involves many disciplines, including the forestry and energy sectors, and the areas of climatic change and rural development. Unfortunately, good and effective channels of communication have not yet been developed, which is another drawback affecting the development of wood energy initiatives. With Forest Energy Forum we hope to create a constructive dialogue among the main actors of the different wood energy sectors and disciplines.
FAO, through the Wood Energy Programme of its Forestry Department, has been actively involved in this process for many decades. It has provided technical assistance to member countries for the promotion of sustainable production, equitable market structures and rational utilization of wood fuels as a renewable, locally available source of energy for use in the residential, commercial and industrial sectors. Through Forest Energy Forum, we are pleased to continue with our efforts and our modest contribution to the development of this old, but completely renovated, source which is gradually receiving the attention it deserves.
In this way, the experience shared with our colleagues of Non-Wood News, through its four issues published since 1994, is consolidated and expanded through Forest Energy Forum in the hope of reinforcing our contribution and making a new energy and forestry order that is more in tune with society's needs - an aim we all desire.
We would like Forest Energy Forum to become a regular meeting point every six months. Meanwhile, we wish to maintain contact between one issue and the next. Please send your comments, ideas, new experiences, projects and information either through our Internet web page, or by E-mail, fax or simply by letter to the address below. We look forward to hearing from you!
FOR INFORMATION ON ANY ASPECT OF FOREST ENERGY OR
FUELWOOD, PLEASE CONTACT:
M.A. Trossero
Senior Forestry Officer (Wood Energy)
Wood and Non-Wood Products
Utilization Branch
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39-6-57054175
Fax: +39-6-57055618
E-mail: miguel.trossero@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>2</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo SPECIAL FEATURES
Wood energy today for tomorrow (wett)
During the activities of the current biennium, we decided to carry out a qualitative and quantitative study of the past and present consumption of wood fuel at the national level for the most relevant regions. The study was based on information and statistical data available in the most relevant databases of the organizations and agencies involved in this field, at the global as well as the regional level, in order to overcome the main problems derived from lack of or insufficient data in this sector.
We established regional studies, Wood energy today for tomorrow (WETT), aimed at revising data on wood fuel utilization in order not only to assess the actual contribution of forests, woodlands and trees to the energy sector, but also to scrutinize the possible future contribution of forest biomass to the energy sector - an energy sector which is ever thirsty for more energy to support the process of globalization, especially in some emerging countries of Asia and Latin America.
We also felt that these studies could help identify the main data gaps, weaknesses and inaccuracies of the present statistical databases available in different regional (the Latin American Energy Organization [OLADE], the Asian Institute of Technology [AIT], Environment and Development in the Third World [ENDA], etc.) and international organizations such as FAO (Forest Products Yearbook), the UN (Energy Statistics Yearbook) and the International Energy Agency (IEA) and thus identify the action required to tackle these information gaps. In addition, this analysis could also lead to the identification of several important aspects and issues concerning the main users in different sectors and supply sources.
The results of the first regional study undertaken are described in the document Background overview of available data on wood energy in Europe and OECD countries which gives an overview and comparison of available data on wood energy in FAO, the UN Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE), the Statistical Office of the European Communities (EUROSTAT), the International Energy Agency (IEA) and the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Paris.
The main results of this analysis are compiled in eight tables for each organization covered (a total of 40 tables), in order to facilitate mutual comparison of data available for 42 countries grouped as follows: the European Union (EU), OECD non-Europe and Europe non-EU countries. Based on the data collected, a best estimate was made on the use of wood energy for the three country groups.
The data collected led to the preparation of another technical document, The role of wood energy in Europe and OECD countries, which clearly shows that wood energy accounts for approximately 3 percent of the total primary energy supply in the 15 EU countries. However, in Sweden and Finland this reaches more than 16 percent and in Austria 13 percent.
In general, in all the groups examined, approximately 30 to 50 percent of the total wood removed from forests is ultimately used for energy purposes, of which only a small amount is directly derived from the forests; a large amount of wood fuels is derived from other sources, such as forest industry by-products, black liquor from pulp and paper industries and recovered wood.
It should also be noted that in most of the countries analysed, wood fuel is still mainly used in households, with the exception of Sweden and Finland where industrial wood energy constitutes an important contribution to the final energy mix.
Other regional WETT studies covering countries in Asia and Latin America have already been carried out. Draft documents describing the information collected and the main findings are currently being edited. More detailed information on these studies will be provided in future issues of Forest Energy Forum.
Unified wood energy terminology (uwet)
A careful analysis of the wood energy data available in different organizations and agencies has been carried out through the above-mentioned WETT studies, even though it has been difficult (and in some cases almost impossible). Much has been learned, on which we need to reflect carefully, but a lot of work still needs to be done in order to improve our wood energy database and information systems.
From this analysis, we would like to bring to your attention the following three main topics which have direct implications on our future activities:
* The wood energy statistics for the EU provided in the FAO Forest Products Yearbook are considerably lower than those provided by UNECE and EUROSTAT. The main explanation for these tremendous differences is that FAO includes only wood fuels (fuelwood and charcoal) directly removed from the forests, without taking into consideration wood fuels from non-forest lands.
* In other cases, the data (when available, i.e. from EUROSTAT) are highly aggregated, which makes it not only difficult to know what kind and type of biomass is used, but also extremely difficult to compare the data with those from other sources.
* In view of the considerable variety of terms, units and conversion factors used for the collection, processing and presentation of wood energy data, it is not easy to compare and exchange information among the different organizations involved.
These three issues have led us to revise our wood energy figures and the mechanisms for their collection, processing and presentation. One of the first steps adopted by the Wood Energy Programme has been the preparation of what we call UWET (unified wood energy terminology), which also includes definitions, units and conversion factors.
We are making considerable progress in this area. A preliminary draft has already been sent to a small group of individuals from different international organizations for their views, opinions and comments. More details on this crucial subject will be provided in future issues of Forest Energy Forum.
Miguel Trossero
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>3</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo NEWS AND NOTES
Earth Summit
One of the results of the Special Session of the UN General Assembly, which met in New York in June 1997 to assess the progress made since Rio, is a new intergovernmental panel on forests called the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF), which has been established under the aegis of the UN Commission on Sustainable Development with a secretariat based in New York.
Sustainable development: development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs ...
The following extract is taken from the text on Forests which was adopted at the Special Session of the General Assembly.
Detailed information on the Earth Summit can be found at the following web site: http://www.un.org/dpcsd/earthsummit/
Latin American Technical Cooperation
Network on Dendroenergy (land)
The Technical Cooperation Networks are mechanisms established by national institutions, either public or private, aimed at the exchange of experiences and knowledge among the countries, basically by making use of their own technical, human and financial resources.
In view of the necessity to establish a broad basis of cooperation on dendroenergy in the region, owing to the importance of wood as a source of energy for domestic and industrial use, LAND was formally established in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in October 1984, with the initial participation of nine countries. The first Regional Coordinating Institution of the Network was the Instituto Nacional de Tecnología Industrial (INTI) of Argentina, followed by the Escuela Superior Politécnica del Litoral (ESPOL) in Guayaquil, Ecuador. Since 1995, the regional coordinating institution has been the Escola Federal de Engenharía de Itajuba (EFEI) in Itajuba, Brazil.
To date, 16 countries have joined the Network: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru and Uruguay.
The Network is composed of national institutions (one for each country) that undertake activities in the field of dendroenergy. In general, these institutions are of a governmental nature; however, non-governmental institutions may also be members of the Network, if so determined by the respective countries.
For more information, please contact the Technical Secretary: Mr Torsten Frisk, Senior Forestry Officer, FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, Casilla 10095, Santiago, Chile.
Fax: +56-2-3372101/2/3
E-mail: Torsten.Frisk@field.fao.org
Biomass Summer School, Austria
Graz University of Technology (Austria), together with the Austrian Biomass Association and the Austrian Ministry of Science and Transport, organized the Second Biomass Summer School at Graz University of Technology from 8 to 12 September 1997. Attendance was limited to 35 participants from all parts of the world.
The topics discussed covered the most important points of energy production from biomass: the characterization of biomass fuels, pretreatment technologies, the conversion steps combustion and gasification, possibilities of small-scale combined heat and power production, the production and utilization of biofuels (RME, AME and ethanol), as well as environmental aspects. Lectures focused on important new developments, such as biomass pellet production, a new technology for efficient dust precipitation (the rotational particle separator), gas engines, biomass fuel engines and an innovative technology for small-scale CHP systems (the screw-type engine). A field trip demonstrating thermal biomass utilization as well as RME and AME production from biomass in practice closed the one-week seminar.
The Third Biomass Summer School will take place in 1998, and there are also plans to organize a Biomass Summer School in Latin America during 1998.
For more information, please contact: Dr Ingwald Obernberger, Institute of Chemical Engineering, Graz University of Technology, Inffeldgasse 25, A-8010 Graz, Austria.
Fax: +43-316-873-7469
E-mail: OBERNBERGER@GLVT.TU-GRAZ.AC.AT
World Energy Council
The Developing Countries Committee agenda, at its meeting at Kusadasi, Turkey, on 7 October 1996, included a forum on rural energy development. Speakers included Francisco Guitierrez, former Executive Secretary of OLADE, on the rural energy situation in Latin America, and Gerald Leach of the World Bank on the findings of the Bank's study, Rural energy development: improving energy supplies for 2 billion people. Regional coordinators will present their draft chapters for the rural energy study at the next meeting of the Steering Committee. The study report is due to be completed before the 1998 World Energy Council Congress in Houston, Texas, United States. (Source: Bulletin d'Information [World Energy Council], Issue 3, March 1997.)
FORESTS FOR ENERGY
(Extracted from World Food Summit Fact Sheet The role of forests in food security)
Wood energy is drawing increasing attention as an environmentally friendly source of energy. Wood is still people's main source of fuel for cooking, processing and preserving food, and will continue to be for many years to come. Worldwide, 2 000 million people depend on wood for cooking, a basic step in ensuring proper nutrition. In many developing countries, fuelwood supplies as much as 97 percent of total energy consumption. Wood-based energy systems are the most readily available in many areas and, when properly managed, they are not only versatile and sustainable but also effective in generating income and jobs.
Des résidus source d'énergie
Désireuses de disposer de leurs résidus selon un objectif de développement durable, les papeteries utilisent à des fins énergétiques des écorces, des résidus de sciage, la liqueur issue de la cuisson des copeaux ou encore des résidus provenant du désencrage des papiers rebuts et du traitement des eaux de procédés. Selon une étude récente, les papeteries et les scieries québécoises engendrent annuellement plus de 4 millions de tonnes d'écorces, de sciures, de planures et de boues qui peuvent être valorisées à des fins énergétiques, horticoles ou autres. Dans la cogénération, par exemple, ces résidus deviennent de précieuses ressources. Au fil des ans, les usines de la pâte et du papier du Québec ont augmenté considérablement leur utilisation de biomasse.
Les combustibles renouvelables issus de la biomasse, telles les écorces, couvrent aujourd'hui près de 50 pour cent des besoins en énergie thermique des usines de papeterie du Québec. En plus de réduire l'accumulation d'écorces aux bords des scieries, cette option a permis aux usines de la pâte et du papier de réduire considérablement l'utilisation des combustibles fossiles. Cette dernière facette est importante, car elle contribue grandement à réduire les émissions de dioxyde de carbone. L'industrie forestière considère donc important de privilégier la valorisation énergétique de la biomasse. (Source: LIAISON - Energie-Francophonie, n^o 32, 3^e trimestre 1996 [Institut de l'énergie des pays ayant en commun l'usage du français - IEPF. 56, rue Saint-Pierre, 3^e étage, Québec G1K 4A1, Canada].)
Rice straw to ethanol project
The United States Department of Energy's National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) is working with a private company to evaluate the potential of turning rice straw into ethanol. The project's first phase consisted of laboratory-conducted pre-feasibility studies which, according to the Biofuels UPDATE, determined the conversion yields and rates of rice straw and combustion properties of residuals from fermentation. The project is now entering its second phase which will be geared towards obtaining data to develop a business plan, as well as pilot-scale testing and refining costs. (Source: Bio Bulletin, Vol. IV, Issue VI, June 1997.)
LEAP 2000: new directions in energy analysis
A new century is approaching with new demands on incorporating environmental externalities and greenhouse gas mitigation costs in energy planning. With a need for better simulation techniques and more user-friendly tools, the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) is developing a new energy planning software tool - LEAP 2000.
LEAP 2000 builds on almost a decade of experience embedded in the use and development of the Long-range Energy Alternatives Planning (LEAP) system developed by SEI. (Source: Renewable Energy for Development [newsletter of the Energy, Environment and Development Programme of the Stockholm Environment Institute], March 1997.)
LEAP HAS THREE MAIN PROGRAMME GROUPS: ENERGY SCENARIOS, AGGREGATION AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL DATA BASE (EDB).
Energy scenarios
Aggregation
Environmental
data base
Demand
Transformation
Biomass
Environment
Evaluation
The Energy scenarios
group consists of several closely
linked programmes: Demand,
Transformation, Biomass, Environment
and Evaluation.
These are the main tools used to perform an
integrated energy-environment planning exercise for a single area (country, province, region, etc.).
The Aggregation programme is a tool used to
display multi-area results from analyses carried
out in different areas.
EDB can either be used as a stand-alone reference tool, or linked to the rest of LEAP to calculate
automatically emissions and other environmental impacts of energy scenarios.
For more information, please contact: Mr Charles Heaps, SEI-Boston,
11 Arlington Street, Boston,
MA 02116-3411, USA.
Fax: +1-617-266-8303
E-mail: cheaps@tellus.com
Eco-efficiency: business and the environment
The business community is taking on a greater role in preventing environmental hazards, as well as in correcting them when they do occur. More and more companies take into account economic, technological and social implications when designing, producing and marketing their products.
This was not the scenario a decade ago. Those concerned about the environment often cast business in the role of the villain: the primary source of pollution and the main misuser of resources. Today, however, the countries in which business has been most successful in creating wealth for society are those most able to clean up pollution and manage resources. Nowadays these same countries must encourage developing nations to avoid the more polluting aspects of the early northern industrial revolutions and of the industrialization of centrally planned economies. "So much of the world needs to improve its standard of living," said Mr Livio DeSimone, Chief Executive Officer of 3M and Chairman of the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD). "Unless that growth is controlled in a sustainable way, we will put undue stress on the planet's scarce resources."
WBCSD is committed to being a partner in protecting the environment. In a recent report, entitled Signals of change: business progress towards sustainable development, the group notes a number of changes in direction and momentum towards sustainable development. "We think that these changes signal a paradigm shift in the way in which business does business. It is a shift from a fractured view of environment and development issues to a holistic view of business and sustainable development," say the authors Stephen Schmidheiny, Chairman of Anova Holding, and Rodney Chase, Managing Director of British Petroleum - both former chairmen of the WBCSD - and Mr DeSimone. (Source: International Herald Tribune, 23 June 1997.)
Biomass in tropical countries
Tropical countries enjoy favourable conditions for growing biomass. However, constraints to optimal use as an energy source are still to be resolved. The main issues are legal and institutional barriers, as well as a lack of information and technology transfer. Furthermore, common misconceptions about biomass energy have to be redressed. It should be emphasized that the larger part of wood fuels comes from non-forest land; wood fuel use is not the root cause of deforestation; biomass energy is more than a traditional commodity; and biomass energy will not phase itself out in the foreseeable future.
Managed properly, biomass energy (or bio-energy) can be sustainable, environmentally benign and economically sound. Moreover, biomass energy creates substantial local employment. The advantages are also being recognized in industrialized countries, and several governments have successfully adopted articulate policies for promoting biomass energy. (Source: Biomass: more than a traditional form of energy, a publication of the FAO Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia in cooperation with the EC-ASEAN COGEN Programme and the ASEAN-EC Energy Management Training Research Centre.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Wim Hulscher, Regional Wood Energy Development Programme
(RWEDP), FAO, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand. Fax: +66-2-2800445
E-mail: Wim.Hulscher@field.fao.org
How sustainable are energy crops in Europe?
Energy crops may play an important part in the supply of energy to the European Union. Increasing attention has been paid to these renewable energy sources since the 1970s. The contribution of biomass to the European energy supply is currently about 2 percent, and its use has increased considerably during recent years. An important stimulus for this has been the permission extended to farmers to cultivate non-food crops on fallow land, while retaining the fallow premium. Besides this, transport fuel based on agricultural crops is sold free of excise duty in a number of countries, such as France and Germany. During 1995/96, nearly 800 000 ha of fallow land in the European Union lay under rape oilseed. So the importance is clear, but how sustainable are these crops?
The Centre for Agriculture and the Environment (CLM) has developed a methodology for a systematic assessment of the ecological and socio-economic sustainability of energy crops. The report, Sustainability of energy crops in Europe - a methodology developed and applied, can be ordered from CLM. The research has been conducted with financial support from the Netherlands National Research Programme on Global Air Pollution and Climate Change (NRP/MLK) and the Netherlands Agency for Energy and the Environment (NOVEM). (Source: Change 34, January 1997.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Gert van der Bijl, Centre for Agriculture and the Environment (CLM), PO Box 10015, 3505 AA Utrecht, the Netherlands.
Fax: +31-30-244-1318
E-mail: gvdbijl@clm.nl
Diesel fuel substitutes - Jatropha curcas L.
Following the oil crisis of the 1970s and recognition of the limitations of world oil resources, plant species which can be processed to provide a diesel fuel substitute have received special attention. Most of the research was carried out in temperate regions with the aim of making available to farmers possibilities for diversifying in view of the increasing subsidy-driven surpluses in traditional commodities. Another argument for the cultivation of oil crops for energy purposes is the increasing global warming/greenhouse effect. When these fuels are burnt, the atmosphere is not polluted by carbon dioxide, since this has already been assimilated during the growth of these crops. The CO[2] balance, therefore, remains equable.
Special interest has been shown in the physic nut (Jatropha curcas L.) for this purpose, especially since it is drought resistant and can potentially be used to produce oil from marginal semi-arid lands, without competing with food production. (Source: Extracted from Physic nut [Jatropha curcas L.] by Joachim Heller, published as No. 1 in IPGRI's Promoting the Conservation and Use of Underutilized and Neglected Crops Series.)
For more information, please contact: IPGRI, Via delle Sette Chiese 142,
00145 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-6-5750309
E-mail: j.heller@cgnet.com
http://www.cgiar.org/ipgri
International symposium - Jatropha curcas
The symposium was organized by Sucher & Holzer, Austria, in cooperation with the Technical University, Managua, Karl-Franzens University, Graz and the Technical University, Graz. Sucher & Holzer is a private consultant agency which is running a project on the production of physic nut methyl esters as a substitute for diesel fuel in Nicaragua. The project is being funded by the Austrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In the last seven years, 1 000 ha of physic nut plantations were established on private land around the town of León and a pilot plant for the production of methyl esters, aimed at producing 1 500 tonnes of methyl esters annually, is in the final stage of completion. This will eventually substitute 0.3 percent of Nicaragua's diesel fuel demand. Considerable research has recently been carried out on certain aspects of Jatropha curcas (e.g. characterization/evaluation, toxicology, pest and diseases, insecticidal properties, etc.), mainly by the Technical University,
Managua to give the Austrian development project scientific support. There is now increasing awareness of the need for provenance trials, before establishing plantations. Numerous provenances were collected from all over the region and are being characterized and evaluated in Nicaragua and Mexico. However, this happens in a rather uncoordinated way and the establishment of an informal network (which was not the objective of the symposium) would improve efficiency of these and other activities. (Source: Travel report by Joachim Heller.)
For more information and a list of abstracts, please contact: Proyecto Biomasa, Apartado postal 432,
Managua, Nicaragua.
Fax: +502-2-490937
E-mail: biomasa@ibw.com.ni
or
Sucher & Holzer, Aid Development, Alberstrasse 4/II, A-8010 Graz, Austria.
Fax: +43-316-383703
E-mail: keil@email.kfunigraz.ac.at
The vertical shaft brick kiln
The vertical shaft brick kiln (VSBK) has become widespread in China and is slowly gaining a foothold in Pakistan. In India, Bangladesh and Pakistan, the relatively energy-efficient Bull's trench kilns are standard; although VSBKs are using 30 to 50 percent less energy, this new technology still has to prove its worth locally. However, with a growing awareness of the environmental impact of the brick industry, new emission standards are now being introduced and enforced, thus providing an opportunity for the VSBK technology which pollutes less than other methods. (Source: VSBK Newsletter, September 1996.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Henrik Norsker, Editor, VSBK Newsletter, Rorbaekvej 10, DK 8766, Nr. Snede, Denmark.
E-mail: hnorsker@post2.tele.dk
or
Ms Hannah Schreckenbach, GATE in GTZ, PO Box 5180, D 65726 Eschborn, Germany.
Fax: +49-6196-797352
E-mail: gate-isat@gtz.de
(German Appropriate Technology Exchange [GATE] is a quarterly magazine founded in 1978 as a special division of the German Agency for Technical Cooperation [Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit, GmbH - GTZ]. There is an article in issue No. 3/95 of GATE by Thomas Neumaier entitled Vertical shaft brick kiln, Peshawar - environmentally friendly technology. This article is also available on the Internet at the following address:
http://gate.gtz.de/isat/gate_mag/gate_95_3/texte/report_2.html)
And have you heard about ...
Boiling Point - a technical journal for those working with stoves and household energy? It deals with technical, social, financial and environmental issues and aims to improve the quality of life for poor communities living in the developing world. Recent issues have covered: Household energy in high cold regions (April 1997); and Biomass fuels: their use and how different fuels affect technology choice (September 1997).
Boiling Point is produced by the Intermediate Technology Development Group's Household Energy Programme (HEP) of GTZ. Intermediate Technology, a British charity, enables poor people in developing countries to develop and use technologies and methods which give them more control over their lives and contributes to the long-term development of their communities.
For more information, please contact: Ms Elizabeth Bates, Boiling Point Coordinator, Intermediate Technology, Myson House, Railway Terrace, Rugby CV21 3HT, UK.
Fax: +44-1788-540270
E-mail: elizabeth@itdg.org.uk
http://www.oneworld.org/itdg
http://www.itdg.org.pe
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>4</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo FOCUS ON... HONDURAS
FAO Starts Wood Energy Project In Honduras
Following the success of its recent activities in Mexico (with the Secretaría del Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales [SEMARNAP]), the Dominican Republic and the northern states of Brazil, the Wood Energy Programme has initiated technical cooperation assistance with the Government of Honduras.
The main aims are to: provide advice to the National Forestry Service, COHDEFOR, for the preparation and formulation of a wood energy policy and programme to promote the development, sustainable production and use of forest biomass as a source of energy; help COHDEFOR assess the wood fuel flows around some large urban centres in order to collect field information and data to understand the dynamics of the wood fuel flow from the supply sources to the users; and identify the action required to promote more sustainable and efficient wood energy systems.
The project, funded by FAO within the framework of its Technical Cooperation Programme, has a duration of 24 months and an estimated budget of US$252 000 to cover the costs of activities and hiring international and national consultants.
Bio-Gen Biomass Power Generation Project, Honduras
The United States Initiative on Joint Implementation (USIJI) is a pilot programme which encourages private sector participants to use their resources and innovative technologies and practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in developing countries, where the costs of abatement are often lower than in the United States, and to promote sustainable development worldwide. To date, the programme has received more than 60 project proposals resulting in 25 accepted projects in 11 countries. (See also Country Compass - Mexico.)
One of the highlights of the USIJI programme is the 30-MW Bio-Gen Biomass Power Generation Project in Honduras which is being developed by Nations Energy Corporation, an affiliate of Tucson Electric Power Company. Nations Energy is a lead United States partner for the Bio-Gen project; other United States participants include the International Utility Efficiency Partnership at Edison Electric Institute and Add-On Energy 1. The total estimated project cost is US$55 million, with more than US$15 million in equity and US$40 million in debt.
Biomasa-Generación is the project company with a limited partnership, organized under Honduran laws to develop and implement the project. Biomasa-Generación will also own and operate the plant. All power produced will be sold to the Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica (ENEE), the primary utility responsible for the generation, transmission and distribution of electricity in Honduras. Nations Energy has begun negotiations for a power purchase agreement with ENEE and a letter of intent to purchase all power produced has been signed by the utility.
According to Robert Perez, Nations Energy's Director of Business Development, the Bio-Gen Biomass Power Generation Project is the first power-only utility-graded biomass-fired plant of its type in Central America. The Government of Honduras has championed the Bio-Gen Biomass Project as a cornerstone of its plan to integrate a portfolio of private sector renewable energy projects into the country's electricity grid. A further goal is to help meet current and future energy needs in a fiscally and environmentally sustainable manner. (Source: Independent Energy, May 1997.)
Noruega Presta 2,7 Millones De $EE.UU. Para
Electrificar 88 Poblados Rurales
Noruega otorgó a Honduras un préstamo por 2,7 millones de dólares (36 millones de lempiras) para desarrollar proyectos de electrificación en 88 localidades rurales, informó una fuente oficial.
El gerente de la Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica (ENEE), Manuel Arriago, indicó que el Gobierno noruego también donó medio millón de dólares para un proyecto de generación eléctrica que está en etapa de estudios de factibilidad.
Los 88 poblados rurales que se beneficiarán de los programas de la ENEE se encuentran en las zonas central y norte del país, apuntó Arriaga.
Remarcó que es la primera vez que Honduras tiene acceso a fondos noruegos para el sector de energía en Centroamérica, también se benefician Costa Rica y Guatemala. (Fuente: La Prensa, 10 de julio de 1997.)
Avanza En Honduras El Proyecto Del Bambú
La Compañia Hondureña del Bambú está promoviendo el desarrollo de plantaciones de bambú en Honduras con fines comerciales.
También se contempla el establecimiento de una fábrica de pulpa de papel y otra extractora de etanol, ambas utilizando bambú como materia prima. Parte de los brotes o retoños de bambú se usarán para ser procesados en alimento.
La implementación del proyecto creará gran cantidad de nuevas fuentes de trabajo en el área rural, generando al mismo tiempo los siguientes beneficios: empleo de tierras actualmente incultas, desarrollo de nuevos bosques, mejoramiento del ecosistema, transferencia de nueva tecnología, capacitación de grupos de campesinos incorporados al proyecto, desarrollo socialcomunitario, menor dependencia de fuentes de combustibles foráneos y el mejoramiento en la balanza comercial del país.
La empresa se ha comprometido a colaborar con todas las instituciones para el mejoramiento y protección de los recursos naturales y medio ambiente en Honduras.
El bambú es una planta elegante y de belleza única, perteneciente a la familia de las gramíneas, sus tallos leñosos se caracterizan por su rápido crecimiento. (Fuente: El nuevo día, 13 de Junio de 1997.)
El Bambú Será El Petróleo Hondureño
La Empresa Nacional de Energía Eléctrica (ENEE) ahorrará millones de lempiras con la implementación de un proyecto para generar electricidad a través del bambú, afirmó el diputado Jack Arévalo, miembro de la Comisión del Congreso Nacional de Energía.
El proyecto es de «grandes beneficios para Honduras porque el bambú está considerado como el petróleo hondureño, que será sembrado por los campesinos».
Arévalo agregó que hay más de 150 000 plantas que los campesinos ya comenzaron a sembrar y se calcula que en dos años ya estará en producción la energía, pues es el tiempo que requiere la planta para crecer.
Señaló que va a beneficiar a la población porque no habrían tantos aumentos en la electricidad y además va a reforzar la economía del sector pues en el sistema que se está utilizando el 70 por ciento del circulante va para los países productores de petróleo.
Afirmó que actualmente están dando asistencia técnica a los campesinos para que puedan al final vender el producto a una de las empresas que generarán la energía eléctrica. (Fuente: Tiempo, 16 de Junio de 1997.)
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>5</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo COUNTRY COMPASS
Austria
The utilization of biomass for energy in Austria
In 1991, about 13.5 percent of the total consumption of energy in Austria was supplied by biomass, which is by far the highest contribution of all central European countries. The motivation for using biomass for energy depends on a country's agricultural, energy, environmental and social policies; in Austria, in these areas, there are good reasons to utilize biomass for energy.
Agricultural policy. Austria is the most densely wooded country (46 percent forest) in central Europe and there is a very long tradition of using fuelwood for space heating. Large quantities of forest residues are produced every year which can only be used for energy production. In addition, as in most European countries, there is a considerable surplus production of food and feed crops, which can be expressed as surplus land area. Of this surplus land area, 170 000 ha are available for the production of energy crops.
Energy consumption. Two-thirds of Austria's energy requirements have to be imported. The use of fossil energies has been decreasing over the years, owing to the slow exhaustion of domestic reserves and, since this will continue in the future, it will cause an increasing dependency on imported energy. In order to compensate for this decrease, a corresponding increase in the use of hydropower and bioenergy is required. However, since 70 percent of the domestic hydropower potential is already being used and there are serious environmental objections against the use of the remainder, a greater reliance will be put on bioenergy in the future.
Environmental aspects. Carbon dioxide is the dominant issue and emissions are still increasing. The intensified utilization of bioenergy, therefore, would be very attractive as it is neutral with regard to carbon dioxide emissions. Another positive aspect is that bioenergy, together with hydropower and solar energy, will be available for an unlimited time and is not finite like fossil fuels.
Social aspects. The creation of new jobs in the rural areas is a priority of Austrian social policy. The regional utilization of biomass for energy production prevents the drain of buying power from rural communities and creates new jobs and wealth in many economically problematic regions.
There is, therefore, a strong motivation to develop the use of biomass for energy in Austria and, in fact, in 1978 the Austrian Government declared that the increased utilization of bioenergy was a priority target of the country's energy policy. (Source: IEA Bioenergy News, Vol. 8, No. 2, 1996.)
Canada
At a recent renewable energy conference in Ottawa (Renewable Energy: Releasing Canada's Stranded Opportunities), David Manning, President of the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, invited the renewable energy industries to form strategic partnerships with petroleum producers who need the environmental citizenship that supporting renewables provides. That citizenship is needed, he explained, in order to allow Canadian energy companies to compete in world markets, where environmental performance is increasingly a factor in the selection process. (Source: Bio Bulletin, Vol. IV, Issue VI, June 1997.)
Denmark
Pricing differentiation of fuel types, which promotes the development of
bioenergy in Denmark
(Source: Biomass: more than a traditional form of energy - a publication of the FAO Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia in cooperation with the EC-ASEAN COGEN Programme and the ASEAN-EC Energy Management Training Research Centre.)
France
A.I.L.E. (Association d'initiatives locales pour l'énergie) est une structure locale créée conjointement par l'Ademe Bretagne, la F.R. CUMA Ouest et les F.D. CUMA de l'Ouest dans le cadre du programme européen P.E.R.U. (Programmation energétique au niveau régional et urbain) de la Commission Européenne (Délégation à l'énergie - D.G. XVII).
A.I.L.E. a pour domaine d'activité la maîtrise de l'énergie dans les milieux agricole et rural et se consacre, pour l'instant, à trois thèmes particuliers, à savoir: i) les filières de valorisation non alimentaire des cultures; ii) la filière bois énergie en Bretagne; et iii) les économies d'énergie au niveau de la mécanisation agricole.
A.I.L.E. mène actuellement des actions et études portant sur la faisabilité économique de la valorisation énergétique de plantes lignocellulosiques, et sur la faisabilité de l'implantation de taillis de saule à très courte rotation (destinés à une valorisation énergétique dans des chaudières à bois) en Bretagne. En outre, A.I.L.E. est engagée dans la filière bois-énergie au titre du programme «Bois-énergie Bretagne». Celui-ci comprend deux objectifs: la structuration de l'offre en bois-énergie (15 000 tonnes de bois consommées en plus); et la réalisation de chaufferies à bois à raison de 16 MW en quatre ans. Les études menées par A.I.L.E. dans ce cadre sont plutôt orientées vers des actions de structuration de l'offre en bois-énergie et plus particulièrement sur les études de gisement de bois autour des projets chaufferies, tout en veillant à mobiliser les différentes ressources en bois (forêt, industrie, déchets ...), et les moyens à mettre en &#156;uvre pour mieux garantir
et organiser l'offre en bois-énergie.
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: A.I.L.E, 65 rue de St. Brieuc,
35000 Rennes, France.
Télécopie: +33-2-99-546319
Mexico
Three new biomass-related projects have been announced under the United States Initiative on Joint Implementation (USIJI). The projects involve forest conservation in Ecuador, demonstration of sustainable forestry in Mexico and reduced-impact logging in Indonesia.
Ecoenergy is a partner in the Mexican project which plans to sequester 230 000 tonnes of carbon over 27 years through sustainable forestry practices in Mayan communities. (Source: Bio Bulletin, Vol. IV, Issue VI, June 1997.)
Sénégal
L'initiative adoptée par le Ministère de l'énergie des mines et de l'industrie et le Ministère de l'environnement et de la protection de la nature du Gouvernement du Sénégal à travers la Direction de l'énergie et la Direction des eaux, forêts, chasse et conservation des sols ont établi la Cellule des combustible domestiques qui dispose désormais d'un secrétariat permanent, et deux ingénieurs des respectives directions en assurant l'animation.
Le secteur privé n'est pas en reste. La société Elf distribue désormais du gaz butane en emballage populaire, portant ainsi à trois le nombre de distributeurs de gaz se partageant aujourd'hui un marché en croissance de plus de 10 pour cent par an. Les producteurs et distributeurs de foyers améliorés voient également leurs activités se développer progressivement et le charbon de bois, conditionné en emballage papier, commence à être commercialisé dans la région de Dakar.
Au niveau législatif et réglementaire, on notera le travail en cours de révision du code forestier afin de mieux l'adapter aux exigences de la régionalisation et du transfert des responsabilités aux collectivités rurales. Un décret a d'autre part instauré un régime de taxation différenciée sur le charbon de bois, favorisant l'exploitation forestière dans les zones aménagées.
Beaucoup d'évolutions donc, qui nécessitent, plus que jamais, un effort de concertation entre tous les acteurs. (Source: L'Observatoire des combustibles domestiques, novembre 1996)
United Republic of Tanzania
Tanzania Traditional Energy Development and Environment Organisation (TaTEDO) was registered in 1990 as a non-governmental organization in Tanzania. It is a coalition of individuals, artisans, smallholder farmers, community-based organizations and micro enterprises involved in the development of the communities with which it works.
TaTEDO also acts as a network: by developing and promoting the rational use of renewable energy technologies through the provision of relevant information, knowledge and skills geared to the socio-economic development of communities. Enhancing sound practices has been another of TaTEDO's purposes from its inception.
TaTEDO has been creating awareness on biomass energy (wood, biogas and bioresidues), biomass technologies (improved charcoal and fuelwood stoves, improved charcoal production kilns, charcoal and wood ovens, charcoal water heaters and bioresidue stoves) and solar energy technologies (photovoltaics, solar water heaters, solar cookers). (Source: Regional Energy News, Vol. 3, No. 1, April 1997.)
For more information, please contact: The Executive Secretary, TaTEDO,
PO Box 32794,
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Fax: +255-51-74400
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>6</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo EVENTS OF INTEREST
Commercial Issues of Biodiversity
(the Biodiversity Conference for Business)
7-10 April 1997
San José, Costa Rica
Contact: Scherago International,
11 Penn Plaza, Suite 1003, New York, NY 10001, USA.
Fax: +1-212-643-1758
Third Biomass Conference of the Americas
24-29 August 1997
Montreal (Quebec), Canada
Contact: Ms Joan Ross, Conference Coordinator,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
1617 Cole Boulevard, Golden, Colorado 80401-3393, USA.
Fax: +001-303-275-4321
http://www.nrel.gov/bioam
CLER '97 - XVI Conferencia Latinoamericana de Electrificación Rural
(Energía sostenible: futuro rentable para el desarrollo rural)
24-26 de septiembre de 1997
Santiago de Chile, Chile
Contactar: CMC Ltda., Toledo 1991, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.
Fax: +56-2-2742789
Correo electrónico: cmcevent@rdc.cl
Use of Biofuels for Transportation
29 September - 1 October 1997
Stockholm, Sweden
Contact: Dr Claës Pilo, SDAB Transport & Environment, Roslagsvägen 54, S-113
47 Stockholm, Sweden.
Fax: +46-8-151190
E-mail: pilo.sdab@swipnet.se
Eleventh World Forestry Congress
13-22 October 1997
Antalya, Turkey
Contact: XI World Forestry Congress Organizing Committee,
Orman Bakanligi, Atatürk Bulvari, No. 153 Bakanliklar, 06100 Ankara, Turkey.
Fax: +90-312-417-9160
E-mail: abdi-f@servis.net.tr
or
XI World Forestry Congress Organizing Committee, FAO Forestry Department,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-6-522-55137
E-mail: luis.botero@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/wforcong
Fourth International Wood Fuel Conference
(Wood Fuel at Work)
20-22 October 1997
Kenilworth, Warwickshire, UK
Contact: Ms Carol Johnstone, ETSU, Harwell, Oxon OX11 0RA, UK.
Fax: +41-1235-433737
Biomass for Energy and Industry
(Tenth European Conference and Technology Exhibition)
8-11 June 1998
Würzburg, Germany
Contact: Dr Heinz Kopetz, Conference Chairman, WIP,
Sylvensteinstrasse 2, D-81369 Munich, Germany.
Fax: +49-89-720-1291
E-mail: renewables@tnet.de
http://www.wip.tnet.de
AgEng - Oslo 98
(International Conference on Agricultural Engineering)
24-28 August 1998
Oslo, Norway
Contact: Prof. Dr Egil Berge (Chairman), Department of Agricultural Engineering,
PO Box 5065, N-1432 As, Norway.
Fax: +47-64-948810
E-mail: admit@itf.nlh.no
World Renewable Energy Congress V
20-25 September 1998
Florence, Italy
Contact: Prof. Ali Sayigh, Congress Chairman and Director-General of WREN,
147 Hilmanton, Lower Early, Reading RG6 4HN, UK.
Fax: +44-1189-611364
E-mail: asayigh@netcomuk.co.uk
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>7</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo PUBLICATIONS
Etude de cas du marché du bois-énergie au Sénégal
(Case study on marketing wood fuels in Senegal [in French only])
Rapid urbanization of a growing population in many developing countries is changing the patterns of wood fuel procurement. The household energy supply in an urban environment cannot continue depending on self-procurement but has to rely on commercial supply structures.
A case study was carried out in Senegal within FAO's Forest Products Marketing Programme to develop methodologies for analysing the current structures and practices of marketing wood fuels. It was prepared by a consultant, Mr Alioune Tamchir Thiam, under the supervision of Mr L. Lintu, Senior Forestry Officer in the Forest Products Division of FAO.
The study sets the analysis of wood fuel marketing in perspective by assessing the role of wood fuels in the total energy balance in Senegal and reviews the policies, institutional and infrastructural factors and social aspects affecting production, trade and utilization of wood fuels. It also identifies and discusses in detail the wood fuel markets and the various marketing factors (product, channels of distribution, promotion and price) with which market needs are being satisfied.
The report ends with comments on the applicability of the methodology in analysing wood fuel marketing in other developing countries.
For copies of the study and more information, please contact Mr L. Lintu, Senior Forestry Officer (Forest Products Marketing), Forest Products Division, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: +39-6-5225705618
E-mail: leo.lintu@fao.org
FAO WOOD-BASED ENERGY PUBLICATIONS OF FAO'S WOOD
ENERGY PROGRAMME
FORESTRY TOPICS REPORTS
* Wood for energy. Forestry Topics Report No. 1, 1983 (E, out of print^*)
* Forests, fuels and the future. Forestry Topics Report No. 5, 1995 (E)
FORESTRY PAPERS
* Simple technologies for charcoal making. Forestry Paper No. 41, 1983 (E,F,S)
* Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries. Forestry Paper No. 42, 1983 (E,F)
* Industrial charcoal making. Forestry Paper No. 63, 1985 (E)
* Wood gas as engine fuel. Forestry Paper No. 72, 1986 (E,S)
* Energy conservation in the mechanical forest industries. Forestry Paper No. 93, 1990 (E,S)
* A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi Programme of Action. Forestry Paper No. 108, 1993 (E)
OTHER RELATED ENERGY PAPERS
* A new approach to energy planning for sustainable rural development. Environment and Energy Paper No. 12, 1990 (E)
MISCELLANEOUS
* Wood fuel surveys. GCP/INT/365/SWE, FAO/SIDA, 1983 (E)
* Productos forestales y energía para el desarrollo rural. FO:MISC/95/5, 1993 (S)
* Análisis de la contribución forestal a la producción de energía en América Latina. Tomo 1, (D/V8299), 1993 (S)
* Análisis de la contribución forestal a la producción de energía en América Latina. Tomo 2, (D/V8301), 1993 (S)
* Caso de estudio: autoproducción de electricidad a partir de residuos de madera y leña en la República Argentina. FO:MISC/95/1, 1995 (S)
* Household energy and Agenda 21. HEDON Discussion Paper No. 1, 1995 (E)
* Reunión regional sobre generación de electricidad a partir de biomasa. RLC, Serie Forestal No. 7, 1996 (S)
If you would like copies of any of the above publications, please contact Tina Etherington.
*All FAO publications are available on microfiche through the David Lubin Memorial Library, FAO.
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>8</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo WEB SITES
ITABIA (Italian Biomass Association)
http://www.energ.polimi.it/ITABIA
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Colorado, USA
http://www.nrel.gov
World Energy Council (17th WEC Congress)
http://www.WEC98Congress.org
WIP Energy and Environment, Germany.
http://www.wip.tnet.de
Greenpeace Atmosphere Page
http://www.greenpeace.org/catm.html
NF-2000 Network (Non-Food Agro-Industrial Research Information Dissemination)
http://www.nf-2000.org
Ministère de l'Energie, des Mines et de l'Industrie, Sénégal
http://www.primature.sn/memi/energie/menu.htm
Networks (to exchange information/experience and data)
Stoves: owner-stoves@crest.org'
Gasification: majordomo@crest.org "subscribe gasification"
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>9</section>
#ToC Previous
Logo READERS' CORNER
This page is for our readers to air their views, make their comments and describe their experiences. So, please write to us with your ideas/views/comments and suggestions for items that you feel should be covered in future issues.
PRODUCING AND MARKETING FUELWOOD AND CHARCOAL IN NICARAGUA: LEARNING FROM EXPERIENCE
A personal account by Enrique Riegelhaupt
A small project started in Nicaragua in 1980 to develop the production and marketing of fuelwood and charcoal. It had US$5 000, a pick-up truck, an international adviser and the fuelwood from 14 000 ha of coffee-under-shade groves being cleared. This meant some 2.8 million m^3 of fuelwood - a considerable amount to deal with even if it is located only 40 km from a fuel-hungry city such as Managua.
First, a quick assessment of the domestic fuel-use patterns in the city found that over 70 percent of the population used fuelwood and/or charcoal. Urged by the National Commission for Coffee Renovation (CONARCA), the project started charcoal production in order to speed up the clearing of old coffee groves which had to be replanted as soon as possible.
After six months, 100 people were making charcoal on the basis of their best knowledge (earth-pit technology, 6:1 conversion rate, 200 sacks per couple per week), ten more worked on the wood and storing the sacks, production had risen to 10 000 sacks per month and it was necessary to find storage space and buyers who could pay in cash.
The project tried selling charcoal at cut-rate prices in the four public markets of Managua and a shop was opened in each one. However, most people go to the markets for vegetables, fruit or meat - but not for charcoal. Some charcoal was sold to end users, but most was bought by the sack by the charcoal traders and resold to grocery stores and consumers at doubled prices. Obviously something was going wrong.
The rainy season started. The project's charcoal makers stayed on the production sites (carboneras), but most of the independent ones returned to their fields to plant maize and beans. Traders appeared in the carboneras asking to buy a truckload or "at least 30 sacks". An informal agreement was made: the project agreed to sell them all they wanted at the regular price, on the understanding that they would resell at no more than a 30 percent profit.
The project had by now achieved a 30 percent share in the Managua market, some control of the consumers' price level and a steady cash flow. Fuelwood kept coming into the carboneras, reaching nearly 50 000 m^3, and there was still a lot left in the fields. An attempt was made to sell fuelwood, which proved to be much more difficult, so the project approached the industrial consumers who wanted large volumes, prompt delivery and monthly bills. A cigar firm wanted 4 000 sacks of charcoal per month for tobacco curing; only the project could provide this quantity, so the firm became the main buyer. The sugar mills were used to burning fuel oil and did not want to go back to the old days of fuelwood firing. The project proposed delivering woodchips, right by the side of the bagasse pile. The payload driver could choose between bagasse or fuelchips according to the boiler workers' preferences; since seasoned wood with about 20 percent humidity burns much better than wet bagasse,
the boiler workers usually preferred woodchips.
A mobile chipper was bought, a powerful tractor rented, the wood delivered by railway (12 wagon loads per day), and in one short season some 5 000 tonnes of fuelchips were sold. The sugar mills made a big saving since 1 tonne of fuel oil costing about US$190 was substituted by 3.5 tonnes of chips at US$35 per tonne with no additional handling cost.
The government wanted to widen the project's objectives. It was, in fact, a kind of government-owned enterprise, was growing fast and making large profits which it was investing in its own growth. The ministry decided to invest the profits in other priority activities such as refurbishing a sawmill, harvesting logs in other parts of the country and setting up a forest. There was also the social aspect: the charcoal makers were paid according to their individual production; they did not have any social security or a minimum wage, but they earned three times more than any other worker in the field.
Thus the project became a fully state-owned enterprise with the corresponding overhead structure. It built more efficient brick kilns and hired the workers needed to operate them. It planted trees in order to provide wood for charcoal, with the result that the fuelwood from land reclamation areas was burnt uselessly. Production fell to 1 000-2 000 sacks per month and market penetration dwindled. The charcoal makers went back to their villages and, once again, sold to the traders at one-third of the street price.
LESSONS LEARNED
* It is quite easy to organize charcoal and fuelwood production using local skills and technologies if an honest deal can be offered to the producers.
* It is possible to market charcoal and control market prices through traditional wholesale and retail operators when some degree of supply concentration is achieved.
* It is not difficult to develop a new market for fuelwood when an ample supply of raw material coexists with a concentrated industrial demand for fuels.
It is a pity that these simple facts were not well understood and taken into account.
[Top of page][Contents]
<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.1</title>
#ToC Next
Logo INFORMATION
FOREST ENERGY FORUM
No. 1
December 1997
is compiled by Miguel Trossero and Tina Etherington, Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW) of FAO's Forest Products Division. If you have any material that could be included in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum for the benefit of other readers, kindly send it before 20 March 1998 to:
Forest Energy Forum - FOPW
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy.
E-mail: Forest-Energy-Forum@fao.org
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
IN OUR NEXT ISSUE:
* WETT for Asia and the Pacific
* Harmonized terminology
* Results of November 1997 meeting in Cuba of the National Coordinators of LAND on Production of Fuels and Food from Biomass
[Top of page][Contents]
<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.1</title>
<section>1</section>
#ToC Next
Logo POINTS OF VIEW
Not available in this issue
[Contents]
<section>2</section>
#ToC Next
Logo FORESTS BRANCH OFF...
Not available in this issue
[Contents]
