<title>A Study of the Options for Utilization of Bycatch and Discards from marine </title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Fish capture is imperfect. In the course of trying to harvest fish from the sea for which there is sufficient demand to make the effort worthwhile, fish are also caught which either are not in demand on the markets or should not be caught because their capture is against the goals of the administration responsible for management of the fish stocks. Much of this fish is discarded at sea. Efforts have and are being made to reduce the capture of this fish in the first place, through technical changes to fishing operations and through management measures to make their capture less likely. However, it is recognised that these measures are unlikely to ever eliminate discarding at sea altogether and another line of attack is to look at utilisation of these discards; in the words of the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries -
11.1.8.b) improve the use of by-catch to the extent that this is consistent with responsible fisheries management practices;
This paper firstly looks at what causes discards, their impacts at various levels and quantities and types of discards which have been documented. It then looks at measures that have and are being taken to use presently discarded fish with a view to assisting in identifying options for better use of fish resources throughout the world.
It became obvious, whilst reading and extracting information from the numerous reference materials consulted, that the way in which estimates of bycatch and discards has been conducted in many instances make it virtually impossible to draw firm conclusions that x tonnes of y species are caught as bycatch, discarded or utilised in a particular fishery or from a particular stock. The references generally either estimate the amount of bycatch caught in a particular fishery without endeavouring to quantify the amounts of various species in the bycatch or list the various species in the bycatch without estimating with any precision the amount of each species encountered. In most cases the species composition of the bycatch is merely quantified by referring to some species as dominant or most important rather than giving actual figures. Although there are some studies cited in this paper that endeavour to qualify AND quantify the occurrence of bycatch which is discarded and that
which is retained for use, this information is such that, other than extract the raw data from the original source and present it here, no attempt is made to analyse the data further. The need for standardised methods for estimating bycatch and discards has been highlighted in a number of fora and until this is done information will generally remain fragmented and non comparable between fishing activities and make the estimation of bycatch in both terms of quantity and species extremely difficult and unreliable.
The study concludes that solutions are being found for the problems of discarding fish at sea and that in shrimp trawl fisheries in tropical regions particularly there are definite trends towards greater utilisation. The way and speed with which this evolution occurs depends very much on local conditions but can be stimulated by new utilisation opportunities identified through research and development in the areas of fish technology, market intelligence and exchange of information between different groups and regions.
In other fisheries where there is pressure on resources and threats to sustainable fishing activities the main thrust of development must continue to be the reduction of capture of potential discards.
Introduction
The fact that fishing activities can lead to the capture of unsellable, unwanted and inedible products which are subsequently discarded dead or debilitated and not used for any useful purpose by man, has been long established. This can, not only constitute a loss of valuable food, but also have consequences for the environment, biodiversity and the living resources of the world's seas. The capture of dolphin in tuna nets and turtles in shrimp trawls brought the problem to the foreground of public debate in the early years of this decade, but fisheries scientists, technologists and managers have been aware of problems in various forms and been looking at potential solutions for very much longer.
The main debate, however, over the security of food supplies and the sustainability of the world fishing operations is concerned, not with the capture of endangered species or those that capture the public imagination, but with the capture and discarding of species which could be used to feed people. This is linked to the biological effects that this fishing mortality might have on the sustainability of fish supplies from capture fisheries.
In 1994 FAO published Fisheries Technical Paper No 339 "A Global Assessment of Fisheries Bycatch and Discards" (Alverson et al 1994). The authors attempted to bring together the wealth of information from around the world on the magnitude of bycatch and discards, referring to over 800 papers containing quantitative and qualitative information on bycatch and discards in trying to characterise the nature and scope of the problem on a global and regional basis.
This technical paper and a number of international agreements recognise that there is a large amount of fish wasted for a number of reasons and call on those who exploit and manage marine fish resources to take a responsible attitude towards alleviating the problems that seem to be apparent.
1.1 FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries
The FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries (FAO 1995) encourages nations to "establish principles and criteria for the elaboration and implementation of national policies for responsible conservation of fisheries resources and fisheries management and development".
In even clearer terms the Code of Conduct states the following:
8.4.5 States, with relevant groups from industry, should encourage the development and implementation of technologies and operational methods that reduce discards. The use of fishing gear and practices that lead to the discarding of catch should be discouraged and the use of fishing gear and practices that increase survival rates of escaping fish should be promoted.
8.4.6 States should co-operate to develop and apply technologies, materials and operational methods that minimise the loss of fishing gear and the ghost fishing effects of lost and abandoned fishing gear.
8.4.8 Research on the environmental and social impacts of fishing gear and, in particular, on the impact of such gear on biodiversity and coastal fishing communities should be promoted.
11.1.8 States should encourage those involved in fish processing, distribution and marketing to:
a) reduce post-harvest losses and waste;
b) improve the use of by-catch to the extent that this is consistent with responsible fisheries management practices;
12.4 States should collect reliable and accurate data which are required to assess the status of fisheries and ecosystems, including data on bycatch, discards and waste. Where appropriate, this data should be provided, at an appropriate time and level of aggregation, to relevant States and sub-regional, regional and global fisheries organisations.
12.10 States should carry out studies on selectivity of fishing gear, the environmental impact of fishing gear on target species and on the behaviour of target and non-target species in relation to such fishing gear as an aid for management decisions and with a view to minimising non-utilised catches as well as safeguarding the biodiversity of ecosystems and the aquatic habitat.
1.2. The Kyoto Declaration and Plan of Action
The 95 states that met in Kyoto for the International Conference on the Sustainable Contribution of Fisheries to Food Security in December 1995 (Japanese Fisheries Agency 1995) endorsed the provisions of the FAO Code of Conduct and in Declaration 15 stated that, inter alia, they would "Promote fisheries through research and development aiming at : ........(iii) reduction of discard mortality; (iv) development and use of selective, environmentally safe and cost effective fishing gear and techniques;" This resulted in the following being included in the plan of action agreed at the Kyoto conference:
7. To increase efforts to estimate the quantity of fish, marine mammals, sea birds, sea turtles and other sea life which are incidentally caught and discarded in fishing operations; assess the effect on the populations or species; take action to minimise waste and discards through measures including, to the extent practicable, the development and use of selective, environmentally safe and cost effective fishing gear and techniques; and exchange information on methods and technologies to minimise waste and discards.
These documents reinforce the need to make sustainable and optimal use of the marine fish resources and agree that there are a number of lines of attack which are appropriate if the world is to continue to harvest and benefit from fish in the diet of human beings.
The expert consultations leading up to the adoption of the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries and as recognised in the final document and the Kyoto Declaration, gave definite priority status to the avoidance of fish that might be subsequently discarded and only as a last resort to marketing and utilisation issues. The rationale behind this was that very often little is known about the effects of removal of the discards on the ecosystem and if a market for presently discarded fish is generated it is going to be difficult to reverse the situation.
<section>2</section>
2. Utilisation of bycatch as an option
As has been mentioned above the FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries suggests that states should improve the use of bycatch as long as doing so is consistent with responsible fisheries management and this is considered as an option in many deliberations concerning policy on fisheries management and mitigation of the discards problem.
For instance, the paper produced by the Australian Government for the OECD on Policy Options for Fisheries Bycatch (Truelove 1997) states that "where bycatch has immediate or potential commercial value, is unavoidable in the course of fishing and does not include marine wildlife species subject of separate nature conservation legislation, or utilisation does not undermine broader management arrangements, it should be fully utilised."
The re-formulated Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (USA 1996) which governs the management of fisheries activities in the United States of America has the following clauses which include the option of unavoidable bycatch utilisation:
"BYCATCH REDUCTION PROGRAM- Not later than 12 months after the enactment of the Sustainable fisheries Act, the Secretary shall, ........complete a program to--
(1) develop technological devises and other changes in fishing operations necessary and appropriate to minimise the incidental mortality of bycatch in the course of shrimp trawl activity to the extent practical.....
(2) evaluate the ecological impacts and the benefits and costs of such devices and changes in fishing operations; and
(3) assess whether it is practical to utilise bycatch which is not avoidable."
In other contexts there may be very positive reasons for looking at bycatch use as an option. Where, for instance, fish is incidentally caught in waters adjacent to countries which are short of fish for feeding their people, as is often the case with tropical shrimp fisheries, the use of that fish to assist in alleviating hunger may be a high priority.
It is widely assumed that measures to eliminate the capture of fish which will subsequently be discarded will never be perfect and that some considerable quantity of fish will always be discarded and with more appropriate marketing that fish could be used for human consumption. It is this portion of the presently wasted fish catch with which this paper is concerned. Although it is recognised that the incidental capture of marine mammals, reptiles and seabirds, for instance, may have important implications for their respective populations and also in the public conception of fishing as a "clean" and environmentally responsible activity, these aspects of the problem will not be covered in any depth here, the primary purpose being to assist in the identification of presently wasted resources which could be used for food and increase food security.
<section>3</section>
3. Some definitions
The subject of wastage in fisheries has generated a whole host of words that have different meanings in different contexts and in different parts of the world. One word that is used extensively and causes most confusion is bycatch. As Alverson et al (1994) point out there are at least three accepted definitions of the word. In some circles bycatch is used to refer to catch which is retained and sold but which is not the target species for the fishery. In others (particularly the Northeast and Western Pacific and in American legislation) bycatch means species/sizes/sexes of fish which are discarded (Hall 1996) and in other circles bycatch is used to mean all non-target fish whether retained and sold or discarded. The OECD (1997a) define bycatch as "Total fishing mortality excluding that accounted directly by the retained catch of target species". This definition thus includes fish which die as a result of interaction with the fishing gear, even if they do not leave the water
and could include fish which die as a result of "ghost fishing" - capture of fish in the water by lost or abandoned fishing gear.
This confusion can lead to misinterpretation of information provided in scientific and management discussions and can lead to difficulties of interpretation of what is wasted and what is not wasted in the world fisheries scene. These definitions can also rely on the ability to identify what is meant by a target species or group of species. Identification of a target species may be relatively simple in a single or few species fishery with a static marketing base, but in a multi-species fishery and/or when market forces play a significant part in commercial decisions there may be many species in the target and/or the target may change form day to day or even during a fishing operation in a volatile market situation. One day's waste and nuisance catch can be tomorrow's target. Changes and differences in consumer tastes and marketing opportunities can also influence what is deemed to be waste and what is desirable over a longer time frame and from region to region. For instance
the multi-million dollar tropical prawn capture fisheries and the specialised fisheries for Nephrops norvegicus are based on species which were once considered worthless; tropical Penaeid prawns were once thrown over the side by small scale fishermen in many less developed countries, they now form the basis of large industries; monkfish, once considered a nuisance fish is now a sought after and marketable commodity; megrim, witch and dabs, once caught as bycatch in the Icelandic Nephrops fishery are now the subject of target fisheries in Iceland.
The meeting held in Tokyo in October/November 1996 on the reduction of wastage in Fisheries (FAO 1996) concluded that bycatch can best be used as a generic term, applying to that part of the catch made up of non-target species or species assemblages but, when dealing with a specific portion of the catch, in fisheries management terms, it is better to give a more precise definition. The TOTAL CATCH is that quantity taken by the fishing gear and which reaches the deck of the fishing vessel. DISCARDS is that portion thrown away at sea (for one reason or another). The remainder is the LANDED CATCH or RETAINED CATCH (i.e. that which is brought ashore) which can be further sub-divided into TARGET CATCH and INCIDENTAL CATCH, bearing in mind the volume, value, the incidence of species caught and the nature of the fishing operations. The same species can move from one category to another depending on size, market demand, season or other criteria; at the same time other species may be
undesirable or of limited value.
In the context of this paper bycatch will be used to refer to that part of the catch which is not the primary target of the fishing effort. It consists of both fish which is retained and marketed (incidental catch) and that which is discarded or released.
In the context of international fisheries statistics it should be noted that while the sum of target and incidental catches (landed or retained catch) are recorded, discards and other fishing induced fishing mortalities, are not. This can be illustrated by reference to the diagram in figure 1 which is taken from the FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics Volume 78 (FAO 1996b). Although the terms used in the figure are not precisely the same as those referred to above, the ambiguous term "bycatch" is not used and the definition of discards/discarded catch is the same. It can be seen that
the diagram also divides discarded catch into live and dead. It is the dead discarded catch which is the subject for analysis in this report. There are other sources of unrecorded catch identified in the figure such as that consumed by the crew and fish sold through a black market. These types of lost data do not necessarily, however, imply a loss of fish protein into the human food chain. There may of course be financial losses to a fishing enterprise or loss of the accuracy of data for assessing sound fisheries management strategies through these practices.
However it must be remembered that discarding unwanted fish at sea is not the only cause of non-utilised biomass harvested from the sea. Queirolo et al (1995) suggest, for instance, that offal produced from the processing at sea of ground fish in the Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands groundfish fishery weighs more than four times the weight of whole fish discarded from the fishery.
There are also of course many instances where fish are marketed but at less than optimal efficiency. For instance where fish at less than the size suitable for the human consumption market is caught, it may be thrown away and constitute part of the discards but, alternatively it may be converted into fish meal. From a utilisation point of view this is a potential under-use of the resource, because of the loss of nutritional value to the intended end user (man) of passing the fish protein it represents through a longer food chain. If the alternative would have been to discard the fish DEAD into the sea then the argument would be that it is better to use the already dead fish for feeding livestock to feed humans than to feed other sea life, however if the fish could have been released ALIVE back into the sea then perhaps allowing it to be harvested later directly as a human food would be better. The interactions between bycatch/discards and arguments for and against reduction
are dealt with in some detail by Hall 1996. Fish may also of course be used for the making products outside the human food chain such as pet foods, fertilisers and numerous speciality products which may use part of the fish. There are also of course large quantities of fish wasted because of inadequate post-harvest infrastructure to ensure that is gets to market in edible condition having spoilt before they do so.
<section>4</section>
4. Why discard ?
Before trying to analyse what marine products are discarded it is important to try to understand the reasons why discarding occurs. What drives the discard process ?
Fish are wasted or discarded for a number of reasons, (Clucas 1996). These may include the following:
Fish of wrong species.
(Not of the target species for the particular operator).
Fish are of the wrong size
. (Command too low a price on the market to be worth landing or outside the limits imposed by management for capture or landing of that particular species).
Fish are of the wrong sex
(Usually where gender is important from the processing and marketing point of view).
Fish are damaged
(Caused by gear or predation in nets or mis-handling etc.).
Fish are incompatible with rest of catch
(Slime or abrasion could cause damage to target species).
Fish are poisonous
or otherwise considered inedible.
Fish spoil rapidly
(Causing problems with the rest of the catch).
Lack of space on board (Where fishing operations are successful and target species take precedence over lower value or non-target species).
High Grading
(Certain attributes of a fish make it more marketable and therefore more valuable than another and the less valuable is discarded - this is often related to size).
Quotas reached
(This may involve discarding of small specimens of the target species to make way for more valuable specimens of the same species for instance - which is often a reason given for high grading).
Prohibited Species
(Where quotas are species-based fish may be discarded from one vessel although another vessel with a quota related to the errant species may have been able to land that same fish legally).
Prohibited Season
(Where time bound constraints are made on catching particular species, specimens may be discarded if caught in the wrong season).
Prohibited Gear
(A quota may be given for capture of a particular species by a particular type of gear - if the wrong gear catches the wrong fish then fish may be discarded).
Prohibited fishing grounds
(Fishing ground may be closed for capture of one species but open for others - if the wrong type is caught it can be discarded).
The driving forces behind the practices of discarding can be divided into a number of categories. Crean and Symes (1994) define three main classes as follows:
a) marine biomass caught incidentally while targeting other species and discarded as sea (by-catch discards)
b) quota discards, where part of the catch is returned to the sea to comply with legal requirements relating to permitted quota entitlements of minimum landing sizes
c) pre-market selection, for example high grading, discarding of damaged fish etc.
Discards can be made because of commercial and market considerations by the operator of the fishing business - it is a business decision to discard. Within this category however there are two distinctly different types. Bycatch from shrimp trawling operations which is discarded is an example of the first type. This fish that is almost invariably of lower value than the target and the in investment in sorting preservation and processing may not be rewarded by high enough returns in the market place. Typically, if the bycatch from shrimp trawling has any value at all, it can be twenty or thirty times less valuable than the shrimp.
The other example of market considerations leading to discarding is where fish is discarded which are less valuable than others of the same species because of their size, sex or physical condition. This may be done for instance where there is anticipation of catching fish of higher value later in the fishing voyage or fishing season and in quota fisheries is referred to as `high grading'.
Often legislation forbids or restricts the landing of the fish and makes it more advantageous for the fishermen to discard fish in anticipation of more valuable fish being caught later against a quota system - this is a legislation reinforced `high grading' scenario. Where a fishing unit is allocated a quota there is an incentive to maximise the return on that quota and thus an incentive to land the higher quality and more valued fish caught resulting in the discarding of the less valuable or poorer quality specimens. Legislative discarding also occurs in multi or mixed species fisheries where quotas or total allowable catches are given which do not match the actual composition of the catch. This means that a vessel or fleet of vessels may reach the target quota or total allowable catch for one particular species in a mixed catch whilst there is still unfulfilled quota of other species. Rather than forgo the, as yet un-caught, quota the individual or fleet will continue
fishing but discard fish for which the quota has been filled. Alternatively the over quota fish may be landed and enter the black market or where a ban on discarding exists it may enter the market through a formalised system specifically designed to accept "illegal fish".
Where discard and waste are associated with the capture of fish prohibited by law this may well lead to the under recording of catches and therefore difficulties with management of the fisheries concerned.
Discards occur because fishing methods and gears are not perfectly selective or because there is pressure on fishermen to catch more of the target species than they can market. Avoiding catching these unwanted individuals at an acceptable cost (be it economic or social) is a major challenge.
<section>5</section>
5. Why is discarding a problem ?
It is generally recognised that fisheries statistics upon which fisheries management decisions are based and estimates of optimum fishing practises are made do not include the quantities of organisms discarded at sea and which contribute substantially to the mortality caused by fishing operations. This is specifically recognised in the FAO fish landing statistics, for instance. (See Figure 1) The non-recording of discards is felt particularly, therefore, by those wishing to estimate the out-take of fish and other creatures from a fishery and, from those estimates, derive measures to control fishing intensity and sustainability of the fishery and biological system. Species which are caught incidentally to the main species of interest are less likely to be recorded accurately than those targeted for sale. Indeed, where restrictions are made on the species and sizes of fish and where and when they can be caught, the catchers of "illegal" fish may deliberately hide the fact that
this fish has been caught resulting in under-recording of the impacts of fishing and, if sold, distortion of the trade in fish products. It has been found that relying on fishing crews to record accurately the nature and extent of discards is unreliable and produces inaccurate data. Direct observation and recording by unbiased observers on board vessels of discards is rare and costly, for enforcement or scientific agencies, but is now mandatory in some fisheries such as Namibia and Canada.
The discarding of fish at sea is often associated with the reasons for wastage listed above. This would not be a major biological problem if, when returned to the sea, the fish were alive and able to survive. Most fish species when discarded, however, are already dead or in such a moribund state that they will not survive. Their survival depends on the species, the method of capture and probably the physiological condition of the fish. Estimates of 100% mortality are common and reported in Alverson et al. One study of mortalities of halibut (NRC 1990 cited in Alverson et al) gives figures ranging from 2 - 14 % for long line vessels operating in the North Atlantic to 90 - 100% for ground fish trawl operating in the same waters. The same NRC study gives mortalities for Chinook salmon in the North Pacific of 2 - 28% for fish caught by gillnet in the Washington area to 50 - 90% for the same species caught by purse seine. There is general agreement that round fish with large
swim/air bladders (such as cod, hake, pollock, croakers, groupers and snappers) die as a result of distended bladders when being lifted from the sea, whereas some flat fish, sharks and invertebrates may survive the trauma of rapid depth changes and temperature. The survival rate therefore will depend on species, the depth at which they are caught, gear type, time taken in fishing and a number of other factors. Some species, if returned to the sea quickly, will survive.
<section>6</section>
6. Influence of capture method on quality and possible survival
Fishing methods will influence the quality and therefore usefulness of fish which is discarded. Gillnets, for instance which may be set at sun-down and lifted again at sun-up may have fish in them which has been dead for a number of hours. In tropical waters where sea temperatures can be in the mid 20's Celsius fish can be partially spoilt and may also be attacked by predatory species such as shark. This applies not only to any potential discards, of course, but also to target fish species. Indeed one of the reasons for discards at sea can be that target species are already spoilt before lifting the net.
The quality of trawled fish similarly will depend on time of soaking as well as such factors as the amount of fish in the cod end, the water temperature, the type of substrate etc. Kungsawan (1996) asserts that in Thailand, the quality of bycatch from otter trawl vessels catching shrimp as their main target is worse than that from pair trawlers or gill netters. This results in most otter trawl bycatch being used for fish meal, whereas bycatch from other shrimp fishing methods is more likely to be used for human foods.
The best quality fish at capture will be associated with fishing methods that remove fish from the water immediately they are caught and where fish are usually alive at this stage. These would include the various surrounding and lifting nets and some hook and line fisheries such as pole and line and hand lines. It is usually the case, for instance, that trawl caught fish will be less valuable than fish of the same species caught by hand line. Where fish are discarded from this type of fishery there is also a higher likelihood that they will be discarded alive, that is released, and that they may survive. The fact that they are released alive does not, of course mean that they will survive. Damage inflicted by the catching method may mean they will die later or fall victim to predators or disease because they are in a weakened state. The fact that that they may be released back into a different location and habitat may also mean that they have less chance of survival.
Fish caught and likely to be discarded are usually going to be treated badly so that their quality is not preserved. The possibility of using the fish for human consumption will normally only be possible if some sort of onboard preservation is used or the fish is unloaded onto carrier vessels, for instance, for swift movement to shore base facilities for preservation and processing.
<section>7</section>
7. Impacts of Discards
7.1 Biological and Ecological Impacts
The biological impact of discards varies according to the vulnerability of the species affected. Some can be of major concern, but others are much less of a problem.
The following list, based on Hall (1996), attempts to cover the different levels encountered
* Critical Discards of populations or species that are in danger of extinction.
* Unsustainable Discards, where, although not currently at risk, continued mortality could put a species or population at risk.
* Sustainable Discards which do not pose a threat to the resource.
* Biologically insignificant discards, where the numbers are negligible from the point of view of the population involved.
* Unquantifiable Discards for which a lack of data creates an unknown level of impact. Given the lack of data for most populations, this is the category, according to Hall (1996), with the greatest number of cases.
* Ecosystems impacts, which occur, for instance in tropical shrimp trawling, where a complex of species is removed. In many cases the biological consequences of these impacts are unknown.
* Charismatic discards, which involve species of particular significance to groups of people. The taboos against killing certain animals and the public concern over marine turtles, dolphins and whales come within this category and in many ways have fuelled public debate. The capture of these animals may or may not have significant biological consequences.
It is a generally recognised that the discarding of fish at sea may have detrimental biological effects and may have effects on the stocks of commercially important species. Discards of undersized target species in the Gulf of Maine groundfish fisheries have been identified as contributing to a decline in the populations of fish in the region. (Saville 1980). In the Irish Sea the decline in abundance of the common skate (Raja batis) has been attributed to excessive quantities being taken as bycatch (Brander 1981). In the North Atlantic minimum landing sizes for cod, haddock and whiting lead to the capture of undersized specimens which are in turn discarded.
Shrimp fisheries in tropical and subtropical regions are also known to harvest large quantities of incidental catch. Studies of the impact of shrimp fishery discards in the Gulf of Mexico have demonstrated reductions in the population levels of non-target species. A reduction of 40% in Atlantic croaker populations since the 1970's has been cited as being caused by over-fishing as bycatch in other fishing operations. It has been noted that in this fishery the catch of croakers now consists of almost entirely one year class in contrast to previous years when several year classes of much larger individuals were present.
The Norwegian mackerel fishery particularly targets fish of more than 600 gms as these specimens are much more valuable than smaller ones. The non-selective nature of the fishing gear meant that large numbers of smaller mackerel were being discarded and only larger ones being used to make up quotas - the fish were being high graded. It was thought that this practice was having adverse effects on the balance of year classes within the population. Since no discard bans are difficult to enforce at sea and the quota system was modified so that quotas specify the landings reflect a balance between fish over 600 gms and those less than 600 gms based on the year classes in the populations being fished. Thus a balance of the population is removed rather than a distinct group which could cause imbalances in the natural stock.
Apart from changes in single species stocks caused by discarding the balance between species within a multi-species population may change. Prior to the introduction of shrimp trawling on the east coast of peninsular Malaysia the families of Leiognathidae, Ariidae, Carangidae, Nemipteridae and Pomadasyidae dominated the marine community. After the introduction of shrimp trawling the population of Leiognathidae, dropped sharply (Chan and Liew 1986). A similar situation was noted in the populations of Leiognathidae and Dasayatidae in the Gulf of Thailand over ten years of shrimp trawling. (Pauly and Neal 1985) It has also been noted that in the Gulf of Carpentaria (Australia) the balance between demersal and pelagic fish species has changed over a twenty year period with demersals declining and pelagics increasing in abundance. (Harris and Poiner 1990)
Apart from impacts on fish populations there may also be environmental impacts or effects on non-fish species caused by discarding at sea. The raising of benthic organisms to the surface which are then discarded dead back into the sea can cause habitat modification. However the destruction of habitat caused in this way and the damage caused by the gear itself (particularly bottom trawling) are difficult to separate. The oxygen depletion of water bodies caused by the decomposition of discards on the sea bottom may cause effects on the benthic community. Where discards are low or the vessel is moving through the water whilst discarding is occurring, the density of the detritus reaching the bottom and decomposing may not have a serious effect.
For scavengers, discarding may have positive effects on populations, with birds, sharks and dolphins having been noted to commonly scavenge for fish discarded during fishing. It has been documented that the rise in sea bird populations in the North Sea can be attributed to the ready availability of food from fish discarded by fishing vessels.
Thus not all impacts of discards are negative as far as populations of individual species are concerned and it can be important to consider both positive and negative impacts when considering alleviation of the problem.
In many cases the effect of discarding is unknown, but public perception of the problem is that it must be wasteful and causing biological/environmental damage and if the fishing industry is to maintain its image as a responsible industry it needs to be seen to be tackling the problem.
7.2 Economic Impacts
Economic losses associated with discards can be divided into a number of differing categories. Discard mortalities associated with a fishery which discards fish of economic importance to another fishery is often the most cited example. This situation can be compounded by quota systems which permit individual fishers to only land specific species. Studies of the Bering Sea multi-species ground fish fishery cited by Alverson et al demonstrated that if fishermen were allowed to seek out the optimum mix of catch and bycatch known as the Acceptable Biological Catch (ABC) there could be a significant improvement in the discard picture compared with that imposed by a quota system based on specific species.
A second economic loss occurs where discard induced mortalities affect immature individuals or non-legal sexes of the target species. Studies of the Texas shrimp fishery determined that the value of the harvest increased by some $9.4 million when closure of the fishery allowed juvenile shrimp to grow to more marketable sizes. The Bering Sea crab fishery has been cited as loosing between $40 and $50 million per year through the discarding of illegal crab. Queirolo et al (1995) discuss and attempt to measure the opportunity costs of fishing discards in the Alaska groundfish fisheries recognising that not all discards represent losses of catches for alternative fisheries. These include catches of fish that have no economic value at present and those where the present quotas are not fully utilised and therefore the discards can be regarded as surplus to the needs of the fishery.
A third economic consequence of capture and subsequent discarding is associated with the capture of non-target species of little, if any, commercial value. The losses are not in this case associated with the loss of commercial value per se but with the extra costs associated with catching, sorting and throwing the unwanted catch over board, as well as the opportunity cost of the better utilisation of the discards. Costs can be associated with higher fuel consumption in active fishing operations (such as trawling), longer on-deck times for target species whilst the catch is sorted leading to a reduction of quality and therefore value of the fish, employment of extra crew members required to sort and remove the unwanted catch from the target catch, greater "wear and tear" on the fishing gear and vessels employed and other such examples.
A fourth stream of costs associated with discards is the money that is spent each year on monitoring surveillance and control. In global terms the cost of monitoring and surveillance operations associated with fishing activities are very large although only a portion of those costs are associated with reducing discards, Alverson et al give a conservative estimate of $4.5 billion a year.
7.3 Socio-cultural Impacts
The most difficult to quantify and describe are the social and cultural impacts that arise because of discarding fish. People in different circumstances have different perceptions of the value or otherwise of incidental catches. For instance the environmental groups in the US have instigated an embargo on shrimp imports where the method of harvesting may be harmful to sea turtles. However, this will affect the livelihood of Indonesian shrimp fishermen, for instance, whose principal source of income is from shrimp. Dolphin safe tuna and the "walls of death" have been a subject of hot debate in recent years and yet some drift net fisheries have been shown to have relatively low discard rates and some fishermen have been encouraged to use them on conservation grounds. In most debates of this sort there are at least two sides to the story and it is often that side with the highest political profile that will win the day. This is often based on emotional and heightened public
awareness rather than on hard evidence that a conservation, ecological or economic problem exists. This can be particularly so in the difference between protein rich developed nations and less developed nations where fishermen are dependent on fishing for their very existence and the national economy may rely on exports, to developed nations, of high value marine products such as shrimp.
In the debate concerning conserving the biological equilibrium and maintaining stocks of commercially important fish stocks, the human dimension for some of the poorest members of the world community must not be forgotten. The possible banning of the use of set bag nets in Bangladesh, because they are thought to catch unacceptably high numbers of juveniles of commercially important species, is one example impacting on small scale fisherfolk. The search for alternative income generating activities for these people is a priority if they are not to be displaced by such a ban. In the same region and in other parts of the developing world a large number of people rely on bycatch from the shrimp fisheries which they sort, selecting out fish for sale for human consumption and then drying the remainder for eventual sale as crude animal feed. The reduction in the amount of bycatch caught by these fisheries in such a situation would not only affect the livelihood of such people but
would also reduce the amount of animal protein available for feeding livestock. These problems and the balance between them are not easy to solve, but they must not be forgotten in the search for solutions.
<section>8</section>
8. Bycatch in single or few species fisheries
The discarding of fish at sea can occur when fish of a commercial species is caught but it is either commercially not worth keeping or is prohibited by law to keep it. This may be because the fish is of the wrong sex, size, or quality or the vessel which caught is prohibited from landing that particular species. It is recognised as a problem in a number of fisheries and attempts are now being made to quantify and qualify the amount of fish discarded in this way. This section outlines some of the recent work that has been done to both identify the amount and species of bycatch fish in those fisheries where there are a relatively small number of species in the fishery ecosystem and affected by the fishing activity. The meeting in Tokyo in 1996 on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries (FAO 1996a) contained presentations from a number of experts who work in these types of fisheries and which refined earlier estimates of discarded catch from various regions of the world. These papers
have been used extensively, but not exclusively, in the following sections. This gives indications of the quantity of discards and the methods that are being employed to alleviate the problems, recognising that generally the emphasis is normally on reduction of potential discards rather than the utilisation of them.
8.1 North East Pacific (Alaska - Bering Sea)
Extensive programmes of monitoring and collection of data from fisheries takes place in United States of America. This makes the possibility of identification of species and quantities discarded at sea possible in some of the fisheries. This collection of data, by direct observation, has been most extensive in the fisheries of the Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska. Here, since 1990, groundfish vessels above 125 ft LOA were required to carry a biological observer 100% of the time and 30% of the effort of boats between 60 and 125 ft is monitored. This means that for the last few years information on the amounts of catch and the discards on much of the fleet operating in this area has become available with some accuracy. This has generated a, probably unique, data base from which information on the quantity of discards of particular species of fish from particular fishing operations can be calculated. Alverson et al include information derived from this data on specific species
discarded in the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands fisheries in 1992, in two tables one related to trawl fisheries and the other hook and line fisheries. These indicate that the amount of discarded catch of different species were as shown in Table 1 below.
Table 1 - Discards of groundfish in the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands - 1992
Species 
Discarded by trawls (tonnes)
Discarded by Hook and line (tonnes)
Total (tonnes)
Pollock 
Sablefish 
Atka mackerel 
Pacific cod 
Pacific ocean perch
Yellowfin sole 
Flounder 
Turbot 
Rocksole 
Other 
Rockfish 
Arrowtooth flounder
Halibut 
et al Tables 22 & 23. (NMFS special data run)
The total amount of fish of the above species landed and used amounted to over 1.4 million tonnes. The reason the above were discarded are various. There is for instance a ban on landing of halibut in the region so that all halibut from what ever gear is discarded. In pollock trawl fisheries small pollock make up 60 -70 % of the discards because they are either legally undersize or not commercially worth landing. Similarly in the Atka mackerel fishery 60 % of the discards are of Atka mackerel. However small cod in the cod trawl fishery make up less than 10% of the discards with other species such as pollock, rocksole, arrowtooth flounder and Atka mackerel making up the rest. In addition to these extensive observer programmes the North Pacific Fishery Management Council have instituted controls since 1986 on the amount of bycatch that can be taken in the ground fish fleet. (Smith 1993) Recognising that groundfish fisheries not only take small specimens of their own targets
but also specimens of target species of other fisheries such as halibut, crab, herring and salmon these species were given a Prohibited Species Catch (PSC) limit to target fisheries for bycatch species.
8.2 North West Atlantic (Canada)
The information in Table 2 below taken from a paper on discards in the fisheries of Canada in the Atlantic Ocean (Duthie 1996) gives the amount of all species discarded by each type of gear and the target.
Canada now has a regulatory requirement in the groundfish fishery that all catches and bycatches are landed. This is considered reasonably effective, particularly on larger vessels which are required to have 100% observer coverage. This implies of course that there are now no discards at all in these fisheries. This may not in fact be true but as with the banning of discards in other countries it makes the industry move towards the elimination of unwanted catch voluntarily. The use of separator grates and other bycatch reduction measures has been regulated for alongside the discard ban.
Table 2 - 1994 Estimated discards from the Atlantic Canada fisheries
Gear
Species
DISCARD TOTAL
Traps Pots
Bottom Trawl
Mid Water Trawl
Set Net/ Gill Net
Purse Seine
Other
Cod 
Hake (Misc.) 
Greenland halibut
Pollock (Saithe) 
Redfish 
Haddock 
Rays 
Atlantic herring 
Mackerel 
Northern prawn 
Salmon 
Queen crab 
Sea scallop 
Blue mussel 
Clams (Misc.) 
Lobster 
Short fin squid 
Other 
TOTALS 
8.3 North East Atlantic and North Sea
The major fisheries of the North Sea and the Celtic Sea are governed in part under the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) of the European Union (EU). The CFP has provisions to enable the introduction of measures in five areas to control and regulate fisheries in EU waters. These include total allowable catches (TAC) and quotas, technical measures, structural policy, marketing policy and access to third countries waters.
The implementation of restrictive TAC designed for conservation of stocks simply seems to exacerbate the problem of illegal landings and wasteful discarding in the North Sea cod fishery according to Salz P (Ed) (1996).
The flatfish fishery of the north sea has TACs for plaice and sole but not for the other flat fish species such as witch, turbot, brill, megrim, dab, and flounder although there are minimum landing sizes for these species. There are also mesh size regulations. The general minimum mesh size for demersal trawling in the North Sea is 100 mm, however there are exceptions for certain fisheries. When fishing for sole, for instance south of 55^oN a minimum mesh size of 80 mm is allowed as long as the catch is at least 5% sole and no more than 10% of the catch is composed of cod, haddock or saithe. The minimum landing size for plaice is larger than that for sole and in using the 80 mm mesh undersize plaice are caught. This situation leads to substantial discards of undersized plaice by the fishermen to avoid landing of undersized fish and to ensure that the proportion conform with the regulations.
In the North Sea documentation of catches of haddock and whiting over recent years through at sea sampling have allowed an assessment to be made of the discarding of the target species of these two species. This data indicates that significant quantities of both species are discarded. See Table 3 below.
Table 3 - Annual weight of haddock and whiting in human consumption landings, discards, and bycatch of the industrial fishery
North Sea Haddock
Year Total Catch
(tonnes x 1000)
Landing for Human consumption
(tonnes x 1000)
Discards
(tonnes x 1000)
Industrial bycatch
(tonnes x 1000)
Average/year
North Sea Whiting
Year Total Catch
(tonnes x 1000)
Landing for Human consumption
(tonnes x 1000)
Discards
(tonnes x 1000)
Industrial bycatch
(tonnes x 1000)
Average/year
More recently a paper by Smith of FAO (Smith 1996) attempted to estimate discards on a gear by gear basis for the major types of fishery in the North Sea and N E Atlantic. The results of the analysis made by Smith are given in Table 4.
Table 4 - Estimates of discards in the North Sea and North Atlantic
Type of Fishery and Species
Discards in Tons
%age of Total
Pelagic Food Fish 
Herring 
Pilchard 
Atlantic mackerel 
Horse mackerel 
Sprat 
Sub total 
Fish for Fishmeal 
Capelin 
Blue whiting 
Sandeels 
Norway pout 
Assorted pelagics 
Sub total 
Human Food Fish 
Atlantic cod 
Haddock 
Saithe 
Redfishes 
Whiting 
Plaice 
Ass demersals 
Sub total 
GRAND TOTAL 
A major problem with the fisheries of the North Sea is that there are a number of major species of gadoid fish all able to be caught with similar gear but with differing growth patterns and optimal sizes for harvesting but with overlapping areas of abundance e.g. cod, haddock, saithe and whiting. The fact that the various species mature at different sizes requires that the permitted catch sizes for the different species should be different and therefore the mesh sizes of the cod ends required to catch them are correspondingly different. This means that a suitable mesh size to catch haddock for instance will catch cod (which matures at a larger size) which are under size.
It is estimated that the amount, in terms of number of individuals, of haddock discarded in the North Sea may exceed the number landed and similarly the number of hake discarded in the Bay of Biscay/Celtic Sea may exceed the number landed. (OECD 1997b)
The emphasis in the work cited above is on the discarding of specimens of main commercial species caught in the North Sea. A study of discards of fish with very little or no current commercial value has been undertaken on behalf of the Commission of the European Community (Jensen et al 1994). This study concentrated on the discards in the Scottish and Danish fleets operating in the North Sea and specifically excluded discards of main commercial species such as cod, haddock, plaice, whiting, saithe, sole, herring, sprat and mackerel. The main species which were found to be discarded were as in Table 5 below. In addition significant discards were found of Norway pout, lesser spotted dogfish, horse mackerel, witch and cuckoo ray. Of the species studied the Danish fleet was estimated to discard 4,237 tons per year, the Scottish Nephrops fleet 2,820 tons per year and the rest of the Scottish fleet 12,757 tons/year.
Table 5
- The five highest discards of non commercial species in the Danish and Scottish North Sea fleet
Species Country 
Tons discarded/year
Common dab Denmark 
Scotland
Grey gurnard Denmark 
Scotland
Starry ray Denmark 
Scotland
Lemon sole Denmark 
Scotland
Long rough dab Denmark 
Scotland
8.4 South East Atlantic
In the Southern Atlantic off the Angolan, Namibian and South African coasts Japp (1996) estimated the amounts of discards for various species as in Table 6 below. Japp reports small quantities of other discards caught by other types of gear such as some snoek from the handline fishery and hake, shark and kingklip from the long line fisheries of the area. As can be seen from Table 6 however there appear to be substantial quantities of discards from trawl fisheries of various types. This is one of the few publications where discard estimates of particular species are made against particular types of fishing gear, rather than a blanket figure being given for all species discarded against a gear or of a figure for one species being discarded over a number of gears.
Table 6 - Discards in the South East Atlantic
Species
Total landed
Total Discarded
Bottom Trawl for Hake
Hake 
Kingklip 
Ribbon 
Mackerel 
Angel 
Jacopever 
Dory 
Red mullet 
Octopus 
Red squid 
Trash/Fish meal 
Monk 
Snoek 
Squid 
St Joseph & shark
Bottom Trawl Monk fish
Monk 
Bottom Trawl for Shrimp
Crustacea 
Cephalopods 
Finfish 
Bottom Trawl for Sole/Hake
Soles 
Skates and rays 
Kob 
Panga 
Silver 
Gurnard 
W. Stumpnose 
Linef (Tr) 
Mid water Trawl Horse mackerel
Horse mackerel 
Trawl finfish 
Dentex & alfon 
Japp reports that in Natal province of South Africa in spite of increased utilisation of bycatch and better selectivity in trawling there are still regular reports of dumping particularly when markets require specific sizes of fish.
8.5 Japan
Estimations of discards in some Japanese fisheries are given by Matsuoka (1996) who taking the best available evidence tries to assess the quantities of the various species discarded in the many and various fisheries in Japan. He concludes that the major discards problems are associated with the small trawl and boat seine fisheries in coastal waters of Japan. There are also major discards of fish associated with the distant water long line tuna fleet. Quantified discards of particular species are given as in Table 7.
Table 7 - Partial estimates of discards of some major species in Japan (1994)
Products W/W Discards
Species and sector (MT) disc. ratio (MT)
Walleye pollock (distant water trawl in N Pacific)
Walleye pollock (off-shore trawl) 
Flatfishes (small trawl) 
However the quantification of the amount of discards is less certain in most cases and Matsuoka is only able in most instances to indicate in more general terms that fish of particular groups are discarded during various types in fishing operation. This information is summarised in the Table 8 below.
Table 8 - Summary of major discards from the various fishery types in Japan
Type of fishery Target Specie(s) Discarded Comments
Commercial Fisheries
Walleye pollock, thornyheads, rockfish and pacific cod
Small/soft shell/female Tanner crabs
Small Scale Fisheries
Non-commercial - 28%
Other organisms - 30%
8.6 Falkland/Malvinas Islands
The fishery around the Falkland/Malvinas Islands in the South West Atlantic which started commercially in 1987 has been regulated and controlled on the basis of real time commercial and scientific data since soon after it's inception.^ (Nolan and Yau 1996). This has involved collection of data from commercial logbooks, scientific onboard observation and research cruise information. The entering of information on discards into logbooks is mandatory under the licences issued for fishing by the Falkland Islands Government, however it has been found that the information entered into the logbooks is often incomplete and unreliable. The log book records have been compared with those recorded by onboard observers and show that vessels without observers on board reported only 24% of the total bycatch recorded by observers over the same period.
The long line fishery for Patagonian toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides) catches a high proportion by weight of the target species which is discarded because it suffers from what is known as "jellied meat". Nolan and Yau report that over 56% by weight of the toothfish are discarded because of this condition but that this represents less than 14% of the number of fish caught. This suggests that the condition is associated with larger and older fish and that it may become less of a problem as the larger fish become fished out in this relatively young fishery. The jellied meat condition is associated with myxosporidean protozoan parasites in other species of fish although as far as is known no specific identification of the cause in Dissostichus eleginoides has been made.
In the pelagic trawl fishery for southern blue whiting (Micromesistius australis australis) catches of non-target fish are rare and it is reckoned that less than 0.4% of the catch is generally discarded. However the southern blue whiting itself is often heavily infested with Kudua alliaria (a myxosporidean protozoan parasite) and these fish along with those too small for processing will make up the bulk of discards.
Table 9 summarises the major species in the discards by type of fishery as reported by Nolan and Yau. Overall the most commonly reported species in the bycatch/discards are notothen, blue whiting, and hoki. Other species which are incidentally caught but which are not recorded as discards because they are probably consumed on board the vessels include, kingclip, common and Patagonian hake. The discarding of undersized specimens of commercial species are also only occasionally recorded in log books.
Table 9 - Major discard species in Falkland/Malvinas Islands fisheries
Fishery - Species Common Name 
Loligo - Bottom Trawl
Patagonotothen ramsayi Notothen 
Micromesistius australis australis Blue whiting 
Loligo gahi Squid 
Macruronus magellanicus Hoki/Patagonian grenadier
Ilex - Bottom Trawl
Macruronus magellanicus Hoki/Patagonian grenadier
Stromateus brasiliensis Pomfret 
Squalus acanthia Spiny dogfish 
Patagonotothen ramsayi Notothen 
Rays spp 
Finfish - Trawl
Micromesistius australis australis Blue whiting 
Coelorhyncus fasciatus 
Patagonotothen ramsayi Notothen 
Macrourus holotrachys Bigeye grenadier 
Macrourus carinatus 
Macruronus magellanicus Hoki/Patagonian grenadier
Ilex - Jigging
Moroteuthis ingens Squid (Sea arrow) 
Martialia hyadesi Black squid 
Toothfish - Longline
Dissostichus eleginoides Patagonian toothfish <56% of target species discarded because of "jellied meat" condition.
Macrourus holotrachys Bigeye grenadier 
Antimora rostrata Blue antimora (Blue hake)
Bathyraja papilionifera Skate 
Rajidae - Fishery
Patagonotothen ramsayi Notothen 
Raja doellojuradol 
Dissostichus eleginoides Patagonian toothfish 
Echinodermata Sea urchins 
Blue Whiting - Fishery
Micromesistius australis australis Blue whiting Discarded because of parasites
Lampris immaculatus Southern opah 
Lamna nasus Porbeagle shark 
8.7 Western Pacific Ocean tuna fishery
The western and central Pacific Ocean represents the highest concentration of tuna fishing in the world. The statistical area covered by the South Pacific Commission produced an estimated catch of 948,863 tons in 1995. The major species of tuna caught are dominated by skipjack (70%), yellowfin (23%), bigeye (4%) and albacore (3%). The majority of the catch is harvested using purse seines (80%), longline harvesting 12% and pole and line just 8%. There are also small commercial fisheries utilising handlines and trolls for tuna. Bailey et al (1996) review the literature holdings of the South Pacific Commission concerning bycatch and discards in the tuna fisheries and it from this document that the information that follows is extracted.
8.7.1 Purse seines
Purse seine catches can be divided into a number of categories dependent on whether the set was made on a school of fish associated with an object or not. It appears that this association has an affect on the amount of non-tuna (bycatch) species caught at the same time.
Logbook data suggests that 50% of purse seine catches are made on schools not associated with floating objects whereas others are associated with floating logs (34%), man-made fish aggregating devices - FADs (5%) and a small number (1%) with animals. The non-associated school sets tend to produce a lower incidence of non-target species in terms of numbers, weight and the variety of species than those associated with floating objects. It is suggested that un-associated sets produce between 0.35 and 0.77% bycatch whereas associated sets produce 3.0 to 7.3% bycatch. The mix of species are also different depending on the type of set.
Un-associated sets commonly produce ocean anchovy (Stolephorus punctifer) bycatch with smaller numbers of shark, scombrids, billfish and other species.
Whereas associated schools have a higher incidence of bycatch and a larger number of species as shown in Table 10
Table 10 - Species found as bycatch in purse seine catches associated with floating objects
Common in large numbers
Amberjack (Seriola rivoliana)
Mackerel scad (Decapterus macrarellus)
Rainbow runner (Elagatis bipinnulata)
Drummer (Kyphosus cinerascens)
Mahimahi (Coryphaena hippurus)
Ocean triggerfish (Canthidermis maculatus)
Common in moderate numbers
Silky shark (Carcharhinus falciformis)
Wahoo (Acanthocybium solandri)
Bigeye trevally (Caranx sexfasciatus)
Filefish (Aluterus monocerus)
Man-o-war fish (Psenes cyanophrys)
Sergeant major (Abudefduf saxatilis)
With schools associated with logs the purse seines can harvest around 1 tonne of non-target fish per set (range 0.5 to 5.0 tonnes) of which a large portion may be discarded. It has been found, however, that rainbow runner and trigger fish may survive the discarding process and thus are generally released alive. Some mahimahi and wahoo may be retained for eating by crew. Generally, schools attracted to FADs will have the same species composition as the log sets but possibly in larger quantities. Sets on schools alone can include sharks such as silky and oceanic white tip and marlins (blue and black).
8. 7 .2 Long lines
Non-tuna bycatch in tuna longlines can include billfish, blue shark, oceanic white tip shark, Carcharinus spp and turtles. However, these species are thought to have high survival rates and therefore may not be a particular problem. When skipjack are caught these may be discarded. There may be irregular and unpredictable discards of target tuna species because they are too small or damaged.
8.7.3 Pole and line
Pole and line fisheries can produce bycatch of kawakawa (little tuna), frigate mackerel, mahimahi and rainbow runner. However the fishery uses live bait so if bycatch gets too high the vessel will stop fishing or move to other grounds to save wasting the bait. With the use of barbless hooks and flick off practices the survival rates for accidentally caught fish are thought to be high. Unsalable fish may also be taken home by the crew and in Fiji has been given to coastal communities to compensate for bait fishing access. (FAO 1997).
8.7.4 Trolling
When trolling the main targets are juvenile albacore 90 cm long. The bycatch may include sharks, scombrids, billfish, other tunas and skipjack most of which is discarded. Yellowfin may be retained if caught whilst heading for port. Some of the bycatch may be kept for crew consumption. Albacore may be lost during hauling or discarded because it is too small for canning.
8.7.5 Driftnets
The incidental catch of dolphin in tuna driftnets was a major concern and resulted in the banning of their use in the Western Central Pacific and in other parts of the world and was instrumental in brining the question of capture of unwanted marine life by fishing fleets to world attention.
8.7.6 Handlines
The small tuna handline fishery has low bycatches mostly of shark, which are released alive.
8.8 South Pacific artisanal/subsistence fisheries
In the artisanal and subsistence fisheries of the South Pacific islands very little of the catch is not utilised. The exception are fish for which there are taboos such as remoras and shark in certain islands. The known possibility of ciguatera poisons in some fish may lead to discarding of these fish. (FAO 1997)
<section>9</section>
9. Discards and bycatch in Shrimp trawl fisheries.
The highest rates of incidental catch of non-target species as identified by Alverson et al (1994) and other workers is associated with shrimp trawling. The use of selection technology in reducing the incidental catch of non-shrimp in temperature waters does, however, seem to be affecting the amount of bycatch discarded and recent evidence, suggests that in many parts of the world tropical shrimp bycatch which was once discarded is now being utilised. The figures which suggest that large quantities of fish are wasted in certain regions may be over estimates because it had been assumed that non-shrimp catches from tropical shrimp fisheries was automatically equated to discards. (See Table 11)
Alverson et al for instance suggest, that in the Northwest Pacific 97% of the shrimp bycatch is discarded producing over 4 million tonnes of waste fish. This however is countered by information provided by Zhou and Yimin (1996) who suggest that the Chinese shrimp trawl fleet discards very little of the non-shrimp catch. According to Zhou and Yimin the shrimp fishery of China catches about 1.8 million tonnes of bycatch all of which is used, much for feeds for the Chinese aquaculture industry. In S E Asia there has also been a growth in recent years in industry's which use bycatch from shrimp fisheries for human consumption (Chee 1996).
Recent (1997) evidence from the countries of central America and the Caribbean suggest that the amount of incidental catch that is now utilised in the region is greater than that suggested by Alverson et al. In countries such as Belize, Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua for instance it seems that between 20 and 30% of the once discarded bycatch is now utilised and in Venezuela it is probably at least 30%. In Guyana and Brazil the amount of utilisation has increased and probably now accounts for about 10% of the incidental bycatch. In Cuba where the state operates fishing, marketing, processing and distribution it is thought that virtually all edible bycatch is now used which probably accounts for up to 70% of the non-shrimp catch. (F Teutscher, Pers comm.) These figures seem to contradict the blanket figure of 3% utilisation that Alverson et al suggested for the whole of the West Central Atlantic, and perhaps indicate fuller use of the catch in a similar fashion to the
trends seen in South East Asia. See Table 11 below.
The trend for greater and more complete utilisation of bycatch has been noted over the years and as Andrew and Pepperell (1992) state "It seems likely.......that the utilisation of by-catch will increase as demand for protein escalates and the retention and processing of by-catch becomes more economically viable".
Table 11 : Estimated bycatch and discard levels from shrimp fisheries of the world
Area 
Estimated Bycatch
Estimated Discard
Percent Discarded
N W Atlantic 
N E Atlantic 
W C Atlantic 
E C Atlantic 
Mediterranean/Black Sea
S W Atlantic 
S E Atlantic 
W Indian Ocean 
E Indian Ocean 
N W Pacific 
N E Pacific 
W C Pacific 
E C Pacific 
S W Pacific 
S E Pacific 
Total 
Based on: Alverson et al Table 4
9.1 Temperate waters
9.1.1 Pandalus
In temperate waters there has been extensive introduction of selector devices in trawls in recent years which have enabled reduction in the catch of non-target species to be made. This work centres around the use of the Nordmre grate which originated in Norway as a means of reducing the capture of jelly fish but it was also found that incidental catch of fish was reduced without substantial reduction in the catch of shrimp. (Isaksen 1996) The technology has been further developed in particularly Norway, Canada and Australia and incidental catches have now been reduced in the shrimp fisheries of various regions. The grate works by separating active swimming fish, which will swim out of the net to avoid passing through the grate, from passive shrimp which will pass through the grate into the cod end. The device not only greatly reduces the catch of unwanted fish but will also lead to better quality catches, because less large objects get mixed with the shrimp in the cod end
and less time is required on hauling and to sort out the catch before preservation. (Lbach and Viem 1996). In addition it has been suggested that fish escaping from nets fitted with the grates have a high survival rate, particularly compared with fish which escape through the meshes of the cod end of a trawl, which can be so damaged and traumatised by the experience that there chances of long term survival are much reduced. (Vold Soldal & Engs 1997)
In the northern Pandalus borealis shrimp fishery of Canada bycatch, particularly of redfish, has been almost eliminated by the use of Nordmre grates, and new fisheries for shrimp have been opened up in Canadian waters which were not practised before because of high bycatch rates. Bycatch has been reduced from over 20% to less than 5% of total catch in some instances. In 1993 Norway and Russia agreed to introduce compulsory use of the grates in the shrimp fishery in both their EEZ's as well as around Svalbard and their use is mandatory from January 1997 on bottom trawls in the Barents Sea. The use of the grate is now also compulsory in many of the northern shrimp fisheries of the United States of America, Canada and Iceland.
9.1.2 Nephrops
The Nephrops norvegicus fisheries in the North Atlantic and North Sea also produce bycatch some of which is discarded. The Belgian fishery, according to Redant and Polet (1994), discards very small numbers of undersized cod, plaice and sole but there are sometimes discards of large numbers of whiting and dab, depending on area fished and season. However the fishery catches as a matter of course white fish such as cod, plaice and sole for sale when at or above legal size and gunards and dabs are also sold on local markets as well as Nephrops which is the nominal target catch. Figures for the landings (1993) of the most important fish in the catches show that Nephrops in fact only constitutes just over 35% of the landed weight and just under 50% of the value. (See Table 12 and Table 13) It appears, therefore, that the fishery does not target Nephrops exclusively and will react to market demands, auction prices and the catch rates of Nephrops, targeting other species or fishing
other grounds for other species. The regulation concerning landing sizes for the various round and flat fish caught along side the Nephrops dictate or influence the amount of these species discarded. The authors estimate that discarding of undersize and unmarketable whiting by the Nephrops fishery, although amounting to large numbers per year, is small in comparison to discards of whiting from other fishing activities and that probably the discarding of undersize cod, plaice and sole are negligible in comparison with others sources of discarding. This case illustrates the problems associated with the definition of target and non-target species in fishery. The fishery in this case is called the Nephrops fishery but the figures suggest that if only Nephrops was caught and marketed it would not be viable.
Table 12 -
Top ten species in the landings of the Belgian Nephrops fishery 1993 (tonnes)
Species 
Landings tonnes
% age of landing
Nephrops 
Plaice 
Whiting 
Sole 
Cod 
Rays 
Turbot 
Grey Gunard
Dab 
Whelk 
Table 13 - Top ten species in the landings of the Belgian Nephrops fishery 1993 in terms of auction sales figures
Species 
Sales Million BEF
% age of landing
Nephrops 
Sole 
Plaice 
Turbot 
Cod 
Whiting 
Rays 
Brill 
Dab 
Anglerfish
BEF = Belgian Francs
This situation in the Belgian Nephrops fishery seems to contrast with others. Evans et al (1994) report that only 12% of the catch in the Nephrops fishery of the Farne Deep (North Sea) is Nephrops and that a large number of other species, both vertebrates and invertebrates are also caught. Although some lemon sole, plaice, whiting, cod, haddock and sting ray are landed the vast majority of the bycatch was juvenile fish of species of no commercial value and discarded. They conclude that most of the fish was dead before being discarded and much was scavenged by sea birds.
Thorsteinsson (1992) asserts that capture of small haddock has often been a problem in the Icelandic Nephrops fishery. A double trawl one with square mesh window of 135 mm mesh proved that the window allowed the effective release of small haddock and whiting and some cod. All Icelandic Nephrops trawlers were obliged to use such windows very soon after the work concluded.
It seems therefore that progress is being made in eliminating or very much reducing discards in shrimp fisheries in temperate waters. This is happening through the use of selection devices such as the Nordmre grate in the North Atlantic and Australian waters or by the fuller use of fish that is caught alongside the target species. The use of square mesh panels in Nephrops trawls seems to hold some promise for reducing non-target catch and is being introduced in some fisheries. In others however the catch of non-primary target species actually make valuable contributions to the commercial viability of the fishing units.
9.2 Tropical and subtropical waters
The Nordmre grate in its original configuration works by excluding large specimens and retaining the smaller ones which are allowed to pass into the cod end of the trawl net. In tropical shrimp fisheries the shrimp are generally part of a species assemblage where the size of the target shrimp overlap with the size of the fish that need to be excluded and it is often, in fact the smaller specimens that need to be excluded from the net. The size characteristics, therefore, of the species flock and behavioural differences between shrimp and fish mean that the direct transfer of this technology has not been possible into tropical fisheries although some work is continuing in this field with the use of a grids and other devises mounted in the top panel of tropical shrimp trawls allowing the smaller fish and shrimp to escape, showing some promise.
The public conception of the problem of bycatch in tropical shrimp fisheries is, however, different from that associated with the problem in temperate fisheries. It is a fact that many of the tropical shrimp trawling activities take place in waters adjacent to low income, food deficit countries. The pressure in this scenario is not, necessarily, to stop the bycatch being caught but to make use of it for feeding people once it has been caught. Work, for instance, on the use of grid technology in the shrimp fishery of Mozambique was focused on the reduction of catches of "only the very smallest fish..........as the intention of a newly approved project was to take care of and process most of the bycatch taken by the shrimpers" (Isaksen and Larsen 1993) In this case, in the final analysis it seems, that the Mozambique government were reluctant to introduce a top mounted grid in trawls as it reduced incidental fish catch too much. They preferred instead to look further at a
larger size cod-end mesh which reduced only the catch of the very smallest fish and shrimp and retained the large valuable shrimp for export and the fish which could be used for local consumption (R Larsen, Pers comm.)
9.2.1 Species composition
An analysis of the literature reporting the species composition of bycatch in tropical shrimp trawl fisheries shows that there are a large number of species represented in the bycatch but that they represent a relatively small number of families and that some families are found in the bycatch in many parts of the world.
Table 14 below illustrates the commonality of families that occur in the bycatch of shrimp trawlers throughout the topical world. For instance Ariidae (Marine Catfishes), Carangidae (Jacks), Clupeidae (Herrings, shads, sardines, menhaden), Gerreidae (Mojarras), Sciaenidae (Croakers), Trichiuridae (Ribbon Fish) are found in bycatch in all the regions shown in the table. Other species groups such as the Leiognathidae (Pony Fish) are not so wide spread but where they are found can make up large proportions of the non-target catch.
Table 14 - Families of fish reported as tropical shrimp trawl discards/bycatch
Family Name 
Bay of Bengal
Indonesia Australia
S China S
Gulf of Mexico
Caribbean
E Africa / Indian Ocean
Arab Gulf
West African coast
Ariidae Catfish 
Bothidae Flounders 
Carangidae 
Chirocentridae Wolf Herring 
Clupeidae 
Cynoglossidae Soles 
Engraulididae Anchovy 
Gerreidae Mojarras 
Haemulidae Grunts 
Leiognathidae Pony Fish 
Lutjanidae Snappers 
Mullidae Goatfish 
Muraenescidae Eels 
Nemipteridae Threadfin Breams
Platycephalidae Flatheads 
Polynemidae Threadfins 
Priacanthus Bigeye 
Sciaenidae Croakers 
Scombridae Mackerels 
Serranidae Groupers 
Sillago 
Sphyraenidae Barracuda 
Stromateidae Pomfrets 
Synodontidae Lizard Fish 
Trichiuridae Ribbon Fish 
Sources: Alverson et al (1994); Papers from: Gulland and Rothschild (1982); U Khum Mg Aye (1995); Chee (1996); Bejei (1980); Barratt (1986); Hendrickson and Griffin (1993); Gordon (1991); Feidi 1989
Andrew and Pepperell (1992) conclude that the four main characteristics of shrimp bycatch are:
1. Fin fishes make up the majority of the catch in many shrimp fisheries.
2. The sizes of the fish are generally small <20 cm and often of similar size to the shrimp.
3. A relatively small number of species of fishes may dominate the by-catch.
4. Several families of fish are abundant in the bycatch of many of the worlds shrimp fisheries (such as sciaenids, pomadasyids, sparids, synodontids, serranids, bothids, and nemipterids)
9.3 The early work on tropical shrimp bycatch use
In the 1970's the growth of shrimp fisheries in tropical and warm waters and the perceived growth of demand for animal feed stuffs in those countries with growing shrimp fisheries led to the search for means of utilising bycatch for animal feeds. Experiments on the production of fish silages or fish hydrolysates based on methods already used in Denmark and Poland were made. (Disney et al 1978) The goal of this work was to produce a simple technology that could be used on a small scale in tropical fisheries where the main source of raw material was to be found. The use of organic and inorganic acids or the use of acid producing bacteria were investigated which, when added to a mixture of small fish, would produce an stable liquid which could be incorporated into animal feeds. This work in UK, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Sri Lanka, Australia and elsewhere suggested that it was technically feasible to produce such products and that they had potential as feeds for livestock. However
the uptake of this technology in tropical shrimp fisheries has been small. In spite of the fact that the technology is simple it still requires the supply of acids or acid producing bacteria, a change in the way in which animal feeds are produced (since a liquid rather than a solid are made) and extensive training of potential users. Twenty or more years since the first work was done and there are few if any examples of its uptake in the target communities.
In the late 1970's and early 1980's the focus had changed in the search for answers to the utilisation of shrimp bycatch. The proceedings from a conference in Guyana in 1981 (IDRC 1982) illustrate that workers were now looking at the use of bycatch to produce new products mainly for human consumption. The products under investigation sought to disguise the original fish by the production of minced products from the flesh either as salted products (Young 1982, Bligh and Duclos 1982) or as frozen minces (Tan at al 1982, Productos Pesqueros Mexicanos 1982, Tableros and Young 1982). Other investigations used existing technology to endeavour to make products resembling existing products such as canned pates, sausages, frozen fish sticks etc. (Poulter 1982). Recent evidence suggests that very few of these technology lead initiatives have provided long term solutions to the use of bycatch with few examples of products still being made commercially.
9.4 Gulf of Mexico and South Atlantic prawn fisheries of the United States
A study conducted by the Gulf and South Atlantic Fisheries Development Foundation into bycatch reduction devises applicable for use in the Gulf of Mexico and the South Atlantic Shrimp Fisheries analysed in some depth the species composition and quantity of catch in the two fisheries. The study was prompted because of concern that shrimp fishing may have been contributing to over fishing of commercially important species through capture of juveniles of those species. Capture of juvenile red snapper (Lutjanus campechanus) in the Gulf of Mexico and in the South Atlantic of weakfish (Cynoscion regalis) along with king and Spanish mackerel (Scomberomorus cavalla and S maculatus) in both fisheries had been cause for concern and it was thought that the incidental catch of these species in the shrimp trawl fisheries was limiting the resource available for fisheries directed at these species and the main aims of the programme were to reduce the capture of these species although, as
can be seen below, other less commercially important species were more common in the incidental catch.
In the Gulf of Mexico Fish Shrimp trawl fishery was concluded that over 450 taxa were identified in the catch and average catch was about 27 kg/hour of trawling. The catch could be divided into three major components as shrimp 26%, other invertebrates 17% and finfish 67% giving a ratio of 5.25 bycatch to 1 of shrimp. This figure contrasts the figure of 10.3:1 given in Alverson et al for the Gulf of Mexico shrimp fishery.
The top ten species found in catch were as follows in Table 15
Table 15
- Top ten species found in Gulf of Mexico shrimp trawl catches
Species - English Name 
Percentage of Total Catch
Longspined porgy 
Brown shrimp 
Atlantic croaker 
Inshore lizardfish 
Pink shrimp 
Gulf butterfish 
Lesser blue crab 
White shrimp 
Longspined swimming crab
Brown rock shrimp 
In the South Atlantic about 150 taxa were found in shrimp trawls with a catch rate of about 26 kg/hour. Shrimp made up 18%, other invertebrates 31% and finfish about 51% of the total catch. This gives a bycatch to other species ratio of about 4.5 to 1. The top ten species in the catch are listed as follows in Table 16.
Table 16
- Top ten species found in South Atlantic shrimp trawl catches
Species - English name
Percentage of Total Catch
Cannonball jellyfish 
White shrimp 
Spot 
Atlantic menhaden 
Brown shrimp 
Other jellyfish 
Atlantic croaker 
Southern kingfish 
Blue crab 
Star drum 
9.5 Northern Prawn Fishery of Australia
The area of sea within Australia's EEZ from Cape York in the east to Cape Talbot in the west is a rich area for capture of penaeid prawns. Known in Australia as the Northern Prawn Fishery (NPF) it yields quantities of the shoaling banana prawns (Penaeus merguensis) which involve little if any bycatch and quantities of the more disperse tiger prawns (P. esculentus and P. semisulcatus) which involve capture of considerable quantities of non-target fish or bycatch. A study by the Northern Territory Department of Primary Industry and Fisheries of bycatch between 1987 and 1992 (Pender et al 1992a) looked at the likely utilisation options for the common species in the bycatch. They concluded that 97% of the bycatch was discarded at sea with presently only valuable species being retained, these are detailed in Table 17.
Table 17 - Components of the bycatch in the northern prawn fishery retained onboard
Local Name Scientific grouping
Bugs (Shovel nosed lobsters) Thenus orientalis
Squids Loligo spp
Snappers Lutjanus spp
Emperors Lethrinus spp
Mackerels Scomberomorus spp
Cods Epinephelus spp
Sharks Carcharhinidae and Hemigaleidae
Of the discarded bycatch most was fish, with over 200 taxa recorded, belonging to 75 families. The major families of the discarded fish bycatch are given in Table 18 which shows that they are primarily of families which have a small size at maturity and were currently un-used in Australia.
Table 18 - Major families of fish discarded in the mixed species fishery in 1988
Local Name Scientific grouping Percentage of fish bycatch
Grinners Synodontidae 
Threadfin/Monocle Breams Nemipteridae 
Dollar Fish Leiognathidae 
Trevallies, scads, queenfish Carangidae 
Goatfish Mullidae 
Leather jackets Monacanthidae 
The studies identified a number of species with potential commercial value within the discarded catch. (Pender et al 1992b). The options for use included fish for direct human consumption, production of surimi, use as bait, fertilisers and animal feeds. The major city and capital of Northern Territories - Darwin, has groups of residents from Asian and other back grounds for whom some of the fish in the discarded bycatch are more familiar, than for Australians. A number of species in the bycatch were assessed for their acceptability by these groups and assessments of the viability of utilisation made. The data indicated that taking into account the population sizes and the amount of fish potentially available the following had market potential - trevallies, goatfish, threadfin breams and emperors. Available in smaller quantities but with higher demand from certain groups are species such as black pomfret, Bombay duck, whiting, tufted sole and octopus. The findings also
indicated that generally any fish more than 13-15 cm in length could be acceptable for consumption.
The work also looked at the possibility of production of surimi, canned, dried and frozen products. It was concluded that, although feasible technically, there would be, at best, marginal profits on such enterprises.
Non-food use as bait, animal feeds and fertilisers were also investigated. Squids, pilchards, garfish, mullets and cuttlefish have potential as bait for anglers and commercial fishermen. The aquaculture of barramundi (Lates spp) requires supplies of raw fish. Three species in the bycatch were found particularly suitable as food for barramundi, with others which were tried being less acceptable and other species not eaten at all by barramundi. See Table 19.
Table 19 - Fish species preferences of Lates calcarifer brood stock
Species 
Preparation
Preference^*
Pellona ditchela 
Whole
Polydactylus multiradiatus
Whole
Setipinna tenuifilis 
Whole
Thryssa hamiltonii 
Whole
Thryssa setirostris 
Whole
Harpadon transluscens 
Headed
Saurida micropectoralis 
Headed
Euristhmus lepturus 
Tails only
Trichiurus lepturus 
Headed
Apolectus niger 
Whole
Chirocentrus dorab 
Headed/halved
Cynoglossus spp 
Whole
Johnius vogleri 
Whole
Johnius vogleri 
Fillet
Platycephalus spp 
Headed
Priacanthus tayenus 
Whole
*Scored from untouched (1) - most preferred (4)
This extensive study of the NPF bycatch utilisation possibilities concluded that "Although there is a large unused bycatch resource, making more use of it is fraught with difficulties as the potential large scale markets are not lucrative enough to support the costs of processing the product." This confirms the case that more often than not it is economics rather than technology that stands in the way of fuller utilisation of bycatch.
Recently it has been reported that trawlers operating in the Northern Territory Prawn fishery use hoppers on the deck of the vessel to assist in sorting of the catch. The prawns and fish are dumped on a grid above the hopper. The small animals fall into the hopper which is filled with sea water. The large ones are released over the side. The prawns sink to the bottom and land on a conveyor belt. These are brought out and transferred to a sorting conveyor belt. The fish swim around in the hopper until the prawns are sorted. The water is released and the fish are quickly moved along the conveyors back into the sea. No information is presently available regarding the eventual survival of the released fish. (S Kennelly Pers. comm.). A system of sorting in the water has also been reported as being used in the New South Wales prawn fishery where the mixed catch in the cod end of the trawl is emptied into a water tank, the live prawns settle at the bottom and the fish are taken
from the top and floated off.
9.6 South East Asia
The move towards the use of bycatch species for the production of traditional food products in South East Asia, such as fish balls, was catalysed largely by the South East Asia Fisheries Development Centre, Marine Fisheries Research Department (MFRD) in Singapore. Through a series of laboratory based experiments it was ascertained that the meat of certain species of bycatch fish had the right gelling and protein properties to produce fish jelly products such as fish balls for local consumption and had potential for the production of surimi as a potential export. The MFRD has been running training courses and publicity campaigns for fish ball manufacturers in S E Asia for a number of years now and bycatch is now a supplementary source of raw material for the industry. The species involved include threadfin breams, croakers, big eye snapper and barracuda which are found in bycatches from the shrimp trawlers in the region and other parts of the world.
9.6.1 Thailand
Suwanrangsi (1988) reported the development of a range of products from bycatch from both fish and shrimp trawlers in Thailand, with the assistance/collaboration of the SEAFDEC and others. Dominant among the species caught are threadfin breams (Nemipteridae) goat fish (Mullidae), trevallies (Selaroides), flatheads (Platycephalus) and bigeye (Priacanthus) which as can be seen from Table 14 are common in other fisheries as well. In looking for means of using these potentially valuable fish groups it was necessary to assist in improving on-board handling systems so that improved quality raw material was available. This involved work on upgrading handling systems using chilled sea water and the transhipment at sea on a daily basis to ensure the raw material of adequate quality for processing and eventual human consumption.
Threadfin bream, and other species were found to have suitable gelling properties for the production of surimi products and the number of surimi plants in Thailand and the exports of surimi from Thailand to Japan increased dramatically during the 1980's. In addition bycatch species have been increasingly used for the production of locally consumed products such as fish balls - species which have been demonstrated to be particularly useful in this regard are again, threadfin bream, tongue sole, bigeye, goat fish, glass pony fish and flathead and these species are increasingly being used to supplement and replace the more traditional species (barracuda, sea eel and sole) which because they can be used for export products such as surimi are in greater demand. Several other products have been developed such as noodles, sausages and seasoned minces using bycatch species. One particular item that has found both export and local marketing success is fish satay made from lizard fish
(Saurida spp). A report prepared for FAO (Kungsawan 1996) maintains that very little discarding now takes place at sea in the Thai shrimp industry. The non-shrimp catch can be divided into specimens which have immediate human consumption value, those that are processed before consumption, those which are juveniles of commercially important species and "true trash fish". It appears therefore that a whole new sub set of activities has now developed in Thailand specifically to deal with non-target organisms from the shrimp industry. The paper by Kungsawan suggests that over 1.2 million tons of trash fish was made into fish meal in 1992 contributing substantially to the country's fish meal requirements. Using the conversion factor suggested in the paper this is likely to have produced about 266,000 tonnes of meal. The FAO figures for imports of fish meal to Thailand for 1992 are given as nearly 67,000 tonnes, valued at just over 49 million US $ (FAO 1996c). This suggests that
locally produced fish meal from shrimp trawling makes a substantial contribution to the nations fish meal requirements. As well as over 100 land based fish meal plants some processing boats for fish meal are also reported to be operating at sea and purchasing trash fish from boats at sea.
The trash fish component of the catch which is called "true trash" and made into fish meal is made up a number of species the predominance of which depends on the fishing methods and areas. The most common families/groups are given in Table 20 below.
Table 20 - Main species in the "true trash" component
Species group 
Rough proportions in trash
Leiognathidae 
High
Trash crab 
High
Apoginidae 
Medium
Gobiidae 
Medium
Balistidae 
Medium
Biohidae 
Medium
Tetraodontidae 
Small to medium
Callionymidae 
Small to medium
Pentapodidae 
Small
Daya spp 
Small
Periophthalmidae 
Small
Platycephalidae 
Small
Scorpaenidae 
Small
Bragmaceros spp 
Small
Synancedae 
Very small
Pentaprion longimanus
Very small
Siganus spp 
Very small
Other at-sea operations for use of bycatch include the preliminary salting of anchovies for fish sauce manufacture, the boiling of anchovies, prior to land based drying to make dried boiled anchovies for export to Malaysia and the salting of some other varieties of fish, such as king mackerel for production of high quality/value products for both domestic and export markets.
The rest of the catch will be sorted into fish suitable for human consumption including small specimens which would be classified as bycatch. In the industry large fish of commercially species are not considered bycatch and are part of the normal fish catch, entering the human food chain directly as fresh fish on local markets. Small species of fish such as threadfin breams, monocle breams and croaker, are especially sorted from the rest for production of surimi type products and fish balls. Local traditional products such as salted dried fish, fish sauce, fermented fish, shrimp paste and dried cephalopods are also made from bycatch. The main components within the bycatch not categorised as trash are shown in Table 21.
Table 21 - Main commercial fish species caught as juveniles in the Thai shrimp bycatch
Common Name Scientific Name
Indian mackerel Rastrelliger kanagurta
Lizard fish Saurida isarankurai
Lizard fish S. undosquamis
Lizard fish S. elongata
Threadfin bream Nemipterus hexodon
Threadfin bream N. mesoprion
Purple spot bigeye Priacanthus tayenus
One-finlet scad Atule mate
Yellowstripe scad Selaroides leptolepis
Monocle bream Scolopsis teaeniopterus
Tonguesole Cynoglossus spp
Flathead fish Platycephalus spp
Deep bodied trevally Atule kalla
9.6.2 Malaysia
The species make up of catches from trawlers operating in waters near Kuala Kedah on the west coast of peninsular Malaysia has been reported by Abd. Haris Hilmi (1997). He reports that there is no discarding at sea from the small trawlers fishing from Kuala Kedah which operate on a one day per trip basis. Landings obviously vary but, averaged during the survey about 500 kg per day trip. Of this 330 kg (66%) was classified as "trash fish" and was "sent to the nearby fishmeal factory". Details of species classified as trash fish are given in Table 22.
Table 22 - Trash fish in Malaysian shrimp trawls
Common Name Scientific Name
Short mackerel Rastrelliger brachysoma
Cardinal fish Apogon spp *
Pugnose ponyfish Secutor insidiator *
Sardine/Sprat Kowala macrolepis
Andhra anchovy Stolephorus andhraensis
Shad Pellona spp
Greyfin croaker Pennahia macrocephalus
Largehead hairtail Trichiurus haumela (lepterus)
Short-nosed tripodfish Triacanthus brevirostris
White-spotted spinefoot Siganus oramin
Anchovy Thrissocles spp *
Pony fish Leiognathus spp *
Scad Selar kalla *
Puffer fish Lagocephalus spp *
Deep pugnose ponyfish Secutor ruconius *
* The authors refer to these species as "genuine trash fish"
Dominant in the fish sent for fish meal are small Rastrelliger spp, Apogon spp, Secutor spp during spring tide fishing and during the neap tide fishing Stolephorus andhraensis made up over 40% of the trash fish.
In addition to the species listed above some small prawns of the target species were also included in the trash and as can be seen some fish which are also included in Table 23 below for marketing and sale. The criteria for sale as human food or conversion to meal is based on size, small specimens being sent for fish meal production the larger ones for human consumption either fresh or dried.
Table 23 - Major commercial species caught in Malaysian shrimp trawls
Major group Scientific Name Common name
Shrimp 
Penaeus merguiensis Banana prawn
Metapenaeus lysianassa 
Metapenaeus dobsoni 
Metapenaeus affinis 
Pelagic Fish 
Rastrelliger brachysoma Short mackerel
Sardinella fimbriata Fringescale sardine
Chirocentrus dorab Wolf herring
Scomberomorus spp Spanish mackerel
Atule mate Yellowtail scad
Stolephorus heterolobus Shorthead anchovy
Pampus argentus Silver pomfret
Demersal Fish 
Atropus atropus Cleftbelly trevally
Cynoglossus lingua Long tongue sole
Dasyatis spp Stingrays
Muraenesox cinereus Conger eel
Nibea soldadu Soldier croaker
Pennahia macrocephalus Greyfin croaker
Nemipterus japonicus Japanese threadfin bream
Nemipterus hexodon Ornate threadfin bream
Otolithes ruber Tiger-toothed croaker
Anodontostoma chacunda Chacunda gizzard shad
Cephalopods 
Loligo duvauceli Squid
Sepia aculeata Cuttlefish
Sepioteuthis lessoniana Squid
Sepiella inermis Cuttlefish
Crab 
Carybdis cruciata Swimming crab
As reported by Chee (1996) there are now specific value added marketing opportunities for some of the previously discarded trawl bycatch species in Malaysia as follows:
Table 24 - Uses for some Malaysian trash fish
Species Use
Croakers Salted/Dried
Mullids Barbecue/Snack foods
Mantid shrimp & Shovel nose lobsters Sold fresh
Synodontids, bulleye Fish balls
9.6.3 Myanmar
In Myanmar, U Khum Mg Aye (1995) reported that some bycatch from the shrimp trawlers along the Rakhine coast is collected by local fishing craft at sea and brought for sale at local markets although the majority was discarded at sea. The report suggests that between 10 and 20% of the bycatch had value as human food on local markets with the rest being sold as animal feed. The fish involved in the bycatch belonged to the following families;
Pomadasyidae, Sciaenidae, Synodontidae, Nemipteridae, Trichiuridae, Clupeidae, Carangidae, Scombridae, Mullidae, Ariidae, Dasyatidae, Lutjanidae, Serrenidae, Muraenesocidae, Stromatidae, Loligonidae, Polynemidae.
9.6.4 South East Asia general
From the above it would appear that there are markets in South East Asia for many species caught as bycatch in shrimp trawling particularly the following species groups:
Flatheads (Platycephalus)
Threadfin breams (Nemipteridae)
Bigeye (Priacanthus)
Goat fish (Mullidae)
Tongue sole (Cynoglossidae)
Croakers (Sciaenidae)
Barracuda (Sphyraenidae)
Trevallies (Selaroides)
Glass pony fish (Leiognathidae)
Referring to the Table 14 above it can be seen that some of these species are common throughout the world of shrimp bycatch and the literature and experience suggests that although they are utilised to advantage in some Asian countries this is not necessarily so in other regions. The profitability of the main activity of catching shrimps has perhaps declined and the added income from marketing selected fish from the catch has become more attractive. This trend was noted even in the early 1980's by Saisithi (1982) where there was in Thailand, at least, a move from use of bycatch for animal feeding towards human consumption - this trend has been accelerated in recent years.
9.7 South Asia
9.7.1 India
Studies on the options for improved use of bycatch form shrimp trawlers in India have been made which suggest that, as might be expected in such a vast and diverse country, the socio-economic and marketing differences affect utilisation scenarios in different parts.
In Gujarat on the north west coast of India for instance virtually all bycatch from the local prawn trawlers is used, (Bostock 1987). The majority is dried either with or without salt and depending on species and quality of raw material will be used for human consumption or for poultry feeds. More recently the processors sort out larger specimens from the bycatch which will be able to be sold fresh on the local market. They also now sort the bycatch by species to produce single species dried products which can be sold at higher prices than mixed species batches. The main sorted species are jewfish (Sciaenids), pomfret and ribbon fish. (Personal observation)
The situation on the east coast of India however is more varied it seems. (Bostock and Ryder 1995) There are a number basic types of trawling operation in the Bay of Bengal for shrimp varying in size, fishing grounds and means of onboard preservation. These differences influence the way in which the non-shrimp catch is used. The freezer trawlers tend to retain all "quality fish" which is bulk frozen in pounds and assuming storage space is available on board the small miscellaneous fish may be bulk frozen in the cold rooms during the last few days of a voyage. The government owned freezer trawlers sell their frozen bycatch through a pre-arranged system to traders who transport it to Howrah Market in Calcutta.
With the smaller craft the landed quantities depend primarily on the length of trip and the availability of excess ice (after the preservation of the target shrimp), salt and deck space for sorting and /or drying of certain species such as anchovy and jewfish.
The most common reason given for not retaining more of the bycatch is the difference in value between shrimp and the non-shrimp. However, there are also considerable differences between the value of different species within the fish bycatch as is illustrated in Table 25. This data illustrates the influence that size can have on value with Polynemus and Sciaenids for instance being classed as high value above a certain size but as trash below that size. This means that fishermen will tend to sort out fish of particular species and sizes for separate sale from others which they may either discard at sea or land but sell in bulk for production of animal feeds or fertiliser.
Table 25
- Average percentage composition of fish landings - Nov. 1990 to Mar. 1991
Category of bycatch and group
Average quay-side price (Rs/kg)
Approx. size (cm)
% of landings
Small miscellaneous fish 
Clupeids 
Sciaenids 
Catfishes 
Carangoids 
Scombroids 
Nemipterids 
Sharks 
Lizard fish 
Chirocentrus 
Barracuda 
Psenes 
Polynemus spp 
Ribbon Fishes 
Solefish 
Others 
High Value Fish 
Pomfrets 
Eels 
Perches 
Cods 
Polynemus spp 
Skates 
Sharks 
Sciaenids 
Flat fishes 
Tunas 
Others 
Source: Bay of Bengal Programme (1991), cited in Bostock and Ryder (1995)
Rs = Rupee 25 = US$ 1 (at the time of publication)
9.8 Preservation before landing
One of the primary reasons why shrimp bycatch is not used more extensively is that in order for it to be landed in fresh enough condition to be of use it needs to be preserved and stored on board the catching vessel, probably for some days (on multi-day fishing trips), before landing. The costs in terms of storage space on board, means of preservation (ice or refrigeration) and the time and effort of the crew in undertaking the tasks involved generally out-weigh the first sale value of the catch.
Investigations have been made in a number of situations on ways to unburden the catching vessel of the bycatch and the associated costs. These have involved the possibility of mother ships and carrier vessels collecting fish direct from the trawlers or from containers of bycatch jettisoned into the sea for instance. The costs involved in setting up and running such formalised, often government run and instigated, systems, however, have often been found to far out-weigh the value of the bycatch itself. More success has been found with the involvement of small craft where the capital and running costs are less and the owners and operators have stepped in to take advantage of a raw material which costs little. This activity has appeared as a follow on from fishing in some instances. Small-scale fishermen in coastal waters finding it more and more difficult to make a living from fish capture have turned, using their existing tools and skills (boats and seamanship) to collecting
unwanted catch from shrimp trawlers. It is ironic, perhaps, that the use of shrimp trawlers in coastal waters has sometimes been blamed for the disruption of traditional fishing patterns by small-scale fishermen and yet that same activity may be alleviating some of the problems it has created by giving those same fishermen alternative income generating opportunities.
The problems of retaining fish on board are as follows:
* Sorting problems onboard
* Time taken for unloading bycatch in port
* Prolonged turn round in port reduces the operational time of the vessel
* Limited storage space on board
* Limited preservation facilities on board
* Possible contamination of shrimp
It would appear that transferring the fish to carrier vessels for subsequent discharge at port overcomes these problems, however, transfer at sea brings with it it's own problems:
* Physical difficulties of transfer between vessels
* Rough weather making it difficult and unpredictable
* Possibility of the crew off loading not just bycatch but also more valuable catch makes it unattractive for many vessels owners/operators
* Problems with the catching vessels and the collecting vessels locating one another at sea
However, even if these problems can be overcome simply bringing the fish to shore is not generally enough. In order for sustainable arrangements to be made for collection of bycatch at sea there appear therefore to be some important prerequisites. These might be listed as follows:
* Suitable collector vessels
* Willing crews
* Favourable sea conditions
* Agreement with the vessel owners
* Marketing opportunities for the bycatch
There are, however, a number of cases where transfer at sea has helped to promote the use of fish that would otherwise be wasted.
9.8.1 Bay of Bengal
Fish collection happens with Indian vessels operating in the Bay of Bengal, but in an informal and opportunistic manner. As suggested above some of the mitigating circumstances which appear to make informal collection such as this more likely are as follows:
* Trawlers working relatively close to shore.
* Poor fishing opportunities for traditional fishermen who use their normal boats to collect bycatch instead
* Favourable weather conditions.
The informal arrangements seem to be often of little advantage to the crew of the trawling vessel since as reported by Kulberg (1989) in one observed exchange in the Bay of Bengal the crew of the vessel received some cigarettes for the fish but no cash payment. In other exchanges fresh food is exchanged for the bycatch. On the other hand there is little disadvantage to the crew of the vessel since they would be involved in disposing of the fish over the side in any case. The main point that is apparent from the information available on the situation in the Bay of Bengal is that the transfer of fish at sea is generally not sanctioned by the vessel owners, who fear the clandestine transfer of more valuable catch and therefore loss of revenue.
9.8.2 Gulf of Thailand
In the Gulf of Thailand, Kungsuwan (1996) reports that collection at sea now normally happens with vessels making longer trips. The company which owns the vessel arranges to rendezvous at sea primarily to provide provisions such as ice and food and for the collection of the target catch, however if space allows bycatch will also be transferred at sea and brought to shore for marketing. In the Gulf of Thailand there are also vessels which produce fish meal at sea from waste fish and fish is transferred to them from fishing vessels for processing.
9.8.3 Mozambique
In Mozambique a system is now operating whereby small scale, artisanal fishermen are using their boats to collect bycatch from shrimp trawlers, negotiating for a share of the bycatch on a barter basis and in competition with a system of collector vessels that had been set up by government with foreign aid assistance, (Kelleher and Musa 1995). The aid project had adopted a strategy for establishment of five collection centres where fish would be salted and dried or packed for fresh distribution along the coast of Mozambique. These centres were to be serviced by collector boats from trawlers to shore for raw fish and transport vessels for transport of product from the collection centres to major cities. The project's experiences were, however, not encouraging. In the first few months of operation the production targets were only being fulfilled to about 10% and the over capitalisation in boats and equipment was proving problematical. As has been suggested above however the
project provided a spur to entrepreneurs to enter the system and utilising a less capital intensive and simpler mechanism for use of the resource. The uptake in Mozambique has been assisted by the shortage of alternative protein supplies on the local market because of years of civil unrest. The bycatch products have centred around traditional food items in the diet such as dried/salted and fresh fish rather than development of new products.
The species which appear with most frequency in the bycatch in Mozambique are shown in Table 26.
Table 26 - Common species in Mozambique bycatch
Scientific Name English/local Name
Hilsa kelee Kelee shad
Thryssa vitrirostris Orangemouth anchovy
Johnius dussumieri Sin croaker
Otolithes ruber 
Trichiurus lepturus Hairtail
Arius dussumieri Blacktip sea catfish
Cynoglossus spp Sole
Pellona ditchella Indian pellona
Upeneus sulphureus Silver goatfish
Upeneus taeniopterus Fin stripe goatfish
Terapon theraps Largescaled terapon
Leiognathus equulus Common ponyfish
Polynemus sextarius Blackspot threadfin
Gazza minuta Toothed ponyfish
Sillago sihama Silver silago
Sepia spp Cuttlefish
Pomadasys maculatum Saddle grunt
Small prawns
9.8.4 Madagascar
In Madagascar an aid assisted programme for the collection at sea and the use of bycatch from prawn trawling has been reported by Rakotondrasoa (1995). The bycatch was divided into three categories depending on the end use to which it could be put. First choice fish with the highest value could be used for fresh distribution into the hotel and restaurant trade as well as to higher income consumers. The species concerned are shown in Table 27.
Table 27 - First grade fish for hotel and restaurant trade in Malagasy bycatch
Scientific name English name
Sphyreana spp Barracuda
Scomberomorus commersoni Narrow-barred Spanish mackerel
Psettodes erumei Indian spiny turbot
Otolithes ruber Tiger-toothed croaker
Nemipterus bleekeri Threadfin bream
There is a second category of fish species which is sold to the less affluent section of the population, consisting of the species listed in Table 28.
Table 28 - Second grade fish in Malagasy bycatch
Scientific name English name
Leiognathus spp Ponyfishes
Decapterus russelli Indian scad
Dussumieria acuta Rainbow sardine
Rastrelliger kanagurta Indian mackerel
Terapon spp Terapon
Upeneus vittatus Goatfish
The third group of species which is used as animal feeds includes:
Saurida tumbil
(Greater lizardfish)
Chirocentrus dorab
(Wolf herring)
Small mixed fish
Mixed crabs and other crustacea
The programme was geared towards producing a fully integrated system for collecting the bycatch from the prawn trawlers at sea, transferring it to shore and processing of the fish for both human and animal feeds.
9.8.5 Tanzania
The composition of bycatch and potential discards in the Tanzanian shrimp fishery is similar to elsewhere. Mgawe (1995) lists the species in Table 29 as being most important in the composition of the fish that is landed. Fish that is discarded at sea is not included. Although species of fish takes priority over size, fish which is retained for sale is generally of 50 gms or above, with smaller fish being thrown overboard - discarded what ever the species.
Table 29 - Most frequently observed species in the bycatch in Tanzania
Scientific name Local/English name
Leiognathids Pony fish
Thryssa spp Anchovy
Trichiurus spp Hairtail
Chirocentrus spp Wolf herring
Otolithes spp Tiger tooth croaker
Arius spp Catfish
Cephalopoda Cuttlefish/squids
Mugil spp Mullet
Holothuria Sea cucumber
The collection of bycatch and its utilisation has evolved over recent years and is now a viable business for a number of scales of operation. This has been catalysed, partly, by government which now requires that a fisheries officer accompanies the fishing boats and that trawl fishing should stop at 18:00 hrs to allow for collection of bycatch. The amount of bycatch landed is also a significant factor in the granting of renewal of the annual fishing licence. These measures have ensured that trawler owners now preserve a reasonable amount of bycatch.
Mgawe suggests that there are no marketing problems for the bycatch and that there is room for increased utilisation. He suggests that legalising the present undercover sales at sea, increased communications between the various centres involved and adherence to the government regulations which restrict fishing after 18:00 hrs, thus allowing time for off loading bycatch at the close of the days fishing, would stimulate the trade still further.
9.8. 6 Gambia
In Gambia an informal arrangement has arisen whereby fishermen who have been displaced and initially disadvantaged by the presence of shrimp trawlers now make a business of collecting bycatch from the trawlers and selling it through various outlets on shore. These collectors have arrangements with the crews and captains of the vessels and most fish is exchanged for food stuffs rather than cash although some of the more valuable fish may be purchased for money. This trade is not sanctioned by the vessels' owners because of the risk of sale of target species but there is little that can be done to stop it. The demand for the products available as bycatch from the trawlers has come from a number of quarters which has encouraged the trade. Shrimp and other "good quality" fish are sold to hotels and restaurants by prior arrangement, sole and cuttlefish are of particular interest to some middlemen and most of the fin fish catch is sold direct to consumers or through middlemen on
the beach. (Jallow 1995) The species present in the catch as listed by Jallow are given in Table 30 below.
Table 30 - Species in shrimp trawler catch in Gambia
Scientific name English name
Pseudotolithus typus Long neck croaker
Pseudotolithus brachynathus Law croaker
Pseudotolithus senegalensis Cassava croaker
Fonticulus elongatus Bobo croaker
Plectorhyncus mediterraneus Rubberlip grunt
Pomadasys jubelini Sompat grunt
Epinephelus aeneus White grouper
Epinephelus guaza Dusky grouper
Polydactylus quadrifilis Giant African threadfin
Galeoides decadactylus Lesser African threadfin
Sepia spp Cuttlefish
Arius latiscutatus Rough head sea catfish
Arius heudeloti Smooth mouth sea catfish
Sphyraena spp Barracuda
Penaeus notialis Shrimps
Drepane africana African sickle fish
Cynoglossus senegalensis Sole fish
Cybium spp Snail
Data provided by Jallow suggests that of the non-shrimp catch the African threadfins, croakers, grunts, sole fish and African sickle fish make up the major part of the bycatch. Barracuda and cuttle fish are relatively rare and seasonal. The Cybium spp have become the subject of specialised processors being fermented and exported to Senegal where they are in high demand.
9.8.7 Cameroon
In Cameroon the transfer of fish at sea is illegal (Eyabi-Eyabi 1995) however local fishermen find that collecting fish from trawlers at sea is more lucrative than going fishing and some practice this trade on a regular basis. It is estimated that about 1,000 tonnes of bycatch fish were landed per year on the beaches and is sold in mixed batches of both marketable and unmarketable fish at prices agreed between the ex fishermen and the crew of the trawler. Resale value at the beach can be two or three times the price that was paid to the trawler crew, although some fish will be thrown out as unsellable. The most common marketable fish which are either sold fresh, smoke/dried, boiled, fried, roasted or grilled are shown in Table 31
Table 31 - Marketable fish in bycatch in Cameroon
Scientific name English name
Ethmalosa spp Bonga shad
Sardinella spp Sardinella
Pellonula vorax Bigtoothed pellonula
Brachydeuterus auritus Bigeye grunt
Ilisha africana African ilisha
9.8.8 Cuba
In Cuba the government have set up a system for recovery of bycatch from their domestic fleet (Garcia-Rodriquez 1995). The difficulties of vessel to vessel transfer of bycatch at sea which can be affected by weather conditions and problems of location at sea have been overcome by the establishment of receiving centres at sea. These are located at the fishing grounds and are used only when the fishing fleet is fishing away from shore and not landing at shore based plants on a daily basis.
The trawlers after each haul sort the catch into three components before onboard preservation.
* Shrimps
* Fish from the bycatch for human consumption
* Fish from the bycatch for animal feed production
The trawlers off-load their catch at the receiving centres on a daily basis, where it is further iced and then transferred to carrier vessels for transport to shore based processing plants. This system allows good quality bycatch for human consumption to be landed for various products. The trawlers, collecting vessels, receiver centres and the industrial plants are all government owned making implementation and control of such a system relatively straight forward. There are requirements that skippers land predetermined quantities and quality of bycatch at the centres and if these are exceeded then crews get bonuses. Recent evidence suggests that all the edible bycatch is now utilised. Bycatch can include up to 30% jelly fish, star fish, sponges etc. which are inedible and discarded but the rest is either sold fresh after sorting by species or made into fish minces and pulps for freezing and human food. (F Teutscher Pers comm.)
A list of the main species used in Cuba for human consumption from the bycatch are shown in Table 32
Table 32 - Main species used for human consumption in Cuban bycatch
Scientific name English Name
Lepophidium graellsi Emerald
Lutjanus synagris Lane snapper
Micropogonias furnieri Croaker
Diplectrum formosum Sand perch
Synodontus spp. Lizard
Dasyastis spp. Rays
Callinectes sapidus Blue crab
Squilla Mantis shrimp
Panulirus argus Spiny lobster
Loligo pealei Squid
Amusium laurentis Clams
Laevicardium laevigatus
9.8.9 Suriname
It appears that most of the bycatch from shrimp trawling in Suriname is discarded at sea. Lieveld (1995) reported that some of the larger specimens of favourable fish were kept but that most of the fish landed along with the shrimp was caught during the return voyage to port in shallow waters and therefore do not necessarily represent the species that are discarded at sea during normal operations. These species are shown in Table 33.
Table 33 - Species landed and utilised from shrimp bycatch in Suriname
Species 
Percentage of landing
English name of species
Arius parkeri 
Gillbacker sea catfish
Arius proops 
Crucifix sea catfish
Bagre spp 
Sea catfish
Other Ariidae 
Catfish
Cynoscion virescens 
Green weakfish
Macrodon anclyodon 
King weakfish
Micropogonias furnieri 
Whitemouth croaker
Nebris microps 
Smalleye croaker
Other Sciaenidae 
Croakers/Weakfish
Caranx hippos 
Crevalle jack
Sharks 
Lutjanidae 
Snappers
Rachycentron canadus 
Cobia
Batrachoides surinamansis
Pacuma toadfish
Xiphopenaeus kroyeri 
Prawns
The capture of some at least of this fish is made deliberately by the crew as they gain direct income from its sale. The catfish is generally smoked whereas the other fish species may be smoked, sold fresh (as fillets or steaks) or salted. Rachycentron canadus and sharks are salted. The quality of the fish at landing is affected by the onboard handling, generally the shrimp are sorted by hand from the catch first. The fish to be kept are then sorted, washed and place in the onboard freezer. The indications are that the quality of the fish is not high but can be sold in local markets fresh. Once unloaded from the trawlers storage in ice during onward marketing is normal.
<title>A Study of the Options for Utilization of Bycatch and Discards from marine </title>
10. General trends apparent in utilisation
10.1 Shrimp fisheries
There have been schemes in various shrimp fisheries in tropical less developed countries to encourage fishermen to land more of the bycatch. The reasoning in these cases has normally been to make available animal protein, which was being dumped at sea, to a protein deficient population.
One of the earliest examples documented was a scheme started in the 1970's by the government of Guyana which required all trawlers to land one tonne of bycatch for each fishing trip, in return for an exemption from export taxation and a nominal payment from the government (Gordon 1981). The rationale behind this initiative was to make use of locally available raw material, reduce dependence on imports of fishery products and increase availability of fish on the local markets. The simple act of requiring some bycatch to be landed did not mean that fish was being utilised and recognising that the species and the types of fish landed as bycatch would not necessarily be immediately acceptable, an extensive government initiative aimed at the expansion of processing and marketing opportunities for the fish was begun. This involved investment in an integrated fish processing facility with a capacity of up to 50 tonnes per day which amongst other options included the ability to
produce individually quick frozen fish, frozen blocks of fish, minced fish products canned products, smoked fish, salted and dried fish and a means of producing fish meal from offal and waste. (Petersen 1981) The investment was made following the successful marketing of products from bycatch on the Guyanese markets, and specifically for fish products already known on the market, through a preliminary phase of experimentation and market testing.
The Guyanese experience has been followed by a number of examples outlined above of use of bycatch from shrimp fisheries showing that there are possibilities for fuller use of the resource, but that each location and each set of circumstances require different solutions. Experience has shown that similarities in raw material supply in different parts of the world, does not necessarily mean similarity of solution. The feasibility of producing commercially acceptable product from shrimp bycatch depends more on market forces and socio-economic conditions than the ability to make products from the raw material. The general trends by region seem to be as follows:
East Asia (China) - Animal and aquaculture feeds
S E Asia - Value addition, novel foods
S Asia - Fresh fish, traditional products and animal feeds
E Africa - Production of traditional products (dried fish)
W Africa - Sold on beaches as fresh fish to various traders into normal fish trade
Latin America - Fresh fish, novel products and animal feeds
One of the main factors which governs the amount of fish from the bycatch which is used is the length of fishing trips. The shorter the trip the more likely that bycatch will be landed. The development of at sea collection systems has and is overcoming this constraint to utilisation in a number of instances in different parts of the world.
In China production of fresh water fish such as carps and tilapia, crabs and shrimp have increased very much in recent years (FAO 1996d) adding to the demand for cheap sources of animal/fish protein. It is suggested that because of this huge demand for animal protein little of any of the bycatch from the nations fishing operations is now discarded at sea. (Zhou Y and Yimin Y 1996)
In South East Asia there has been a trend towards the use of particular species selected from the catch for the production of value added and specialised (sometimes innovative) products. In South Asia the trend as been towards the selection of specimens that would already have a market either as fresh fish or into traditional products such as dried fish with the remainder of the catch being used for the production of animal feeds of fertilisers.
FAO (1996) estimate that in Sub Saharan African shrimp fisheries "only 10 to 15 percent of an estimated bycatch of about 1 million tonnes is landed" It is noted however that there is a trend towards better utilisation of bycatch through the introduction of specific regulations and the development of collection at sea systems.
An FAO workshop held in Cuba in 1997 brought together representatives from a number of Central and South American countries to review the bycatch utilisation systems in the respective countries. The meeting concluded that the amount of non shrimp caught was still high (between 90 and 97% of the total catch) but that utilisation of the bycatch has increased. On the Pacific coast of Central American it was estimated that between 40 and 60% of the bycatch is used and a similar situation exists on the Atlantic seaboard except in Nicaragua, Honduras and Suriname where small lack of demand and infrastructure mean that only between 20 and 30% of the bycatch is used. The workshop concluded that generally the bycatch consisted of 30% commercial species (which were generally being used), 50% trash fish with little direct human consumption use, and the remaining 20% is trash (e.g. jellyfish, starfish and empty shells) which are dumped directly into the sea. (F Teutscher - Pers comm.)
Assuming that technical measures for bycatch reduction in shrimp trawling are never going to be perfect and the production of shrimp will continue to be a lucrative business and earner of foreign exchange there will always be quantities of fish which are presently discarded which could be used for inclusion in the human food cycle. Past experience has shown that although technically it is possible to produce human food stuffs from the mixture of small fish, that make up the bycatch, in most situations the economic and financial incentives and marketing opportunities for such products precludes their wide-scale adoption. The identification of the species involved and the likely quantities of particular species as well as the exchange of information and experiences between different regions would assist in the development of more complete discard utilisation and direct the research and development activities required.
As the pressure on traditional fish stocks has increased and the demand for fish products has continued to grow the resultant shortage seems to have had a positive impact on the amount of fish from the incidental catch which is used. This has been a natural progression and seems to be most successful where fishery products made from the bycatch can be assimilated into existing processing and marketing systems.
<title>A Study of the Options for Utilization of Bycatch and Discards from marine </title>
<section>1</section>
11. Incentives and disincentives to discarding
From experience around the world it has been generally found that one incentive which will reduce discards is to create viable markets for incidental catch. However, the incentive not to discard because the potential discard has a value must be balanced against the conservation and sustainability needs of the fishery or ecosystem. To quote Crean and Symes (1994):
"The ideal would be to create a marketing infrastructure that could accept all the catch taken by approved methods without stimulating demand for material which contravened conservation rules"
11.1 Banning Discards
For a number of years different governments and fisheries administrations around the world have instituted schemes making it obligatory for "bycatch" or non-target catch to be landed. This has either been in the form of the requirement for a certain percentage of bycatch to be landed or a complete ban on discarding of particular species. The enforced landing of specimens which for conservation or management reasons it would be better not to have been caught in the first place, brings its own problems.
Having landed the fish there are a number of questions that need answering.
1 Should the fish be dumped (is this any better than discarding at sea) or should the fish be used ?
The enforced landing allows ability to record catches and thus better information on which to base management decisions and control of subsequent fishing activities to conserve stocks and sustain the fishery, however, the individual fish at this stage is dead and will not be available to replenish stocks or be caught later if released. In the interests of food security and non wastage of food it would seem appropriate that the fish be utilised.
2 However if the fish is to be used, should the fish catcher be paid for the "illegal" fish ?
If, as is suggested in 1 above, the fish is to be used should the fish catcher be paid for it as this might encourage, or at least not deter, the capture of more of the undesirable fish from a conservation or sustainability point of view. As the examples below illustrate different approaches have been taken, including normal pricing structures, no monetary value and others in between.
3 If the fish is to be used, should the fish processor have to pay for the fish ?
If the fishermen is to be paid for this "illegal" fish the processor might be cited as an accessory after the fact (to use the legal jargon) in encouraging the first capture in the first place, if full market value is paid by the processor to the fishermen.
4 Will utilisation of the fish create a market for the fish and thus encourage rather than discourage further capture of similar fish ?
These market and pricing pressures and mechanisms run the risk of creating market forces for illegal fish and encouraging rather than discouraging first capture.
These questions therefore raise others, such as: if a ban on discarding is to be instituted what incentives should be in place to encourage compliance or conversely what disincentives should there be to non-compliance. There is a danger that if full market price is paid for fish which contravenes conservation regulations, fishermen will be encouraged to fish for it more. On the other hand if fishermen are not compensated at all for the extra work and costs of landing the full catch then there will be a temptation on the part of the fishermen to continue discarding at sea. Thus there needs to be balance between over compensation and encouraging trade and under compensation and thus encouraging discarding. This of course assumes that there is a market for the products of a discard ban and they have a value. This would normally be the case where the specimens landed is the same species as the target catch or is the target catch of another fishery, but in the case of bycatch
from a multi species shrimp fishery, for example, there may be no ready market for the catch prompting the search for suitable products and markets.
The availability on markets (through discard banning) of quantities of probably low value, previously unmarketable products, could have profound effects on the marketing situation both locally and more widely. This is a major consideration required of fishery management bodies when instituting a ban on discarding and needs careful consideration and monitoring. Whilst not wanting to encourage capture in the first place it would seem that fishermen require some sort of compensation for landing unwanted fish if they are to land it. On the other hand they need to be discouraged from catching it in the first place. A number and combination of measures have been tried. The monetary value of the landed catch should be less than legally caught fish, the fish should count in part at least against the quota etc. etc. The carrot and the stick need to be carefully balanced if discarding is to be discouraged but capture in the first place is also to be discouraged.
11.1.1 Norway
The Norwegian Government introduced a ban on the discarding of some commercial species of fish in mid 1990. The idea of banning discards is that since the fish that are discarded have a negligible chance of survival it is better from a management perspective that they are included in the fishing induced mortality figures on which allowable catch estimates are based. The initiative in Norway has been coupled with a comprehensive programme of monitoring and surveillance and a system whereby areas can be opened and closed when bycatch rates become excessive. The Norwegian system of attempting to reduce mortality of illegal fish is based on reducing their capture rather than reducing landing of "illegal" specimens. (Lbach and Viem 1996). The legislation specifies minimum sizes at capture rather than minimum landing sizes and it is at the capture point that the most efforts at control and assistance by the Norwegian government to the industry has been concentrated. Although
anecdotal evidence suggests that discarding still occurs it seems to have stimulated the further development and acceptance by the fishing industry of selective fishing gears. The use of selective gears has now become compulsory in a number of Norwegian fisheries. Illegal fish that is landed is sold through the fishermen's sales organisations but the revenue from sales remains in the sales organisation rather than being credited to the fishermen's account thus acting as a disincentive to capture.
11.1.2 Canada
Canada has also instituted a ban on discarding at sea in it's Atlantic groundfish fishery that makes it illegal to return to the water any groundfish except those specifically authorised and those caught in cod traps. Authorised release is only considered for species that are known to have high survival rates on release or where there is no practical or nutritional use for a particular species. In addition to the banning of discards larger vessels are required to carry observers which would imply that there are now no illegal discards on these vessels. The discards ban in Canada has been backed up by regulations which allow temporary closure of areas with high bycatches and including small percentages of bycatch in quota allocations. Fishermen may market small fish or bycatches and these quantities are counted against quotas.
11.1.3 Iceland
The introduction by Iceland of an ITQ system of fisheries management across virtually all its major fisheries has now been followed by the introduction of a ban of at-sea discarding of catch, it seems that in spite of the ITQ system the cod stocks for instance had not recovered and in fact discarding had increased. The Icelandic regulations require the retention of most fish specimens for which there are TACs or species for which a market value exists. There are however provisions within the legal framework for exceptions to me made. For instance it is a requirement that live cod less than 50 cm long be released, haddock caught by hook and line and less than 45 cm must be released and diseased or damaged fish can be discarded. In addition species for which there is no quota system and have no commercial value may be discarded. Since it is compulsory to land smaller fish but the government does not wish to encourage it's capture, there are upper limits on the percentage
weight of fish that can be landed below minimum landing size and any cod, saithe, haddock or redfish which is landed is counted against the individual quota at 50% of its weight. (G Valdimarsson Pers comm.). Fish kept on board under these no-discard rules may be marketed.
The Icelandic ban on discarding has been coupled with the establishment and running of a "bycatch bank" for a number of years from 1989. The primary aim of the bank was to demonstrate to fishermen and the fish trade that there were markets for unusual species of fish caught as bycatch and where necessary introduce and promote those new species to consumers. This was done by such activities as "strange fish weeks" in restaurants, manuals which assist in identification of new species and recipe booklets. The bank organised to purchase blocks of frozen fish of normally non-commercial species from fishing boats, arranged taste panels, promotion schemes and sales to restaurants etc. As a result fish such as megrim, witch/pole dab and rough dab are the subject of specific fisheries in Iceland and a number of others such as starry ray (Raja radiata), great silver melt (Argentina silus), grenadiers (Macrouridae) and piked dogfish (Squalus acanthias) are caught and traded through
normal channels, with other species such as Portuguese shark (Centroscymnus coelolepis) showing potential for market expansion. (Thorsteinsson and Valdimarsson 1994 and J G Helgason Pers comm.)
Both Greenland and the Faroe Islands have introduced rules requiring landing of some potential discards. The illegal fish thus landed may be freely marketed by fishermen.
11.1.4 New Zealand
The quota management system instituted in New Zealand makes discarding or dumping of most species illegal, but it is still known to occur. In the multi-species inshore trawl fishery particularly the capture of non-quota fish or fish for which the quota has been exhausted is often encountered. The ITQ system in New Zealand is a complex system where quota to cover overrun fish can be bought from another quota holder after it has been landed or the value of the overrun catch be surrendered to the state for instance. However, it seems that in many cases the fishermen find it easier to discard the fish at sea than go through the complex system of landing the fish and then making it legal. In addition the New Zealand system allows a quota to be overshot by 10% in one season, however this over-quota landing can be deducted from the next season's quota. The fact that discarding does still occur is illustrated by the fact that vessels carrying observers have reported larger
quantities of non-target species than vessels fishing in the same area not carrying observers. (Annala 1996).
Grafton (1996)^ suggests that with the introduction of the ITQ system in the New Zealand fishery there was an increase in discarding at sea although the fishermen could receive 10% of the market price for fish landed outside quota. In an attempt to discourage discarding the percentage of market price was increased to 50%. There obviously has to be a balance between these incentives to land and the disincentive to catch fish over or outside quota limits so the percentage revenue that can be gained from catching and landing fish which are outside specification has to be very carefully balanced.
11.1.5 The European Union
Whilst not eliminating discards altogether banning them does overcome the anomaly which seems to exist in a policy which professes to conserve resources but which at the same time requires that fishermen should discard unwanted catch. The EU legislation for instance says that there are total allowable catches for each species which are divided between countries with in the Union. The individual countries generally use this as a basis for quota allocation. The quota rules however require that any fish which is caught outside quota allowances or outside regulatory sizes etc. be discarded and that it basically an offence for a fishing vessel to be carrying on board any fish for which it does not have a valid quota or which is outside regulated size limits.
A study was published in 1992 (CEC 1992) which reviewed the state of knowledge regarding the discards in the EU fisheries and looked at the various options for a strategy for reduction of discards. One of the options (following the example of Norway) discussed was the introduction, of a ban on discarding. The fact that EU fishing vessels fish in Norwegian waters and vice versa has created the anomalous condition where north of latitude 62^oN it is illegal to discard fish into the sea and south of that line it is compulsory to immediately discard the same fish. Interim measures are in place to overcome this anomaly but at the time of that report the conclusion suggested that a discards ban in EU waters was not feasible.
However the report of the Intermediate Ministerial Meeting on the Integration of Fisheries and Environmental Issues - 13/14 March 1997 (Anon 1997)^ suggests that ministers at that meeting including EU representation would like to consider the implications of a discard ban further. To quote:
The Ministers AGREE that measures should be taken to protect juvenile fish, crustaceans and molluscs so that the biomass of both juveniles and ensuing adults is increased. The Ministers therefore INVITE the competent authorities to consider within appropriate fora means of strengthening protection through:
8.1 as a matter of urgency, searching for all possible effective means, including the possibility of a ban, to minimise discards;......
In spite of this wording, however, it appears that the all EU partners feel that on conservation grounds a discard ban is not appropriate and that other measures such as greater gear and fishing practices selectivity are more appropriate. The European Commission proposal laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources (CEC 1996) contains the practical proposals for implementation within EU waters of measures to reduce discards. These include proposals concerning net types, minimum landing sizes for fish more closely allied to mesh sizes of nets, minimum percentages for target species. Existing regulations require immediate discarding of fish which contravene these percentages, however these newer proposals allow discarding at any time prior to return to port so that percentage catches can be adjusted accordingly for a particular trip rather than on an individual fishing operation basis. All these measures are designed for discard reduction.
11.2 Charitable disposal of fish that would be discarded
A ban on discarding of major groundfish species with a limit on the percentage of catch that is not used for products for human consumption has also been considered in a range of measures for managing of bycatch in the Alaska groundfish fisheries. These measures would be part of a whole range of measures designed to reduce/monitor and control bycatch. One measure already in place is a voluntary programme that facilities the retention of bycatch salmon for food banks.
The need to be able to record and monitor all catch, not just targeted catch, is a prerequisite for accurate statistics and from this an ability to manage the fishery with confidence based on realistic estimates of fishing mortality. For this reason it is a legal requirement in some fisheries, notably in the United States of America, that all fish impacted by the fishery be recorded. In the Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea Aleutian Islands fishery for instance there are a number of prohibited species, such as Pacific salmon, steelhead trout, halibut, Pacific herring, king and tanner crabs the rules for which say that ground fish vessels "must return all prohibited species or parts thereof to the sea immediately, with the minimum of injury, regardless of condition, after allowing for sampling by an observer, if an observer is aboard." (NOAA 1997) In the Bering Sea Aleutian Island trawl fishery, however, this regulation, which requires immediate return to the sea, has been
amended by the need for all salmon taken as bycatch in this fishery to be recorded by official observers, even when one is not onboard the capture vessel. This means that, when an observer is not on board the vessel the fish has to be preserved by chilling or freezing, until landing so that the required information can be gathered. This obviously results in the fish not being alive at subsequent disposal and the main ecological reason for immediate release of the salmon is lost. To allow, however for some benefit to be gained from the capture a system known as the "Salmon Donation Programme" has been authorised under the same legislation. This allows the establishment of mechanisms for bycatch salmon to be disposed of into the human food chain through hunger relief agencies. This has enabled the establishment of private, non-profit organisations which access surplus or unmarketable fish from seafood companies for distribution to food needy Americans through national food
bank networks. The charities form a link between sea food producers and food banks, whereby the producers do not get paid for the fish but the food banks benefit. (T. Donnelly Pers Comm.).
The International Pacific Halibut Commission proposed a regulatory change to the North Pacific Fishery Management Council which would allow a similar scheme for bycatch halibut to be started probably at the beginning of 1998. Industry activists are also seeking to amend management plans for trawl fisheries of Washington, Oregon and California states to allow similar charitable donation schemes to operate in these states. Salmon taken as bycatch in the whiting trawl fishery off the Oregon coast which cannot be sorted at sea are landed, sorted, enumerated at the dock side. Rather than dispose of the fish at sea it will be frozen for collection by the local food bank. No payment is made to either fishermen or processor.
The recently revised Magnuson-Stevens Act (USA 1996) provides for a study of giving bycatch to charity in America and reads as follows:
SEC. 208. STUDY OF CONTRIBUTION OF BYCATCH TO CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
(a) STUDY- The Secretary of Commerce shall conduct a study of the contribution of bycatch to charitable organizations by commercial fishermen. The study shall include determinations of:
(1)the amount of bycatch that is contributed each year to charitable organizations by commercial fishermen;
(2)the economic benefits to commercial fishermen from those contributions; and
(3)the impact on fisheries of the availability of those benefits.
(b) REPORT- Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall submit to the Congress a report containing determinations made in the study under subsection (a).
The Pacific Fishery Management Council has also been considering the issue of whether to institute a discards ban so that all catch could be counted. All fish would be brought ashore for enumeration and fishermen would be paid for fish up to their trip limit. Payment by processors for excess fish would be made into a special fund which might be used for research. The fish itself would then enter the normal marketing channels and the profit or loss from onward sales accrue to the purchaser.
<section>2</section>
12.Concluding Remarks
This study has shown that solutions are being found for the problems of discarding fish at sea and that in certain fisheries there are definite trends towards greater utilisation. This is particularly apparent in shrimp trawl fisheries in tropical waters where the incidental catch of species other than shrimp can form the basis of a subsidiary, but important, local industry, providing food stuffs and employment to many. The way and speed with which this evolution occurs depends very much on local conditions but can be stimulated by new utilisation opportunities identified through research and development in the areas of fish technology, market intelligence and access to marketing information including exchange of information between different groups and regions.
In other fisheries, were there is pressure on resources and threats to sustainable fishing activities, the main thrust of development is the reduction of capture of potential discards. The use of selective fishing devices, management of fishing activities to reduce catch of vulnerable stocks is continuing although the need to take drastic action such as closures of fishing grounds and the reduction of fishing effort will no doubt still be necessary in these situations.
By highlighting some of the successful initiatives and ongoing trends in reducing discards by more complete utilisation it is hoped that this document will assist the world fishing community in the process towards more rational and less wasteful use of marine resources.
<section>3</section>
13. References
Abd. Haris Hilmi (1997) Shrimp trawl net (Modified) in Malaysia. Report to the co-operative Research Network in the Asia and Indian Ocean region on Selective Tropical Shrimp Trawling. FAO.
Alverson D L, Freeberg M K, Murawski S A and Pope J G. (1994) A global assessment of fisheries bycatch and discards. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper No 339 Rome, FAO 1994
Andrew N L and Pepperell J G (1992) The by-catch of shrimp trawl fisheries. Oceanography and Marine Biology - An Annual Review Vol. 30 (Barnes, Ansell and Gibson eds.)
Annala J H (1996) New Zealand's ITQ system: have the first eight years been a success or a failure? Rev in Fish biol. and Fisheries vol. 6 (1) - 1996 pp 43-62
Anon (1997) - Statement of conclusions, 5th International Conference on the Protection of the North Sea - Intermediate Ministerial Meeting on the Integration of Fisheries and Environmental Issues - Bergen, Norway 13/14 March 1997
Bailey K, Williams P G and Itano D - (1996) By-catch and discards in Western Pacific tuna fisheries: A review of SPC data holdings and literature. SPC Oceanic Fisheries Programme Technical Report No 34. Noumea, New Caledonia 1996.
Barratt F A (1986). A study on the feasibility of utilizing prawn by-catch for human consumption. Report to South Pacific Regional Fisheries Development Programme - RAS/85/004. FAO Oct. 1986
Bejei A (1980) Observations on the trash fish from catches of a prawn trawler in coastal waters of Sarawak. Paper presented at Workshop on the biology and resources of penaeid shrimp in the South China Sea area. 30 June - 5 July 1980 Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia. SCS/GEN/80/26
Bligh E G and R Duclos (1982) - Salting of minced fish. From: Fish By-catch...Bonus from the Sea: report of a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana, 28-30 October 1981. Ottawa, Ont., IDRC, 1982.
Bostock T (1987) Marine fisheries of Gujarat: post harvest losses: possibilities for development. Report of the Tropical Development and Research Institute, No L25. UK 1987
Bostock T and Ryder J (1995) By-catch usage in India: an NRI/ODA BOBP project experience. In Report and Proceedings of TCDC Workshop - Utilisation of by-catch from Shrimp Trawlers, 6 - 8 June 1995. Nose B, Madagascar. Govt of Madagascar/UNDO/FAO 1995
Brander K M (1981) Disappearance of common skate Raja batis from the Irish Sea. Nature Vol. 290 (5801) p 48 - 49
Branstetter S (1997) Bycatch and it's reduction in the Gulf of Mexico and the South Atlantic shrimp fisheries. Gulf and South Atlantic Fisheries Development Foundation, Inc., Tampa, Florida
CEC (1996) Proposal for a Council Regulation (EC) laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources. (96/C 292/01) COM (96) 295 final - 96/0160 (CNS)
CEC (1992) - Report from the Commission to the Council on the discarding of fish in Community fisheries: causes, impact, solutions. CEC 12 March 1992 SEC (91) 413 final
Chan E H and Liew H C (1986) Characteristics of an exploited tropical shallow-water demersal fish community in Malaysia. In Proceedings of the First Asian Fisheries Forum. Asian Fisheries Society, (Maclean J L, Dizon L B and Hosillos LV, eds) 26 - 31 May 1986 Manila. pp 349 - 352
Chee P E (1996) A review of the bycatch and discards in the fisheries of Southeast Asia - In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. (Clucas I J and D James - Eds.) Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO, 1996.
Clucas I J (1996) Reduction of fish wastage - An introduction. In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. (Clucas I J and D James - Eds.) Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO 1996.
Crean K and Symes D (1994). The discards problem: towards a European solution. Marine Policy 18 (5) 422-434 pp 1994
Disney J G, Parr W H and Morgan D L (1978) Fish silage: preparation, utilisation and prospects for development. In: Proceedings of symposium on fish utilisation technology and marketing in the IPFC Region, Section III. IPFC 18th Session Manila, The Philippines, March 1978.
Duthie A (1996) Estimates of discards in the 1994 Atlantic Canada fisheries (Part of FAO region 21). - In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO 1996.
Evans S M, J E Hunter, Elizal and Wahhju R I (1994) Composition and fate of catch and bycatch in the Farne Deep (North Sea) Nephrops fishery ICES Journal of Marine Science Vol. 51 (2) pp 155 - 168
Eyabi-Eyabi G (1995) Utilisation of by-catch from shrimp trawlers in Cameroon. In Report and Proceedings of TCDC Workshop - Utilisation of by-catch from Shrimp Trawlers, 6 - 8 June 1995. Nose B, Madagascar. Govt of Madagascar/UNDO/FAO 1995
FAO (1995) Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries - Rome, FAO 1995
FAO (1996a) Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547. Rome, FAO 1996.
FAO (1996b) FAO Yearbook - Fishery Statistics: catches and landings - 1994 Vol. 78. Rome, FAO 1996
FAO (1996c) FAO Yearbook - Fishery Statistics: commodities - 1994 Vol. 79. Rome, FAO 1996
FAO (1996d) AQUACULT-PC. Rome, FAO 1996
FAO (1997) The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 1996. Rome, FAO 1997
Feidi I (1989) Economic utilization of fish by-catch and by-products in the Arab Gulf region. Paper prepared for Seminar on Economic Utilization of Waste. INFOSAMAK/FAO. Jeddah 1989
Garcia-Rodriquez E (1995) Utilisation of shrimp by-catch in Cuba. In Report and Proceedings of TCDC Workshop - Utilisation of by-catch from Shrimp Trawlers, 6 - 8 June 1995. Nose B, Madagascar. Govt of Madagascar/UNDO/FAO 1995
Gordon A (1991) The by-catch from Indian shrimp trawlers in the Bay of Bengal: the potential for its improved utilisation. FAO/BOBP Working Paper No 68, 1991. Madras, India
Gordon R M (1981) Guyana. In Fish By-catch....Bonus from the Sea : report on a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana 27-30 October 1981. p131 Ottawa IDRC 1982
Grafton R Q (1996) - ITQs: theory and practice. Rev in Fish biol. and Fisheries vol. 6 (1) - 1996 pp 5-20
Gulland J A and Rothschild B J (eds.) (1982) Penaeid shrimps - their biology and management. Fishing News Books. Farnham , England.
Hall M A (1996) On bycatches. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries vol. 6 (3) pp 319 - 352 (1996)
Harris A N and Poiner I R (1990) By-catch of the prawn fishery of the Torres Strait, composition and partitioning of discards into components that float or sink. Austr. J. Mar. Freshwater Res. Vol. 41 pp 37 - 52
Hendrickson H M and Griffin W L (1993) An analysis of management policies for reducing shrimp by-catch in the Gulf of Mexico. North American journal of fisheries management. Lawrence KS; vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 686-697; 1993
IDRC (1982) Fish By-catch...Bonus from the Sea : report of a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana, 28-30 October 1981. Ottawa, Ont., IDRC, 1982.
Isaksen B (1996) The Norwegian approach to reduce bycatch and avoid discards. - In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. (Clucas I J and D James - Eds.) Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO, 1996.
Isaksen B and Larsen R B (1993) Size selectivity for shallow water shrimps using a rigid metal grid in the aft and top section of the trawl. Report of Institute of Marine Research, Bergen and The Norwegian College of Fishery Science, Troms, Norway
Jallow A M (1995) Recent positive and negative experiences on the utilisation of shrimp by-catch in the Gambia. In Report and Proceedings of TCDC Workshop - Utilisation of by-catch from Shrimp Trawlers, 6 - 8 June 1995. Nose B, Madagascar. Govt of Madagascar/UNDO/FAO 1995
Japanese Fishery Agency (1995) The Kyoto Declaration and Plan of Action - Fisheries Agency, The Government of Japan 1995
Japp D (1996) Discarding practices and bycatches for fisheries in the Southeast Atlantic region (Area 47) - In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. (Clucas I J and D James - Eds.) Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO, 1996.
Jensen H, Emslie D and Coull K (1996) Discards of fish species of no or little economic interest. Study Contract no 92/3508 - final report for Commission of the European Comunity, May 1994
Kelleher V and A Mussa (1995) Retention of by-catch for human consumption; The Mozambique experience. In Report and Proceedings of TCDC Workshop - Utilisation of by-catch from Shrimp Trawlers, 6 - 8 June 1995. Nose B, Madagascar. Govt of Madagascar/UNDO/FAO 1995
Kulberg R (1989) Shrimp trawler by-catch in Andhra Pradesh, India. Report on a minor field study to BOBP. Oct. - Dec. 1988. SIDA funded.
Kungsawan A (1996) Regulations, practices and statistics with regard to by-catch in the shrimp industries in Thailand. Paper prepared for FAO - mimeo 1996
Lieveld R (1995) Utilisation of shrimp bycatch in Suriname. In Report and Proceedings of TCDC Workshop - Utilisation of by-catch from Shrimp Trawlers, 6 - 8 June 1995. Nose B, Madagascar. Govt of Madagascar/UNDO/FAO 1995
Lbach T and Viem A K (1996) Compatibility and applicability of discard/retention rules for the conservation and utilisation of fishery resources in the Northwest Atlantic. Workshop on Discard/Retention Rules. St Petersburg. 7-8 September 1996
Matsuoka T (1996) Discards in Japanese marine capture fisheries and their estimation - In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. (Clucas I J and D James - Eds.) Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO, 1996.
Mgawe Y (1995) Recent positive and negative experiences in Tanzania with regard to utilisation of Shrimp by-catch. In Report and Proceedings of TCDC Workshop - Utilisation of by-catch from Shrimp Trawlers, 6 - 8 June 1995. Nose B, Madagascar. Govt of Madagascar/UNDO/FAO 1995
NOAA (1997) - Federal fishing regulations pertaining to the exclusive economic zone off Alaska. AL Regulations - National Marine Fisheries Service, Juneau, Alaska 1997
Nolan C P and Yau C (1996) Observed and reported estimates of discard and bycatch from the commercial fishery of the Falkland Islands - In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. (Clucas I J and D James - Eds.) Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO, 1996.
OECD (1997a) Towards sustainable fisheries: economic aspects of the managment of living marine resources. OECD Paris 1997
OECD (1997b) Towards sustainable fisheries: Country reports (European Union) OECD - OCDE/GD(97)119 Paris 1997
Pauly D and Neal R (1985) Shrimp vs. fish in Southeast Asian fisheries: the biological, technological and social problems. In: Recuros Pesqueros Potenciales de Mexico: La Pesca Acompaante del Camarn. Progr Univ de Alimentos, Inst Cienc del Mar y Limnol., Inst. Nac. de Pesca, UNAM, Mexic D F pp 487 - 510
Pender P J, Willing R S and Canns B (1992b). NPF by-catch a valuable resource ? Is it worth the effort. Australian Fisheries February 1992 pp 30 -31
Pender P J, Willing R S and Ramm D C (1992a). Northern Prawn Fishery bycatch study: Distribution, abundance, size and use of bycatch from the mixed species fishery. Fishery Report No 26 Department of Primary Industry and Fisheries, Northern Territory, Darwin Australia. 1992
Petersen E E (1981) The Guyana project: industrial use of by-catch. In Fish By-catch....Bonus from the Sea : report on a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana 27-30 October 1981. p69 Ottawa IDRC 1982
Poulter N H (1982) - Canned, frozen and dried products from by-catch fish. From: Fish By-catch...Bonus from the Sea : report of a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana, 28-30 October 1981. Ottawa, Ont., IDRC, 1982.
Productos Pesqueros Mexicanos (1982) - Pepepez - A new, frozen minced product. From: Fish By-catch...Bonus from the Sea : report of a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana, 28-30 October 1981. Ottawa, Ont., IDRC, 1982.
Queirolo L E, Fritz L W, Lingston P A, Loefflad M R, Colpo D A and deReynier Y L (1995) Bycatch, utilisation and discards in the commercial groundfish fisheries of the Gulf of Alaska, Eastern Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands. NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-AFSC-58. US Dept of Comm., NOAA - November 1995
Rakotondrasoa M (1995) Rcupperation du poisson d'accompagnement de la pche crevettire - l'exprience Malgache. In Report and Proceedings of TCDC Workshop - Utilisation of by-catch from Shrimp Trawlers, 6 - 8 June 1995. Nose B, Madagascar. Govt of Madagascar/UNDO/FAO 1995
Redant F and Polet H (1994) Introduction on the finfish by-catches and discards in the Belgian Norway lobster (Nephrops norvegicus) fishery. International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, Demersal Fish committee CM1994/G:29
Saisithi B (1982) Thailand. In: Fish By-catch....Bonus from the Sea : report on a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana 27-30 October 1981. Ottawa IDRC 1982.
Salz P (Ed) (1996) Bio-economic evaluation of multi-species and multi-annual fisheries management measures The Hague, Agricultural Economics Research Institute (LEI-DLO), 1996.
Saville A (1980) The assessment and management of pelagic fish stocks: discussion and conclusion of symposium. In: Rapports et Proces Verbaux des Reunion du Conseil International pour L'Exploration de la Mer. ICES 177 pp 513-517
Smith A (1996) Estimation of discards in the North East Atlantic (Area 27) - In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. (Clucas I J and D James - Eds.) Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO, 1996.
Smith T P (1993) Allocating the incidental catch of crab, halibut, herring and salmon in the groundfish fisheries off Alaska In Proceedings of "The International Symposium on Management Strategies for Exploited Fish Populations" Anchorage Alaska 21 - 24 Oct. 1992
Suwanrangsi S (1988) By-catch utilisation in Thailand. INFOFISH International 5/88, 1988.
Tableros M A and R H Young (1982) - Acceptability and storage characteristics of frozen, minced products from Mexican by-catch. From: Fish By-catch...Bonus from the Sea : report of a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana, 28-30 October 1981. Ottawa, Ont., IDRC, 1982.
Tan Sen Min, Tatsuru Fujiwara, Ng Mui Chng and Tan Ching Ean (1982) - Processing of by-catch into frozen minced blocks (surimi) and jelly products. From: Fish By-catch...Bonus from the Sea : report of a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana, 28-30 October 1981. Ottawa, Ont., IDRC, 1982
Thorsteinsson G (1992) Experiments with square mesh windows in the Nephrops trawling off South Iceland. Conc. meeting of the ICES 24 Sept. to 2 Oct. 1992. pubs ICES 1993
Thorsteinsson H P and G Valdimarsson (1994) Experimental utilisation and marketing of by-catches and deep water species in Iceland. From: Deep-Water Fisheries of the North Atlantic Oceanic Slope: Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Research Workshop, Hull, UK, March 1994. A G Hopper (Ed) Kluwer Academic Pubs.
Truelove K (1997) Australia: Policy options for fisheries bycatch. In: Towards sustainable fisheries: Issue papers. OCDE/GD(97)54 OECD Paris 1997
U Khum Mg Aye (1995) Bycatch in commercial trawling for shrimp in Myanmar. Mimeo paper presented at Workshop on Research in Fishing Gear and Methods Selectivity in the Southeast Asian Countries with special attention to shrimp fishing. Chendering, Malaysia - May 1995
USA (1996) Magnuson-Stevens fishery conservation and management act. Public Law 94-265 US Department of Commerce/NOAA/NMFS. NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-F/SPO-23. December 1996
Vold Soladal A and Engs A (1997). Survival of young gadoids excluded from a shrimp trawl by a rigid deflecting grid. ICES Journal of Marine Science. Vol. 54 (1), Feb. 1997
Young R H (1982) - Development of a salted, minced product from Mexican shrimp From: Fish By-catch...Bonus from the Sea : report of a technical consultation on shrimp by-catch utilisation held in Georgetown, Guyana, 28-30 October 1981. Ottawa, Ont., IDRC, 1982
Zhou Y and Yimin Y (1996) Estimation of discards and bycatch in Chinese fisheries - In Report on the Technical Consultation on Reduction of Wastage in Fisheries. (Clucas I J and D James - Eds.) Tokyo, Japan, 28 October - 1 November 1996. FAO Fisheries Report. No 547 supplement. Rome, FAO, 1996.
