<title>Guidelines for the management of tropical forests 1. The production of wood (FAO forestry paper 135)</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
This publication has been prepared in response to a request from the 12th Session of the Committee on Forestry (13-16 March 1995) which called for a handbook on tropical forest management, aimed at providing practical advice to forest services and to the practising tropical forest manager in the field.
Recognising that the sustainable management of forests implies the provision of a range of products and services, this book focuses on the maintenance and enhancement of the productive functions of tropical forests, and deals in depth with the practical aspects of the management of tropical forests in which the main products are wood and timber.
The importance of the productive functions of forests was once more recognised in the conclusions of the XI World Forestry Congress (Antalya, Turkey, 1997) which stated that: "managing the world's tropical forests for sustainability is one of the most critical challenges facing humanity; one of its main objectives continues to be management for wood production, while paying increased attention to the sustainability of other goods and services provided by them".
The present document complements other FAO publications already available, including FAO Forestry Papers Nos. 53, 55, 88, 89, 101, 107, 117 and the FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. It is intended to be followed by other publications currently in preparation: "Management of Tropical Forests: II. The Production of Non-Wood Products"; and "Planning for Forest Use and Conservation".
FAO hopes that this publication, which identifies and outlines practical steps for more effective and efficient tropical forest management, in the long run, will contribute to the improvement of the quality of forestry field operations and help increase the area of tropical forests under planned and sound management, in all tropical regions.
Jean Clément
Director
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
FAO wishes to acknowledge the excellent work done by Mr. Ian Armitage, main author of the document. Furthermore, FAO sincerely thanks the following persons for collaborating as external reviewers and for providing useful comments in the course of the preparation of the handbook: Jean-Paul Lanly, initiator and supporter of the idea, now with the Regional Council of Rural Engineering for Water Resources, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, Paris, France; B. von der Hyde, GTZ, and Thang Hooi Chiew, Forestry Department, Malaysia; B. Hahn-Schilling, FOMISS-GTZ, Sarawak, Malaysia; E. Kleine, Malaysia-German Sustainable Forest Management Project; Niro Higuchi, INPA, Manaus, Brazil; Richard Bruce, Selva Madera Ltda., Brazil; Tim van Eldik, Precious Woods, Brazil; the Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR), Indonesia; and the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), Japan.
Colleagues in the Forestry Department of FAO were closely involved in the work; their individual and collective assistance and support is acknowledged.
ACRONYMS
AAC
Annual Allowable Cut
ACA
Annual Cutting Area
CAI
Current Annual Increment (m^3/ha/year)
CFI
Continuous Forest Inventory
CIFOR
Center for International Forestry Research
DCF
Discounted Cash-flow
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GIS
Geographic Information System
GPS
Global Positioning System
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
ITTO
International Tropical Timber Organization
MAI
Mean Annual Increment (m^3/ha/year)
NGO
Non-governmental organization
NPV
Net Present Value
NWFP (s)
Non-wood Forest Product (s)
PAME
Participatory Assessment Monitoring and Evaluation
PCT
Potential Crop Trees
PRA
Participatory Rural Appraisal
RRA
Rapid Rural Appraisal
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
ABBREVIATIONS
dbh
diameter at breast height (1.3 metres above ground level)
ha
hectare
km^2
square kilometres
m
metres
m^3
cubic metres
mill
millions
m^3/ha
cubic metres per hectare
sp/ha
stems per hectare
vol
volume
<section>3</section>
Introduction
1 The purpose of the guidelines
2 An overview of tropical forest management for wood production
3 Further reading
1 The purpose of the guidelines
Background
Intended users
Scope of the Guidelines
There is no universal model for the management of tropical forests
Background
The extent of tropical forests being purposely managed on an operational scale for the sustainable production of wood is, on a world scale, very small and may be as little as five per cent of the total tropical forest area. Progress in establishing stable and enduring forest management arrangements is so slow that it is currently having little impact on the general decline and quality of tropical forests. These Guidelines have been written as a partial response to this concern.
Sustainable forest management signifies that due attention be given to the productive, protective, social and environmental aspects in an integrated manner. Recent international efforts have concentrated on efforts to facilitate monitoring of effects of forest management through the specification of criteria, by which sustainability is defined; and the identification of corresponding, quantitative, qualitative and descriptive indicators, to be used as tools for monitoring and evaluation both of the effects of forest management and of possible remedial action taken to improve management strategies and methodologies to better meet specified aims (see Annex 1).
The present Guidelines aim at providing advice related mainly to one of the seven or eight commonly used criteria for sustainable forest management: the productive functions of the forest; and more specifically, on the production of timber, wood and wood products from forest ecosystems.
A companion volume on management of tropical forests for the production of non-wood products is currently in preparation. Forestry Paper 107, "Conservation of Genetic Resources in Tropical Forest Management" (FAO 1993), in turn, reviews principles and concepts related to genetic aspects of tropical forest management. Documentation on forest management planning; and on socio-economic aspects of tropical forest management is also and on will provide complementary information in this regard.
The main purpose of these Guidelines is to promote and encourage more extensive application of forest management practices for the production of wood that will ensure that tropical forests will improve the contribution of the forestry sector as a component of sustainable social and economic development. It is hoped that they will fill a need for procedural and practical guidance on how managers working in and close to tropical forests can plan and undertake operations where the production of wood is the main objective, within the wider framework of a comprehensive strategy into which the various complementary components of sustainability are incorporated in a holistic manner.
Intended users
The primary users of these Guidelines will be those involved in forest planning and management at the operational forest level. Users are likely to be government district forest officers, concession managers and supervisors, managers and planners of privately-owned forests, supervisors of logging and wood processing companies and forest supervisors of local communities and of non-governmental organizations having a managerial role with tropical forests. It need not of course be limited to these predominantly field users. Others are forestry students, lecturers and personnel involved with forestry sector development planning and policy development. The attention of users should be drawn to the fact that wood production constitutes one of many, mutually complementary and generally compatible uses and functions of forests and forest ecosystems, and that management for the production of wood should invariably be within the wider framework of forest management.
Scope of the Guidelines
Within the framework of sustainable forest management, the present Guidelines cover the management of tropical forests for wood production, because they are among the largest wood sources in tropical developing countries and, equally importantly, because there is a compelling need for well planned management of them. Emphasis upon wood production recognises that timber and other wood products from tropical forests are in high and continuing demand worldwide and that wood can to be produced profitably from them on a sustainable basis through careful management, which duly considers also the other values of forest ecosystems. It is an acknowledgement that, in most cases, revenue from wood production is likely to be the most secure source of funding for maintaining the range of environmental services that tropical forests can provide.
The Guidelines, in focusing mainly on the criterion of maintaining the productive functions of the forest, and more specifically on the production of wood and non-wood products, are intended to be practical and provide advice on how to plan and manage tropical forests for the sustainable production of wood. Principles rather than detail are highlighted thereby enabling potential users to adapt the guidance offered to their own local situations. They do not provide a comprehensive presentation of new methodologies that are being developed for forest management. The aim has been to keep the Guidelines relatively simple and focused on basic issues concerned with how the production of wood in tropical forests can be planned and implemented in practice at an operational level. It is a response to an expressed need for basic guidance on topics concerning the sustainable production of wood in tropical forests which were not easily available. It is recognised that it is difficult at
the present time to include all aspects of sustainable forest management in one book and these Guidelines do not attempt to do this.
It is acknowledged that environmental and social considerations are important in planning a balanced approach to sustainable management of tropical forests for wood production. The Guidelines will, to some extent, consider soil, water and biological diversity conservation and the interests of forest dependent communities.
The Guidelines may be read in their entirety in order to provide a comprehensive review of the steps involved in maintaining and sustainably utilising the productive functions of the tropical forest, or they may be referred to part-by-part for detail on specific stages of management focused on wood production. Selected books, papers and reports having relevance to topics covered in each part are listed. These include references to information presented in the Guidelines which may be referred to for greater detail on specific topics. The Guidelines complement other publications currently under preparation elsewhere. Each has its own focus but collectively are all expected to contribute towards the goal of achieving sustainable tropical forest management that will be of enduring value to forest communities, to forest owners and to others who have direct interests in them. Advice has been drawn from existing knowledge and experience in tropical Asia, Africa and America.
There is no universal model for the management of tropical forests
There are two strong arguments in support of management for the production of wood in natural tropical forests. The first is that no ecologically satisfactory alternative land uses to natural forests are to be found for many tropical sites because they are too infertile for agriculture. Secondly, wood having the qualities found in many types of tropical forests cannot be produced as cheaply, in large dimensions or in the quantities required to meet present and future industrial requirements from intensively managed plantations on the same infertile sites. Maintaining the land under a permanent forest cover, and adopting a planned basis of sustained yield management within an overall, sustainable forest management plan, is usually the most appropriate long-term development strategy.
Significant policy, legislative, technical, economic and social differences between countries mean that each country needs to approach the challenge of determining an effective development strategy in its own way.
It is because of such wide-ranging variation that there can be no single approach or method for achieving sustainable management of tropical forests where wood production is the main objective. Although these Guidelines do not illustrate all methods or techniques that can be applied for securing better quality and more extensive forest management, they do aim to describe principles, systems and a number of practical ways that can be adapted to help improve management practices pertaining to the criterion related to the production of wood. Flexibility and adaptation of principles and advice will enable national forest managers to develop their own approach to forest management, considering the opportunities and constraints of each case.
Whilst there is no universal model for sustainable management of tropical forests, there is a considerable body of collective knowledge and experience from tropical Asia, America and Africa which can be shared and adapted to local circumstances. It is hoped that the advice set out on the sustained production of wood and wood products in these Guidelines can be adapted to the situations prevailing in each country which will gradually lead to meaningful increases in the extent of tropical forests that can be managed on a sustainable basis for wood production.
2 An overview of tropical forest management for wood production
A definition of tropical forests
The current status of tropical forests in the world
Rates of deforestation of tropical forests
Forest utilisation
A definition of tropical forests
Forests growing in tropical regions vary widely in composition, structure,, function and productivity because of the diversity of climates, soil types and biogeographic conditions where they grow. Definitions of tropical forests are varied. For the purposes of these Guidelines they are considered to comprise two forest classes, namely, evergreen tropical rainforests and moist deciduous tropical forests as defined by FAO in Figure 1. These classes are sometimes grouped together and referred to as Tropical High Forests, located in the tropical belt of the world where the dry season is short or does not occur at all. Both classes are of seedling origin that normally develop a high closed canopy.
Figure 1: Forest Classes Comprising Tropical Forests
Evergreen Tropical Rainforests: Occur where the annual rainfall is greater than 2,500 mm, where forests grow mostly at low elevations, are evergreen, luxuriant, predominantly of hardwood species, have a complex structure and are rich in both plants and animals. Soils tend to be shallow and poor in nutrients, features having a marked effect on forest management practices.
Moist Deciduous Tropical Forests: Occur where the annual rainfall is between 1,000 and 2,500 mm. The composition and structure vary greatly depending on rainfall distribution, temperature and soil types. They are less rich in tree species and much less biologically diverse than the tropical rainforests.
Source: FAO, 1993. The Challenge of Sustainable Forest Management.
The current status of tropical forests in the world
Tropical forest occurs in more than 80 countries and, in 1990, occupied 37 per cent of the total land area of the tropical regions, about one-third of the world's forest cover. They are the source of most of the wood harvested in the tropics. Within this large area is a diverse range of forest types, but they may be broadly grouped into four main classes:
- Evergreen tropical rainforests
- Moist deciduous forests
- Dry forest zones
- Upland forest formations.
The greatest concentration of evergreen tropical rainforests is in Central and tropical South America, constituting 52 per cent of the total world area, much of it in the Amazon Basin. Africa has the next largest area (29 per cent) and a smaller area occurs in Asia (19 per cent). Most moist deciduous forests occur in Africa and Latin America. This class is now less extensive than tropical rainforests because much of the land where it formerly occurred is well suited for human settlement, has been cleared and is now used for agriculture and other purposes. Bamboo and rattan are also significant resources in many tropical forests.
Rates of deforestation of tropical forests
Although the extent of the world's forests is still substantial with some 40 per cent of the earth's land surface under various types of tree cover, there are major differences in the rates of forest loss amongst different forest types. Tropical forests and other types, such as dry and upland forest formations, are estimated to have covered some 1,790 million hectares in 1990, down more than 120 million hectares in the 10 years from 1980, a decline of 0.8 per cent annually in tropical developing countries. The decline has continued in the period between 1990 and 1995. Forest cover and mated rates of deforestation in tropical forests are illustrated in Tables 1 and 2.
Recent estimates suggest that nearly two-thirds of tropical deforestation worldwide is due to farmers clearing land for agriculture. The largest losses are occurring in tropical moist forests, the zone best suited for human
Table 1: Tropical Land Area and Forest Cover (million ha)
Tropical Region
Land Area of Each Region
Total Forested Area in 1990
Tropical Rainforests
Moist Deciduous Forests
Africa
Asia
America
World Total
Source: FAO. 1993. Forest Resources Assessment 1990 - tropical countries.
Table 2: Tropical Forest Cover and Deforestation (million ha)
Tropical Region
Total Forested Area
Annual Rate of Deforestation
Area
Percent
Africa
Asia
America
Oceania
Source: FAO. 1997. The State of the World's Forests 1997. settlement and agriculture.
Forest utilisation
As an important part of the economies of most tropical countries forests provide a wide range of products, including timber, fuel, food, medicines and building materials; they also have prominent environmental values. Fuelwood utilisation is increasingly important as data in Table 3 for tropical developing countries show. The figures probably underestimate the real level of utilization because of unrecorded cutting. Fuelwood production in tropical developing countries in 1994 is estimated to have been 67 per cent of total roundwood production.
Table 3: Fuelwood Production from Tropical Forests in 1984 and 1994 (million cubic metres)
World
Tropical Asia & the Pacific
Tropical Africa
Tropical America
Source: FAO Yearbook: Forest Products. 1994, Rome.
Timber has been a primary source of income through trade in logs. Forests have also been used as security for loans and debt relief and through the exchange of concession rights for the construction of physical infrastructure. A prominent production component from tropical forests is sawlogs and veneer logs, largely from unsustainably managed forests, as 1994 data in Table 4 illustrate.
Table 4: Sawlog and Veneer Log Production from Tropical Forests in 1994 (mill cubic metres)
World
Tropical Asia & the Pacific
Tropical Africa
Tropical America
Source: FAO Yearbook: Forest Products, 1994, Rome.
Considerable regional variation exists in the rates of commercial log recovery from tropical forests. For example, commercial levels of log production are about 8 m^3/ha in Latin America and the Caribbean region, 14 m^3/ha in Africa and 33 m^3/ha in the Asia and Pacific region. There is considerable variation within regions. Log production in Indonesia, for example, is commonly 50-100 m^3/ha and in Colombia can be as low as 6 m^3/ha.
3 Further reading
de Montalembert, M. R. & Schmithüsen, F. 1994. Policy, Legal and Institutional Aspects of Sustainable Forest Management. In "Readings in Sustainable Forest Management". Forestry Paper No. 122, FAO, Rome.
Dubourdieu, Jean. 1997. L'Aménagement Forestier: Gestion Durable et Intégrée des Ecosystèmes Forestiers. Office National des Forêts, Paris, [in print]
FAO. 1993. The Challenge of Sustainable Forest Management - what future for the world's forests? Rome.
FAO. 1994. FAO Yearbook: Forest Products. Rome.
FAO. 1997. The State of the World's Forests 1997. Rome.
Grayson, A. J. (Ed.) 1995. The World's Forests: International Initiatives since Rio. Commonwealth Forestry Association, Oxford.
IIED. 1997. Sustainable Forest Management: a practical guide. IIED-SGS Forestry, London.
Johnson, N. & Cabarle, B. 1993. Surviving The Cut: Natural Forest Management in the Humid Tropics. World Resources Institute, Washington, D.C.
Leslie, A. J. 1994. Sustainable Management of Tropical Moist Forest for Wood. In "Readings in Sustainable Forest Management". Forestry Paper No. 122, FAO, Rome.
Poore, D. 1989. No Timber Without Trees - Sustainability in the Tropical Forest, Earthscan Publications Ltd, London.
Rowe, R. Sharma, N. P. & Browder, J. 1992. Deforestation: problems causes and concerns. In "Managing the World's Forests: looking for balance between conservation and development". Dubuque, Iowa.
Synnott, T. J. 1992. The Introduction of Basic Management into Tropical Forests. In "Wise Management of Tropical Forests 1992." 91-95 p. Oxford Forestry Institute.
United Nations. 1992. Earth Summit - Rio Declaration & Forest Principles. UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Dept. of Public Information, United Nations, New York.
WRI. 1992. World Resources 1992-93: A Guide to the Global Environment. World Resources Institute. Oxford University Press, New York.
<section>4</section>
Principles of sustainable tropical forest management where wood production is the primary objective
1 Background issues concerning sustainable forest management
2 A national policy and legal framework
3 Security of forest tenure and the permanent forest estate
4 Forest management planning
5 Permanent definition of forest boundaries
6 Effective forest protection
7 Maintenance of forest ecosystems and site productivity
8 Assessment of forest resources
9 Knowledge of the sustainability of tropical forest ecosystems
10 The choice of an appropriate silvicultural system
11 Minimisation of adverse environmental impacts
12 Commercial sustainability and business management
13 Community participation in sustainable forest management
14 Monitoring of managerial performance
15 Further reading
The basic principles forming the foundation of practical action for sustainable management of tropical forests where wood production is the primary management objective are explained in this chapter.
Figure 2: The Basic Principles of Tropical Forest Management
The basic principle of tropical forest management comprise the following elements:
· · National Policy and Legal framework
· · Security of Tenure of Forest Resources and Land
· · Effective Forest Protection
· · Knowledge on Sustainability of Tropical Forest Ecosystems
· · Maintenance of Site Productivity
· · Forest Management Planning
· · Goals and Objectives for Forest Management
· · Definition of Forest Resources
· · Application of Appropriate Silvicultural Systems
· · Minimisation of Adverse Environmental Impacts
· · A Regard for the Interests of Forest-Dependent Communities
· · Commercial Sustainability and Business Management
· · Monitoring of Managerial Performance
1 Background issues concerning sustainable forest management
What is forest management?
A definition of sustainable tropical forest management for wood production
ITTO forest management guidelines
Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
Natural forest management as a conservation tool
What is forest management?
The term forest management is applied in situations where an integrated, coordinated series of actions are taken, directed towards the achievement of specified objectives. It is because of the many different situations where choices need to be made in manipulating forest resources to meet particular objectives that the term has come to have different meanings to different people. In the broadest sense, forest management is a process which effectively integrates the biological, social and economic factors which influence the decisions leading towards the implementation of one or more specified objectives. An FAO understanding of forest management is shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3: An FAO Understanding of Forest Management
Forest Management:
Forest Management deals with the overall administrative, economic, legal, social, technical and scientific aspects related to natural and planted forests. It implies various degrees of deliberate human intervention, ranging from actions aimed, at. safeguarding and maintaining the forest ecosystem and its functions, to favouring specific socially or economically valuable species or groups of species for the improved production of goods and services. Sustainable forest management will ensure that the values derived from the forest meet present-day needs while at the same time ensuring their continued availability and contribution to long-term development needs.
(Source: FAO. 1993. The Challenge of Sustainable Forest Management - what future for the world's forests?)
Historically, forest management has mostly considered biological issues with a strong focus upon silviculture for the production of wood. As the forestry profession has grown, an understanding of the term "forest management" has broadened to span wider environmental issues, such as conservation of biological diversity, social and economic matters and, more generally, the concept of sustainability.
The Forest Principles, developed at the Earth Summit - the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED, held in Brazil in 1992) - have defined forest management as a part of a Statement of Principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and Sustainable development of all types of forests; it is expressed in Figure 4.
Figure 4: An UNCED Definition of Forest Management
Forest Management:
Forest resources and forest lands should be sustainably managed to meet the social, economic, cultural and spiritual human needs of present and. future generations. These needs are for forest products and services, such as wood and -wood products, water, food, fodder, medicine, fuel, shelter, employment, recreation, habitats for wildlife, landscape diversity, carbon sinks and reservoirs, and for other forest products. Appropriate measures should be taken to protect forests against harmful effects of pollution, including air-borne pollution, fires, pests and diseases in order to maintain their full multiple values.
(Source: UNCED. 1992. Earth Summit - Rio Declaration & Forest Principles.)
A definition of sustainable tropical forest management for wood production
It is important to define the meaning of the term sustainable management of tropical forests where it is applied to the production of wood. A study undertaken for the International Tropical Timber Organization led to a definition having these primary considerations:
I. Sustainable forest management should be practised on an operational and not an experimental scale.
II. It should embrace a balanced and comprehensive range of management activities that include working plans, yield prediction and control and other technical requirements.
III. It should include the wider political, social and economic criteria without which sustainability is probably unattainable.
ITTO forest management guidelines
Prior to UNCED in 1992, ITTO established a set of principles that comprise an international reference standard for the development of more specific national guidelines for sustainable management of natural tropical forests for wood production. Criteria for monitoring of sustainability in tropical moist forests were also defined by ITTO. The ITTO principles were published as:
Guidelines for the Sustainable Management of Natural Tropical Forests, ITTO Policy Development Series No. 1.
In 1993 the ITTO principles were supplemented by guidelines for the establishment and management of planted forests in tropical regions and guidelines for the conservation of biological diversity in tropical production forests. The development, application and enforcement of national guidelines based on the ITTO reference standard are matters for national decision by individual countries. The primary features of the ITTO guidelines, many having policy and operational implications, are summarized in Figure 5.
Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
UNCED and Sustainable Forest Management
The need to reconcile the productive functions with the protective, environmental and social roles which all types of forests fulfil was firmly expressed at UNCED. A declaration of 27 guiding principles focusing on the rights and obligations of sovereign states with respect to environment and development was agreed to at UNCED.
It included the Forest Principles - a Statement of Principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and Sustainable development of all types of forests and to provide for their multiple and complementary functions and uses. As one positive step aimed at developing the Forest Principles there has been broad international agreement to formulate scientifically sound criteria and indicators for the management, conservation and development of all types of forests.
Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Management at the Forest Level
Criteria and indicators are tools which can be used to define, implement and monitor Sustainable forest management in the broadest sense of the term, nationally and at the forest level.
Figure 5: Features of the ITTO Guidelines Concerning Sustainable Forest Management at National and Forest Levels
NATIONAL LEVEL
Policy and Legislation
- Forest policy
- National forest inventory
- Permanent forest estate
- Forest ownership
- National forest service
FOREST LEVEL
Planning
- Static and dynamic inventory
- Setting of management objectives
- Choice of silvicultural concept
- Yield regulation
- Annual allowable cut
- Management inventory
- Mapping
- Preparation of working plans
- Environmental impact assessment
Harvesting
- Pre-harvest prescriptions
-Roads
- Extraction
-Post-harvest stand management
Protection
- Control of access
- Fire protection
- Use of chemicals
Legal Arrangements
- Concession agreements
- Salvage permits
- Logging permits on private or customary land
Monitoring and Research
- Yield control and silviculture
- Environmental impact studies
(Source: ITTO, 1992. Guidelines For the Sustainable Management of Natural Tropical Forests.)
IV. Criteria: Criteria define the essential factors of forest management against which forest sustainability may be assessed. Each criterion relates to a key management factor which may be described by one or more qualitative, quantitative or descriptive indicators.
V. Indicators: Through measurement and monitoring of selected indicators, the effects of forest management action, or inaction, can be assessed and evaluated and action adjusted to ensure that forest management objectives are more likely to be achieved.
International Initiatives to Define Forest Management Criteria and Indicators
Since UNCED, criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management have been formulated within the framework of several international and national meetings. These include the Helsinki Process (for European forests, 1994), the Montreal Process (for temperate and boreal forests, 1993 to 1995), the Tarapoto Proposal (Amazon Forests 1995), the Dry Zone Africa Proposal (1995), the Near East Proposal (1996) and the Lepaterique Process of Central America (1997). The international initiatives are summarized in Annex 1.
Internationally coordinated efforts in the testing of criteria and indicators at the forest management unit level are being led by CIFOR in tropical and temperate countries. Criteria and indicators which can be considered objective, cost-effective and relevant in the assessment of the sustainability of prevailing forest management practices are being identified, taking into account ecological, institutional, social and economic conditions and needs.
Natural forest management as a conservation tool
Governments and rural community owners of tropical forests sometimes ask under what circumstances should natural forest management be applied as a conservation tool. When and where does tropical forest management have clear and convincing benefits as a mechanism not only for producing wood but also for achieving lasting conservation of a tropical forest resource?
Undisturbed forest land where natural forest management can be considered as a conservation tool should include at least some of the following conditions:
- Proximity of a forest resource to agricultural frontiers from where agricultural expansion might occur,
- Expanding local populations or rural communities,
- High local rates of deforestation or forest degradation occur,
- Easily accessible road access into tropical forest resources already exists and is regularly used by local communities,
- High local immigration rates occur into localities where manageable forest resources exist,
- Close proximity of a forest resource to wood markets and to wood-processing industries.
This approach to forest management is sometimes called the "use it or lose it" principle.
2 A national policy and legal framework
Policy framework
Forest legislation
Policy framework
For sustainable forest management to succeed a sound forest policy is essential. A national forest policy should be part of a national land use policy, assuring balanced forest use and conservation with agriculture and other land uses. Forest policies should not contradict the policies of other sectors. Policies should also reflect development patterns for a country and regional policies where appropriate. Forest policies are basically statements of goals for the forestry sector without going into detail about how they will be implemented.
A key policy feature of sustainable forest management is a commitment by governments to define, and defend a permanent forest estate based on secure, long-term land tenure for communities, concession holders and other forest users. Although each country decides best how to translate development themes which balance human activities with resource management into development policies, a basic feature for sustainable management is a firm and consistent commitment, including management plans and budgetary support, by governments to implement the forest policies it has formulated and approved. It should be a requirement of a national forest policy that management of tropical forests will be undertaken in a planned and disciplined manner.
Forest legislation
Laws and regulations comprising forest legislation are the legal instruments which are necessary to put into effect many of the objectives of a forest policy. Legislation permits the translation of policy objectives into specific legal provisions affecting both forest use and forest land and the way forest resources enter into the life and development of communities and countries.
Forest legislation enacted by the government should reflect the principle of sustainability in order to support implementation of forest policy. Depending upon social needs and prevailing ecosystems in a country, the objectives of forest law may cover a range of forest management issues. Points concerning sustainable tropical forest utilisation and management which should be included in forest legislation are:
- Maintaining or enlarging the amount and regional distribution of forest cover needed to secure a stable environment and to provide a basis for sound economic and social forest development.
- Protecting in a network of protected areas representative examples of all natural forest ecosystems in order to maintain an acceptable level of biological and landscape diversity.
- Preparing management plans for all State forest land and for forest lands in non-State tenure.
- Establishing and supporting a viable and multi-functional forest economy, combining ecological conservation and economic resource utilisation.
3 Security of forest tenure and the permanent forest estate
Security of forest tenure
National land use planning and the permanent forest estate
Security of forest tenure
Security of tenure of forest resources and access to forest land is a basic principle and a prerequisite for sustainable tropical forest management Appropriate and reliable forms of forest and land tenure should be established by legislation, including various forms of forest ownership and usage rights. The following provisions concerning security of tenure should be recognised:
- Two broad categories of forest land tenure, namely, private holdings (such as corporations and communal ownership) and public land (such as central, provincial or community government).
- The rights and obligations of different categories of forest owners, including local communities.
- Categories and the nature of usage rights.
National land use planning and the permanent forest estate
A fundamental component of national land use planning is identification of a permanent forest estate, comprising forests of all ownership types, based on secure, long-term land tenure for local communities, concession holders and other forest users. Sustainable management of tropical forests, irrespective of purpose, cannot be planned and effectively implemented in the absence of a permanent forest estate. Land use planning should balance the developmental needs of the country as a whole, or for specific states or provinces within a country, with those of natural resources conservation, including sustainable forest management.
A permanent forest estate should be classified into productive and protective zones on the basis of a national forest inventory, ecological considerations and community consensus. Forest management units for wood production within the permanent forest estate should be identified and responsibility for management allocated amongst various owners and users.
4 Forest management planning
What is a forest management plan and why is it needed?
Sustainability in forest management
Goals and objectives of forest management
What is a forest management plan and why is it needed?
A forest management plan translates national or regional forest policies into a thoughtfully prepared and well co-ordinated operational programme for a forest and for regulating forestry activities for a set time period through the application of prescriptions that specify targets, action and control arrangements. It is an indispensable part of a forest management system and should regulate protection, inventory, yield determination, harvesting, silviculture, monitoring and other forest operations. It should always:
- Provide firm guidance on the log yields which may be cut,
- Specify where and under what conditions and constraints the yield may be harvested.
A forest management plan is required to provide continuity in managerial operations over time, to formalise administrative arrangements and to provide a basis for monitoring forest activities. A key criterion for the sustainable management of tropical forests is the existence and effective implementation, including monitoring, of an approved management plan that has been prepared using up-to-date and accurate information. A forest management plan has the purpose not only of setting out approved management objectives and specified action but, equally importantly, of communicating these to people who are concerned with the implementation of a plan in a forest or group of forests to which it applies.
Sustainability in forest management
Recognition of the fundamental importance of the principle of sustainability is essential in the preparation and subsequent implementation of prescriptions in a forest management plan, irrespective of the objectives of management. Sustainable management of tropical forests may be regarded as one of the most important contributions which the forestry sector can make to programmes of national development in tropical developing countries.
Goals and objectives of forest management
The identification of a management goal and specific objectives for a forest management unit, according to policy priorities, resources potential and constraints, is a basic forest management principle.
A goal is a long-term aim, derived from forest policies or determined as the end-point of a strategy to achieve sustainable forest resources development. Only one goal should be determined and defined for any particular forest management unit.
Objectives are measurable activities, or outputs, which state specific results to be achieved during a specified period of time. Several objectives may be determined and defined in a forest management plan. Each objective should be clear about:
- What activities will be undertaken,
- Where they will happen,
- Who has responsibility for taking action,
- When the action should be taken,
- When action should be completed,
- How much will be achieved, or specific quantitative statements concerning outputs,
- Why an activity will contribute to achievement of an objective.
5 Permanent definition of forest boundaries
A basic principle of tropical forest management is clear and permanent definition of forest boundaries - irrespective of land ownership and tenure -linked to permanent marking, surveying and mapping of boundaries. Permanent definition and subsequent surveying of boundaries are essential steps in defining and mapping a permanent forest estate. They also contribute towards achieving effective protection of a forest from degradation or loss. It is not possible, in practice, to define the area of a forest where planned sustainable management is proposed, nor to derive an annual allowable harvest in the absence of permanently defined, surveyed and mapped forest boundaries.
6 Effective forest protection
Forest protection from fire, from conversion to other land uses and from losses caused by shifting cultivation and unlawful logging is a fundamentally important principle of sustainable tropical forest management, irrespective of the objectives. Sustainable forest management cannot be achieved in the absence of a firm and lasting commitment and appropriate action to effectively protect a forest management unit from the threats and activities that might impair the achievement of forest management objectives.
7 Maintenance of forest ecosystems and site productivity
Biological diversity conservation and forest genetic resources
Maintenance of ecosystem integrity and site productivity
Maintaining the capacity of a forest to regenerate naturally
Biological diversity conservation and forest genetic resources
Biological diversity means the variety of life forms of both plants and animals, the ecological roles they perform and the genetic resources they contain. An important feature of natural tropical forests is their great biological diversity. It is estimated that tropical forests contain at least 50 per cent and probably more of all living species in the world, including a large proportion of the higher plants and mammals. Apart from the small number of tree species of current economic importance, or of domestic importance to local communities, there are likely to be many others present having lesser known values. Some of these will be important to ecosystem stability, others might form an important part of future wood harvests or other forest products, in response to changing environmental conditions and market demands. Genetic variation helps to buffer ecosystems against environmental change and provides the basis for selection and improvement of the products and other
benefits to meet future needs, so far as they can be foreseen. The greater the uncertainty over the future - whether environmental change or markets for wood and non-wood products - the greater the potential value of conserving biological diversity.
Conservation of the biological diversity of natural tropical forests is dependent upon maintaining essential functional components of ecosystems while allowing for natural dynamic change to occur. It should be recognised that our present level of knowledge is inadequate to enable all the components of tropical forest ecosystems to be determined with certainty. The precautionary principle therefore is that forest management practices, including harvesting, should aim to conserve as wide a range of species as possible. In particular, endangered plant and animal species need to be protected.
Maintenance of ecosystem integrity and site productivity
The maintenance of ecosystem integrity and site productivity includes maintenance of suitable conditions for the biological functions of tree reproduction and growth and the preservation or increase of soil productivity. It is fundamentally important to manage tropical forest ecosystems to maintain their integrity and to enable site productivity to be maintained to supply wood and non-wood products at levels which are consistent with biological requirements, market interest and the needs of local communities. Acceptance of this position may lead to a reduction of wood output where intensive log production has been carried out. In such cases industrial demands for logs may need to be reduced to levels that are consistent with the biological production capacity of specific forest ecosystems.
Key aspects of forest ecosystems management which contribute to the maintenance of site productivity are summarised in Figure 6. The focus is upon maintenance of ecological processes, maintenance of biological diversity, satisfaction of the needs of local people, maintenance of the harvest of all products, and the sustainability of wood production.
Maintaining the capacity of a forest to regenerate naturally
Maintaining the capacity of a tropical forest ecosystems to regenerate naturally is an important principle of sustainable forest management. The essentials are:
- Seed sources of all tree species comprising the ecosystem should be retained,
- Soil disturbance over the entire production forest should be minimised.
Representative areas, especially sites of ecological importance, should be managed to ensure that the capacity of forest ecosystems to regenerate naturally is not impaired. Steps that may be taken include forest protection, minimising canopy opening and protecting corridors of undisturbed forest, including streamside buffer zones.
Figure 6: Key Features of Forest Ecosystems Management That Contribute to the Maintenance of Site Productivity
Maintenance of Ecological Processes
- Forest use should not cause deterioration of the hydrological functions of forested catchments.
- Forest cover should be maintained to protect soils against the erosive effects of rainfall.
- Soil erosion should be minimised.
- The forest structure should, as far as possible, be maintained to ensure that the biological regeneration capacity is preserved.
- Removal of inorganic nutrients should be minimised by leaving branches and foliage, and debarking logs, in the forest.
- Ecologically sensitive areas, especially buffer zones along water courses, should be protected
- Forest management operations should not cause avoidable ponding or waterlogging
- There should be no chemical contamination of soils and food chains.
Maintenance of Biological Diversity
- Sites important for rare or localised species should not be disturbed.
- Endangered plant and animal species should be protected.
- Forests should not be unnecessarily fragmented if it will lead to loss of species which need to range widely or exist at low densities.
- Small areas of undisturbed forest can preserve wildlife species which can recolonise a forest which regenerates after logging.
Maintenance of the Harvest of all Forest Products
- Sustainability cannot be based upon a single product; management should aim at the production, and potential production, of a diversity of forest products.
8 Assessment of forest resources
Clear and reliable definition of all resources comprising a forest management unit, irrespective of ownership or control, is a critically important element of forestry planning. General information on the extent of tropical forest resources is needed for the formulation of sound forest policies and for broad national or provincial planning. Specific forest resources information on wood volumes and growth is needed at the forest management unit level in order to determine sustainable yields of wood production.
Effective forest management relies on the use of good quality information on forest types, wood volumes and growth, on a range of other environmental matters, on local community and wider social relationships and on economic issues. Ideal forest resources information having value for forest management planning and for practical operations are summarised in Figure 7.
9 Knowledge of the sustainability of tropical forest ecosystems
The need for a thorough understanding of forest ecology
Continuous forest inventory
Yield determination
The need for a thorough understanding of forest ecology
A basic principle in the sustainable management of tropical forests for wood production is acquiring a thorough understanding of tropical forest ecology in order to be able to predict how a forest ecosystem will respond to managerial intervention, especially logging. Sustainable forest management should consider the conservation of forest ecosystems as a whole as well as in the context of present or future wood production.
Continuous forest inventory
Continuous forest inventory provides data needed for the construction of yield tables and growth models which may be used, together with current forest inventory data, for growth and yield forecasting. It is also a system monitoring the stocking and development of forests and the rate of growth which enables any unexpected or unfavourable developments to be detected and measured. An important requirement for sustainable tropical forest management is the collection of good quality forest growth and development data through continuous forest inventory in order that the sustainability of forest ecosystems may be properly determined.
Yield determination
A basic principle of sustainable management of tropical forests is that forest products yields should be determined in order that an optimum rate of harvest of wood and other products may be planned. Sustainable forest management can only be achieved through the reliable determination of yields of both wood and non-wood products.
Figure 7: Ideal Forest Resources Information Requirements
Graphical Information Concerning Forest Land
- topographic maps
- cadastral maps
- management maps, including boundaries
- aerial photographs
- satellite imagery
- geographic information system data
Legal Information
- rights and privileges
- land tenure
Environmental Information
- geology
- soils
- biological diversity
- wildlife
- meteorology
- hydrology and watersheds
- forest ecology
- wood (log) resources
- forest growth and yields
- silviculture
- non-wood resources
- pests and diseases
- forest use & management history
- amenity and scenery
Social Information
- population and location
- community structure
- social relationships with forests
- recreation interest or potential
Economic Information
- wood prices
- wood markets
- taxation issues
- costs
10 The choice of an appropriate silvicultural system
The aim of silviculture
Types of silvicultural systems
Harvesting: a silvicultural and a log production operation
The relationship of silviculture to forest management objectives
The aim of silviculture
Silviculture is a set of techniques that can be applied to help attain specified forest management objectives. It aims to achieve the implementation of objectives through manipulation of the composition and structure of a forest. In most instances in a wood production forest, the aim of silviculture is to enhance the growth and quality of potential crop trees.
Types of silvicultural systems
The systematic application of an appropriate silvicultural system is a basic principle in the planned, sustainable management of tropical forests. Since planned management of tropical forests was first introduced in the nineteenth century a number of silvicultural systems have been developed, each comprising a basis for tropical forest management for wood production. Most systems aim to achieve regeneration of trees through natural seed fall from seed trees. Where necessary, artificial regeneration that relies on the planting of nursery-raised seedlings is used to support the natural regeneration systems. The systematic application of an appropriate silvicultural system for management of natural tropical forests depends upon acquiring an understanding of the ecology of the forest for which management is being planned. Silvicultural management of natural tropical forests is superior in both ecological and economic terms to attempts at plantation forest establishment on the
same infertile sites.
The primary characteristics of silvicultural systems which have been applied at various times in tropical forests in Latin America, Asia and Africa are summarised in Figure 8. The polycyclic, selective cutting system is the most widely applied system in hill forests. It offers a flexible, practical, technically and commercially realistic basis for harvesting and at the same time it influences forest composition and structure in favour of the next crop. Clearcutting in narrow strips and group selection cutting patterns are applied in some localities but have the disadvantage of causing damage to remaining trees.
Harvesting: a silvicultural and a log production operation
Harvesting of logs from forests managed under polycyclic and, to a lesser extent, monocyclic systems is a significant silvicultural intervention as well as being a log production operation. The long-term managerial effect of relatively low impact log extraction is that it is also the most formative silvicultural operation to be applied during the management cycle in any particular area of forest through its effect on the future structure, composition and growth of a forest.
Figure 8: Silvicultural Systems That Can be Used in Tropical Forests
The Polycyclic System is applied in all-aged forests where the log harvest is cut from specified size-classes and species of trees at intervals which are about one-half of the growing period taken to reach industrial log sizes. Advanced growth is retained. There is one sub-system.
· Selection Cutting of Crop Trees:
Aims at maintaining uneven aged forests; regeneration is either present before logging or can be encouraged to develop following harvesting by leaving seed, or mother, trees; a range of tree size classes exists and the forest does not have a uniform composition.
Monocyclic Systems are applied in uniform forests where age-classes exist or are to be formed. New crop trees are derived from regeneration, seedlings and. saplings of commercially important species and not from older and larger trees which may have or still do comprise the forest structure. Advanced growth is retained. At the end of a fixed rotation crop trees are either removed by clearcutting or, in the case of the uniform shelterwood system, harvested through a regeneration period. There are three sub-systems.
· Uniform System:
Aims at achieving even-aged stands composed of trees of generally uniform size: regeneration is present in sufficient density before harvesting to provide tree stocks for the next crop.
· Tropical Shelterwood System: Aims at achieving even-aged stands through the formation of a shelterwood of mother (seed) trees which are subsequently removed when regeneration has become established.
· Irregular Shelterwood System: Aims at achieving continuing forest development in situations where regeneration is uncertain and retention of trees below specified cutting limits is necessary and will comprise a part of a future crop.
Log harvesting should not only be considered as being a cost incurred in wood production but also as a silvicultural investment in the production of logs for the next harvest. In particular, it has a major thinning effect in that pole-sized trees, saplings and seedlings are provided with "growing space" whilst soil disturbance creates conditions which enable seed of many species to germinate and become established. As a matter of principle, the logger and the silviculturalist should work as partners with the understanding that harvesting is a part of silvicultural treatment but, at the same time, ensuring that logging operations and management objectives are commercially realistic.
The relationship of silviculture to forest management objectives
The choice of a silvicultural system is determined, firstly, by the ecological characteristics of a forest for which sustainable management is being planned and, secondly, by the management goal and objectives for a specific forest management unit. Sustainable management of tropical forests is at the core of a forest development strategy and implies silvicultural manipulation, or intervention, in order to achieve objectives written in a forest management plan.
The following guidelines should be considered in designing an appropriate silvicultural system for a forest management unit:
- The forest planner should provide an appropriate basic framework for silvicultural treatment. The framework should include clear management objectives.
- The silvicultural concept should express basic principles but should leave firm decisions on the nature of specific silvicultural operations - what and when specific activities will take place - to local foresters.
- The definition of short- and medium-term stocking and regeneration targets is an important step in achieving a desirable forest composition and structure. Diagnostic sampling should be applied as a step in determining stocking and regeneration targets.
11 Minimisation of adverse environmental impacts
Minimisation of adverse environmental impacts in the planning and practical implementation of tropical forest operations is a basic principle of sustainable forest management. At all stages in forest management, be it wood harvesting, silvicultural operations, forest protection, harvesting of non-wood products or other activities, forest managers should safeguard the integrity of both land and forest through thoughtful planning and sensitive implementation of forestry operations.
Environmental impact assessment is a useful tool for assessing the environmental impacts of forest management. It is a systematic, stepwise procedure which gathers information and evaluates the likely impact of the change of circumstances that might result from implementation of a management programme. An important aspect of environmental assessment is to ensure that adverse impacts of harvesting activities - road design and construction, cutting, extraction, landing and transport operations - are minimised. As a general principle, the maintenance of environmental values and services should be supported by revenue from wood production, except where forest land is located in places not zoned for production.
12 Commercial sustainability and business management
Commercial sustainability
Private sector participation in forest management
Funding of forest operations from revenue
Commercial sustainability
As a basic principle of sustainable tropical forest management, all operations comprising a balanced programme of activities need to be financially supportable from revenue earned from sales of forest products, primarily from log harvesting. It is the commercial operation of a forest management unit which is the driving force for the generation of revenue from which all forest conservation and development activities should be funded.
The policy and trading environment of a country or province should enable a forest management unit to be commercially as well as ecologically sustainable and should permit sound business arrangements to be implemented that, in turn, will enable long-term forest management programmes to be achieved. It should however be noted that sustainable forest management which follows ecologically sound environmental standards can be expected to be more expensive than is unregulated exploitation. Lower expectation by immediate profit by the private sector is an important pre-requisite to achieving sustainable management of tropical forests.
Private sector participation in forest management
Most large-scale harvesting and management in tropical forests is undertaken by the private sector, most commonly by concession holders having exclusive rights for defined periods of time in designated areas of State forests. Examples may be found in Indonesia, Malaysia, Bolivia, Cameroon, Congo, Gabon and Brazil and many other countries. Logging concessions are also granted over customary land in some Pacific countries but currently the basis for sustainable management over the long term tends to be minimal. On a world scale, only relatively small areas are harvested and managed by wholly State-owned enterprises or by non-government agencies.
Private sector participation is essential in sustainable forest management. The entrepreneurship and business experience of private owners and enterprises can substantially enhance the operational performance and the economic base of management and lead to greater wealth generation upon which post-harvest management, environmental management and local community development are able to be funded. The institutional framework within which forest development can best operate should encourage the private sector to make long-term investments in forest management under conditions of profitability, fair competition and security which can compete with investment alternatives.
Funding of forest operations from revenue
All funding for protection, post-harvest silviculture, inventory, research, environmental management and community development should, if possible, be derived from revenue generated from harvesting. These requirements should be budgeted into an annual operations plan by including specific budget lines for forest development.
13 Community participation in sustainable forest management
Community forestry promotes improved livelihoods of rural communities, especially those which have a traditional dependency upon forests, through more effective management of tree and forest resources. Rural communities and forest users who depend on tree and forest resources for their survival and for economic development are the primary beneficiaries of community forestry activities. Forest managers should work with forest communities in assessing, planning and monitoring the management of natural tropical forests, according to locally defined concerns, needs and goals, in order to better address rural communities' needs. Effective mechanisms should be formulated that will enable the achievement of effective and enduring two-way communication between forest managers and forest communities.
Three features should be recognised in encouraging rural community participation in sustainable forest management:
- A clear recognition and respect for the rights of indigenous peoples who live in or have a traditional dependence on tropical forests.
- Promoting collaboration amongst people and institutions who are involved in the various aspects of forest management, including wood production, integrating professional skills and training with traditional knowledge and resources of local populations in order to more effectively support the needs of rural communities and to minimise or avoid conflicts in forest management.
- Enhancement of the well-being of forest workers and local communities.
14 Monitoring of managerial performance
Monitoring the implementation of activities set out in an approved forest management plan is fundamental to sustainable forest management and forms the basis for transparent accountability of operational activities. Monitoring of forest management has several functions. It allows for the control of current management activities, for the evaluation of the operating performance of a forest management unit and for the evaluation of management programmes. One approach to monitoring involves making comparisons between physical achievements and programme targets, and between financial expenditure and budgets at the end of specified time periods, for example, at three- or six-monthly intervals. Another approach is to monitor specified key indicators continuously, which enables information on the progress of plan implementation to be collected more frequently, such as at weekly intervals.
15 Further reading
Anthony, R. N. & Herzlinger, R. E. 1980. Management Control In Non-profit Organizations. Harvard University, Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Publishers, Illinois.
Bertault, J. G. Dupe, B. & Matter, H. F. 1995. Silviculture for Sustainable Management of Tropical Moist Forest. In "UNASYLVA", Vol. 46, (181), FAO, Rome.
Bruenig, E. F. 1996. Conservation and Management of Tropical Rainforests: an Integrated Approach to Sustainability. CAB International, Wallingford, Oxford.
Catinot, René. 1997. The Sustainable Management of Tropical Rainforests. General Secretariat, Association technique internationale des bois tropicaux, ATIBT. Paris.
de Montalembert, M. R. & Schmithüsen, F. 1993/4. Policy and Legal Aspects of Sustainable Forest Management. In "UNASYLVA", Vol. 44 (175), FAO, Rome.
Dubourdieu, J. 1997. L'Aménagement Forestier - Gestion Durable et Intégrée des Ecosystèmes Forestiers. Office National des Forêts, Paris.
FAO. 1982. Environmental Impact of Forestry. Conservation Guide No. 7, Rome.
FAO. 1985. Intensive Multiple-Use Forest Management in the Tropics: analysis of case studies from India, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean. Forestry Paper No. 55, Rome.
FAO. 1987. Guidelines for Forest Policy Formulation. Forestry Paper No. 81, Rome. FAO. 1989. Review of Forest Management Systems of Tropical Asia. Forestry Paper No. 89, Rome.
FAO. 1993. The Challenge of Sustainable Forest Management - what future for the world's forests? FAO, Rome.
FAO. 1993. Conservation of Genetic Resources in Tropical Forest Management - Principles and Concepts. Forestry Paper No. 107, Rome.
FAO. 1996. Training Manual for Environmental Assessment in Forestry. Field Doc. 8/1996. FAO, Bangkok/DANCED, Denmark.
FAO. 1996. Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. Rome.
FAO. 1996. Addressing Natural Resource Conflicts Through Community Forestry: setting the stage. Paper for an E-Conference "Addressing Natural Resource Conflicts through Community Forestry". Rome.
Ferguson, I. S. 1996. Sustainable Forest Management. Oxford University Press, Melbourne.
ITTO. 1992. Guidelines For The Sustainable Management of Natural Tropical Forests. Policy Development Series No. 1. International Tropical Timber Organization, Yokohama. 1992.
IUCN. 1991. The Management of Tropical Moist Forest Lands: Ecological Guidelines. IUCN-The World Conservation Union, Gland.
Johnston, D. R. Grayson, A.J & Bradley, R. T. 1965. Forest Planning. Faber & Faber, London.
Leslie, A.J. 1987. A Second Look at the Economics of Natural Management Systems in Tropical Mixed Forests. In "UNASYLVA", Vol. 39 (155), FAO, Rome.
Pancel, L. [Ed]. 1993. Tropical Forestry Handbook. Springer Verlag, Germany.
Poore, D. & Sayer, J. 1991. The Management of Tropical Moist Forest Lands: Ecological Guidelines. IUCN-The World Conservation Union, Gland.
Schulte, A. & Schöne, D. [Eds]. 1996. Dipterocarp Forest Ecosystems - Towards Sustainable Management. World Scientific Publishing, Singapore.
Vanclay, J. K. 1992. Species Richness and Productive Forest Management. In "Wise Management of Tropical Forests". Proceedings of the Oxford Conference on Tropical Forests, University of Oxford.
Worrell, A. C. 1970. Principles of Forest Policy. McGraw-Hill Book Co. New York.
<section>5</section>
1 Guidelines for defining forest resources
1.1 Resources and inventories
1.2 Land area in sustainable forest management
1.3 Forest inventory
1.4 Forest growth and yield
1.5 Diagnostic sampling
1.6 Further reading
1.1 Resources and inventories
1.1.1 Definition and maintenance of forest boundaries
1.1.2 Mapping
1.1.3 Zoning
1.1.4 Remote sensing imagery
1.1.5 Geographic information systems
1.1.1 Definition and maintenance of forest boundaries
Selection of Forest Management Unit Boundaries
Wherever it is practicable to do so, natural geographic features should be selected to define the boundaries of a forest management unit. These include rivers, streams, shorelines, ridges and spurs. Permanent and clearly defined roads, railways and tracks may also be used. On flat country not having clearly recognisable natural features boundaries can be defined using straight lines that have a N-S, E-W orientation to enable them to be shown as true or magnetic coordinates on maps. The number of comers on straight line boundaries should be kept to a minimum.
Demarcation and Maintenance of External Forest Boundaries
External boundaries should be kept clear of bushy vegetation for a width of two metres in order that neighbours may easily recognise a boundary and to allow it to be patrolled. Trees located on a boundary should not be removed. Cost sharing between forest neighbours in the maintenance of common boundaries is desirable. This approach confirms agreement on the line of a common boundary and is cost-efficient.
Boundaries should be defined and marked using beacons which may be durable wooden poles or stone or concrete pillars painted using two contrasting colours, such as broad red and white bands. The tops of poles should be pointed, partly to shed water and also to assist with recognition. Poles should be between 1.5 metres and two metres tall. Although not all pillars need to be labelled, permanent labels should be firmly attached to those that indicate major changes in boundary direction or are triangulation points for surveys, or are "tie-in" points for internal surveys, such as compartment boundaries or various types of reserves. Continuous lines of" live markers are a practical means of spotting a boundary from an aircraft or from a distance. Trees or shrubs used for boundary definition should be fast growing and distinctively different from surrounding forest vegetation. Live markers may also be used on boundary pillars. At the comers of boundary lines direction trenches
can be dug and kept clear of vegetation. Direction trenches should be 30 cm × 30 cm (wide × deep), up to 3 metres long, and should be correctly aligned to indicate the direction of the boundary.
Patrolling is essential and should be undertaken often in heavily populated areas or where the risk of boundary transgression is considered to be high. Forest guards should be accountable to a senior officer or director. Aerial inspection and remote sensing imagery can be helpful for checking boundaries but these methods are most useful after boundaries are known on the ground. Notices should be erected on high-use parts of a boundary.
Demarcation and Maintenance of Internal Forest Boundaries
The boundaries of biological, wildlife, watershed, forest community or other reserves should be as clearly defined as are external boundaries. Roads, cut lines, pillars, painted standing trees and poles should be used to define internal boundaries. Internal compartment boundaries should be surveyed and mapped. Notices should be erected showing boundaries of watershed and other reserves where wood harvesting is not allowed.
Compartments
A compartment is a permanent, geographically recognisable unit of forest land forming the basis for planning, prescription, implementation, monitoring and recording of forest operations. To the extent that it is practicable, areas of forest that are to be managed for different purposes, or have clearly different functions or values, should be placed in separately defined compartments. A compatibility matrix of forest functions that can be used as a guideline for determining compartment functions is shown in Tables 5 (a) and (b).
Practical guidelines for defining forest compartments are:
· Wherever practicable:
· Boundaries should be geographically recognisable, such as rivers, streams, ridges and gullies. Permanent roads and trails may also be used. Boundaries should be recorded on all forest management maps.
· Compartments should as far as possible comprise uniform forest types and be physically recognisable on the ground.
· Numbering should be sequential, usually commencing at a forest headquarters. Compartment numbers should not be changed.
· Compartments should not be so large that sub-division into numerous sub-compartments is required in order to achieve effective implementation of forest operations. Sub-compartmentation should be minimised. Flexibility is required in determining compartment size; a practical size range for many management situations is between 100 ha and 500 ha, depending upon the physical features of the forest and land.
Table 5 (a): Key For A Compatibility Matrix Of Forest Functions That May Be Used As A Guideline For Compartment Formation
Compatible
Not Compatible
To Be Defined In Each Case
On All Slope Gradients
<50% Slope
<30% Slope
Fauna
LDCCS
Recreation
Key to abbreviations used in the matrix:
CLR = Customary land Rights
IPT = Industrial Tree Plantation
GSS = Reduced Impact ground Skidding
LDCCS = Long Distance Cable Crane System
NFM = Natural Forest Management
NWFP = Non-wood Forest Products
Compartment Records
Compartment records may either be constructed and maintained manually in a register, or on a personal computer using database software. Each record should have four main components, as follows:
· A summary of site conditions (soils, slopes, rainfall),
· Pre-harvest inventory data (species, tree numbers and volumes expressed by stem diameter classes),
· Dates and details of harvesting and silvicultural operations (selective harvesting, shelterwood cutting, thinning, climber cutting, enrichment planting, release weeding),
· Post-harvest inventory data (poles, saplings, seedlings, nucleus trees).
An example of a manually maintained compartment history record is shown in Table 6. The design should be modified to meet the requirements of local situations. One form should be prepared for each sub-compartment. The example shows how operations may be recorded. Each record should be accompanied by a compartment map; the scale can vary depending upon local conditions but suitable scales are between 1:5,000 and 1:10,000.
1.1.2 Mapping
Map Interpretation
Maps fulfil a wide range of functions in forest management depending on the type, the amount of detail of features represented and their scale. Map interpretation is the art of extracting from a map all of the information it contains for management purposes so that a "picture" can be drawn in the planner's or manager's mind of the shapes and slopes of the ground, the pattern of streams and rivers, the vegetation cover, and the location and nature of man-made features.
Map reading is best learnt by experience, in a forest or outdoors by comparing the detail of map symbols with the actual area of country they represent. Once an appreciation of a map and its symbols has been built up by comparison with a known landscape, this knowledge can be used to gain an understanding of an unknown area from a map. For example, by comparing the spacing of contour lines in a known locality with those in an unknown area, the relative steepness and alignment of slopes may be determined.
Table 5 (b): Compatibility Matrix of Forest Functions
Table 6: A Manually Maintained Compartment History Record
Forest Name:
Compartment:
Sub-compt:
Area:
Site Summary:
· Rainfall:
· Soils:
· Topography.
Pre-harvest Inventory Data:
· Forest Type:
· Inventory Date
Species
Harvestable Trees (per ha)
Nucleus Trees (per ha)
Over 60 cm
Under 59 cm
No./ha
No./ha
No./ha
No.
Vol
No.
Vol
Species A
Species B
Species C
Harvesting And Silvicultural Operations:
Completion Date
Area (ha)
Operation
e.g. 25 April 1993
selective harvesting; 7 sp/ha cut; skidder; x production = 45 m^3/ha
e.g. 31 Sept. 1993
post-harvest assessment;
e.g. 20 May 1994
diagnostic sampling; 5%; leading trees -26; leading desirables - 87.
e.g. 28 July 1994
release weeding (cleaning);
e.g. 25 Feb. 1995
enrichment planting; 5 m strips; 150 sp/ha (species to be recorded)
Post-harvest Assessments:
Dates:
Poles
Saplings
Seedlings
Seed Trees
Damaged Trees
(No./ha)
(No./ha)
(No./ha)
(No./ha)
(No./ha)
Stages in the Review of Maps for Practical Forest Management
There are two stages in the review of maps for forest management.
· Stage One: To identify and acquire published base maps of a forest area to be managed showing physical features, including settlements, villages, roads and other infrastructure, rivers and coastlines, contours, geology, soils, land uses, forests and agricultural vegetation type boundaries. Reports or notes which might accompany the maps should also be acquired. In many countries, the national series of topographic maps combine some of these features at scales of 1:50,000, (2 cm = 1 km), or 1:25,000 (4 cm = 1 km). Maps produced by triangulation control surveys at a scale of 1:100,000 may also be available.
· Stage Two: To review the maps that have been collected. The questions to be answered could include:
· Is the map coverage, map scales and physical detail on maps adequate for planning, zoning or operational purposes, such as recognition of forest boundaries, definition of major physical features (rivers, ridges) and definition of contours? Are they up-to-date?
· Which new maps are required for forest zoning (protection, production and other broad zones), for forest stratification and inventory, roading, for forest protection, community development and other purposes which might be related to specific forest management objectives? What map scales should be used?
· Where and through whom can relevant new maps showing the detail required for management purposes be prepared or acquired? What are the priorities in map preparation?
· How long will acquisition of new maps take? What are the requirements and estimated cost?
Primary Map Types and Scales for Planned Forest Management
Detailed mapping requirements for planned forest management will depend upon the goal and objectives for each forest management unit, determined through the review outlined in the previous section. As a general guide, the primary map types to be purchased, or drawn if they do not exist, for planning sustainable management for wood production should include the following:
· Essential Maps:
· Topographic map, showing primary geographic features, including contours; 1:50,000 or 1:25,000.
· Land use planning map, showing the forest management unit together with settlement, agriculture and other land uses; 1:50,000 or 1:25,000.
· Forest zoning map, showing zones for watershed protection, wood production, specific non-wood products, biological diversity conservation, recreation (or amenity) and any other primary forest zones; 1: 50,000 or 1:25,000.
· This map should be drawn as a part of the planning process, especially to determine the net productive area for wood production.
· Strategic planning forest harvesting map (felling blocks or felling series/compartments/roading); 1:50,000 or 1:10,000.
· Tactical planning forest harvesting map (felling blocks/topography); 1:10,000, 1:5,000 or 1:2,000.
· This map should be drawn as a part of the planning process.
· Reconnaissance forest map of merchantable tree species above a minimum dbh, e.g. > 50cm dbh, based on a low intensity forest reconnaissance; 1:50,000 or 1:100,000.
· This map, or maps, should be drawn progressively as a management plan is implemented.
· Forest inventory map (for continuous forest inventory), showing sampling strata/blocks and PSP positions; 1:50,000 or 1:25,000. This map should be drawn as a part of the planning process.
· Tree position/tree species/topographic maps, overlaid with road map, compiled through 100% pre-harvest inventory of each compartment; 1:10,000 or less. This is a series of maps that should be drawn regularly for compartments as a management plan is implemented.
· Desirable Maps:
· Cadastral map, showing legal ownership of land; 1:50,000.
· Geology map; 1:100,000, or less.
· Soils map; 1:50,000, or less.
· Contour map; 1:5,000 or 1:10,000.
These need not be the only map types for forest management and it is important that a forest manager should ask questions about mapping needs for each specific management situation. The following are examples:
· What other map types are needed that will assist a forest manager in implementing planned management objectives?
· Is a rainfall map necessary? Why?
· Would maps showing the location or distribution of specific, uncommon or endangered plants or animals be helpful? What scale should such maps be?
· Will maps showing the location of villages, areas where traditional food crops, medicinal plants or other products are gathered be managerially helpful? What is the most appropriate scale?
· Will maps showing localities having scenic, recreational or ecotourism value be helpful? Why?
1.1.3 Zoning
A mapping technique that provides a practical basis for planning the sustainable management of tropical forests where wood production and other values are present is forest zoning. Forest zoning is applied where multiple-uses occur and involves identification of the predominant values for specific areas of forest land that are to be managed in respect of management objectives that are related to those values. For example, steep slopes where serious soil erosion may occur if a part of a forest is roaded and logged could be placed into a watershed protection zone. Again, forest that is an important habitat for endangered plants or animals may be described as a biological reserve zone. Where significant environmental or social constraints are not identified an area of forest can be zoned for wood production.
Zoning is a critically important step in defining and locating the "net productive area" for wood production for a forest management unit. The wood production zone is determined by deducting the area of land which is "unproductive" from the total area of a forest management unit. "Unproductive" land does not, or will not, contribute to wood production; it includes agricultural land, roads, rivers and lakes, industrial areas, settlements and land that has been zoned for watershed and biological diversity conservation and for the conservation of forest used by indigenous people. The wood production zone forms the area basis for the determination of the Annual Allowable Cut, explained further in Part II, 3.6.
The process of identifying and describing forest zones is primarily a field activity which should be undertaken with the benefit of good on-the-ground knowledge, gained through observations in a forest by planning foresters, rangers and specialists. All compartments should be examined and the forest values on each compartment considered.
Each specific area of forest that is a separate zone should be placed in a separate sub-compartment, or a compartment if the zone occupies a whole compartment. Value judgements that are formed in the field and will form the basis of forest zones should be supported by inventory data. Forest zoning may be assisted through the use of a GIS that enables computer generated maps of zones to be drawn. A simple forest zoning scheme is shown Figure 9.
Common descriptions of the primary forest zones are set out below. Each may be sub-divided, depending upon local needs, into more specific zones:
Figure 9: Example of a Forest Zoning Map
· Wood Production Zone - where wood production is not bound by other forest values.
· Watershed Zone - where soil conservation and watershed values are dominant.
· Wildlife Conservation Zone - where forest forms an important habitat for specific animals.
· Biological Diversity Conservation Zone - where forest is ecologically important because it contains unusual and possibly endangered plants and/or animals.
· Amenity (or Scenic) Zone - where forest has landscape values in relation to highways, railways or towns where the forest is frequently viewed by people.
· Local Community Zone - where areas of forest are predominantly of value to the physical and spiritual well-being of local forest dependent communities. It can include burial grounds.
· Recreation Zone - where forest is used for public recreation, such as picnic, camping and trekking areas.
· Scientific Studies Zone - where forest is used, or might be used, for specific forest research studies. It may be linked to wildlife, biological diversity and watershed conservation zones.
Important questions that should be asked when undertaking zoning should include the following:
· What are the primary values, or characteristics, of each specific area of forest? Can the values identified be clearly described and can they form the basis of a zone?
· Can value judgements on possible zones be supported by good quality inventory and other technical data? What new data is necessary and how can it best be acquired?
1.1.4 Remote sensing imagery
The Practical Value of Aerial Photography
Aerial photographs are helpful for identification of geographic features and for orientation in the field. They are a practical tool for mapping rivers, ridges, coastlines, swamps and other geographic features. Where vegetation patterns are distinct, aerial photographs are valuable for recognising and interpreting forest types for zoning and stratification at an early stage in inventory planning. Aerial photographs are also useful for locating permanent sample plot positions, for reading, silviculture, forest protection, community settlement planning and for ecological research..
Commonly used and practical scales for black and white aerial photography are 1:20,000 and 1:25,000. Colour or black and white photography taken for specific purposes where greater detail is needed over limited areas is often at a lower scale such as 1:15,000 or 1:10,000.
Questions which should be asked by forest planners and managers when the practical uses of aerial photographs are being considered can include:
· Are recent aerial photographs (black & white, or colour) of a forest management unit available which can be used for detailed forest type mapping?
· Is the quality adequate for the purposes for which photography is being considered (e.g. clarity, cloud cover)?
· Is the coverage complete, or at least adequate, for the areas of a forest where planning interest is to be focused?
· Is the scale suitable for field interpretation for zoning, for recognition and definition of forest types and for other planning needs?
· Is specialist expertise and/or training needed in order that aerial photography can be used in the field effectively? What additional expertise and training might be required?
Satellite Imagery for Forest Management Mapping
Where photographic coverage is limited, or is difficult to obtain because of persistent cloud cover, satellite imagery is more useful than aerial photography for mapping. Good quality, up-to-date imagery and computer mapping systems can strengthen mapping quality and coverage. A mosaic mapping approach is often followed, where cloud-free sections of a series of satellite images are digitised to form a map base. Once formed, maps should be field checked and amended where required to ensure that they are both accurate and precise. Map formation using satellite imagery is a technically skilled task that should be carried out by a trained.
Global Positioning System Technology in Planned Forest Management
The Global Positioning System, or GPS, is a system of satellites orbiting the Earth which transmit precise time and geographic position information. Positions are updated continuously thus enabling speed and bearings to be computed with considerable accuracy, usually less than 30 meters in both latitude and longitude. Position information can be obtained quickly using a range of small, hand-held GPS receivers that can be operated anywhere on Earth, day or night, under any weather conditions. A limitation however is that GPS technology cannot be easily used beneath a forest canopy; "open- to-the-sky" conditions are necessary for the reception of satellite signals.
Although GPS technology cannot be used easily to determine geographic positions within a natural forest it still has several other useful management applications. Some of these are:
· For navigation along rivers, roads and tracks.
· For finding specific positions on a forest edge, such as PSP or research plot track entrances and forest landings.
· For monitoring the location and length of forest roads and tracks.
· In conjunction with formal boundary surveys, GPS data can be used for computer map generation. It is helpful for mapping recently built logging roads and tracks.
· GPS data can be included into GIS updates for the creation of new GIS data layers. In turn, these can be used for the creation of new maps. Positional accuracy is critical in providing optimal use of GPS collected data for integration into a GIS.
Several different commercially available GPS receivers can be purchased and their use is explained in manufacturer's handbooks.
1.1.5 Geographic information systems
The Role of Geographic Information Systems in Planned Forest Management
The term Geographic Information System, or GIS, is applied to the computerised storage, processing and retrieval of geographically referenced spatial data, such as various types of maps, and the corresponding statistical and other attribute information. The capability of combining different maps, known as "overlaying", is one of the most important GIS functions. Three-dimensional images can be generated from contours.
The greatest value of GIS in natural forest management is for modelling alternative technical options as an aid in decision-making. Modelling is a tool for analysis of trends and for identification of the factors affecting them, or for showing the possible consequences of planning decisions that affect forest resource use and management. Training of operational and planning foresters in the use of GIS is necessary in order to gain maximum value from this powerful planning tool.
Three examples of GIS capabilities having practical value in tropical forest management are:
· Integrating maps made at different scales, different projections, or different legends.
· Overlaying different map types for parts of a forest to make a new map by combining features of several separate maps. For example, a forest type map could be overlaid onto soil and rainfall maps.
· Generating three-dimensional (oblique) images of the positions of trees to be harvested, overlaid onto a landform map to assist with logging road location and design.
1.2 Land area in sustainable forest management
1.2.1 Practical methods for measurement of area from maps
A knowledge of area is a fundamentally important aspect of in the management of all tropical forests. Reliable area data are required for:
· Showing the size of a forest management unit, or any part of it.
· Expressing the area of forest types, scrubland, unproductive land, conservation and community development land, water surfaces and other land use categories.
· Deriving the annual allowable cut for the production zone, or net productive area, of a forest.
· Effective planning of forest protection, watershed conservation, silvicultural tending, rural community development and all aspects of sustainable forest management.
1.2.1 Practical methods for measurement of area from maps
The use of a planimeter and the dot-grid are two practical methods for office and field measurement of area from maps. Worked examples of their use are shown in Annex 2. Areas can also be derived by computer using a GIS.
Case Study 1: PT. Sumalindo Lestari Jaya: Batu Putih, East Kalimantan, Indonesia.
Mapping and remote sensing imagery used for map preparation, is firmly recognised by PT. Sumalindo Lestari Jaya as being fundamentally important for planned forest management. Some parts of the concession have an aerial photographic coverage but a high frequency of cloudy days and smoke during the dry season are prominent technical difficulties in not being able to acquire photographs more easily.
Satellite imagery is proving to be more useful than aerial photography because of good quality up-to-date imagery and availability of data processing systems. Satellite imagery can be delivered within a few days of ordering. A mosaic mapping approach is followed, where cloud free sections of a series of satellite images are digitised to form the map base. Extensive use is made of computer technology for map formation and it comprises the basis of the company's geographic information system. Twenty five different overlays are produced from digitisation of remote sensing imagery. Once formed, all maps are field checked and amended where required to ensure they are both accurate and precise. Computer-generated oblique topographic images upon which the positions of trees that can be selectively-harvested (over 60 cm diam, location determined from cruising) can be superimposed are a part of the GIS system. Oblique images greatly help logging planning, including making
considerable savings in road construction and for minimising adverse environmental impacts associated with roading and logging
Planimeter Measurement of Area
A planimeter is an instrument for accurate measurement of irregularly shaped map areas. Older types have a fixed or adjustable pole, a tracer arm and a recording meter showing readings read on a vernier scale at the beginning and end of each measurement. Recently developed planimeters are electronic and show area data automatically for each measurement. Some digitise the measured area which can be transferred to a computer. Map readings are scaled up according to the map scale, as follows:
MA = PU* Ms^2 * 0.00001
where,
MA = mapped area in square metres
Pu = planimeter reading (number of units),
Ms = map scale.
Dot Grid Area Measurement
A dot-grid is a simple and easily used technique for measuring map areas quickly, either in an office or a forest. The transparent dot-grid sheet is placed on an irregularly shaped part of a map, such as a forest type, and the number of dots which occur within the area to be measured are counted. The map scale must be known. There are two procedures for converting an average dot count to area, as follows:
· Where a square grid has been printed on a map
Derive the area of each grid-square from the scale of the map. The area, in hectares, of a dot-grid count on a map is calculated as follows:
MA= (D/d[c])* G
where,
MA = mapped area in hectares
D = the average number of dots counted on the map,
d[c ]= number of dots per cm^2 on the dot grid
G = grid-square area (hectares).
· Where there is no grid-square on a map:
Derive the area of each square centimetre on the dot-grid, in square metres or hectares, according to the map scale as follows:
In square metres; Dcm = Ms^2/1000 and in ha; Dha = Ms^2/10000000
where,
Dcm = area in square metres
Dha = dot-grid area (square metres or hectares respectively);
Ms = map scale
The area of a dot-grid count of an irregular area on a map, in square metres or hectares, is calculated using the following formula:
where,
MA = map area in square metres, or hectares,
D[g] = dot-grid area (square metres or hectares).
D and d[c] = Idem as before
The main limitation of the dot grid method is the error of the area estimates. It is desirable to take three or more dot counts of each map area being measured and the area is calculated from the average of the number of dots counted on each.
1.3 Forest inventory
1.3.1 Forest resources inventories for sustainable forest management
1.3.2 Types of forest inventories
1.3.3 Inventory objectives
1.3.4 A format for a harvesting and forest management planning inventory
1.3.5 Preharvest inventory (cruising)
1.3.6 Check cruising
1.3.1 Forest resources inventories for sustainable forest management
A wood resources inventory is always required to determine wood volumes, species, log qualities and utilization prospects for forest resources planning and for advertising reliable minimum estimates of volume for public bidding for concessions or licenses. Depending upon objectives, existing forest uses, forest composition and distribution, inventories may also be required for non-wood resources.
There are two levels of inventory:
· Planning inventories for the whole or a substantial part of a forest management unit, for example, an inventory of wood or of specific non-wood resources.
· Operational inventories at the level of the compartment, for example, pre-harvest inventories and diagnostic sampling.
The design and conduct of a wood resources inventory for a tropical forest is a detailed task and should always involve the knowledge and experience of inventory specialists. It is beyond the scope of these Guidelines to describe the detail of a wood resources inventory but some guidance is provided in Part II, 1.4 - Forest Growth and Yields. For specific guidance readers are referred to FAO Forestry Papers No. 27, Manual of Forest Inventory with Special Reference to Mixed Tropical Forests (1992) and No. 22/1, Forest Volume Estimation and Yield Prediction; Volume 1 - Volume Estimation (1980).
1.3.2 Types of forest inventories
Eight prominent types of forest inventory, each having their own objectives, are:
· Harvesting
· Pre-concession (for bidding)
· Logging planning
· Management planning.
· Management
· Growth studies
· Biodiversity surveys
· Social surveys.
· Post-harvest
· Diagnostic sampling
1.3.3 Inventory objectives
The main elements of a forest inventory depend very much upon the specific objectives of management. Objectives must be quite clear irrespective of whether an inventory is proposed for an existing forest management unit or for a new concession in order that results obtained from it will be supportive of those objectives. This point cannot be overemphasised. Three specific guidelines should be considered when determining inventory objectives:
· Objectives need to be determined jointly by the people who will use the results, including forest managers, planners and decision-makers, as well as by inventory specialists. Inventory objectives should not be determined by inventory specialists alone.
· Not all inventory objectives have the same level of importance.
Some have higher priority than others and it is the objectives having highest priority that should determine the inventory design and the presentation of results.
· Inventory objectives should consider the physical effort that will be required to conduct an inventory, the organisation, estimated costs and time, the existing knowledge of resources, the availability of specific aspects of inventory technologies and institutional capability. All have a direct bearing upon the implementation of an inventory. An overriding consideration is that an inventory must be practicable and achievable.
1.3.4 A format for a harvesting and forest management planning inventory
The following general format provides a basis for designing a forest inventory for the first time in a tropical forest where sustainable wood harvesting is proposed. It can be adapted for pre-concession harvesting and for management planning. Each inventory is unique and needs to be thoughtfully designed in order to provide information that will satisfy specific management objectives; there is no single inventory format that should be used.
Purpose of an Inventory
· Definition of inventory objectives in collaboration with the potential users of inventory results.
· Priorities for the objectives.
· Specialist needs for non-wood resources.
General Information
· Define the authority that will be responsible for planning and undertaking an inventory and indicate any other agencies that will cooperate with it.
· Assemble, existing and available information and data on the area to be studied based on earlier surveys, reports, maps and remote sensing imagery, as follows:
- a general forest description,
- variability of the parameters to be measured,
- topography, accessibility and transport facilities.
· Resources, including funding, personnel and physical support that will be available.
· Detailed inventory specifications;
- exact limits and area of the inventory,
- divisions that will be made within an inventory area,
- character of the resources information that is required,
-presentation of the inventory information,
- the level of precision, or reliability, that is required.
Inventory Design
· An outline of the inventory design,
· A general description of the various activities that will be undertaken, as follows:
- aerial surveys, interpretation of remote sensing imagery,
- mapping and area estimation procedures,
- sampling methodology to be applied,
- relationships that will be used for expressing estimated quantitative resources data, for example, volume tables.
Measurement Procedures
· A description of the design that will be used, covering both field and analytical activities. In particular, the area, shape, number and distribution of sampling units should be stated to meet specified levels of precision of the results.
· Procedures for interpretation of remote sensing imagery:
- detailed instructions on the use of techniques and procedures,
- staffing requirements and descriptions of duties,
- instruments that will be used.
· Field organization, as follows:
- field crew requirements, organization and duties descriptions,
- transportation arrangements,
- camping guidelines or instructions,
- definition of arrangements for logistical support.
· Field procedures, as follows:
- location of sampling units,
- establishment of sampling units,
- measurements on sampling units,
- instruments that will be used and instructions for their use,
- measurements of tree stems (for wood inventories) or of parts of trees such as foliage, bark or fruit (for non-wood forest products inventories),
- other measurements or assessments, such as insect damage, tree mortality, soil conditions or seed production,
- the design of forms and how observations will be recorded.
Data Compilation Procedures
· Detailed instructions on data processing from both remote sensing imagery interpretation and from field sampling, as follows:
- mathematical formulae that should be applied for computing means and sampling errors,
- the relationships that should be used for converting imagery or forest measurements into desired expressions of quantity, for example, individual tree volume tables.
· Calculation and data compilation methods that should be used, as follows:
- descriptions of procedures to be followed, for example, specific computer software and programs,
- detailed descriptions of all phases of data processing, including data transcription from field forms (or from field computers), verification, data computation, preparation of summaries and database management.
Reporting
· Report outline,
· An estimate of the time required for reporting,
· Responsibilities for report preparation,
· Printing method,
· Number of copies that are expected to be required,
· Report distribution.
1.3.5 Preharvest inventory (cruising)
Planning
In practical terms, a 100 percent preharvest inventory of commercially harvestable trees in a mixed species tropical forest is best planned within the framework of the strategic harvest plan which, itself, is derived from an approved forest management plan. The role of this harvest plan is explained in Part II, 3 - Management Planning.
A preharvest inventory should be based on a specific prescription set out in an approved management plan and also in the harvest plan. Cruising involves the following specific steps:
· A topographic survey and an inventory of potentially harvestable trees (compulsory and optional under the concession) and of trees that should be excluded from the harvesting for environmental and/or conservation reasons.
· The overall area where harvesting is planned should be defined using compartment maps, on a scale of 1:50,000, or a lesser scale, depending upon the area to be harvested. Where compartments are not clearly defined, one kilometre square blocks (100 ha) are a practical starting point for planning a preharvest inventory.
Case Study 2: The Main Features of the Forest Inventory System in Sabah, Malaysia
Characteristic
Description
1. Design
Type of inventory
Systematic layout.
Sampling size
600 - 700 plots per management unit of 100,000 ha.
Plot size
Combined sample plots with 4 different sizes (0.25, 0.04, 0.0025 ha & soil profile pit).
Sampling error < 5% (95% probability level).
2. Accuracy
3. Field work
Field crew
6 persons (1 forest ranger, 2 foresters, 3 labourers).
Performance
10 - 13 plots per crew per month.
4. Data processing
Software
FoxPro (databank system)
Programme
User-friendly, menu driven for data entry, editing
checking, processing and printing of results
5. Costs
US$2.40/ha (based on a forest area of 100,000 ha).
(Source: Kleine & Heuveldop, Forest Ecology & Management, Vol. 61, 1993.)
· The inventory should be designed and implemented in adjoining, parallel strips, 20 to 70 metres wide, through the forest where harvesting is proposed. The width of the strips will depend on factors such as slope or gradient which determine the ease or difficulty of working through a forest.
· The orientation and length of inventory strips and their relationship to forest type boundaries, roads and tracks should be determined in the office by planning foresters and the inventory team leader. It is desirable that inventory strips be aligned on the inventory planning map to cross ridges, hills and other topographic features but should also be based upon their personal knowledge of the forest. A strategic harvest planning map and aerial photographs, if available, should be used for inventory planning.
Cruising Team
The cruising team, four to six people in number, should comprise a team leader, tree cruisers (measurers), tree identifiers and field survey workers. If the cruising team is in the field for several days, it should also include porters and cooks.
Good Cruising Practice
Essential aspects of good cruising practice are:
· A clearly defined and accurately located access track should be cut that will form the centreline of each inventory strip.
· The traverse distance of each cruise strip should be measured continuously by tape from the strip origin as the cruising team works along it. Marker lines should be cut through undergrowth on the edges of strips, the outer line of one strip marking the inner edge of the next, parallel strip. Strip widths should be regularly checked by tape, at least every 100 metres of traverse distance.
· Topographic contours, tree positions and tree numbers are mapped by sketching on pages of graph paper as the cruise proceeds along the length of a cruise strip. Each graph paper record of the inventory should be associated by appropriate numbering with the tally sheets. Both form a permanent record of the inventory.
· Sketch mapping of tree positions and topography on graph paper is a practical procedure and allows tree positions, contours and streams to be digitised for recording in a GIS. In association with remote sensing imagery, sketch mapping helps in the preparation of detailed topographic maps of specific areas to be harvested in the near future. An example of a tree distribution and topography map compiled from field sketch mapping and tree cruising of Dipterocarp forest in East Kalimantan, Indonesia is shown in Figure 10. The scale is 1:1,000 and the width of each cruising band is 20 metres. Tree positions are marked as triangles and are numbered, corresponding to numbers in the cruising book. Species codes are entered into each "tree triangle."
· The location and density of climbing plants, including rattan, which might need to be cut in a pre-felling treatment, should be noted by the cruising crew.
· Only commercial species and tree sizes (heights and minimum stem diameters) should be measured in a pre-harvest inventory.
· Tree measurement data should be tallied on booking sheets as the cruise proceeds. Although this is a simple procedure it requires care to ensure that tree identity and measurements are accurate and are correctly recorded. Data can also be tallied into a hand held field computer which enables data to be downloaded later into an office computer for processing.
· If practicable, the approximate tree falling direction should be marked on the tree base using an arrow or line in order to assist the cutter.
Tree Labelling
Tree labelling requirements are:
· Trees that are mapped and measured should also be labelled, numbered and recorded, using differently coloured waterproof plastic labels for trees to be cut and for "mother" trees (also called seed or nucleus trees) which are to remain and be protected from harvesting. Paint can be used to mark tress but it tends to disappear in a short time depending mainly on weather conditions, making re-repainting necessary. Trees that are to be harvested must be very clearly marked on the ground and located on a map which should be carried constantly by the sawyer, as a reference, in order to make sure that the right trees are cut down.
· The name, or a locally determined identity code for each species, and the estimated log dimensions of trees that are to be cut are tallied against a tree number, as follows:
- on a tally sheet which forms part of the inventory record,
- on a tree label, plastic or aluminum, using a permanent felt-tipped pen or a hard tip device, respectively. Labels should be brightly coloured (yellow or red) and preferably having a "tear-off duplicate section. The identity code, tree number and log dimensions are repeated on the duplicate section of the label.
· The species identity code that is marked on the tree label should also be marked in the "tree triangle" on the graph paper record.
· Mother, or nucleus trees, which are not to be cut, must also be located on the map, and labelled on the ground using a differently coloured label. Again, the locally determined identity code for each species, and the estimated log dimensions of trees are tallied against a tree number. This label will remain as a permanent mark on each mother tree and the sawyers should be aware of this.
Tree Tallying and Volume Calculations
Tree tallying and volume calculations requirements are:
· Tree species, dimensions (especially stem diameter) and tree condition (forking, decay, etc) are tallied and volumes calculated in the office using a calculator or a database software computer system. Readers are referred to FAO Forestry Paper No. 22/1 (1980), Forest Volume Estimation and Yield Prediction; Vol. 1 - Volume.
Figure 10. Cruising Map Showing Tree Distribution, Contours and Part of a Proposed Road Line.
Legend:
- triangles and circles show tree location, circles denoting harvestable trees.
- a number within a circle or triangle are species codes.
- a number beneath the triangle or circle is the booking number.
- the parallel dotted lines are the edges of 20 metre wide cruising strips, the curved lines are contours
- the three heavy lines mark the alignment of a new roadline.
(Source: Pt. Sumalindo Lestari Jaya: Batu Putih, East Kalimantan, Indonesia) Scale: 1:1,000
Case Study 3: PT. Sumalindo Lestari Jaya: Batu Putih, East Kalimantan, Indonesia.
PT. Sumalindo Lestari Jaya conducts its own pre-harvest inventory and does not engage local consultants. The cruising team, about eight in number, comprises a team leader, tree cruisers (measurers), tree identifiers, field survey workers and porters/cooks. Each team spends up to a month in the bush but is in periodic contact with HQ through visits made by trekkers who bring food, other supplies and retrieve field data.
The work of cruising teams is field checked at random by company supervisory staff and also by provincial forestry officials. Forest is cruised in 20 metre wide parallel strips, trees are mapped, labelled and numbered, using coloured waterproof plastic labels for trees to be cut (red) and for nucleus trees (yellow). Topographic contours and tree positions/numbers are sketched on graph paper as the work proceeds along each 20 m strip. This is a practical arrangement as it allows tree positions to be digitised and also assists in the contour definition of topography, in association with remote sensing imagery. Although tree positions are estimated in relation to the edges of cruising strips and the traverse distance (the distance walked by the cruising team along each strip), it is unlikely that trees are more than three or four metres from true positions.
· Computer methods are to be preferred over the use of calculators for processing inventory data because of their ease and efficiency for handling large amounts of data, the ability to undertake comprehensive data analysis and because data can be entered directly into and used in a GIS. Specialist assistance from foresters having a sound background in the application of computer technology in forestry is necessary.
· Estimation, for detailed descriptions on tree volume estimation, especially the use of tariffs, for indirect measurement of forest volumes from stem diameter measurements.
Pre-harvest Inventory Field Manual
The foregoing guidelines should be adapted to the local prevailing conditions on a forest management unit and be incorporated into a pre- harvest inventory manual to provide clear and readily accessible guidance to field workers.
1.3.6 Check cruising
An essential feature of every preharvest inventory is random checking of the work of a cruising team. Known as check cruising, it should be carried within two or three weeks of a pre-harvest inventory by a team led by a planning forester. Where a forest management unit is being managed by a concession holding company or an NGO on behalf of customary landowners, check cruising should be undertaken by a team comprising company or NGO supervisory staff. Government forestry officials should make separate field checks, at random, on the pre-harvest inventory where forest land is in State ownership.
Check cruising should involve monitoring of sections of inventory strips selected at random. All aspects of inventory practice are examined, as follows:
· Inventory strip traverse distances and widths.
· The identity of trees to be harvested and reserved as mother trees.
· Tree labelling and numbering practices.
· Tree measurements and tree condition assessments.
The extent of checking will depend upon the confidence limits imposed by a forestry authority or set by a concession company. As an easily understood and practical guideline, two per cent of the area traversed by a pre-harvest inventory should be check cruised and the following checking standards applied:
· Where more than one team is conducting pre-harvest inventories, the work of all inventory teams should be checked.
· The area of a section of an inventory strip that has been selected at random for a check cruise should be within 95 per cent of the actual area measured by the check cruise team.
· The identity of trees should be correct for 95 per cent of all trees examined in the check cruise, that is, 19 trees in 20 should have been correctly identified.
· All trees meeting species and stem diameter criteria for harvesting or for reservation as mother trees must have been recognised, labelled and measured in a pre-harvest inventory.
· There should not be more than a+/- 5 per cent difference between the pre-harvest inventory and the check cruise for stem diameter measurements and volumes calculated from these.
Check-cruising data must be processed in exactly the same way as the pre-harvest inventory in order that valid comparisons can be made. Consistent differences between a check cruise and a pre-harvest inventory should be examined to determine the reasons for this. They should also be discussed with the cruise team leader and members with a view to eliminating any differences.
1.4 Forest growth and yield
1.4.1 The components of forest growth in tropical forests
1.4.2 Sampling and measurement of forest growth and yield
1.4.1 The components of forest growth in tropical forests
A knowledge of forest growth provides a confident basis for the measurement of increment which can be used to derive wood yields for a production forest. Growth data are also required for planning operational aspects of management, for technical and for economic studies. In these Guidelines only the most basic methods for measuring tropical forest growth are described in order to show the main stages involved and to encourage forest managers to take the first steps for making growth measurements from which forest yields can be derived. Readers are referred to specialized references listed at the end of this chapter for details.
Growth in a mixed tropical forest comprising a large number of species has three separate components:
· Individual tree increment,
· Mortality, or the death of trees,
· Ingrowth (or recruitment), the growth of new trees into measurable size classes from regeneration.
Forest growth relationship can be expressed as follows:
G={(I[trees] * n)-(M+ R[e])}/n
where,
G = the net forest increment, usually expressed as m^3/ha/yr.
I[trees] = the sum of increments of trees, usually expressed as m^3/ha/yr., that survive during a specified measurement period.
M = the volume of trees that have died during a specified measurement period and no longer contribute to net forest growth.
R[e] = the volume of ingrowth, or recruitment, measured at the end of a specified measurement period.
n = period in years.
Measurements of ingrowth and mortality are as important in determining net forest increment as are measurements of tree growth. Tree growth and forest growth in a tropical forest cannot be equated as they can be in plantations. The methods used for growth measurement and prediction of wood yields have four components:
· Measurement of growth and estimation of yield.
· Making of a yield model and fitting it to growth and yield data.
· Testing of the yield model for its validity.
· Application of the model to the required end-use.
Apart from the measurement of growth and estimation of yield, other components will require the assistance of technical specialists in forest mensuration and yield modelling. The basic features of sampling and the measurement of growth and yield are explained later in this chapter. Technical references listed at the end of this chapter explain the methodology.
1.4.2 Sampling and measurement of forest growth and yield
Four Basic Components of Forest Sampling
There are four basic aspects of forest sampling for the measurement of growth and yield which should be considered during management planning and in plan implementation. These are:
· Define the "Yield": Be quite specific and clearly define what the yield is intended to be. The "yield" could be the volume of wood of specific trees, or the wood volume of the whole forest, or it might be non-wood products, or it may be a mix of wood and non-wood products.
· Permanent Sample Plot Design: The design of PSP system will be determined by the definition of the yield and should also consider the most effective way of measuring the yield. Permanent sample plots are used for the measurement of wood growth and also to measure the growth of non-wood products.
· The Sampling Pattern for Permanent Sample Plots: Sampling can either be systematic or random. Irrespective of forest variability, it can be more important to achieve an adequate number of sample plots, using either systematic or random sampling, than it is to aim at achieving pre-determined sampling intensity.
· Regular Remeasurement of Permanent Sample Plots: The establishment and regular remeasurement of permanent sample plots throughout the forest over a long period of time is essential. This practice monitoring the effect of site variation on forest growth and the real effects of log harvesting operations to be measured and included within a yield model.
Continuous Forest Inventory
Continuous forest inventory means the measurement of forest growth and development through making repeated measurements of trees in permanent plots. CFI provides a record of growth in volume and of changes in other forest variables over time. Data on forest growth are needed for the construction of yield tables and growth models which may be used, together with current inventory data, for growth and yield forecasting and for yield regulation. Continuous Forest Inventory comprises a network of regularly measured permanent sample plots; it provides the most reliable data for estimation of:
· Changes in the characteristics of forest stands over time.
· Variations in forest composition and productivity with site and silvicultural treatment.
· The relationships between tree variables, stand variables and increments which may be used for yield forecasting.
· Long-term changes in the site and its continuous productive capacity.
The closeness of the results actually gained from CFI to true values will depend on the sampling method, on variability within a forest and on the sampling intensity. The variability of a forest after the first logging operation should be determined using a pilot field study in respect of tree volume, the growth variable having greatest commercial and planning significance.
Permanent Sample Plots
Permanent sample plots are permanently defined areas of forest that are periodically but regularly remeasured to provide data on stocking, tree dimensions and volume. Information on changes in the composition, structure and growth of a forest over time can be derived from PSP's.
Sampling Designs
Systematic sampling and random sampling designs can be used for setting out a network of permanent sample plots.
· Systematic Sampling: It is a square or rectangular pattern where plots are established on grid format. It has the advantages that it is simple to design and implement in a forest and the plot coverage is uniform. The systematic sampling design is shown diagrammatically in Figure 11. It has the disadvantage that it does not include stratification. Systematic samples may have bias, caused by any uniform natural variation, such as hills, and by the layout of the grid. Sampling error of variables (from which confidence limits are derived) cannot be determined in systematic sampling.
Figure 11: Systematic Sampling Design for Locating PSPs in a Forest
· Stratified Random Sampling: Stratified random sampling is an effective, and practical procedure for tropical forests which allows reliable confidence limits to be calculated for tree and other forest variables. There are two designs, unrestricted stratified random sampling and two-stage stratified random sampling. An example of this type of sampling is shown diagrammatically in Figure 12.
· Unrestricted Stratified Random Sampling:
- Unrestricted stratified random sampling involves sub-division of a forest into several uniform or near uniform zones, or strata, on the basis of ecological, geographical or administrative similarities. Major forest types, or groups of compartments, are examples of sampling strata. Strata are permanently defined on a management inventory map.
Figure 12: Stratified Random Sampling for Locating Pairs of Plots Within Sampling Blocks in a Forest
- Strata should be as small as possible and may involve subdivision of major strata into smaller and more uniform sampling zones, such as specific forest or site types.
- Strata should be large enough to enable at least two permanent sampling plots to be located at random within each stratum without increasing the number of plots beyond the sampling intensity target of the inventory. Two or more plots are necessary within each stratum to allow confidence limits of the volume estimate to be calculated.
· Two-stage Stratified Random Sampling:
-Two-stage sampling is a variant of stratified random sampling which has the benefit of enabling limited staff and technical resources to be focused on particular areas thus helping to reduce the costs of the CFI programme.
Stage One: The primary sampling units are defined as for stratified random sampling. Units are called blocks, not strata. An objective sample is then made of the blocks by listing these and selecting at random from the list.
Stage Two: The selected blocks are sub-sampled with PSPs being located at random (or systematically). - A combination of two-stage sampling with stratified pairs of PSP's is a practical and efficient design for a CFI. It has the disadvantage that only selected, not all, blocks are sampled and therefore it cannot be used as a part of a forest management monitoring system.
Pilot Survey for Deriving Permanent Sample Plot Numbers
If there is insufficient growth information about a particular forest from earlier inventory data then an ad hoc pilot study, involving five, six or more temporary one hectare plots, should be carried out to derive the coefficient of variation for volume to provide a guide to the PSP sampling intensity. The coefficient of variation for volume is calculated because volume is the variable of greatest management interest. The number of PSPs required to achieve a specified level of precision in an inventory can be calculated from the equation:
PSP's = (CV[v]/p^2)
where,
PSPs = Number of PSP's required
CV[v ]= Coefficient of variation for volume,
p = the acceptable limit of precision, e.g. for 5%, p = 0.05.
Because the study is made once, it is unable to indicate a coefficient of variation for growth over a period of time. Detailed guidance on the calculation of the coefficient of variation, standard error and confidence interval of the mean volume is described in Annex 3. Other methods are described in references at the end of this chapter.
As a general guide and based on experience in several tropical forests, 50 -100 randomly distributed plots, each of 1 ha, are likely to be adequate for acquiring growth data over areas of several thousand hectares, or several compartments within one stratum, or several blocks in two-stage sampling. Initially, one plot for each 100 - 150 ha of forest will probably be sufficient, depending on the uniformity of the forest, intensity of silviculture applied and the precision of growth data required.
Plot Size and Shape
The most efficient plot area is a compromise between the total forest area sampled and the physical effort needed to establish, maintain and regularly remeasure plots. The aim is to minimise the plot edge to area ratio. The most efficient plot size in any particular forest will depend on inventory objectives, the level of precision required, forest variability and the costs of PSP establishment, maintenance and remeasurement. One hectare square plots are widely used in many tropical forests, with the following advantages:
· They are easily subdivided into 25 sub-plots of 0.04 ha, or 100 sub-plots of 0.01 ha, for sub-sampling within a plot.
· They represent values per hectare for stocking and other measured parameters, thereby avoiding conversion problems.
· They provide good representation of species diversity.
Square plots have the following advantages:
· They have shorter boundaries than an equal area of strips, thus reducing the effort and cost of plot establishment and maintenance. The shorter boundaries will reduce errors which might be caused by trees located on plot boundaries.
· Square plots are easier to locate than strips without introducing bias and are less likely to be interfered with by tracking or roading. Edges and boundaries of square plots are easier to relocate than circular plots.
· Square plots are more practical to establish and maintain in many tropical forests than are circular plots. It is impractical to set out large circular plots accurately in dense vegetation because trees near the plot boundary cannot be seen from the centre. Circular plots cannot easily be sub-divided into sub-plots.
The following guidelines can assist in the establishment of square plots:
· They should be numbered to ensure that tree data will be systematically recorded for each plot at establishment and at each remeasurement.
· Each plot should be laid out as five adjacent 100 m long strips, each 20 m wide. Each strip is laid out 10 m to the left and 10 m to the right of a centre line.
· Each strip is divided into 10 m long sections giving 25 square sub-plots, each of 0.04 ha, in each 1 ha PSP.
· Once a starting point has been determined, the centre lines should be cut in E-W or W-E directions on flat land using a compass for direction. On sloping land centre lines may be cut across the contour.
· Sub-plots are numbered from the NW comer of the plot in the sequence of proposed measurement.
· Pegs are placed on each strip centre line at 10 m intervals to mark the limits of each sub-plot. Each is numbered sequentially.
· Distances indicated are horizontal distances. On sloping land, the actual distance should be read from a slope reduction table after measuring the slope using a clinometer.
When each PSP is established the exact plot area, corrected for slope, should be calculated. The following basic site information should also be recorded:
· Latitude, longitude and altitude.
· Aspect, slope, soil profile.
· Monthly rainfall and temperature data (from the nearest meteorological station).
· Forest history and past forest use.
Plot Subdivisions
Small quadrants, or sub-plots, should be permanently laid out during plot establishment to ensure that a plot can be fully covered at each assessment with the minimum number of trees being missed. Plot subdivisions help each tree to be found easily, to ensure uniform distribution of crop or potential crop trees that are to be measured and to allow tree measurements to be checked. Each quadrant should be numbered in the plot records.
A quadrant size of 20 m × 20 m (0.04 ha) is a useful size for measuring a selection of trees on a plot. A 10 m × 10 m quadrant (0.01 ha) allows for assessment of potential stocking of final crop trees and, in practice, is the minimum size for locating and relocating saplings.
Plot Location and Access for Growth Sampling
Initial plot location should be determined on a management inventory map in the office. Plot location in stratified random sampling is derived from random numbers which define two coordinates for each plot. Random numbers can be derived from random number tables, by using the random number generator available in many calculators or by using spreadsheet software (use the @RAND function) in a personal computer.
If a pair of coordinates fall outside the boundaries of each stratum they are rejected and the next pair are selected. A plot position should also be rejected if it falls wholly or partially in an unproductive vegetation type or on unproductive ground, such as a road, river, rocky land or an industrial site; these are unproductive areas from a yield determination point of view. The plot should be rejected if it falls within 100 m of the nearest edge of a previously selected plot.
When plot positions have been determined they should be mapped and written as field instructions (bearings, distances and be marked on aerial photographs) to guide the field workers to each plot site. Plot comers, boundaries and sub-plots should be permanently defined using posts which should be clearly visible.
Each plot should be carefully located by survey on a management inventory map, including survey of the access track from a roadside or a clearly defined physical point of reference. Survey helps with plot relocation. Access tracks and roadside notices should be clearly defined and maintained. Mounds and corner trenches help to define the location of plot boundaries and access lines.
Tree Numbering
Each tree within a sub-plot for which a long-term measurement record is made should be permanently numbered to enable individual tree increments, plot growth, recruitment and losses to be calculated. It is impractical to derive a long-term record of individual tree growth, tree mortality and recruitment without making repeated measurements on individually numbered trees. Numbers should be attached to trees using a combination of non-rust labels and scribing, depending on the characteristics of bark, wood and tree size.
Tree Diameter Measurements
Measurement of tree diameters is an important variable for determining forest growth, and care is needed to ensure that an accurate tree measurement history is assembled. Successive tree diameter measurements should be taken at the same point on a tree, 1.3 m above ground (the dbh point), using a diameter tape that measures diameter directly, not girth. The dbh point should be paint marked on each tree or, where paint does not hold permanently to bark, by using a galvanised nail holding a tree number label. Trees which are buttressed or branched at the dbh point should be marked at a permanently defined, and painted, point on the stem and buttress.
Measurements of recruitment and mortality are recorded by comparing tree counts between successive remeasurements. Detailed information about sapling and seedling numbers and species can be collected by PSP sub-sampling.
Plot Remeasurement Interval
The interval between PSP remeasurements depends upon tree growth rate. A new plot should be remeasured after a shorter than normal interval in order to capture the growth data the measurements will provide. The longer the interval between measurements the more accurately tree increments can be determined. As a general guide the remeasurement interval for many tropical forests is three to five years but the plot remeasurement interval should be determined for a specific forest in respect of the prevailing local conditions.
Data Processing and Database Management
Data processing and the management of inventory data are specialized topics and are not explained in these Guidelines. Readers are referred to publications listed at the end of this chapter for detail on these topics. FAO Forestry Papers No. 22/1 & 22/2, Forest Volume Estimation and Yield Prediction; Vol. 1 - Volume Estimation; Vol. 2 - Yield Prediction (1980) and Oxford Forestry Institute, Tropical Forestry Paper No. 30, Growth Modelling for Mixed Tropical Forests (1995) are especially helpful. Computer systems using commercially available database software are essential for data processing and storage. Statistical and spreadsheet computer software should be used for growth modelling and yield prediction.
Inventory and Database Administration
Administrative office support for forest inventories and database management should be as carefully organized as are other aspects of forest management. The planning and practical implementation of inventories and the processing of inventory data is a forest operation, comparable with protection, harvesting, silviculture and other forest operations.
The practical steps required for inventory and database administration are:
· Appointment of a senior forester responsible for inventory, database management and yield modelling activities.
Case Study 4: Growth Studies in the Tapajos National Forest, Brazil
Successive inventories of a silvicultural experiment in rain forest within the Tapajos National Forest in Brazil have been examined to provide guidelines for operational forest management on a sustainable basis. The study site was logged in 1979 using chainsaws and attempts at directional felling. On average, logging removed 75 m^3/year from 16 trees/ha, all over the felling limit of 45 cm dbh. There was no additional silvicultural treatment, but the site was protected from further logging and encroachment ('log and leave'). Thirty six PSPs established in 1981 were remeasured in 1987 and 1992. Logging had changed the canopy structure and altered the composition of the stand, reducing the number of shade tolerant species and stimulating the light demanding species.
There was a net increase in stem number and stand basal area during the 11 year observation period, and this trend also holds for most of the individual species. The stand basal area 13 years after logging was about 75% of that in a comparable unlogged forest. Logging stimulated growth, but this effect was short-lived, lasting only about three years, and current growth rates are similar to those in the unlogged forest. Between the first and second measurements, average diameter increment decreased from 0.4 to 0.2 cm/year, mortality remained relatively constant at 2.5% per year, while recruitment (at 5 cm dbh) decreased from 5 to 2%. Total volume production declined from approximately 6 to 4 m^3/ha/year, while commercial production remained about 0.8 m^3/ha/year. New commercial species increased the commercial volume in 1992 from 18 to 54 m^3/ha, and the increment of 1.8 m^3/ha/year.
Results from this experiment provide the first quantitative information for management planning in the Tapajos Forest, and may guide the choice of cutting cycle and annual allowable cut. Silvicultural treatment to stimulate growth rates in forest areas zoned for timber production should be considered as a viable management option. Extrapolations of these results to an anticipated 30 to 35 year cutting cycle must be interpreted with caution. On-going remeasurement and analysis of these and other plots over the next 30 years are necessary to provide a stronger basis for their use in management planning.
· Adequate long-term funding for salaries, logistical support, staff training, equipment and other arrangements to enable an inventory programme to proceed efficiently.
· Thoughtful planning of all aspects of inventory and database management, including objectives, technical design, staffing, logistical arrangements and time schedules.
· Appropriate in-company or external training of all personnel who are involved in inventory and database management.
Personnel Training for Continuous Forest Inventory
It is essential that both planning and field personnel involved with inventories be technically well qualified for the exacting role they have in PSP establishment, data collection and plot remeasurement. Basic qualifications and practical experience in forest mensuration, map reading and tree identification are essential. Equally important is the need for periodic training and retraining of staff in the use of new and existing techniques to ensure that high standards of tree and plot measurement practice are maintained.
1.5 Diagnostic sampling
1.5.1 The purpose of diagnostic sampling
1.5.2 Benefits
1.5.3 Diagnostic sampling methodology
1.5.1 The purpose of diagnostic sampling
Diagnostic sampling provides information on the condition of a forest. Such information can then be used to determine forest management interventions required before or after logging or after silvicultural treatments have taken place. It is a practical field sampling method for collecting information on forest composition, structure and potential productivity before or after selective harvesting, that can be used for making realistic and ecologically sound decisions on silvicultural tending.
Diagnostic sampling aims to look forward in time and to visualise and project the development possibilities for future crops, based on the species, spatial distribution and size of individual trees that are already present. It is not a detailed regeneration survey, a botanical or ecological survey, nor a wood resources inventory and its aim is to provide a quantitative estimate of the silvicultural conditions of a forest.
1.5.2 Benefits
Diagnostic sampling has the following benefits:
· It can establish priorities for commencing silvicultural tending in different forest types where sustainable management is planned.
· It provides information for defining forest types and stand structure and for determining an appropriate initial sequence and design of silvicultural operations.
· It can provide an estimate of the likely cutting cycle in relation to ingrowing size classes of commercially desirable trees.
· With experience, it is a simple and rapid procedure to apply and the results are not difficult to interpret.
1.5.3 Diagnostic sampling methodology
Selection of a "Leading Desirable"
The primary feature of diagnostic sampling is the recognition and selection within a small sample area of one Leading Desirable (LD) within a sample area, usually a plot of 10 × 10 m or 0.01 ha. The "Leading Desirable" is the "best" tree or sapling present. It is the tallest and with the largest dbh of a desirable species present in the sample plot in terms of its potential value as a future crop tree. Furthermore, the "Leading Tree" must have a: dbh of at least 5 cm but not greater than the predetermined "minimum cutting diameter"; (b) straight bole of 4 m long or more, without defects, malformation, decay and large knots and (c) vigorous and well formed crown. Being oriented towards future harvests, diagnostic sampling should include Leading Desirables only up to the minimum cutting diameter. This can vary, depending upon forest type and species. In many forests a minimum cutting diameter between 50 - 60 cm is adopted although it is advisable to determine it by species or
groups of similar ones.
Practical Application
Diagnostic sampling can be applied in unlogged, previously logged and in secondary forest. It can be applied before or immediately after logging or at intervals after this operation has been completed. Sampling should be based upon the use of temporary systematically located plots within selected compartments or sub-compartments. The field procedure is rapid and the work involved in setting out and assessing the forest in each temporary plot usually takes only a few minutes. The practical sampling unit of 10 × 10 m or 0.01 ha leads to the widely used number of 100 evenly-spaced potential final crop trees per hectare. This is a convenient standard against which actual stocking may be compared. In most forests, a commercially viable and sustainable harvest of logs is usually less than 100 stems per hectare and consequently this figure provides an allowance for natural mortality. The sample plot area is related to the predicted, or expected, optimum stocking.
The steps involved in conducting diagnostic sampling are as follows:
· Define a List of Commercially Desirable Tree Species
Prior to any field work a list of commercially desirable tree species should be compiled jointly by planning foresters, wood utilization and marketing specialists. The species must be ranked in order of priority, preferably by groups of similar species, before sampling and should not be changed during field sampling. Tree identification during sampling must be accurate and carried out by a reliable observer.
· Define Criteria for Selection of a "Leading Desirable"
The criteria for defining and selecting a Leading Desirable need to be set out before field sampling commences, usually by government forestry officials. Defining criteria for selection of a Leading Desirable is particularly important where the forest to be assessed comprises a wide range of species having variable growth rates and variable stem and crown form. Selection criteria for a Leading Desirable can be adapted to the characteristics of each specific forest management unit. A list of criteria for defining "Leading Desirables" are summarized in Figure 13.
· Field Sheet Design
Field sheets should be designed in the office before sampling and the design should be improved from time to time with the benefit of experience. A flexible approach to design is suggested, depending upon the characteristics of the forest being sampled, but the field sheet should provide spaces for making the following additional entries:
Figure 13: Criteria for Defining "Leading Desirables"
· Define a list of commercially desirable species;
· Define tree types:
TREES
SAPLINGS
SEEDLINGS
10- 19 cm dbh.
20 - 29 cm dbh
5 - 9 cm dbh
less than 4.9 cm dbh and more than 30 cm high.
30 - 39 cm dbh
40 - 49 cm dbh
50 - 59 cm dbh
Over 60 cm dbh
· Define stem quality for commercially acceptable species
- current log, -future log, deformed, rejected and decayed steins
· Forest name, compartment, sub-compartment and plot numbers, date:
Commercial species
- stem quality for a future log (10-39 cm, upper stem)
- rejected stems (deformed, damaged, decayed)
Non-commercial species
- stem quality for a current log (40 cm +, butt log)
- stem quality for a future log (10-39 cm, upper stem)
- rejected stems (deformed, damaged, decayed)
Depending upon the local conditions the field sampling form could make provision for recording information on trees having non-wood forest products potential. This information may have planning value in respect of the interests of local communities. It could include:
· Species name, dbh, crown illumination class, stem condition (acceptable, deformed, damaged, decayed),
· The characteristic of interest, for example, fruit, foliage and resins.
An example of a field form (entries are in some boxes) is shown in Table 7. It can be adapted to specific local conditions by a user.
· Define the Area to Be Sampled
If available, select aerial photographs covering the area to be sampled, and using a photo marking pencil or crayon, the broad limits of the area of interest. Mark existing roads, ridges, tracks or other features that can be used for gaining access and enable a survey team to recognise its position on the ground. Select maps, preferably at a scale of 1:10,000, covering the area defined on aerial photographs and make copies for use when sampling in a forest.
· Plot Location and Establishment for Diagnostic Sampling
The following guidelines are suggested:
· Plots should be adjacent to each other and located in either strips or blocks. Strips, or blocks, can be 100 m to 200 m apart, depending on local forest conditions, and should be aligned to cross the topography. A sample strip could be 5 m wide on either side of a centre line and 10 m in length along the strip.
· Experience indicates that a minimum of 100 plots should be established but a larger number is preferable.
· Another widely followed guideline is to sample between 3 and 5 per cent of the area of the forest selected to be surveyed.
· Selection and Recording of Information on a Leading Tree
Identify and record information on one "Leading Tree", if present. A "Leading Tree" has a diameter larger than the minimum cutting diameter. Record whether it is a commercial or non-commercial species and the stem quality (good, deformed, damaged or decayed). If more than one tree greater than the minimum diameter is present, select and record information on the best one, in terms of species and stem quality.
Table 7: An Example of a Diagnostic Sampling Plot Form
Forest Name:
T/L:
Date:
Plot No:
Compartment/Sub-compartment No:
LEADING TREES: (larger than the minimum cutting diameter; ONE only)
Species:..........................................................
dbh: (cm)
e.g. 58.2
Quality of the Best Potential Log: (tick one)
Commercially Acceptable
Not Commercially Acceptable
Stem Quality:
Stem Quality:
Current Log.Ö
Current Log.
Future Log. Ö
Future Log.
Rejected Stems:
Rejected Stems:
Deformed.
Deformed.
Damaged.
Damaged.
Decayed.
Decayed.
LEADING DESIRABLE: (less than the minimum cutting diameter; ONE only)
Species:
Type:
Tree
Sapling
Seedling
No Leading Desirable
tick one®
Productive
Unproductive
dbh: (cm)
e.g. 32.3
Crown Illumination Class: (tick one)
Full Vertical & Lateral
Full Vertical
Partial Vertical
Oblique
Indirect
Notes:
· Selection of a Leading Desirable
Examine the vegetation on each plot and determine which tree meets the criteria for selection as a "Leading Desirable". It can be either a tree, a sapling or a seedling. Plots that do not contain a "Leading Desirable" are recorded as being unstocked. The procedure is explained in Figure 14.
· Record Data on the Leading Desirable
Record two types of data, as follows:
· The dbh of the "Leading Desirable".
· The crown illumination class of the "Leading Desirable" using the following set of classes.
- full vertical and lateral illumination (top and upper sides of a crown are emergent and fully exposed)
- full vertical illumination (the whole of the top of a crown is exposed but the crown is not emergent)
- partial vertical illumination (small parts of the top of a crown are exposed, other parts are shaded by other trees)
- oblique (small parts of the upper sides of a crown are exposed)
- indirect (no direct exposure of the crown at all).
· Summarise Data
Field data can be summarized using a calculator or, preferably, a personal computer using commercially available database or spreadsheet software. Although a summary should reflect the specific data collected, the following headings are a guide for presenting information:
· Leading Trees:
- species and per cent of trees > minimum cutting diameter,
- number of trees/ha,
· Leading Desirables:
- per cent and dbh classes of trees and saplings
- species and number of LD/ha,
- percent of seedlings
- distribution of crown illumination, type of LD and dbh classes.
Figure 14: Example of the Steps Involved in the Selection of a Leading Desirable.
Step One: The plot contains a TREE meeting the following criteria for selection as a Leading Desirable:
· it is the best (and often the tallest or having the largest dbh) among the commercially trees present,
· it is 10 cm dbh, or larger, but is less than the minimum cutting diameter,
· it has a single, well-formed trunk, containing one straight section at least 4 m long, free of defects, large knots or deformations,
· it has a well formed, vigorous crown.
Step TWO: The plot does not contain a tree meeting the criteria for a Leading Desirable listed in Step One, but it does contain a SAPLING meeting the following criteria:
· it is a merchantable or commercially acceptable species,
· it has a dbh between 5 cm and 9.9 cm,
· it has a single straight trunk, taller than 30 cm, that is free of defects, deformations and heavy branches,
· it has a vigorous and well-formed crown.
Step Three: The plot does not contain a sapling meeting the criteria for a Leading
Desirable listed in Step Two, but it does contain a SEEDLING meeting the following criteria:
· it is a merchantable, or commercially acceptable species,
· it has a height not greater than 30 cm,
· it has a stem not greater than 4.9 cm dbh,
· it has a single, straight, defect free stem,
· it has a vigorous crown.
Step Four: The plot does not contain a tree, sapling or seedling meeting the criteria for a Leading Desirable. It is technically unstocked.
· If the plot is assessed to be "potentially productive" (soils, proximity to plots having a Leading Desirable, vegetation similarities) this should be recorded.
· If the plot is located on a site assessed to be "permanently unproductive" (rock, permanent water, swamp) and is unlikely to ever support productive forest this should be recorded.
Silvicultural Decision-making
The results of diagnostic sampling should be used for making decisions on the priorities for silvicultural tending in different forest types, for determining an appropriate initial sequence and design of silvicultural operations, including the intensity of liberation thinning, and the need for, the extent and density of enrichment planting. The following guidelines are suggested:
· Results of sampling should be plotted onto compartment maps and entered into compartment records. This allows areas of forest having similar characteristics and topography to be defined and where similar silvicultural treatments can be applied.
· For practical reasons, the areas defined should be reasonably large, for example, at the scale of a sub-compartment.
A silvicultural decision-making structure, based on the results of diagnostic sampling, is shown in Figure 15.
Figure 15: A Silvicultural Decision-making Structure Following Diagnostic Sampling.
1.6 Further reading
Alder, D. 1992. Simple Methods for Calculating Minimum Diameter and Sustainable Yield in Mixed Tropical Forest in "Wise Management of Tropical Forests". Oxford Forestry Institute, University of Oxford.
Alder, D. 1995. Growth Modelling for Mixed Tropical Forests. Tropical Forestry Paper No. 30, Oxford Forestry Institute, University of Oxford.
Alder, D. and Synnott, T. J. 1992. Permanent Sample Plot Techniques for Mixed Tropical Forest. Tropical Forestry Paper No. 25. Oxford Forestry Institute, University of Oxford.
Brasnett, N. V. 1953. Planned Management of Forests. Alien & Unwin, London.
Catinot, René. 1997. The Sustainable Management of Tropical Rainforests. General Secretariat, Association technique internationale des bois tropicaux, ATIBT. Paris.
Cedergren, J. 1996. A Silvicultural Evaluation of Stand Characteristics, Pre-felling Climber Cutting in a Primary Dipterocarp Forest in Sabah, Malaysia. Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Umeå.
Davis, K. P. 1966. Forest Management. Second Edition. McGraw-Hill Inc., USA.
Dawkins, H. C. 1958. The Management of Natural Tropical High-Forest with Special Reference to Uganda. Imperial Forestry Institute; University of London.
FAO. 1980. Forest Volume Estimation and Yield Prediction; Vol. 1 - Volume Estimation; Vol. 2 - Yield Prediction. Forestry Paper No. 22/1 & 22/2, Rome.
FAO. 1984. Intensive Multiple-Use Forest Management in Kerala. Forestry Paper No. 53, Rome.
FAO. 1985. Guidelines for Sustained Yield Management of Mixed Dipterocarp Forests of South East Asia. Field Document No. 8, Project GCP/RAS/106/JPN, Bangkok.
FAO. 1988. Geographic Information Systems in FAO. Rome.
FAO. 1989. Management of Tropical Moist Forests in Africa. Forestry Paper No. 88, Rome.
FAO. 1989. Review of Forest Management Systems of Tropical Asia. Forestry Paper No. 89, Rome.
FAO. 1992 (first printed 1981). Manual of Forest Inventory with Special Reference to Mixed Tropical Forests. Forestry Paper No. 27, Rome.
FAO. 1993. Management and Conservation of Closed Forests in Tropical America. Forestry Paper No. 101, Rome.
FAO. 1993. Common Forest Resource Management - an annotated bibliography of Asia, Africa and Latin America. Community Forestry Note No. 11, Rome.
FAO. 1994. Mangrove Forest Management Guidelines. Forestry Paper No. 117, Rome.
FAO. 1995. Planning for Sustainable Use of Land Resources: towards a new approach. Land and Water Bulletin No. 2, Rome.
Ford-Robertson, F. C. (Ed). 1971. Terminology of Forest Science, Technology Practice and Products: Multilingual Forestry Terminology Series No. 1. Society of American Foresters, Washington, D.C.
Freese, F. 1962. Elementary Forest Sampling. US Dept. Agriculture Handbook No. 232.
Howard, A. F. & Valerio, Juvenal. 1962. A Diameter Class Growth Model for Assessing the Sustainability of Silvicultural Prescriptions in Natural Tropical Forests. Commonwealth Forestry Review. Vol 71 (3/4).
Husch, B. 1971. Planning a Forest Inventory. FAO Forestry Series No, 4. and FAO Forestry and Forest Products Studies No. 17. Rome.
Hutchinson, Ian D. 1991. Diagnostic Sampling to Orient Silviculture and Management in Natural Tropical Forest. Commonwealth Forestry Review, Vol. 70 (3), No. 223.
Hutchinson, Ian D. 1993. Puntos departida y muestreo diagnóstico para la silvicultura de bosques naturales del trópico húmedo. CATIE. Serie Técnica. Informe Técnico No. 204. Colección y Manejo de Bosques Naturales No. 7.
Johnston, D. R. Grayson, A.J. Bradley, R. T. 1965. Forest Planning. Faber & Faber, London.
Kleine, M. Heuveldop, J. 1993. A Management Planning Concept for Sustained Yield of Tropical Forests in Sabah, Malaysia. In "Forest Ecology and Management". Vol. 61, pp. 277-297. Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam.
Kofod, E. O. 1982. Standtable Projections for the Mixed Dipterocarp Forest of Sarawak, Malaysia. Field Document No. 9, FAO Project MAL/76/008, Forest Department, Kuching.
Leuschner, William A. 1984. Introduction To Forest Resource Management. Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University. John Wiley & Sons.
Lugo, A. E. & Lowe, C. 1995. Tropical Forests: Management and Ecology. Ecological Studies 112, Springer, Berlin.
Mayers, J. Howard, C. et al. 1996. Incentives for Sustainable Forest Management: A Case Study in Ghana. IIED Forestry and Land Use Series No. 7, IIED, London.
Pancel, L. [Ed]. 1993. Tropical Forestry Handbook. Springer Verlag, Germany.
PCARRD. 1985. Technical Publication No. 58, The Philippines Recommends For Dipterocarp Production, Philippines Council For Agriculture and Resources Research and Development, Manila.
Schmidt, P. & Schotveld, A. [Eds] 1996. Sustainable Management of the Guyana Rain Forests. Proc. of a Seminar on Management Systems of Tropical Forests. Wageningen.
Snedecor, G. W. & Citron, W. G. 1967. Statistical Methods. Iowa State UP.
Spurr, Stephen H. 1952. Forest Inventory. The Ronald Press Company, New York.
Synnott, T.J. 1979. A Manual of Permanent Sample Plot Procedures for Tropical Forests. Tropical Forestry Paper No. 14. Commonwealth Forestry Institute, University of Oxford.
van Assen, B. W. 1996. Community-based Sustainable Timber Production in the Tropics: a preliminary survey of experiences and issues. National Reference Centre for Nature Management. Wageningen.
Vanclay, J. K. 1991. Review: Data Requirements for Developing Growth Models for Moist Tropical Forests. Commonwealth Forestry Review. Vol. 70 (4), No. 224.
Vanclay, J. K. 1994. Modelling Forest Growth and Yield: Applications to Mixed Tropical Forests. CAB International, Wallingford.
Vanclay, J. K. et al 1995. Growth and Yield of A Tropical Rain Forest in the Brazilian Amazon 13 Years After Logging. Forest Ecology and Management, Vol. 71 (3).
Vanclay, J. K. 1996. Lessons from the Queensland Rainforests: Steps towards Sustainability. Journal of Sustainable Forestry, Vol. 3 (2/3).
Wenger, K. F. [Ed] 1984. Forestry Handbook. Wiley & Sons, New York.
<section>6</section>
2 Guidelines for defining financial, economic, environmental and social information
2.1 Financial considerations
2.2 Economic considerations.
2.3 Environmental considerations
2.4 Social considerations
2.5 Further reading
2.1 Financial considerations
2.1.1 Costs
2.1.2 Work study
2.1.3 Forest revenue
2.1.1 Costs
Principles
Costs are important in tropical forest management and are used for:
· Decision-making involving expenditure on possible alternative courses of action,
· Monitoring actual costs against budgets,
· Evaluation of alternative economic options in management planning,
· Calculation of financial returns,
· Budgeting,
· Detection of fraud.
Costs should be recorded or derived for all forest operations forming a part of the annual forest budget, or where required for economic and financial studies on specific aspects of forest management. They are usually made up of several components, including labour, equipment purchase and operation, materials, supervision and other overheads.
Types of Costs
There are several ways of classifying costs, as follows:
· Absolute and Opportunity Costs:
· Absolute Cost: Measures the loss in value of assets.
· Opportunity Cost: Is the value of the next best alternative that is foregone by directing resources into a particular investment. It can also be expressed as the value of an alternative opportunity that is foregone in order to achieve a particular objective or investment.
· Prime Costs and Overheads:
· Prime Costs: Direct wages and salaries, direct material and direct expense costs.
· Overheads: All costs which are not direct costs.
· Fixed Costs and Variable Costs
· Fixed Costs: Fixed costs accumulate with the passage of time, rather than with the rate of work. Fixed costs are incurred once and must be spread over the number of hours, or days, of work during the year. They include capital purchases, equipment depreciation, interest on borrowed funds, taxes and insurance.
· Variable Costs: Variable, or operating, costs vary directly with the rate of work, or production. Examples include the cost per m^3 for logging, cost per km for road construction or the cost per hectare for enrichment planting or thinning.
· Total Cost and Unit Costs
There is almost always more than one way of undertaking a particular forest operation and it usually has both fixed and variable cost components. It may be possible to change the amount of the fixed or variable cost, or both, and determine a minimum total cost. The relationship between production and costs is expressed in the two following formulae:
TC = C[fixed ]+ (C[v.]^ O) and
UC = (C[fixed ]/ O)+ C[v]
where,
TC = total cost
C[fixed] = fixed cost
UC = unit cost (of one unit of production)
C[v] = variable cost
O = output (or the number of units of production).
Determination of Minimum Total Cost
Determination of the point of minimum total cost involves fixed and variable costs for undertaking an operation with the aim of bringing the sum of the two costs to a minimum. It is helpful for minimising expenditure of a forest operation. Determination of minimum total cost involves changing the fixed and/or variable costs for an operation, summing these to derive a total cost and then showing the results in a table. The minimum total cost is determined by inspection from the table. Annex 9 shows how to calculate the minimum total daily cost for an enrichment planting operation. Break-even Cost Analysis
Break-even cost analysis determines the point at which the costs of one possible method for accomplishing a forest operation are equal to the costs of another method for achieving the same task. The relationship is expressed as follows:
FC1+ (VC1.O) = FC2+ (VC2.O)
The equation compares the fixed and variable costs for one method of work (FC1 and VC1) with those of a second method (FC2 and VC2). O (output), can be calculated as follows:
O = (FC1 - FC2)/ (VC2 - VC1)
An example of how the break-even cost can be found for a "cut-and-fill" road formation operation using manual or mechanical work methods is shown in Annex 9.
Calculation of Unit Costs
The use of break-even and minimum cost point methods require the collection of unit costs. Unit costs should be divided into sub-units, each measuring specific parts of a total cost, and should be selected carefully because they are the key to successful cost studies. Unit costs should be determined from daily or hourly records of operations, obtained from labour or equipment time-sheets, or from time-studies of individual operations. Examples of unit costs are:
· Costs per m^3 for cut-and-fill in road formation, or for selective harvesting of logs.
· Cost per 1000 trees for growing nursery transplants.
· Cost per ha, or m^3, for pre-harvest inventory.
· Cost per ha for thinning.
A simple-to-use computer programme, called PACE (Production and Cost Evaluation), has been developed to assist in calculating machine rates, road construction costs and log harvesting costs. Readers are referred to FAO Forestry Paper No. 99 (1992), Cost Control in Forest Harvesting and Road Construction for details on forest management cost control issues and for access to and use of the PACE system.
Daily Costs of Operations
Calculation of the total daily cost of forest operations is an important aspect of the business management of tropical forests. First identify the separate elements that make up an operation, calculate or estimate their costs and transform these to a total per work day. A costing structure for a harvesting operation is shown in Figure 16.
Work days are those days of the year when the operation is preferred; costing is sensitive to the number used. In a large forest operation where contractors can work all year, between 200 and 250 days are worked. The number varies depending upon weather conditions, access to a forest, markets and prices for logs and how often crews move from one work site to another. The elements that should be included in the total daily cost are:
· Machines: For each machine used, such as tractors, derive the cost on an hourly basis, then multiply by the average number of hours worked in a day. The cost should include allowances for depreciation, interest on capital, insurance costs, fuel, oil, repairs, tyres and rigging, such as wire ropes.
· Chainsaws: There are two approaches. Either cost on the same basis as machines, or if chainsaws are provided by workers, add the rate of the chainsaw allowance paid to the costs of fuel and oil supplied by the contractor.
· Labour costs: Summarise all of the costs of employing labour for a year, then divide the total by the number of work days in a year.
· Transport: Crew transport, if applicable, should be costed on a per kilometre basis and then multiplied by the actual (or an estimate) number of kilometres travelled per work day. Use the same allowances as for machines (such as fuel and insurance) but also include vehicle registration and road tax (if applicable).
Figure 16: A costing structure for A harvesting Operation
· Operating Costs and Overheads: Calculate on an annual basis. Divide the total by the number of work days in a year.
· Profit: Add component daily costs to derive a total daily cost to which is added a percentage that is called profit. The profit percentage can vary, depending upon the business interests of a company and the amount of competition it experiences. On the average, it may range between 5 and 30 per cent but may differ.
2.1.2 Work study
The Role of Work Study in Sustainable Tropical Forest Management
Work study is a generic term for those techniques, particularly method study and work measurement, which are used in the examination of human work in all its contexts, and which lead systematically to the investigation of all factors which affect the efficiency and economy of the situation being reviewed, in order to effect improvements. Reduction of inefficient steps in tropical forest management leads directly to lower costs and to more economic performance.
Two work study techniques are defined in Figure 17. It invariably involves interaction between groups of people, such as management and workers, or between machines and people. An important role for work study is to assist often reluctant local people who are employed in tropical forest management to make changes in working habits but which lead to easier, or quicker and always to less costly working procedures.
The main type of work study in forestry has often been work measurement, with the objective of setting realistic targets for production operations. There are five main steps in this process:
· Develop work standards for forest operations.
· Develop procedures which identify the main forest variables which may then be applied to work standards.
· Introduce monitoring, or quality control, arrangements which ensure that work is carried out in line with agreed standards.
· Make workable arrangements to resolve problems that might arise during a forest operation.
· Introduce incentive systems that provide adequate rewards for workers, or groups of workers such as logging teams, who exceed work standards at an acceptable quality level. Three main incentive systems are commonly applied:
- Piece work: payment for each "piece", or item of work, that is produced, e.g. a payment per thousand, for tree planting.
- Task work: payment for satisfactory completion of a whole task, or job, e.g. building a specific length of road and logging landings.
- Bonus payments: payment of a bonus, in addition to wages, for satisfactory completion of work above an agreed production target, e.g. for weeding or release thinning.
Figure 17: Work Study Techniques
Method Study: Method study is the systematic recording and critical review of existing and proposed ways of doing work, as a means of developing and applying easier and more effective working methods and for reducing costs.
Work Measurement: Work measurement is the application of techniques for measuring the time taken for a qualified worker to carry out a specified job at a defined level of performance.
Readers are referred to the following references for details on the application of work study procedures.
· Introduction to Work Study. 1981. ILO, Geneva.
· Grundzuge forstlicher Zeitstudien und ihrer Auswertung (The Principles Of Forestry Time Studies And Their Evaluation). 1990. Haberle, S. Institut fur Waldarbeit, Universitat Gottingen, W-3400 Gottingen, Germany.
· Work Study, Currie, R. M. 1980. Pitman for Brit. Inst. Management, London.
· Work Study In Forestry. 1973. Wittering, W. O. (Ed.) Forestry Commission Bulletin, No. 47. London.
Time Standards
Time standards are formulated and derived from actual time measurement studies of operations in different forest types, in different divisions of a company or forest enterprise where specific conditions apply. There are two practical and easily applied methods:
· The continuous timing method of individual operations provides data that can be compared with other more broadly based standards for similar conditions elsewhere.
· Sampling systems are a variation of the continuous timing method that enables one work study observer to follow several workers, or several operations.
Specific time standards are only applied to a prescribed operation using a specified method and specified tools. Divergence from a time standard will inevitably result in unrealistic targets, creating needless problems to both workers and managers. Time standards should cover the following points:
· The limits of the range for standards.
· The equipment to which the standards apply.
· The work method.
· Standards for each work element.
· Procedure sheets describing target calculation methods.
· The target assessment sheet.
Detailed examples of time standards determination for harvesting a bamboo plantation and natural bamboo stands in the Philippines are described in FAO Forestry Paper No. 87, Small Scale Harvesting Operations of Wood and Non-Wood Forest Products Involving Rural People (1988).
Quality Control
The purpose of quality control is to ensure that forest operations are carried out in accordance with prescriptions and contract schedules. Quality control is determined by making measurements of variables related to a management plan prescription, using temporary sample plots placed at random within areas of forest where a treatment has been applied. Data measured on quality control plots indicates the standards of work achieved and provides objective standards that cannot be determined from visual assessments. This approach can be applied to silvicultural operations.
2.1.3 Forest revenue
Principles
Tropical forest pricing policies have an important function in the management and conservation of tropical forests and also in financing long-term sustainable forest management. Revenue can be expenditure or income, or money spent or received from, raw materials or other items intended for resale which benefit a business. Frequently used forest revenue terms are shown in Figure 18.
Forest Fees
Forest fees are payments that are set at levels to reflect the value of a forest resource and provide economic incentives for better management and more efficient forest utilization. Forest fees can include:
· Stumpage prices of the logs harvested.
· Fees and charges applied by forest owners on forest concessions.
· Export taxes and other fees that are applied to forest products by governments.
High forest fees that more fully reflect the value of tropical wood can deter over-exploitation. High fee levels can also generate revenue that should be used to finance long-term forest management, making tropical forestry both financially and economically sustainable. Low forest concession fees indicate abundance rather than future scarcity and make commercial logging and wood processing highly profitable and also encourage over-harvesting and depletion. Low fees tend to encourage concession expansion into areas that would not otherwise be utilized economically for wood production.
Summary of Forest Revenue Charges
Forest revenue charges vary depending upon the base and location at which they are levied, how they are determined and the reason why they are made. Forest charges that relate directly to the management of a forest management unit are summarised to provide a working guide to the relationship between each class and type of charge.
Wood Values and Prices
The concepts of value and price are central to the establishment of a system of forest revenue charges and have a direct bearing upon sustainable forest management. The distinction between value and price is often overlooked and for this reason the basic concepts are summarised here.
Figure 18: Frequently Used Terms in Relation to Forest Revenue
Ad Valorem: A payment made in proportion to value. The amount to be paid in ad valorem charges or taxes is proportional to the value of logs, sawn timber, rattan, bamboo or other forest products.
Bonus Bid: At an auction the price that is bid over and above an upset price that is set by a seller.
Conversion Return: The selling price of logs or processed forest products, less the operating costs, including depreciation.
Demand: The quantity of a commodity that will be bought at a particular price and within a specific period of time.
Economic Rent: The excess of total payments to a factor of production, such as land, labour, capital or raw materials, over and above the earnings necessary to keep it in its present use.
Open-Bid Auction: A sale in which interested parties bid openly for the purchase of wood.
Royalty: A payment made to an owner of a forest for the right or privilege of cutting it, generally based on a rate per unit of produce harvested, such as an amount per cubic metre.
Sealed-Bid Auction: A sale in which interested parties submit written bids at a specified time and place.
Shadow Price: Value measured by opportunity cost principles instead of market prices, related to costs or values of goods and services not normally quantifiable by costing, or valuing, according to opportunities foregone.
Stumpage Value: The value of wood as it stands uncut, expressed as an amount per cubic unit.
Stumpage Appraisal: The estimation of financial value to a concession or licence holder of standing wood to be harvested and marketed as logs or as processed forest products.
Upset Price: A reserve price, or a predetermined minimum price, generally with reference to auction sales of wood.
Financial values and price are the same only in certain situations, such as in competitive markets where there are many buyers, sellers and transactions. Under less competitive situations in which wood is sold in log, sawn or other forms, financial values and prices are likely to diverge. The financial value and the price of wood are summarized as follows:
Classes of Forest Revenue Charges
· The Charging Base at which Charges are Levied
· Forest area
· Log volumes
· Log Value
· The profits of an operation.
· Location at which Charges are Levied
· In the forest (stump)
· Roadside, landing or railway
· Processing plant
· Port
· How Charges are Determined
· By negotiation
· By competitive tender, or auction
· By administrative decision.
· The Timing of Charges
· Initial charge
· Annual charge
· Progressive charge, or as wood is cut.
· The Purpose of Forest Charges
· Stumpage fees to government
· Royalty payments to government
· Payments to local communities
· Reforestation fees
· Fees for post-harvest silviculture
(silvicultural fees)
· Public works charges.
· Fees for forest research
Types of Forest Revenue Charges
· Forest Concessions
· License fees
· Annual Land Rentals
· Fees based upon standing wood, the AAC or property values.
· Charges On Wood Harvested
· Per tree charges
· Volume based charges
· Charges based upon the area harvested.
· Charges on the Production of Forest Products
· On processed forest products
· On non-wood forest products.
· Charges for Services
· Fees for services provided.
· Charges on Productive Factors
· Charges on equipment and workers.
· Charges on Companies and Cooperatives
· Company or corporation tax
· Value added tax
· Profit based royalty.
· Financial value to a buyer: This is the estimated range of potential prices a buyer would be prepared to pay, based on alternative uses to which the wood can be put. It is based on a buyer's willingness to pay, the perceived uses which the wood has and the perceived revenues and costs involved. The range of potential prices is limited by the price a buyer would be prepared to pay for a given quantity of wood based on its best use.
· Financial value to a seller: This is the estimated range of potential prices a seller would be prepared to accept, limited by an estimated acceptable minimum price. Willingness to sell values depend upon the seller, the perceived alternative uses, and the revenues and costs of these alternative uses.
· Market price: Market price is the amount actually paid by a buyer and accepted by a seller for a commodity or service when a transaction takes place.
There is one market price established for a specific sale and purchase transaction, but there are a range of values, based on the values to potential buyers and sellers. The value of a commodity or service also depends on potential uses, the circumstances of the potential buyers and the costs and limitations faced by a buyer as well as assumptions and the judgement of a buyer. For example, high quality tropical forest logs have different values as domestic sawlogs, as peeler logs for veneer or as export logs.
Information on Local and International Market Prices for Wood
A reliable and constantly updated source of international and domestic price information for logs, sawnwood, plywood and veneers and added-value products is Tropical Timber Market Information published twice monthly by ITTO as a valuable contribution towards greater transparency in tropical timber markets. Producer and consumer reports are included in each issue.
Tropical Timber Market Information is available from the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), Pacifico-Yokohama 1-1-1, Minatomirai, Yokohama 220, Japan.
A Simple Model of Exchange
A simple model of exchange, shown in Table 8, helps to identify values to buyers and sellers of wood and to distinguish values from price. This model of exchange framework shows relationships for (a) a single buyer and a single seller and (b) several buyers and a single seller of wood. A buyer and a seller are able to reach an agreement and establish a price, called the forest charge, for wood within an overlapping range of values. The price can be set by negotiation, by open-bid or sealed-bid auction or by prices administered by the seller. Although a buyer-seller transaction involves a range of values to buyers and sellers, only one price is agreed to.
Two examples show how the simple model of exchange helps to clarify value - price relationships.
· Single Seller - Single Buyer: A buyer's willingness to buy values might range up to $120 per m^3 while a seller's willingness to sell values might range upwards from $100 per m^3. The overlapping range of values between the buyer's maximum and the seller's minimum is $20. It is within this range that agreement on price will be reached.
· Several Buyers - Single Seller: Four buyers each have different willingness to buy values, - $110, $120, $130 and $140 per m^3 - while values of a seller's willingness to sell might range upwards from $100 per m^3. Four different overlapping values occur within the sellers willingness to sell values. It is within the range of the maximum buyer ($140) and the next best buyer ($130) that agreement on price will be reached.
Stumpage Appraisal - Deriving the Stumpage Value for Wood
The stumpage value of wood to a concession holder or a cooperative reflects a buyer's evaluation of the wood in alternative uses and also the buyer's own circumstances and costs. For a concession holder, a cooperative or a short- term wood buyer who produces logs, sawn timber or plywood, stumpage values are derived from the market price of the logs or processed products.
Table 8: Diagram Showing a Simple Model of Exchange
A. Single Buyer -Single Seller
Buyer's Range Of Willingness to buy Values
< = = Buyer's Maximum
Seller's minimum = = >
Seller's Range of Willingness to Sell Values
Maximum Values for Each Buyer
B. Several Buyers -Single Seller
Buyer A
B
C
D
< = = Maximum
< == Area of Overlapping Values = = >
Seller's minimum = = >
Seller's Range of Willingness to Sell Values
$0 < = = Value of Merchantable Wood Standing in a Forest ($/m^3) = = >
Stumpage values can be derived by Stumpage Appraisal which is the estimation of the financial value to a concession holder or cooperative of the wood in standing trees to be harvested and marketed as logs or as processed wood products. Stumpage appraisal can provide a guide for establishing forest charges in situations where:
· There is competition among buyers of wood in standing trees, as in open-bid or sealed-bid auctions.
· There is no competition among wood users.
· There is a requirement for establishing the level of an administratively set fixed-rate charge, the level of ad valorem rates, or in guiding negotiations on forest charges.
If charges are set too low there will be loss of revenue and a tendency to overcut the forest. If charges are set too high there could be loss of revenue because there is a tendency for logs to be left in the forest.
The following general guidelines for conducting a stumpage appraisal are suggested:
· The starting point is the average export price of logs, or forest products such as plywood, for specified species and grades. Prices used should reflect competitively determined average prices for the species, grades and qualities of logs being appraised.
· Deduct port handling charges and log transport costs from the export price, giving a derived value for the logs on a roadside or landing. This is the Conversion Return, the amount available for profit and stumpage charge and is the maximum price the buyer would be prepared to pay for logs on a roadside. Costs must be accurate, or derived stumpage charges will be set too low or too high.
· Deduct log production costs, giving a derived demand value of the wood in standing trees in a forest. It is the maximum price that a buyer would be prepared to pay for wood for export logs.
· If a log market is not competitive with well defined market prices, or if the processed products represent an alternative use of the logs, or if the logs are directed to a processing plant operated by a concession or licence holder, then the stumpage appraised should start from the market prices of processed products.
· An alternative starting point for a stumpage appraisal is the first point in the marketing channel in which a competitive, defined price can be determined. This point can be logs stacked on a forest landing, logs in log pond, logs in a mill yard or at a railway landing. The closer the stumpage appraisal can begin to a forest the fewer the costs to determine and the easier is the calculation.
· Specialized assistance is desirable for the design and conduct of a stumpage appraisal.
The costs involved will vary depending on port handling costs, the hauling distance and road conditions, topography, climate, harvestable wood volumes per hectare and logging costs. The derived demand stumpage value incorporates a profit based on the fixed capital assets, working capital requirements and other expenditure. The allowance for profit has a direct impact on appraised stumpage values. If it is too generous, appraisal values will be too low. If the profit allowance is too low, appraised stumpage might be higher than a company is prepared to pay for wood. In equation form the relationships are:
SP = C+ M+ S
where:
SP = selling price (per m^3)
C = operating cost, including depreciation (per m^3)
M = profit allowance (per m^3)
S = stumpage value (per m^3)
Conversion Return = SP-C = M + S
Stumpage Value = SP - C - M
Three worked examples of stumpage appraisals are shown in Annex 10. Leaders are referred to Forest Revenue Systems in Developing Countries, 'FAO Forestry Paper No. 43 (1983), for details on stumpage appraisal procedures, the value of concessions and timber rights and criteria for evaluating forest charges and revenue systems.
2.2 Economic considerations.
2.2.1 The economic viability of sustainable forest management
2.2.2 Compounding and discounting of costs and benefits
2.2.3 Discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis as an aid for forest management
2.2.4 Uncertainty and the use of sensitivity analysis
2.2.5 Use team work for investment analysis
2.2.6 Other Economic Values of Tropical Forests
2.2.1 The economic viability of sustainable forest management
The following economic issues can influence the sustainable management of topical forests for wood production:
· Tropical forest tends to survive and be managed as a permanent natural resource if the land upon which it is growing is considered to be more valuable when the cover is retained than if the forest is cleared and the land converted to another use.
· Forest location, topography, accessibility, soil and forest types, climate and weather patterns and harvestable volumes.
· Stumpage values, prices of processed wood products, interest rates on borrowed funds, length of a cutting cycle and a recognition of and the reliability of operational costs.
· Non-market environmental values of watersheds, including the value of water flowing in streams, the significance of biological diversity, landscape and recreation, wildlife conservation and gene pools.
· Traditional community dependency and other social values of forests for food, medicinal plants and other products.
· Management of natural regeneration offers an annual return from year one, to amortise costs. By comparison, planted seedlings incur an interest cost each year until maturity. Natural forest management is, by comparison, more viable than forest established by planting.
2.2.2 Compounding and discounting of costs and benefits
Compounding
Compounding finds a future value of a present payment, or value, that is compounded annually for a specified number of years. The value may be a cost or an income. The basic formula for compounding is:
Fv[n ]= PV (1+ i)^n
Where:
PV = the present value
i = discount rate, e.g. 6% is 0.06
Fv[n ]= a future value, in year n
n = the number of years until a future value occurs
Discounting
Discounting adjusts a future value to the present time. The "adjusted" value is the present value and can be calculated using the following formula:
The expression, 1/(1+i)^n is the discount multiplier. A practical example of discounting a future value to a present value is shown in Annex 10 A. An individual discounting calculation can be made easily using a scientific calculator that has a y^x key. It can also be derived using a simple calculator in conjunction with discount multipliers. A table of discount multipliers is shown in Annex 11.
2.2.3 Discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis as an aid for forest management
General Guidance
Economic evaluation is important when forest planners and managers make or recommend decisions on alternative management options. The most acceptable method for evaluating long-term forest management programmes and specific short-term operations is discounted cash-flow analysis involving the computation of net present value. The key feature distinguishing DCF from other methods is a recognition that money has a time value. It assumes that money today is worth more than the same sum in the future, because money can be invested today to yield a return sum in the future. DCF analysis is designed to assess the value, or worth, of a possible investment, taking account of the timing as well as the amount of the cash flows.
The main use of DCF analysis for tropical forest management is that it allows comparisons of alternative options to be made rather than in providing an absolute measure of their value. DCF analysis can be used for evaluating management options for a whole forest, or at the compartment level, or for evaluating alternative ways of implementing a specific operation. An example of a compartment level analysis is evaluation of the benefits and drawbacks of the timing and frequency of weeding following selective cutting, thinning or other silvicultural operations. It can also be used for determining and evaluating comparative economic returns from changing the length of the cutting cycle.
Comparative valuation uses current prices, costs and interest rates for comparing forest management options. It assumes that the present is "knowable", and the future is not, so comparative valuation can be justified with the use of known data to compare alternatives as being more attractive and less attractive, not to derive their absolute value. Interpretation of results should be cautious because results can become distorted when high discount rates and long time periods are involved.
The following guidance is suggested when undertaking DCF analysis:
· Care in the Formation of a Value-Flow Table: A value flow table should be formed carefully and should be a realistic profile of both benefits and costs. The term "cost" is used to denote actual operational expenditure. It specifically excludes non-cash expenditure, such as depreciation which should not be included. Administrative overheads are a "cost" and should be included.
· Use Sound Data: Ensure that data are of high quality; data of questionable quality should never be used. The likely consequences of making an analysis using unreliable data will be to convey a false sense of confidence to a management proposal which might be quite misleading. Accurate and realistic yield, price and cost information is essential.
· Inflation: Because it is impossible to predict the long-term effect of inflation on costs and prices in forestry, the general practice is to "freeze" data used in a DCF analysis in present-day values. This approach assumes that, in the long term, inflation will affect costs and prices in the same way and that costs and prices will inflate at the same rate.
Figure 19: Some Commonly Used Terms in Forest Investment Planning
Cash Flow: The flow of cash payments to or by an organization. Costs may be regarded as negative cash flows, revenues as positive cash flows.
Capital: The stock of goods which are used to produce specific products and which have themselves been produced. It also means stocks of money which are the result of past savings or borrowings.
Benefit-Cost (B/C) Analysis: A technique for evaluating an investment in terms of the costs and benefits related to it, including social benefits and costs.
Discounted Cash Flow: A cash value defined as the present value to allow for the time factor.
Discount Rate: The rate at which future costs or revenues are decreased to a value at the present time.
Internal Rate of Return (IRR): The discount rate at which discounted costs equals discounted revenues, or the present value of cash flows is zero.
Marginal Cost: The additional cost of increasing output by a small amount, such as one unit of production.
Net Present Value (NPV): The algebraic sum of die present value of a series of individual cash flows. It is synonymous with Net Present Worth. Land Expectation Value is a variant of the NPV used in plantation forestry; it is a theoretical price which may be paid for land so that an investment programme breaks even at a given discount rate.
Opportunity Cost: The cost of goods or services measured in terms of foregoing the next best alternative investment. The real cost of satisfying an objective, expressed in terms of the cost of the sacrifice of alternative activities given up.
Overhead Costs: Costs that are not directly attributable to specific units of production, mainly fixed costs and common costs.
Present Value: The value of a cash flow or flows discounted to the present time at a pre-determined discount rate.
Sensitivity Analysis: A technique for examining the sensitivity of the outcome of an investment to changes in costs or revenues, or to physical variables.
Shadow Price, or Cost: An estimated price or cost, derived from the best available information available, that is used as a substitute for a market price or cost.
Social Cost: A cost which does not feature in sets of accounts but which represents a real cost to society, for example, the cost of water pollution or soil erosion.
Uncertainty: Refers to events whose possible occurrence can be recognised but cannot be measured in probability terms.
DCF analysis should not be relied on to provide all of the guidance needed in management decision making. It is only one link in a stream of information that is needed. The method does have limitations caused by difficulties of data projection but despite this constraint it is recognised as being superior to other methods. Properly applied, DCF analysis can be a very useful aid to forest management but if misapplied it may cause unjustifiable and unrealistic decisions to be made.
Net Present Value
Net Present Value (NPV) is derived by subtracting the sum of the present value of a cash flow of costs from the sum of the present value of a cash flow of benefits. It is represented by the following formula:
where,
B[t] = total value of benefits for a period of years, t
C[t] = total value of costs for a period of years, t
r = discount rate.
The basic steps to be followed for deriving an NPV are as follows:
· Construct a value flow table. A value flow table sets out the value of benefits and the value of costs for each year of an analysis. The value of benefits is derived by identifying the volume of a benefit and multiplying it by its value in the year in which it is received. The value of costs is calculated in the same way, by identifying relevant cost factors, such as each separate forest operation, and multiplying it by its cost in the year in which the cost is received. A value flow table is the economic analysis equivalent of a financial cash flow table.
· Select an appropriate discount rate. There are two common methods for determining a discount rate:
- Cost of Borrowing: If money is borrowed commercially at x% per annum, the discount rate may be set at x%. If NPV at x% is greater than or equal to zero, the cost of borrowing is covered and the investment breaks even or shows a profit over and above the cost of borrowing.
- Opportunity Cost: If an investor can earn y% on an investment A, the return foregone by investing in an alternative B is y%. In this case, the opportunity cost of B is y% and the appropriate discount rate is also y%. If NPV is positive at y% then investment B is worthwhile.
· A practical way for carrying out a DCF analysis is on a personal computer using commercially available spreadsheet software. The value flow table in a spreadsheet comprises:
- Rows, being the values of separate sets of costs and separate sets of benefits,
- Columns, representing years.
· An NPV is derived by applying the @NPV function that is available in spreadsheet software to the sum of net values (benefits less costs) in the value flow table for the range of years to be included in the analysis.
· In general a positive NPV can be interpreted as an immediate return, while a negative NPV indicates a loss. The general rule is to accept an investment if the NPV is positive at a pre-determined discount rate, and to reject it if negative. Where a number of alternative options are being evaluated, that with the highest NPV at a given discount rate is the best proposition.
A simple worked example of a value flow table is shown in Table 9. It is able to be modified by adding columns to extend the time frame, or adding, or deleting, rows to modify the benefits (revenue) and cost flow structure of the analysis. In this example, benefits and costs involved in both wood and non-wood aspects of forest management are shown. An example of a DCF analysis generated using a spreadsheet on a personal computer is shown in Annex 10 B.
Internal Rate of Return
The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is the discount rate, at which discounted costs equal discounted revenue, or the rate at which the NPV of a projected future cash flow is zero. It is the rate of discounting at which the present value (worth) of benefits becomes equal to the present value (worth) of costs. The IRR relationship is shown in Figure 20 and described by the following formula.
This approach has the practical advantage to a forest manager or planner of not having to select a discount rate because it is determined by calculation. In Figure 20, NPV is plotted against several discount rates and cuts the X-axis, or the zero value, at 13 per cent, indicating an IRR of 13 per cent. In practice an IRR can be computed using a DCF spreadsheet analysis on a personal computer by using the @IRR function.
In general, management options having an IRR higher than a pre-determined discount rate, 13 per cent in this example, can be accepted, while those with a lower rate would be rejected. Where several alternatives are being assessed the most attractive is that with the highest IRR.
Analysis of the Cost of Growing, or Break-even Stumpage
Analysis of the cost of growing, or break-even stumpage, is helpful for deriving the cost of growing wood per cubic meter at a specified discount rate. Break-even stumpage is the stumpage price required for a forest
Table 9: An Example of a Value Flow Table for DCF Analysis
ITEMS
Year 0
4 to 28
A. BENEFITS:
AMOUNTS (wood - m^3/ha) non-wood products - kg/ha)
Non-wood, e.g. rattan
Sawlogs
Veneer Logs
VALVES (wood - $/m^3; non-wood products - kg)
Non-wood, e.g. rattan
Sawlogs
Veneer Logs
REVENUE ($/hectare)
Non-wood, e.g. rattan
Sawlogs
Veneer Logs
TOTAL REVENUE/ha
B. COSTS ($/ha):
Planting (inc. treestocks)
Release Weeding
Thinning
CFI
Climber Cutting
Log Harvesting
Rattan Harvesting
Diagnostic Sampling
Watershed Management
Fire Protection
Admin. Overheads
TOTAL COSTS/ha
NET CASH FLOW/ha
Note: The value flow table has been compressed between years 4 and 28 so it can be printed on this page. The principles applied in its construction are the same for the years not shown. Values enclosed in brackets in the Net Cash Flow row are negative values. management investment to "break even" at a given discount rate. It can be computed using a spreadsheet designed for DCF analysis.
The cost of growing analysis has the important practical value of providing a standard reference point against which current stumpage for wood can be compared. If the calculated cost of growing timber in a proposed forest management programme is less than current stumpage, then the investment is probably worthwhile; but if the calculated growing cost is greater than current stumpages, the investment is probably not economically worthwhile.
Benefit-Cost Ratio
The Benefit-cost Ratio (B/C ratio) is the present value of benefits divided by the present value of costs. Benefit-cost ratio analysis is a method of evaluating a proposed investment in terms of all relevant forest costs and benefits associated with it, including social costs and benefits.
· If B/C is greater than 1, it means that an investment could be economically worthwhile but if
· B/C is less than 1, then it means that the investment should be redesigned, or abandoned.
The B/C Ratio is shown in the accompanying formula. It is computed in practice using spreadsheet software on a personal computer, by discounting the total flow of benefits and the total flow of costs separately, then dividing the sum of the benefit flow by the sum of the cost flow. The Benefit-cost
Ratio is sometimes called the Profitability Index of a proposed investment in forest management.
Which Economic Indicator Should Be Used?
It is the total net value that is the economic objective in production forest management and it is the total net value that should be maximised when making forest management decisions. The NPV should not be the only economic indicator used but it should be given some weight because it is a tool that indicates net value when evaluating alternative forest management options. The following guidance should be considered:
· Where one or more proposed forest management options are not mutually exclusive and there are no cost constraints, all options which yield positive NPV results can be selected.
· Where not all proposed forest management options can be selected because of cost constraints the aim should be to select those which yield the total greatest NPV.
IRR and B/C Ratio indicators do not show the size of the net effects. Too strong a reliance on either the IRR or B/C Ratio can easily lead to a result in which the total economic effects from an investment that has been selected are smaller than if the NPV indicator is used.
2.2.4 Uncertainty and the use of sensitivity analysis
The long term nature of investment in forest management presents a problem for the projection of data relating to events into the future because of the uncertainty associated with the data used in analysis of options and in the final results. A statement of results as single value estimates from a single DCF analysis provides no indication of the effects of other possible results. A forest manager may ask, "what happens if the value of a cost or a benefit is changed, or if the discount rate is changed, and what effect will these changes have on the result?" For example, what happens to the NPV if the silviculture costs are increased, or if the expected stumpage is not realised?
In many studies small changes in some data can lead to large variations in others. A sensitivity analysis identifies the physical and financial elements which have the greatest effects on results. The next step is to test the sensitivity of results to changes in these key elements.
The effect of increasing and decreasing all costs and all revenues respectively on an NPV of $205 is shown an example in Table 10. The discount rate used was constant at 10 per cent.
Table 10: The Effect of Increasing and Decreasing Costs and Revenues on the NPV by 10%
NPV = $205
Costs
No Change in Costs
Benefits (Revenues)
Sensitivity analysis can be applied to individual costs or benefits. The effect of changing the discount rate can also be tested.
2.2.5 Use team work for investment analysis
A team approach is desirable when comprehensive forest investment analyses are planned and undertaken. Forest managers or foresters having first-hand knowledge and experience of practical operational conditions, especially costs and the values of benefits, should always work with an experienced forest economist whenever substantial investment analyses for a forest management unit are planned.
These guidelines only consider the most basic approach to investment analysis. Readers are referred to Economic Analysis of Agricultural Projects (1972) Gittinger, J. P. and FAO Forestry Paper No. 17, Economic Analysis of Forestry Projects (1979) for detailed guidance on the topic.
2.2.6 Other Economic Values of Tropical Forests
Non-wood Forest Products
The role of non-wood forest products should be clearly recognised in social, environmental and economic terms in sustainable tropical forest management. Free access to non-wood forest products is essential to millions of people in rural areas, especially women, having close and traditional relationships with forests. Food plants, honey, meat, medicines, fungi, dyes, gums, resins, silk and building materials are amongst the more important types. Rattan and bamboo poles are significant non-wood forest products.
The following themes covering NWFP should be considered when planning and implementing sustainable forest management programmes:
· Encourage cooperation with rural communities having traditional relationships with forests and recognise and accept that their interests in a range of non-wood forest products can increase the forest revenue for rural communities.
· Recognise the positive value of non-wood forest products, both saleable and non-saleable, in the planned management of tropical production forests. An example of the value of rattan has been shown in the DCF analysis spreadsheet in Annex 11 B. Rattan, bamboo, lianas and other saleable non-wood products are sources of intermediate income between cutting cycles of crop trees. Earnings from eco-tourism and recreation can comprise an intermediate income.
Water and Soil Resources
Effective soil conservation and regulation of the water flows in streams and rivers is a primary benefit of carefully implemented forest management activities. Thoughtful planning and sensitive implementation of operational programmes will contribute to effective watershed conservation. Sustainable supplies of water from stable watersheds are essential for agriculture, for domestic use and for industry. Nutrition is a part of food security and sustainably managed tropical forests provide a wide range of fruits and foods, medicinal plants, fungi, honey, aromatic plants and wildlife.
Forest planners, managers and economists should always consider the positive roles of water and soil conservation in tropical forest management. Practical steps that should be taken in respect of specific forest management units can include incorporating the views of agricultural, water supply and conservation authorities into forest management plans.
Eco-tourism and Recreation
Increasing interest is being shown by urban people and by overseas visitors in the eco-tourism and recreation opportunities that can be gained from visits to tropical forests. These include adventure trekking, viewing wildlife, forest ecology studies, photography, rafting and canoeing, visiting traditional forest communities and forest education. Where it is appropriate, eco-tourism and recreation opportunities should be considered as having economic value in the context of a planned forest management programme.
2.3 Environmental considerations
2.3.1 Environmental issues
2.3.2 Environmental impacts and benefits
2.3.3 Environmental acceptability of forest management proposals
2.3.1 Environmental issues
Watershed Conservation
Forests have a fundamentally important role in forested tropical regions, both physically and socially, for the conservation of water and soil resources through the protection of hill and mountain slopes from erosion by rainfall and the flooding of rivers. Protection of sloping land and soils is the single most important physical and biological function of forests. In addition to the local effects of loss of soils and land productivity there may be serious repercussions downstream. Eroded soil carried in streams settles in slower moving parts of rivers, in reservoirs and in the sea. The capacity and life of irrigation and hydropower assets are reduced and the quality of water and the flow of rivers deteriorates.
Case Study 5: Financial Study of Sustained Yield Management in the Deramakot Forest Reserve, Sabah. Malaysia
The shift from high cutting rates to sustainable levels of log harvest-vests from secondary forests will reduce revenues and increase investment and operational costs. A major question is whether sustainable tropical rainforest management will cover operational costs and provide an acceptable financial return to the Forest Department in Sabah and to private sector companies. Key features of management of the Deramakot Forest Reserve that recognise this and other questions are:
· A focus on key resources - soil, water, trees, biodiversity and community needs.
· Sustained yield harvesting, enhancing growing stock and forest regeneration.
· Investment in rehabilitation, silviculture and low-impact harvesting techniques.
· Equitable distribution of benefits between forest owner and the licensee.
A financial study on the Deramakot Forest Reserve examines stumpage values and resource supply costs for tractor and skyline yarding of logs under Forest Department and concession management respectively. From a financial viewpoint tractor skidding is to be preferred but skyline yarding causes less forest damage. In easy terrain not having technical restrictions the costs of tractor skidding are lower by RM 39/m^3 compared with skyline yarding. In difficult terrain it is expected that the cost difference narrows, especially if the costs of environmental damage is taken into account. Tractor and skyline yarding do not exclude each other but are complementary systems.
Price and Cost Elements (Values in RM/m^3)
SFD Management
Concession Management
Skyline
Tractor
Skyline
Tractor
A. Sales from exported sawn timber
(0.5 m^3 sawn timber = 1 m^3 logs)
Production & overhead costs, profit & risk
B. Log Value, ex Sawmill
Production & overhead costs, profit & risk
C. Log Value, ex Forest Road
Road construction, maintenance & harvesting costs, profit & risk
Concession management costs
Profit & risk (25 % of all ex. sawmill cost)
D. Stumpage Value
* RM = Malaysian Ringgit.
Source: Malaysian - German Sustainable Forest Management Project.
Issues that should be considered by forest planners and managers are:
· Topography, climate - especially rainfall - and the season of harvesting.
· Location of roads and skid trails, construction quality, drainage and maintenance.
· Cutting system used, number and volume of trees per hectare cut,
· Types of hauling operations and the types and power of machinery used,
· The character and extent of silvicultural tending.
For detailed guidance on the topic readers are referred to the following Watershed Management Field Manuals in the FAO Conservation Guide series:
· Vegetative Measures and Agricultural Projects, No. 13/1 (1985),
· Gully Control, No. 13/2 (1986),
· Slope Treatment Measures and Practices, No. 13/3 (1988),
· Landslide Prevention Measures, No. 13/4 (1988),
· Road Design and Construction in Sensitive Watersheds, No. 13/5 (1989),
· Watershed Survey and Planning, No. 13/6 (1990).
Conservation of Biological Diversity
Conservation of genetic forest resources and the maintenance of biological diversity is essential for sustaining the productive and protective values of all tropical forest lands. Long term sustainability of tropical forest ecosystems is an essential part of a balanced production forest management programme and in large part depends upon the effective conservation of biological diversity. Practical steps that can be taken are as follows:
· Recognise and define sites where localised or rare species of plants and animals are known, or are thought to exist.
· Where necessary, plan and undertake local surveys in consultation with specialist ecologists, including NGO specialists, to better define the extent of specific sites and the conservation status of plants or animals that might occur.
· Where appropriate, consult with representatives of local communities to determine the nature of traditional interests that may exist in sites having endangered or rare plants or animals.
· Reach agreement through consultation between the forest owner, forest planners and managers, local people living in and around the forest, ecologists and interested conservation groups to identify sites that should be reserved from wood production and protected to conserve biodiversity values.
· Where it is technically appropriate and practicable to do so, combine forest land having biodiversity, watershed, wildlife and non-wood forest products conservation values, including streamside buffers.
· Define the boundaries of forest land to be reserved and protected from wood production with markers and notices.
Wildlife Conservation
There is a growing interest in conserving wildlife in tropical forests through the creation of reserved land where habitats and species can be protected. Forest planners and managers can contribute towards effective wildlife conservation by promoting practical action along the following lines:
· Reserves or refuges, representing all major forest types, especially having a high species diversity and endemism, in a forest management unit should be protected. Priority should be given to forest where endangered species are known to occur.
· Corridors connecting refuges should comprise part of a reserve's network. Corridors should physically connect two or more reserves and aim to provide undisturbed habitat access that allows free movement of animals in either direction. They should be maintained as far as possible in a natural state.
· Major animal feeding grounds that maintain specific wildlife populations should be protected. Tree species that are important food sources for animals should be protected from damage or loss during wood harvesting and subsequent tending operations.
· Hunting by forest concession company employees should not be allowed because it can lead to loss of endangered animals and weaken the basis for maintaining sustainable forest ecosystems.
· Wildlife populations should be regularly monitored in a systematic manner in order to detect and then respond to changes in populations and distribution of animals.
Buffer Zone Formation
A buffer zone is an area that is peripheral to an ecological reserve (such as a national park or protected forest) where restrictions are placed upon forest use and management in order to protect or enhance the conservation value of the reserve. It provides a gradient between totally protected land, and land can be managed for wood production. A diagram of a buffer zone surrounding an ecological reserve is illustrated in Figure 21. Practical steps that can be planned to implement buffer zones are:
· Tree cover and habitats should be maintained as far as possible in a natural state.
· Buffer zone vegetation should resemble that of the protected area, both in species composition and structure.
· Buffer zones should have similar biological diversity to that in a protected area.
· The capacity of the ecosystem in the buffer zone to retain and recycle nutrients should be retained as far as possible.
Forests and Global Climate
Forest clearing and burning have led to increased amounts of "greenhouse" gases in the atmosphere, mainly carbon dioxide. At the same time worldwide losses of forests have reduced global capacity for atmospheric carbon dioxide to be sequestered from the air by growing trees. Balanced and sustainable forest management programmes in tropical forests for both wood production and for environmental conservation objectives can contribute towards atmospheric carbon dioxide sequestration.
Figure 21: Diagram of a Buffer Zone Between an Ecological Reserve and a Production Forest
2.3.2 Environmental impacts and benefits
Environmental Impacts in Production Forest Management
The linkages between ecology and economics are particularly strong in the management of tropical forests for wood production, mainly because of the physical impacts that can be caused to the forest environment by careless roading and harvesting. Environmental impacts can be of four types:
· Positive: Thoughtful planning can lead to beneficial environmental impacts. For example, maintaining forest cover may lead to improvements in water quality and to protection of the interests of communities having a traditional dependence on forests.
· Negative: A poorly planned and carelessly implemented programme can lead to a deterioration of desirable environmental qualities. Adverse impacts can be caused by roading and harvesting to the structure and composition of forests, to soil stability, to forest hydrology and watershed relationships and to disruption of traditional community relationships with forests.
· Direct: A forest management programme can have a direct effect on an environmental factor. For example, protection of a watershed forest will have a direct impact on maintaining biological diversity.
· Indirect: A programme can lead to an indirect environmental impact on forest resources. For example, where an increasing resident population is associated with increased employment opportunities in forest utilization, there is an increased but indirect fire risk to a forest.
2.3.3 Environmental acceptability of forest management proposals
Overview of the Environmental Assessment Procedure
Environmental assessment is a practical tool for minimising adverse environmental impacts that can occur during tropical forest operations. Environmental impact assessment (EIA) is a part of the environmental assessment procedure that identifies and assesses the magnitude of impacts, both positive and negative, of a management proposal. It is a systematic procedure which gathers information and evaluates the likely impact of a change of circumstances that will or might result from implementation of a proposal. EIA can be applied as a part of a management plan formulation programme.
The process aims to provide answers to the following questions:
· What changes will occur within and near the forest environment as a result of implementing a forest management programme?
· What will be the extent of such changes?
· Do the changes matter and what can be done about them?
· Can a proposed forest management programme be modified and are there better alternatives that will cause less environmental impact?
These Guidelines do not go into detail on how to plan and undertake an EIA. This is a specialized role and is beyond the scope of these Guidelines. Readers are referred to the following publications for advice on conducting an EIA:
· Environmental Impact Assessment. 1995. Gilpin, A. Cambridge University Press.
· Training Manual for Environmental Assessment in Forestry. 1996. FAO Field Doc. 8/1996. Bangkok/DANCED, Denmark.
The Environmental Assessment Procedure
Environmental assessment commonly involves four practical steps that can be coordinated and carried out by managerial personnel on a forest (Figure 22.). The four steps for identifying, evaluating and minimising adverse environmental impacts during the formulation of a forest management plan are:
· Screening of a proposed forest management programme,
· Preliminary assessment of environmental impact,
· Management programme revision,
· Environmental monitoring.
· Step One - Initial Screening of a Programme: Screening identifies significant environmental issues and eliminates insignificant ones. Screening should identify and refer to as many of the affected parties, such as communities and conservation groups, as possible. In practice, screening involves consultation between forest planners and managers with representatives of other parties. The outcome of screening will be a consensus opinion of one of the following options:
· Specific environmental aspects are poorly known or are unknown and a preliminary assessment is required.
· Impacts have been identified that can be prevented or moderated by a revision of some management proposals.
· A management proposal is located in an environmentally sensitive locality that will lead to severe impacts, and a detailed environmental assessment is required.
Figure 22: The steps involved in screening and making a preliminary environmental assessment of a forest management programme
· A proposed programme has no harmful effects, or has positive environmental impacts.
· Step Two - Preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment: If an initial screening indicates that a preliminary EIA is necessary, then further planning should take the outcome of this assessment into account. EIA must be an integral part of forest management planning and not a separate process running parallel to it. Once a decision has been made during Step One - Initial Screening of a Programme, then the planning procedure must include it. The following steps should be followed:
· Assemble all available information: Much of this information is likely to have been assembled during the normal course of management planning. Specific information is required on:
- Climate, soils, rock types and vegetation with an assessment on the sensitivity to disturbance. Identify basic information on biodiversity values that are likely to be affected.
- Make a brief analysis of the communities that are likely to be affected, directly or indirectly, by a proposed management programme.
- Identify existing direct or indirect uses within the forest management area.
- Identify the institutional context within which the proposed programme will operate and the institutions that are likely to be affected.
- Identify planned or potential conservation areas likely to be affected by a proposed management programme.
· Prepare a checklist of likely impacts with an assessment of the magnitude of the impacts: The preparation of a checklist of likely impacts is a useful way of checking that nothing is overlooked and should be specific for the proposed management programme. An example of an Environmental Impacts Checklist for production forest management is shown in Annex 12. The following guidelines should be considered when assessing impacts:
- Consider all aspects of an operation and look at positive as well as negative impacts.
- Make assessments in relation to the facts that have been assembled for the locality. Do not make judgements that cannot be supported by facts.
- Focus on the main issues. Do not try to cover too many topics in too much detail.
- Be realistic and use common sense. Remember, the most important part of an environmental assessment is to predict the possible changes which would be brought about by alternative management options, and having predicted the changes, to decide how much these changes really matter.
Decide whether to revise a programme based on an impact assessment: The information gathered and presented in the form of a checklist should enable a decision to be made, if necessary, concerning redesign of parts of a proposed management programme, or to conduct a detailed Environmental Assessment.
· Step Three: Revision of a Proposed Management Programme: The preliminary Environmental Impact of a proposed management programme may lead to a decision to revise aspects of it. Be realistic in considering alternative management options. Revision may require only simple modifications, such as relocating roads or changing the seasonal timing of road construction or harvesting. Avoid preconceptions and do not make prejudgements on possible action.
· Step Four: Environmental Monitoring: Environmental monitoring is an extension of the information collection process and should be applied to those topics in an EIA where there is an incomplete knowledge of the impacts of a proposed management programme. A management programme should be sufficiently flexible to incorporate any observations from monitoring that might be made as a management programme proceeds.
Detailed Environmental Assessment
If a proposed forest management and wood utilization programme is considered to have substantial environmental impacts, as might occur in an environmentally or socially sensitive locality, then screening is likely to recommend a detailed environmental assessment. This is a specialized topic that will require considerable new information and study. It is beyond the scope of these Guidelines and should be undertaken by technically qualified people having previous experience in environmental assistance.
2.4 Social considerations
2.4.1 Background
2.4.2 Involvement of local communities
2.4.3 Social surveys using rural appraisal methods
2.4.4 Guidelines for planning and conducting a rural appraisal
2.4.5 Guidelines for the integration of wood with non-wood forest products production
2.4.1 Background
A large number of the people who live in or near forests and are at least partly dependent on forest resources live in tropical forest localities. Each distinct ethnic group has its own cultural inheritance and its own social and economic relationships with forests that cover religion, ceremonial activities, art, food supply, medicine and economic use. Where community-forest relationships have evolved, the social organization and culture of individual communities have adapted to the characteristics of the plants comprising the forests as well as to local soils and climates.
Sustainable tropical forest management is concerned not only with technical management but also with the integration of agriculture with forests for food production, the production of wood for community use and for the supply of non-wood forest products. It should lead to social and economic development of local communities, including the provision of basic needs and to income generation and employment. A balanced programme of forest management can contribute to these objectives by supporting opportunities to share information, experience and the responsibilities of management with local communities. A definition of community forestry that recognises a degree of local control and participation amongst rural communities is shown in Figure 23.
Figure 23: A Definition of Community Forestry
Community Forestry: ".. the control and management of forest resources by the rural people who use them especially for domestic purposes and as an integral part of their farming systems ".
Source: Fisher, R.J. "Collaborative Management of Forests for Conservation and Development". IUCN. 1995.
The sustainability of tropical forest management depends upon having local communities work together with government agencies, concession holders, NGOs and other institutions involved in forest management in assessing, planning and monitoring management operations according to locally defined concerns, needs and goals. The aim is for rural communities, government agencies and forest managers to work together.
2.4.2 Involvement of local communities
Principles and Approaches
Involvement of local communities in sustainable tropical forest management can be secured, depending upon locally prevailing conditions, as follows:
· By adapting the conventional technical tools and methods of land use planning, watershed management, market assessment, agroforestry and wood production management, to the participatory approaches of rural development, such as Participatory Rural Appraisal, farming systems analysis, and Participatory Assessment Monitoring and Evaluation.
· By incorporating nutrition, population and gender analysis into the development of balanced management programmes.
· By using participatory tools adapted to local conditions, throughout the analysis, design, management and evaluation phases of local community development programmes, to increase mutual learning opportunities for local people and their technical partners.
· By encouraging local community participation in forest products marketing. One example is the development of local market information systems managed mainly by local communities.
Conflict and Conflict Management
Conflict is an inevitable feature of all societies. What varies from one culture to another is its scope and scale, whether it is valued or avoided, and the manner in which it is managed or resolved. Conflict management is a broadly-based field of study and action that addresses questions of how people can make better decisions by cooperating together. It attempts to focus upon the reasons why conflicts occur by building upon shared interests and finding points of agreement that accommodate the respective needs of the various parties involved. During some conflict management processes, there can be changes of awareness and recognition, minds can change, people learn about themselves and others and new patterns of significance can arise.
The main features of conflict management having practical significance in sustainable tropical forest management are:
· Trust, Understanding and Communication: The parties involved in problem solving need to develop trust and understanding, exercise good communication skills and collect credible data. Forest managers should foster and encourage productive communication and collaboration with rural communities, addressing the underlying causes of conflict prior to the outbreak of serious confrontation. "Tools" that can be used for conflict resolution are negotiation, mediation, conciliation, and consensus building.
· Ownership: The conflict management process should encourage a sense of ownership of the solution, as well as the problem.
· Indigenous Knowledge Systems: Explore local perspectives and mechanisms for dealing with disputes, including the local knowledge base, local practices and methods that are in use. Key questions to be considered can include:
- How are conflicts managed at a local level?
- What indigenous methods and mechanisms, both formal and informal, exist for dealing with conflicts?
- What is their authority in the context of the structural changes localities have, and continue to experience?
- How can effective conflict management techniques be transferred between communities at the forest level?
· Promoting Equitable Dialogue under Unequal Conditions: Very often local groups are not well organized, or are unable to adequately represent themselves. Under these conditions communication, or dialogue, is liable to be unequal, and even strongly one-sided. Key questions leading to more equitable dialogue can include:
- What is the link between power relations and conflict management in forest management?
- How do power differences (economic, social and political) impact on conflict management and dispute resolution strategies?
- How can powerful groups be brought to the conflict management process?
- What institutional and other mechanisms are needed to promote a more equitable dialogue?
· The Role of Ethnic Minorities and Women: At the heart of the involvement of local communities is participation and promotion of ethnic minorities and women. Key questions are:
- What is the role, perspective and interests of minorities and women in relation to forestry and land use conflicts?
- How do they differ from other members of the wider community?
- How can they be better integrated and taken into account?
- What is the nature of their participation and to what extent are they further marginalised or more empowered by the conflict management process?
- How can conflicts be managed to take into account the views and needs of disadvantaged groups?
· Be Practical: Care should be taken to ensure that the various solutions and agreements reached are practical and are capable of being implemented.
2.4.3 Social surveys using rural appraisal methods
Types of Rapid Appraisal
Social surveys using rural appraisal methods are intended to acquire practical information on development issues in local communities quickly. Two common reasons for undertaking rural appraisals are:
· So that villages can create plans to make better use of forest resources available to them.
· To inform and influence national policy and legislation concerning forest resources management.
There are two main types of rapid appraisal, rapid rural appraisal and participatory rural appraisal, the key difference between the two being who undertakes the study, as follows:
· Rapid Rural Appraisal: The study process is mostly managed by outsiders, often comprising a team of specialists who determine the study objectives, conduct field inquiries in a community, undertake analysis and determine what happens to the results.
· Participatory Rural Appraisal: The community manages the study process. An outsider's role is limited, at least initially, to providing training in study methods and, later, in the use of the results. Local communities determine the study objectives, collect and analyse information and decide how the results will be used.
In practice the situation is often not as strictly defined as this and there can be a mix of the two broad approaches. Very often, outsider specialists may initiate the process and then ask the community to select representatives to join the team as active members. In time, a local community that becomes familiar with the techniques may take control of the appraisal process.
Triangulation - a Way of Avoiding Study Bias
When undertaking any study, a field researcher must be aware of bias. If a study is biased, it means that the results do not reflect the reality of a situation, or that there has been a preference for one particular position.
Triangulation is one of the features of rural appraisal that tries to ensure that a study is as objective and as unbiased as possible and means looking at a problem in several different ways, but always at least three ways. When designing and undertaking a study the following features should be recognised:
· Triangulation of the study team perspectives by involving at least three people having different points of view, for example, women/men, social scientists/forest managers, insiders/outsiders, young people/older people.
· Triangulation of the perspectives of the people providing information by ensuring that a range of people are interviewed and that all information collected is verified by at least three different groups, such as women/men, diverse ethnic groups and young people/older people.
· Triangulation of information gathering methods by addressing the same issue using at least three different tools, for example, historical interviews, maps and seasonal calendars.
All rural appraisal methods use a variety of techniques to gather information in the field, rather than relying on questionnaires that have been written beforehand in an office. Techniques include mapping exercises, semi-structured interviews with groups of people and individuals, and ranking activities.
2.4.4 Guidelines for planning and conducting a rural appraisal
A rural appraisal can be divided into three stages:
· Preparation,
· Field collection,
· Information analysis and use.
Where a comprehensive rural appraisal is to be applied in a specific forest situation, the forest manager should secure the specialist assistance of an experienced rural sociologist to provide detailed guidance on the design and conduct of an appraisal.
Preparation of a Rural Appraisal
· Setting the Objectives; The objectives define the purpose of the study and determine exactly what will happen in the field. Objectives should be clear, not too broad and should be related to providing information that will solve pressing community and forest management problems, including conflicts.
· Choosing a Study Site: A decision on how many specific sites, or localities, should be studied will depend on the study objectives, the time frame, costs and the size, character and variability of the area in question. The area chosen should not be so large as to be impractical, nor so small that an appraisal is unlikely to be effective.
· Selection of a Study Team: A study team should be between three and six people. Where village representatives join a team as active members, a larger team may be necessary but the team should not exceed eight people because it can become unmanageable. A diversity of interests, experience and views should be represented. Team members should have compatible personalities so they can work together effectively.
· Review Background Information: Review existing information about the study site or area. Information can include maps, data on the distribution and nature of forest types, village locations, ethnic background, village populations, social structure, farming systems and the uses of traditional plants. Some information may be available in a forest management plan.
· Make Logistical Arrangements for Field Work: Arrangements should be made for transport, village accommodation for team members, arrangements for villages to meet and receive a study team and keeping local authorities informed of the purpose and progress of an appraisal.
Information Collection
· Collect Physical Information About a Study Area: Describe the physical character of a study area from the viewpoint of community-forestry relationships. Features that should be noted are the "territory" of villages, how boundaries are recognised, which part of a "territory" is used by all village families (a "commons") and which parts are family land holdings. Information can be recorded and presented in the form of simple sketch maps and as transects that show a cross-section of the "territory" of a village.
· Collect Information About Forest Resources Use: The aim is to identify and collect information that is directly relevant to the objectives of an appraisal. Don't collect information that will not be useful but be flexible in deciding what information is important. When information is collected the concern should be with what kinds of resources are being used or not used, how and for what purpose they are used and who the users are. This information provides a basis for determining where there are constraints in the use of different forest resources, who has greater access to them, who has limited use or who has no access at all. Although information can be assembled in various ways, depending upon the appraisal objectives, four useful headings for assembling information are:
· Structure of communities and the relative standing of its members, including women as well as men.
· Wealth ranking of community members, both men and women.
· The community calendar of seasonal changes in work, seasonal changes in earning power, seasonal changes in agricultural activities and other changes that might occur during the year.
· A two-dimensional classification matrix for making comparisons between resource use and community structure can be formed. A simple example of a classification matrix is shown in Table 11. It shows the relative importance, or frequency, of occurrence of use of specific resources for three groups of users - men and women, wealthier and poorer people and elderly, adult and younger people.
· Collect Information About Community Management of Forest Resources:
Information that should be collected about community management of forest resources includes the local rules that are applied, the different levels of decision-making and who arranges settlement of disputes that inevitably arise over the management of different forest resources. Many decisions concerning community forest resources management are made informally and by individuals, others are made amongst families whilst others are made by village committees or by powerful individuals. The role of women is often important in decision-making.
Table 11: An Example of an Information Classification Matrix
User Groups Þ
Men
Women
Wealthier
Poorer
Elderly
Adult
Youth
Resource Types ß
Wood
Bottom Land
Hill Slopes
Fruits
Bark
Leaves
Medicinal Products
· Information Collection Techniques:
· Semi-structured interview: A semi-structured interview can be used at any time and involves asking questions on topics of interest, using a checklist of issues that an interviewer wishes to examine.
· A Conflict Matrix: A two-dimensional conflict matrix lists the disputing parties on one axis and the nature of conflicts on the other. An example is shown in Table 12. It is formed by asking specific questions on forest resource use conflicts amongst people or communities and then expressing the relative frequency of their occurrence in the form of a matrix.
· Analysis of Information: Information analysis is an ongoing process that begins during information collection; for example the formation of a classification matrix can be undertaken by villages using help build up a knowledge base in a village about itself. This provides opportunities for communication with communities, for summarising ideas, identifying trends, for evaluating the results of a study and making proposals to concerned local villages about a forest management plan and the community's role in it. The approach taken will depend upon the type of appraisal being made, as follows:
Table 12: An Example of a Conflict Matrix
Disputing Groups Þ
Between Villages
With Neighbouring Villages
With Strangers
With the State
Nature of Conflict ß
Trees
Land
Water
Pastures
Animals
· In participatory rural appraisal the planning, information and analysis phases are likely to be run together. Analysis and discussion will be a community-wide process that might take place over several days after information has been collected. Members of concerned communities will be able to share in discussion.
· In rapid rural appraisal information analysis is likely to be completed away from local communities. There should however be some community participation in order to share preliminary findings and to clarify questionable points.
Readers should refer to Rapid and Participatory Rural Appraisal: Past, Present and Future (1990) and Rural Appraisal: Rapid, Relaxed and Participatory (1992) both by R. Chambers, and also to FAO Community Forestry Field Manual No. 4, Tree and Land Tenure: Rapid Appraisal Tools (1994) for greater detail of these methods.
2.4.5 Guidelines for the integration of wood with non-wood forest products production
The following guidelines should be considered for achieving effective integration of non-wood forest products issues into tropical forest management:
· Cooperation with local communities and NGOs will usually lead to managerially relevant knowledge of NWFPs be provided. Local communities should be encouraged to be actively associated with forest resource management, including wood harvest scheduling.
· NWFPs should be considered in a positive and balanced manner in the planning and operational management of tropical forests in relation to wood production. They should not be an "add-on" topic that is introduced as an afterthought in management planning.
· NWFPs should be defined in specific inventories in order that reliable information is available for short- and long-term planning. One aim will be to provide continuing access to NWFPs by communities having a traditional dependence upon them.
· Ethnobotanical references on a region where wood harvesting is taking place or is planned should be consulted to supplement information on traditional uses of plants that might have been gained through consultation with local communities. Literature searches can provide ideas on plant products as well as on traditional plant management practices.
· Where it is relevant to do so, harvest planning for wood production should be dispersed so that adjacent or nearby compartments are at different stages of recovery following harvesting and mature and near mature compartments are located close to each other. By minimising forest fragmentation greater species diversity is likely to be maintained and the risk of loss of NWFP species is minimized. The following guidelines are suggested:
- Management planning should aim to conserve NWFP species where significant plants occur. Incentives and disincentives can be offered to harvesting crews to encourage a positive response to this. Road and skid trail planning should include arrangements that do not disrupt and perhaps will facilitate harvesting and transport of NWFPs.
- The method and scale of wood harvesting should accommodate any existing NWFP harvesting and trade patterns of local communities if well developed and where disruption that might be caused by logging would become a source of conflict.
- Where it is realistic and practicable, a diversity of non-wood forest products should be extracted. This approach can lead to seasonally complementary harvests and to less vulnerability to fluctuations in market demand for a particular NWFP.
- Traditional systems of NWFP management and harvesting should be used, or adapted, to the needs of wood harvesting programmes.
- Local communities should be invited and encouraged to work with forest managers on pre- and post-harvest assessments to ensure that NWFP species are properly considered.
· The choice of a silvicultural system should consider the impacts it might have on the sustainable production of NWFPs. It should not change the ecological structure to the extent that significant NWFP species are endangered or lost.
· The ecological sustainability of all NWFPs should be assessed, as far as practicable, based on the plant part that is of interest, the forest composition, the type and intensity of harvesting and the particular species or type of NWFP that is being harvested. Changes in NWFP development should be monitored using PSPs.
2.5 Further reading
Chambers, R. 1990. Rapid and Participatory Rural Appraisal: Past, Present and Future. Paper for a Seminar at University of Chiang Mai, Thailand.
Chambers, R. 1992. Rural Appraisal: Rapid, Relaxed and Participatory. Institute for Development Studies Discussion Paper No. 311, University of Sussex, Sussex.
Currie, R. M. 1980. Work Study. (4th Edition). Pitman for British Institute of Management, London.
FAO. 1979. Economic Analysis of Forestry Projects. Forestry Paper No. 17, Rome.
FAO. 1982. Environmental Impact of Forestry. Conservation Guide No. 7, Rome.
FAO. 1983. Forest Revenue Systems in Developing Countries. Forestry Paper No. 43, Rome.
FAO. 1987. Guidelines for Economic Appraisal of Watershed Management Projects. Conservation Guide No. 16, Rome.
FAO. 1988. Small Scale Harvesting Operations of Wood and Non-Wood Forest Products Involving Rural People. Forestry Paper No. 87, Rome.
FAO. Watershed Management Field Manuals. Conservation Guides, Rome.
· Vegetative Measures and Agricultural Projects, No. 13/1 (1985),
· Gully Control, No. 13/2 (1986),
· Slope Treatment Measures and Practices, No. 13/3 (1988),
· Landslide Prevention Measures, No. 13/4 (1988),
· Road Design and Construction in Sensitive Watersheds, No. 13/5 (1989),
· Watershed Survey and Planning, No. 13/6 (1990).
FAO. 1992. Cost Control in Forest Harvesting and Road Construction. Forestry Paper No. 99, Rome.
FAO. 1994. Tree and Land Tenure: Rapid Appraisal Tools. Community Forestry Field Manual No. 4, Rome.
FAO/DANCED. 1996. Training Manual for Environmental Assessment in Forestry. Field Doc. 8/1996. Bangkok.
FAO. 1997. Aménagement des Forêts Naturelles des Zones Tropicales séches. FAO/Sveriges Lantbruksuniversitet (SLU)/CIRAD/SIDA; Cahier. Conservation Guide No. 32. Rome.
Fisher, R. J. 1995. Collaborative Management of Forests for Conservation and Development. Issues in Forest Conservation, IUCN-The World Conservation Union, Gland.
Gittinger, J. P. 1972. Economic Analysis of Agricultural Projects. John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore and London.
Gray, John A. 1997. Forest Revenue and Pricing Policies for Sustainable Forestry. Paper to 11th World Forestry Congress, Antalya.
Haberle, S. 1990. Grundzuge forstlicher Zeitstudien und ihrer Auswertung (The Principles Of Forestry Time Studies And Their-Evaluation). 1990. Institut fur Waldarbeit, Universitat Gottingen, W-3400 Gottingen.
Hammond, D. 1995. NZIF 1995 Forestry Handbook. The New Zealand Institute of Forestry (Inc), Christchurch.
ILO. 1981. Introduction to Work Study. ILO, Geneva.
Kennedy (cited in Gilpin, A.) 1995. Environmental Impact Assessment. Cambridge University Press.
Kollert, W. Uebelhöt, K. Kleine, M. 1995. Financial Analysis of Natural Forest Management on a Sustained Yield Basis: A Case Study for the Deramakot Forest Reserve in Sabah, Malaysia. Report No. 200, GTZ Malaysian-German Sustainable Forest Management Project.
Laird, Sarah 1995. The Natural Management of Tropical Forests for Timber and Non-timber Products. O.F.I. Occasional Papers No. 49, Oxford Forestry Institute, University of Oxford.
Leslie, A.J. 1987. A Second Look at the Economics of Natural Management Systems in Tropical Mixed Forests. In Unasylva, Vol. 39 (155), FAO, Rome.
Sayer, J. 1991. Rainforest Buffer Zones: Guidelines for Protected Area Managers. IUCN-The World Conservation Union, Gland.
Stohr, G. W. D. &, S. 1978. Importancia e aplicacao do estudo do trabalho. (The Importance And Application Of Work Studies). Floresta Vol. 9 (1). S. Univ. Federal do Parana, Curitiba, Parana.
Poore, D. & Sayer, J. 1991. The Management of Tropical Moist Forest Lands: Ecological Guidelines. IUCN-The World Conservation Union, Gland.
UNESCO. 1992. Forests and Culture in Asia. International Fund for the Promotion of Culture. Paris and the Regional Unit for Social and Human Sciences in Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok.
Wittering, W. O. (Ed.) 1973. Work Study In Forestry. UK Forestry Commission Bulletin, No. 47. London.
<section>7</section>
3 Guidelines for forest management planning
3.1 The forest management planning process
3.2 Yield prediction
3.3 Determination of the allowable cut
3.4 Yield regulation
3.5 Forest management planning
3.6 Harvest planning
3.7 Further reading
3.1 The forest management planning process
3.1.1 The basic elements of planning
3.1.2 Two time horizons of planning
3.1.3 Legislation for management planning
3.1.4 Balance between production, social and environmental objectives
3.1.5 The participation of all interest groups in planning
3.1.1 The basic elements of planning
Planning is an active process requiring careful thought about what could or should happen in the future and involves the coordination of all relevant activities for the purpose of achieving specified goals and objectives. Planning is an integral component of forest management; is about determining and expressing the goals and objectives which government, rural communities or companies have, and for deciding the targets and steps that should be taken in order to achieve those objectives.
Planning need not be a complicated process but it requires clear objectives which a government or other group aims to achieve. It requires imagination and a willingness to consider all points of view having relevance to a given situation. The planning process should lead to the formation of a balanced outlook from which proposals for effective management can be written. An element of flexibility is desirable and necessary, however, in order to cope with unforeseen events which could affect the achievement of the objectives.
A range of information is used in planning to evaluate the benefits and drawbacks of alternative courses of action, which enables preferred options to be determined, coordinated with other activities, and expressed in writing. Information should be of good quality. Information of questionable quality should either be discarded or, if used, it should be noted that it is of poor quality and one of the activities of the plan should be acquiring better quality information.
3.1.2 Two time horizons of planning
Forest management plans should have a minimum duration, or length, of 10 years. A shorter period than 10 years does not provide the medium-term stability that is needed to guide consistent implementation of sustainable forest management activities. A realistic maximum length is 20 years. The duration is also called the term, or period, of a plan. A management plan should include prescriptions that provide for:
· Review at the mid-point of the plan,
· Review in the final year of the plan,
· The preparation of a new plan upon expiry of the present plan.
Annual plans of operations are written for a one-year period and should be derived from a five-year (or longer) management plan. A Plan of Operations should express specific activities in tabular form for one year only and for a specific locality, such as a felling area. An example of the tabular structure of a plan of operations is shown in Annex 5.
The relationships between elements of medium-term and annual forest management planning cycles are shown in Figure 24. Table 13 describes a tiered structure of long-, medium- and short-term management relationships. A number of commonly used terms in forest management planning and in the implementation of plans are defined in Figure 25.
Figure 24: The Forest Management Cycle
Table 13: The Tiered Forest Management Planning System
Management Level
Time Frame
Key Elements of Forest Management
Strategic Issues
National
> 10 years
Conservation driven forest policies
Sub-national
> 10 years
Forest Sector Development Plans
Operational Issues
Forest Management Unit
10 years
1. Management function - Planning
- Integrated forest resources inventory
- Environmental impact assessment
- Forest zoning by forest functions
- Forest protection
- Integration of customary land rights
- Yield regulation
Compartment
Annual
2. Management Function - Implementation
- Low impact forest resources management
- Yield allocation according to stand maturity
3. Management Function - Control
- Forest resources accounting
- Periodic revision of management plans
Source: adapted from the Malaysian-German Forest Management and Conservation Project
3.1.3 Legislation for management planning
A component of forest legislation that applies to a country or province should be that management plans are to be prepared for State forest land and for forest lands in non-State tenure the conservation of which is in the national or provincial interest or where subsidiaries or incentives are paid to promote forestry development.
The following guidelines indicate the primary requirements that should be included in forests legislation in respect of forest management planning:
· Subject to the rights existing in a forest when a management plan comes into operation, forests legislation should specify that a plan must regulate the management of forest land in conformity with the management objectives for a specified time period.. The maximum number of years for which a management plan can be in operation should be specified. It should not be less than five year nor more than 20 years. Scope for review of a plan during the planning period should be provided.
Figure 25: Commonly Used Terms in Forest Management Planning
Forest Management Plan: A document that translates forest policies into a coordinated programme for a forest management unit and for regulating production, environmental and social activities for a set period of time through the use of prescriptions specifying targets, action and control arrangements.
Forest Management Unit: An area of forest for which an approved. Forest Management Plan is in operation, or any subdivision of it, such as a block (a specified locality) or a felling series.
Felling Series: Specific compartments of a Forest Management Unit that are being managed in a specific way for silvicultural reasons and also have an independently calculated harvest yield.
Plan of Operations: A tabular statement showing the order and extent of forest work to be carried out during one year and is based upon the prescriptions of a Forest Management Plan. The term is synonymous with Annual Work Plan.
Compartment: A permanent, geographically recognisable unit of forest land forming the basis of prescription and permanent record of all forest operations.
Sub-compartment: A sub-division of a compartment, sometimes temporary, where because of particular characteristics an area of forest has a special description and requires separate silvicultural treatment.
Prescription: A concisely written specification in a forest management plan that translates an objective, or a part of one, into an operational activity.
Mean Annual Increment (MAD): The total increment, usually volume, up to a specified age, divided by that age.
Current Annual Increment (CAI): The average increment, usually volume, for a management plan prescription, including where, when and how the yield should be extracted.
Yield Regulation: The determination of the yield and its expression in a management plan prescription, including where, when and how the yield should be extracted.
Working Circle: One or more parts of a working plan area, not necessarily adjoining, having the same objectives, silvicultural system and prescriptions.
Working Plan: A document that regulates wood production, silviculture and tending activities for a specific period of time through the application of prescriptions specifying targets, action and control arrangements. A Working Plan is not synonymous with a Forest Management Plan.
Source: Terminology of Forest Science. Technology, Practice and Products. Society of American Foresters. 1971.
· Each forest management plan should specify:
- the maximum area from which forest produce may be harvested, or the maximum quantity of forest produce which may be harvested, or both, in a given time period,
- the forest protection operations to be carried out,
- the forest development operations to be carried out, including silviculture,
- other matters which are necessary or appropriate in order to implement management objectives effectively. This could include forest inventory, mapping, technical and social surveys, and public consultation.. A management plan to be applied to State or private forest land should be approved by the Ministry responsible for forestry or other specified authority.
3.1.4 Balance between production, social and environmental objectives
Forests provide a wide range of benefits at local and national levels. Log production is usually the main objective and revenue earned for governments and companies is the major driving force in tropical forest harvesting. Revenue earned from log harvesting will usually be the main funding source for long-term sustainable tropical forest management.
Many communities depend heavily upon non-wood forest products for subsistence and as a basis for local trade, for example, canes, medicinal and food plants, gums, resins and wildlife. Tropical forests are an essential source of energy for many communities, directly through burning of wood for cooking and heating and indirectly to protect watersheds as source of water for hydroelectricity generation. They have an important role in protecting physical and biological environments at local and provincial levels. Tropical forests are dwelling places for many millions of people and are increasingly of value for recreation and tourism, notably "eco-tourism". They are important havens for wildlife and are the habitats of many endangered species of plants and animals. It is essential in tropical forest management planning to achieve a balance between the long-term between wood production, social and environmental management objectives.
3.1.5 The participation of all interest groups in planning
The initiative for the formulation of a forest management plan should be taken by the forest owner, such as the state, or by a concession holder on behalf of the owner. Local communities and others having historical rights or privileges in a forest are important stakeholders and must be involved in planning. The likelihood that sustainability will be achieved will be considerably enhanced if local people who live in and around tropical forests have a say in and participate in management planning and are able to share in the benefits of forest use to ensure that their basic needs are met. The steps that can be taken can include:
· Granting secure tenure to existing productive farmland within the forest
· Local participation in management decision-making.
· Guaranteed access to forest products.
· Provision of employment.
· Shared benefits in forest harvesting.
Accommodation of the respective interests of forest management companies and local community groups can be eased with the recognition that companies and indigenous communities are, in most cases, interested in different things - industrial logs by forest management companies on the one hand and small dimension wood and non-wood products by local communities on the other. A positive approach towards adapting the interests of both groups is to include rural communities as partners in forest management and to share the benefits of wood production with them.
3.2 Yield prediction
3.2.1 Types of yield prediction models
The basic steps involved in the construction of a yield prediction model
3.2.2 Examples of yield prediction modelling technology
3.2.1 Types of yield prediction models
A yield prediction model uses the quantitative relationships between measured growth variables to predict yields of forest types, and is a tool that helps to schedule and regulate harvests at sustainable levels. Two basic methods are available for their construction, diameter class (or stand table) projection and cohort modelling. Both depend upon the use of comprehensive growth data to construct and fit a yield prediction equation. Detailed development and application of both methods require specialized assistance that is beyond the scope of these Guidelines but descriptions of each are included to illustrate the basic steps involved in their construction.
The basic steps involved in the construction of a yield prediction model
Diameter Class Growth Projection
The manual method of diameter class growth projection is the oldest method, first used in Myanmar in 1856, and used elsewhere for simulating the growth of tropical forests. A tree population/diameter class distribution is compiled using PSP summary data. DBH classes are in 5 or 10 cm intervals. Stratification of the tree population can be made on the basis of species groups. Average diameter growth and average tree mortality rates are determined from periodic measurements of PSP, for each diameter class. Growth is projected for a five-year period for each diameter class per hectare by applying growth and mortality rates.
Construction of a Growth and Wood Yield Prediction Model
The process of fitting a yield prediction model from forest data may be by fitting the field data to a pre-determined regression, for example, a linear regression, or manually by plotting the data on graph paper; equations can then be developed from the hand-drawn curves. The use of personal computers allows statistical procedures to be applied with greater precision and more quickly than manual methods.
Testing of a Yield Prediction Model for its Validity
A wood yield prediction model must be tested to determine its validity and precision. The precision of a yield model will depend on how well the PSP represent the forest, the number and period of the remeasurements, on covariances of the predictor variables and on coefficients used in the model.
Model testing is best done using a second set of forest data which was not used during the preparation of the yield model. The model is used to predict the behaviour of the forest from where the test data were collected and the results are compared with the actual observations. It is often necessary to repeat this stage several times. Adjustments to the model are made as a result of anomalies, or irregularities, that show up at each stage of testing.
Application of the Yield Model to the Required End-Use
A yield model may be applied in one of three ways:
· To forecast timber out-turn through a simple table or graph or a set of both. These can be used by forest planners directly or tables can be entered into a computer for updating of inventory data.
· To test forest management options as a computer or calculator programme which produces a table or graph of growth and yield for a particular set of treatments.
· To provide information on timber outputs for wider aspects of forest planning
Readers will find references at the end of this chapter for detailed guidance on the development of yield prediction models.
3.2.2 Examples of yield prediction modelling technology
A Simple Diameter Class Growth Projection Model
Data Assembly:
Assemble the relevant tree population and size data collected from a CFI for a whole forest management unit, or a part of it (a felling series), for which a yield determination is proposed.
Stand Table Preparation:
Using PSP summary data, compile a tree population/diameter class distribution. DBH classes are typically in 5 cm intervals, e.g. 30-35 cm. Stratification of the tree population into smaller groupings can be made, based on species groups, e.g. "present commercial", "potentially commercial" and "presently non-commercial" species, and also on crown illumination classes.
Growth and Mortality Rates:
Determine average diameter growth and average tree mortality rates from PSP data, for each diameter class.
Diameter Class Projection:
Growth is projected for a five year period for each diameter class, on a per hectare basis, by applying growth and mortality rates. An adjustment is made to reflect the actual rather than the step-wise diameter class distribution of a stand because there are fewer trees in the upper part of a diameter class than in the lower part. In its simplest form, diameter class growth for each separate diameter class can be projected by applying the following formula:
where:
N = the number of trees growing from one diameter class to the next,
S = number of live trees in each diameter class,
I = average diameter increment for the class (cm),
q = an adjustment factor for each specific forest type and groups of diameter classes that is used to reflect the actual diameter class distribution.
The calculations can be carried out using standard spreadsheet software on a personal computer.
DIPSIM (Dipterocarp Forest Growth Simulation Model): an Empirical Individual-tree Growth Simulation Model
DIPSIM is an empirical individual-tree growth simulation model that has been developed in Sabah, Malaysia, as a management planning tool for natural Dipterocarp forests specifically for the purpose of:
· predicting annual growth in terms of stocking, volume and basal area,
· predicting changes in stand characteristics for periods of up to 60 years,
· providing decision-support in yield regulation through the simulation of different harvesting prescriptions.
Main Features of the DIPSIM Modelling Process
Diameter Growth:
Developing a multiple regression that relates basal area increment of individual trees to tree basal area, site quality, stand basal area and overtopping basal area. Increment equations have been developed for groups of species having similar growth patterns; 20 growth groups in all. Diameter increment patterns are developed for each species group.
Mortality:
Developing a model that reflects regular and catastrophic mortality and predicts the probability of mortality from tree size and stand competition.
Recruitment:
The model predicts recruitment rates for species in seven timber groups into the lowest (10 cm) stem diameter class.
Harvesting:
Three steps are included in the harvesting component;
· stocking assessment - the model compares the actual stocking of a stand against pre-defined post-harvest minimum stocking standards. In Sabah, a post-harvest minimum stocking of at least 8-10 trees/ha _ 60 cm dbh after 40 - 60 years.
· tree selection and removal - predetermined minimum and maximum diameter cutting limits of 60 cm and 120 cm respectively are specified in the model.
· harvesting damage - the user can specify in the model the percentage of trees expected to be destroyed in two size classes, 10-39 cm and_ 40 cm. The model randomly selects trees, removes them from the simulation database and places them into a mortality account database.
Model Operation:
The PC-based DIPSIM is programmed in relational database software and the model structure consists of three main modules, database preparation, simulation and output. These are shown in Figure 26. The output module summarizes the simulation output in the following forms:
. stand and stock tables,
. volume increment tables,
. harvesting tables, comprising a harvest composition table and an annual harvest record table.
Operation of this system is explained in a manual: DIPSIM: an Empirical Individual-tree Growth Simulation Model, Ong, R. & Kleine, M. 1995. Research Paper No. 2, FRC, Forest Department, Sabah, Malaysia.
Figure 26: The DIPSIM programme structure
Although practical and easy to understand, this and other diameter class projection methods do not effectively take changes in stand density or the consequences of spatial distribution (of diameter classes) of tropical forests into account. They are best used for preliminary yield analysis. For more accurate work the cohort modelling approach should be used.
Cohort Modelling
The term "cohort model" refers to a group of trees of the same species group and size class which is the basic information unit used for cohort growth modelling.
· CAFOGROM Model: A new and powerful tool for growth modelling research workers is the CAFOGROM model, developed at the Centro do Pesquisa Agropecuaria da Amazonia Oriental, in Brazil. It is a cohort model that is directed towards the analysis of PSP data from mixed tropical forests to produce growth and yield models. Although the CAFOGROM model is complex and does not provide, in itself, a standard set of computer programmes for the analysis of PSP data, the method is described in order that this new approach can become more widely known and to encourage local research on growth modelling. The four development stages of the CAFOGROM model are explained in Figure 27.
Figure 27: Main Features of the CAFOGROM Modelling Process
Data Entry, Editing and Preliminary Processing:
Topics: Design of a PSP database, data checking, calculation of basic variables, such as increment, derivation of tree competition indices, formatting and condensing data for statistical analysis. Application: Establishment of a PSP data processing system, including all preliminary calculations for functional or transition matrix development.
Diameter Class Projection:
Topics: Formation of a stand table as a description of forest structure, mathematical and classical stand projection methods by diameter classes, matrix methods, pragmatic adaptations and case study for a complete model. Application: Description of analysis methods leading to either a spreadsheet stand projection model, or transition matrix model. Suitable for simple, highly aggregated models for broad forest-sector planning or feasibility studies.
Cohort Models for Forest Growth:
Topics: Analysis of growth functions for diameter increment, mortality and recruitment. Modelling harvesting operations and felling damage.
Application: Development of a dynamic simulation model for tropical mixed forests based on the cohorts/growth function approach. Suitable where good PSP data for many plots are available.
Growth Model Validation and Application:
Topics: Methods of validating functions by residual analysis. Use of growth models for forest planning, compatibility of inventory data, management information systems and the role of a growth model in them.
Application: Validation and application of a growth model as a component of a forest management system for use in the production of cutting plans in conjunction with inventory data.
Readers are referred to a manual and demonstration computer software on the technology in Growth Modelling for Mixed Tropical Forests, by Dr. D. Alder, 1995, Tropical Forestry Paper No. 30, Oxford Forestry Institute, University of Oxford.
· SIRENA Model: In early 1996 a model called SIRENA I was developed for applied forest management in Costa Rica, Central America. It is an operational growth modelling tool, conceptually similar to CAFOGROM, but based on the analysis of local PSPs. SIRENA I is being used in the northern part of Costa Rica by an NGO CODEFORSA (Comisión de Desarrollo Forestal de San Carlos/Commission for Forest Development in San Carlos) for making management plans for private forest owners in that region of the country. SIRENA is based on "Excel" and "Visual Basic for Applications" software. SIRENA II is a revised version of SIRENA I based on operational experience with SIRENA I which is a flexible operational tool where a user may specify treatments and outputs. It is also used in Costa Rica.
· Queensland Model: The Queensland model, used until harvesting was discontinued for environmental conservation reasons in 1988, was developed to predict the growth of commercially loggable harvests in mixed species, uneven-aged rainforests in North Queensland, Australia. More than 100 commercial species and several hundred others are aggregated into about 20 species groups based on growth habit, volume relations and commercial criteria. Trees are grouped into cohorts, according to species group and tree size, which form the basis for simulation. Equations have been developed to predict increment, mortality and recruitment. The model has been used for determining wood harvests from north Queensland forests and provide an objective basis for investigating the effects of rain forest management strategies. The approach is expected to be applicable to other natural tropical forests.
3.3 Determination of the allowable cut
3.3.1 Classical methods for determination of the allowable cut
3.3.2 Determination of the AAC where regrowth and previously harvested forest occurs
3.3.1 Classical methods for determination of the allowable cut
Yield regulation, irrespective of the silvicultural system being applied, provides a basis for deriving a log harvest which is in balance with forest increment and for controlling the output to ensure that the cut is neither exceeded nor undercut. In many tropical forests where a knowledge of the uncut and regrowth forest resources is incomplete, where there is little or no information of forest increment and where forest management is being introduced for the first time, the allowable cut should be derived using one of the classical empirical procedures.
There is no alternative in these situations but to use an empirical approach. Four allowable cut determination procedures are explained to enable the reader to appreciate and understand the main features of each. In practice, the choice and use of each method depends upon the silvicultural system being applied, either polycyclic or monocyclic, in a specific forest situation. The methods are:
· A combination of area and the felling cycle.
· A combination of area, volume and the felling cycle.
· A combination of volume and forest increment.
· A consideration of volume only.
Each of these methods provides only a general guideline for deriving an allowable cut. Notwithstanding this qualification, a application of one of the methods having relevance to the technical characteristics of a forest management unit and the management objectives will be a positive contribution to sustainable forest management where at present no other basis for this exists. Selected technical reports listed at the end of the chapter explain each method and how they are applied in practice.
New computer-based methods of yield determination are currently being developed and have the potential for achieving much greater precision than do older methods. Their use depends upon having good quality information of tree diameter class distributions, tree volumes, growth, recruitment and tree mortality derived from CFI. The new procedures enable a user to calculate on a personal computer the increment of tree diameters and basal area over time, make allowances for tree recruitment and mortality, to simulate harvesting and logging damage and thus project forest growth and yield. Specialist technical assistance is required in order that these new methods are able to be applied in a specific forest situation.
Figure 28: Some Common Terms Used in Yield Determination and Harvest Planning
Allowable Cut, Prescribed Cut, Prescribed Yield and Permissible Yield: A dearly expressed specification of the average quantity (of wood, bamboo or cane), usually in an approved management plan, that may b e harvested from a forest management unit, annually or periodically over a five- or ten-year period.
Annual Allowable Cut (AAC): The Allowable Cut expressed on an annual- basis.
Annual Cutting Area (ACA): The area of productive forest which may be cut in one year. The ACA is synonymous with Felling Area, Cutting Area and Annual Coupe.
Annual Yield and Periodic Yield: The volume or number of stems that can be removed in a specific area in one year, or during a specified period, respectively.
Felling Cycle: The planned period, in years, within which all parts of a forest zoned for wood production and being managed under a selection silvicultural system should be selectively cut for logs. The term is synonymous with Cutting Cycle.
Rotation: The planned number of years between the establishment of a crop (by planting or regeneration) and final felling. The term is applied where forest is managed under a monocylic silvicultural system.
Sustainable Yield: The equilibrium level of production from the growth rate of trees comprising a forest, annually or periodically, in perpetuity. It means the continuous production with the aim of achieving an approximate balance between net growth of a forest and harvest.
Yield Determination: The calculation, by volume or by area (or a combination of both), of the amount of forest produce that may be harvested annually, or periodically, from a specific area of forest over a stated period, in accordance with the objects of management.
Yield Planning: The allocation over time of land units within a productive forest for harvesting in a manner calculated to yield sustainable amounts of logs and other products, while ensuring the maintenance and regeneration of the forest's productive capacity which may be required to support that production.
Source: Terminology of Forest Science. Technology and Products: Society of American Foresters. 1971.
· A Combination of Area and the Felling Cycle
Where the polycyclic silvicultural system is being applied in an uneven aged forest, the Annual Cutting Area (ACA) can be derived by dividing the area of the net productive forest into equal parts depending upon the length, in years, of the felling cycle. The most productive area is determined by zoning, described in Part II, section 1.1.3, by deducting the area of land which is "unproductive", from a wood production point of view, from the total area of a forest management unit. This method can also be applied in forest types being managed under monocyclic silviculture, such as in mangroves or bamboo. In equation form, the area control method is expressed as follows:
where:
ACA = the ACA; the maximum area of forest which may be cut each year,
TA = the total area of a forest management unit,
UA = the "unproductive" forest area,
n = the length of the felling cycle, in years.
The Annual Cutting Area method can only provide a general, though rapidly determined, indication of allowable cut. Because it is the simplest and least precise method it should not be applied without clear specification of species, tree diameter sizes and numbers of trees per ha which may be harvested.
· A Combination of Area, Volume and the Felling Cycle
In its simplest form, the Annual Allowable Cut (AAC) can be derived by combining the maximum felling area which may be cut each year with the volume of wood in the felling area that has been determined from a pre-harvest inventory, described in Part II, section 1.3.5. The volume figure used can be revised as more volume information becomes available from later inventories. The nominated stem diameter is a variable figure and dependent mainly on the type of forest being managed. It can be as low as 30 cm in some forest types and more than 60 cm in others. This method is expressed as follows:
where:
V = the average volume per ha of commercial species above a specified stem diameter that is estimated from the first forest inventory.
A = the area of a whole forest, or of a felling series.
N = the length of the felling cycle, in years.
This approach is used in Dipterocarp dominant hill forest concessions in Indonesia where n, the felling cycle, is 35 years. It is a relatively simple and easily understood approach and allows yields to be determined easily. In practice, maximum and minimum values are determined and form the basis of the AAC for each concession. The method does not reflect the losses in volume which always occur during logging, caused by stem breakage, nor does it account for volume losses through stem decay. It also disregards increment of existing or potential timber trees. The AAC can be reduced by an "exploitation factor" and a "safety" factor (0.7 and 0.8 respectively in Indonesia) which provides some allowance for losses at harvesting and also for damage to a residual stand during logging.
A modification of this procedure is applied in the Dipterocarp forests in the Philippines. The procedure recognises the variability in size and distribution of large trees in different forest types and it considers an estimate of the volume which can be cut, derived from a yield table. It is explained in Annex 3.
· A Combination of Forest Volume and Forest Increment
In uneven-aged forests where selection cutting is proposed or is underway and where comprehensive forest inventory data and a confident knowledge of current annual increment are available, the Gehrhardt Method provides a basis for determination of the allowable cut. It is expressed as follows:
where:
If = the Current Annual Increment for the forest,
In = the CAI for a theoretically normal forest,
Vf = the total volume for the forest determined by inventory,
Vn = the total forest volume for a theoretically normal forest,
AP = a planned adjustment period for the forest to reach normality.
A drawback in the use of the Gehrhardt Method is the difficulty of deriving a theoretically normal forest and the uncertainty of knowing whether it will be possible to plan cutting over a sufficiently long period to achieve a normal distribution of area classes.
An alternative approach which also depends upon having a reliable knowledge of increment but avoids the need to derive a theoretical normal forest structure, is the Cotta Method. It enables the cut to be determined for a forest being managed under an irregular shelterwood silvicultural system and is explained in Annex 3.
· Yield Determination Based on Volume Only
Where a forest management unit is being managed under a monocyclic silvicultural system and there is currently no knowledge of increment, the most simple method for yield determination is to divide twice the volume of the growing stock by the rotation or cutting cycle. Known as the Von Mantel Method, it does not consider increment, forest structure or variability in growth and volume at all and thus can only provide a very general indication of forest yield. It does however have the benefit of being simple, its use requires only a small amount of data and the yield determination tends to be conservative. In equation form the Von Mantel Method is expressed as follows:
where,
R = the rotation (cutting cycle) for the major tree species comprising the growing stock.
V = the average volume of commercial species above a specified stem diameter that is estimated from the first forest inventory.
3.3.2 Determination of the AAC where regrowth and previously harvested forest occurs
For increasingly large areas of tropical forests the AAC needs to be determined where regrowth and previously harvested forest occur and where there are declining areas of primary forests. The empirical methods described in the previous section are less appropriate is these situations. A typical mixed forest resource structure where an alternative approach for determination of the AAC is required is as follows:
· Some primary forest, yet to be harvested;
· Some previously worked forest where a range of harvesting densities, from light to heavy, have been applied over the past 10 to 30 years, and regrowth has led to a new forest structure;
· Some land that has been cleared of forest through shifting cultivation or wildfires and where a pioneer forest has developed.
A helpful approach for determination of the AAC where a mixed forest structure occurs is as follows:
· Undertake forest zoning to determine the net productive area, being careful to exclude all forest land where social and environmental constraints will preclude any wood production at all.
· Update the forest resources statement for the net productive area of primary and secondary forests by undertaking new inventory.
· Calculate the AAC for regrowth forests that have been harvested previously, and for pioneer forests if applicable, plus the AAC for the remaining primary forest resources which can be cut over a period of "X" years.
· Define a "target growing stock" of commercially harvestable volume for the forest management unit. This is a value judgement based on ecological as well as commercial criteria.
· Using a growth simulation system, such as SIRENA or DIPSIM, derive a cutting cycle, in years, that will be required in order to reach the target growing stock. The cutting cycle will vary, depending upon species and their distribution, the damage pattern, the distribution of wood resources and site productivity. Several different harvesting prescriptions will need to be simulated in order to arrive at a practical and commercially realistic cutting cycle.
· Again using a growth simulation system, determine the adjustment period that will be required in order to achieve the target growing stock for the net productive area of forest.
3.4 Yield regulation
3.4.1 Guidelines for yield regulation planning
3.4.2 Yield control
3.4.1 Guidelines for yield regulation planning
Yield regulation, or allocation, involves making decisions that lead to clear specifications of where and under what conditions a harvest may be cut using AAC and technical information about a forest. It is a critically important part of sustainable tropical forest management. Practical guidelines for yield regulation planning for each compartment that is included in an annual cutting plan are:
· Technical information;
- the average volumes of different species,
- diameter class distribution and the minimum diameter that may be cut,
- distribution of trees on the ground in relation to topography and practical road access,
- site types and the characteristics of the silvicultural system, or systems, specified in a management plan that are being applied in the forest,
- technical information for unlogged, previously logged and secondary forests on each compartment should be considered separately because of differences in tree species, stem diameters and tree distribution that almost always occur. Yield allocation will inevitably be different for each of these classes of forest.
· Clearly define on maps and on the ground those areas of forest which are to be excluded, through zoning, from logging for environmental or social reasons. Harvest planning maps can either be manually drawn or GIS generated.
· It is desirable that yield allocation plans be prepared two and preferably three years in advance of logging to enable roadline logging and road construction to take place, for roads to settle before use and, where necessary, for climber cutting to be completed.
· Wood harvested from roadlines should be allocated as a part of the annual allocation for the year; it should not be an additional allocation of yield.
3.4.2 Yield control
Annual Control of Yield
On a year to year basis it is essential that frequent checks be made by a forest manager to ensure that the AAC and other details of cutting prescriptions are followed by logging crews. A programme of continuous log measurement, or scaling, provides an annual and a compartment-by-compartment basis for yield control. This is an essential practical aspect of sustainable tropical forest management and is a part of operational monitoring.
It is usually difficult to extract equal volumes of wood or other produce every year because of the variability within a forest and physical difficulties caused by wet weather and short term changes in market demand and prices. Some variation, perhaps as much as 15 per cent above and below a prescribed volume, in the annual rate of harvest can be expected and needs to be planned for. Three approaches for managing this situation are:
· Subtract an "overcut" from the prescribed harvest level for the following one (or two) years.
· Add all or part of an "undercut" to the prescribed harvest level for the following year.
· Cancel an "undercut" and add this volume to the total forest growing stock for the next five years and recalculate the AAC.
Long Term Control of Yield
Year-by-year indications of wood harvests and comparisons with the AAC does not enable the question of whether a forest is being managed sustainably to be properly answered. In order to monitor the yield over a longer term, of at least 15 years, the MAI for the whole of the forest management unit should be derived for this period and should be balanced against the total harvest for the same period.
Periodic and regular assessment of a forest is the most reliable method for determination of increment. Accurate mapping and CFI are able to provide reliable data on forest resources at the beginning and end of a planning period for which the MAI is to be derived. The total volume of removals (including logging waste losses) are derived from accurate records of volumes cut each year, supplemented with an estimate of waste determined through logging waste studies. In equation form the relationship is:
where:
MAI = mean annual increment in m^3/year for a forest management unit during a planning period of not less than 15 years in length.
Vt & V (t+n) = total standing forest volume in m^3 determined from CFI at the beginning (Vt) and at the end (V (t+n)) respectively of the planning period.
Vp = total wood volume in m^3 harvested during the planning period, including a logging waste estimate for the period.
n = length of the planning period, in years.
Sustained yield management of wood (or rattan, bamboo or other products) would, in technical terms, be considered to be achieved if the total harvest does not exceed the accumulated annual increment during a specified planning period. Conversely, sustainable harvesting would not be achieved if the total cut during a planning period does exceed the accumulated annual increment. These statements are summarized in Figure 29. Case Study 6 describes studies on the sustainability of yields in Queensland, Australia.
Figure 29: Sustainable Forest Management Criteria
Sustainable Forest Management is achieved if the accumulated mean annual increment for uneven-aged forest having a balanced diameter class distribution is equal to or marginally greater than the total harvest during a planning period of not less than] 5 years. In the case of heavily exploited uneven-aged forest where the diameter class distribution is not balanced the accumulated MAI should always be less than the total harvest.
Sustainable Forest Management is not achieved if the total harvest exceeds the accumulated mean annual increment during a planning period of not less than 15 years.
Case Study 6: Sustainability of Yields in Australia
Commercial timber harvesting commenced in the tropical rain forests of Queensland in 1873 and ceased in 1988 following their inclusion for conservation reasons on the World Heritage List. During the 1950 to 1985 period, eight estimates of the Sustainable yield varied by up to ten times. Discrepancies were due to different assumptions regarding management and to errors in estimating net productive areas and growth rates. Between 1950 and 1985 the allowable cut (130,000 -207,000 m^3/year) exceeded sustained yield estimates (60,000 - 180,000 m^3/year), but the actual harvest (90,000 - 205,000 m^3/year) remained less than the allowable cut. The allowable cut was reduced to a Sustainable level in 1986, and commercial logging ceased in 1988. It is not certain that the harvest during the 1980s was Sustainable, but several indicators suggest that it probably was. Lessons for other tropical wood producers are that area, growth and yield determination must be careful, management
objectives and implementation must be clear and regular monitoring is essential.
An analysis of data from 212 PSPs in the tropical forests of Queensland, Australia, has provided no evidence of any decrease in rainforest productivity after three cycles of carefully implemented selection logging. Relative productivity was determined as the difference between observed diameter increments and increments predicted from a diameter increment function which incorporated tree size, stand density and site quality.
3.5 Forest management planning
3.5.1 Management structure and format
3.5.2 Guidelines for forest management planning
3.5.1 Management structure and format
A Four-Part Forest Management Plan Structure
To be effective a forest management plan should comprise basic information having direct relevance to the management of a forest, a long-term management goal, and specific prescriptions to achieve each of the objectives. The management plan structure should be flexible depending upon the characteristics of the forest for which long-term management is being planned. A logical, easily assembled and practical plan structure has four main parts, shown in Figure 30.
Figure 30: A Four-Part Forest Management Plan Structure
Basic Information:
Basic geographic, ecological, resources, social, industry and environmental information having direct relevance to issues concerning future forest management. It is helpful to identify the managerial implications of specific features of each feature of basic information that are presented.
Management Goal and Specific Objectives:
One goal and several specific objectives, preferably not more than five, with the primary objective being related to wood production.
Management Proposals:
Prescriptions should be directly related to objectives and include forest protection arrangements, the yield and how it will be controlled, silviculture, monitoring and reporting arrangements.
Records of Forest History:
Information on all forest operations, recorded in compartment history records and measured annually.
A Model Forest Management Plan Format
The subject matter of a plan is likely to vary from one locality to another, depending upon the characteristics of the land and forest being considered as well as upon objectives, opportunities and risks. There is however a basic list of contents which should be considered where plans are to be assembled for tropical forests that are being managed for the production of wood. The model format which follows provides an effective framework for drafting a management plan for tropical forests.
Part I Basic Information
* Authority, Period of Operation and Policies
- Name of Management Plan
- Legal (or controlling) Authority
- Period of Operation (Term)
- Local or National Policy Statement
* Location, Area and Legal Description of Forest Lands
- Location and Area
- Legal Description
* Physical Resources
- Climate
· Rainfall, Humidity and Winds (only if relevant)
· Temperature and Sunshine
- Hydrology
- Managerial Implications of Climate and Hydrology
* Geology
- Topography
- Rock Types and Erosion (only if relevant)
- Managerial Implications of Geology
* Soils and Land Use
- Soil Types
- Land Uses
- Land Use Capability Classification (only if relevant)
- Managerial Implications of Soil Types and Land Use Capability Classifications
* Forest Resources
- Vegetation Types
· Natural Forest Types and Distribution
· Ecological Succession and Ecological Changes in Natural Forests. Biological Diversity Amongst Plants
· Ecological Problems Concerning Vegetation
- Summary of Forest Type and Land Use Classes
- Managerial Implications of Forest Ecology Issues
- Summary of Forest Resources Data (tables).
· General Forest Inventory Data.
· Species, Volume and Tree Size Data.
· General Non-wood Forest Resources.
· Overall Forest Resources Summary
- Silvicultural System (s) - type (s), strengths and limitations
- Forest Growth and Yield Data (tables)
- Assessment of the Potential for Sustainable Wood Production
* Log Harvesting and Transport Issues
- Strategic Harvest Plan
- Tactical Harvest Planning
- Logging Methods and Machinery, including potential for minimising environmental impacts of wood extraction
- Log Transport Methods (roads, railways, barging, etc)
- Managerial Implications of Log Harvesting and Transport.
* Forest Industry Issues
- Summary of Existing Forest Industry
- Wood Industry Development Potential (preferred and under-utilized species, resources, log sizes)
* Social Issues Involving Natural Forests
- Characteristics of Community Groups: ethnic origin (s), populations, distribution and size of villages, etc)
- Social Dependency Patterns on the Natural Forests
- Summary of Social Conflicts, or Potential Conflicts with Forests
- Managerial Implications of Social Issues with Forests.
* Wildlife Resources
- The Forest "Landscape" as Habitat for Wildlife
- Significant Wildlife Resources
- Biological Diversity Amongst Animals
- Managerial Implications of Wildlife Relationships with Natural Forests
* Environmental Issues
- Summarise Environmental Issues Influenced by Wood Production Management, for example, Soil and Water Conservation, Biodiversity and Wildlife Conservation, Eco-tourism
* Forest Protection and Security
- Summary of the Issues and Data Concerning Protection of a Forest Management Unit from Fire, Trespass, Shifting Cultivation and other potential threats
- Managerial Implications of Forest Protection and Security Issues
Part II Goal and Objectives
* Goal
* Objectives
- Forest Protection
- Wood Production
- Non- Wood Production
- Other Objectives, such as social development, reforestation, afforestation, research, environmental conservation and business development.
Part III Management Prescriptions
Prescriptions should be explicit, directly related to objectives expressed in a plan and be sufficiently comprehensive to ensure that objectives are able to be implemented without difficulty.
* A plan having sustainable production of wood as the primary objective should, as a minimum, include prescriptions on the following topics:
· Forest and land use zoning, inc. demarcation and mapping of protection forest on steep slopes, natural regeneration, water sources, fragile soils and swamps, endangered species, etc.
· Pre-harvest wood inventory for annual yield planning.
· Continuous forest inventory for determination of forest growth and derivation of yields.
· Specification of a periodic (5 year), or annual cut.
· Tactical harvest planning, inc. wood harvesting and log transport arrangements.
· Forest protection and security arrangements.
· Diagnostic sampling
· Specification of an appropriate silvicultural system (s).
· Specification of silvicultural operations.
· Specification of environmental prescriptions on issues influenced by production management.
· Accountability prescriptions to ensure that progress in plan implementation can be regularly and reliably monitored and subsequently reported.
· Specification of the action that should be taken, before a plan terminates for its review and for preparation of a new plan.
Part IV Annexes
* Maps, including remote sensing imagery.
* Technical details of topics expressed in Part I.
Records
* Comprehensive compartment records of forest operations. Where practicable, records should be made using a computer database system and should include GIS.
3.5.2 Guidelines for forest management planning
Forest Management Plan Formulation
Guidelines for formulating and drafting a management plan are:
· A plan should be prepared in conformity with a country's forest policy, legislation and regulations.
· The planning process must overcome past managerial problems and should provide workable, positive and affordable solutions to these problems.
· Nomination by a government forestry office, a concession holding company or other agency having management responsibility that one person, or a group of people, will be responsible for plan preparation. It should be the primary task of that person, or planning group, and should not be undertaken in conjunction with other duties.
· Once a start is made on plan preparation every effort should be made to continue the process until it is completed.
· Summarise managerially significant resources information. Only information that is directly relevant to implementation of management objectives should be included. Be conservative when resources information is being assembled for the first time and where it is known that information is incomplete, or its quality is uncertain. In practice, conservative resources statements tend to be closer to future reality than do optimistic estimates. Technical details should be placed in an appendix, not in the text of a plan.
· Assemble base maps, aerial photographs and satellite imagery and use these to compile forest maps needed to provide graphical support for management requirements. Subdivide the forest management unit into permanently defined compartments.
· The planning team must visit and acquire a good visual knowledge of all parts of a forest, villages and dependent industries.
· Summarise the managerial implications of specific features of basic information that has been presented in each section of Part I of a plan, for example, climate, topography and social issues. The summary should be a succinct statement of the decisive issues that are expected to influence the management of a forest. Assessments of the managerial implications of each specific feature of basic information become the link between the objectives and prescriptions in a plan.
· A plan should be no longer than is needed to present relevant information - the goal, preferably no more than five objectives and the supporting prescriptions that are related to those objectives.
· One or more people can contribute towards drafting different chapters of a plan but only one person should have responsibility for coordination and final assembly.
· Avoid identifying and specifying too many priorities for action. There should only be one priority on any one subject.
· Plans must be affordable and should be able to support the implementation of realistic budgets; it is unwise to prescribe action if it is unlikely that implementation can be funded.
· Plans must include provision for review at pre-determined intervals.
· Plans incorporate implementation of departmental technical instructions, guidelines and standards.
· Monitoring and reporting requirements should be expressed in the form of prescriptions. A plan should not be approved without having monitoring and reporting requirements included.
· Frequent dialogue with all people having an interest in the formulation of a plan and in its implementation is to be encouraged.
· A plan should have a readable "user friendly" style and must be easily understood by all who will use it in practice.
Formulating Management Plan Prescriptions
The following guidelines for formulating management plan prescriptions are suggested:
· Prescriptions should be concisely written, specific to the issue being addressed and should be related to specific management objectives. They should not be vague or ambiguous.
· Prescriptions should not be too long or too technical. Lengthy or excessively technical prescriptions are likely to be misunderstood or simply ignored. Only include material that is directly relevant to support the implementation of forest management objectives.
· Prescriptions must be measurable, or capable of being monitored easily, so that progress can periodically be reported.
· Although a need for precisely written prescriptions should be recognised, it also needs to be acknowledged that there may be occasions where a manager should be allowed some discretion in the implementation of a prescription if local conditions or common sense indicate that a degree of flexibility is desirable. Losses of forest through fire, additions or losses of forest area, changes in the definition of forest resources or changes in community interests in a forest are cases of unforeseen events which may influence the progress of the management plan.
Examples of text for management plan prescriptions are shown in Annex 5.
Management Plan Approval
The basic requirements for gaining approval of a forest management plan are as follows:
· When completed, an executive summary of a management plan should be assembled setting out the primary features of it, including the goal, objectives, the allowable cut and its location, operational features of the silvicultural system, community participation and forest protection arrangements.
· The principal features of the plan should be explained and discussed with senior staff in an oral presentation.
· The plan should be passed to the office of the approving officer with the support of a covering letter.
· Plans prepared for forests on private land should be approved by the government forestry authority to ensure that plan quality is acceptable, to strengthen the basis of the national forest policy and to ensure that the rights of third parties are protected.
3.6 Harvest planning
3.6.1 Recommended practices for strategic harvest planning
3.6.2 Recommended practices for tactical harvest planning
Harvest planning provides a balanced and comprehensive foundation for sustainable harvesting practices to enable good technical control during harvesting to be reconciled with the need for reducing harvesting costs. Harvest plans are of two types, strategic and tactical, and both are an integral part of the forest management planning process. A map and a written plan are the basic components for both strategic and tactical harvest planning.
3.6.1 Recommended practices for strategic harvest planning
A Strategic Harvest Plan explains why, where, when and what type of harvesting is proposed. Strategic harvest, planning cannot be undertaken without considering the issues which affect the management of the forest more widely. It is an integral part of a forest management plan, prepared by the planning team, and should never be a separate planning statement that is independent of it. Strategic harvest planning should rely upon a knowledge of:
· The area of forest that has been zoned for wood, bamboo or other production objectives; it should exclude all areas zoned as protected or protection forest and for settlement purposes, including buffer zones.
· The annual or periodic cut for woody produce.
· The silvicultural system, or systems, to be applied.
A strategic harvest plan map (or maps), at a scale of between 1:10,000 and 1:20,000, should show the following features which should also be identified in an approved forest management plan:
· Forest types, topography, existing and planned infrastructure.
· Forest land which is to be protected for watershed or biodiversity conservation or for community development reasons.
· Areas where harvesting is proposed, divided into annual felling areas that can be conveniently defined on the ground.
· Areas where major problems exist, such as rock outcrops, river crossings or swamps, that must be overcome when developing a transport system, or in carrying out forest operations.
· Areas of non-forest land uses.
· Locations of communities or indigenous populations that could be affected by harvesting or transport operations.
A written strategic harvest plan should briefly describe the items shown on the harvest plan map and include the following topics:
· The silvicultural system to be applied, and why.
· An explanation of how harvesting is expected to achieve silvicultural objectives, especially its effect on the next crop, and the extent to which this is expected to be achieved.
· A brief description of the types of harvesting equipment to be used in specific felling areas and why these are selected.. A tabular summary, derived from a general forest inventory, of the species, volumes and log size classes that are expected to be cut in each compartment.
· A schedule showing the year when each felling area is to be harvested.. A summary of special problem areas shown on the strategic harvest plan map, such as river crossings and difficult roading areas, with notes on how these might be overcome.. Information concerning the forest transportation system, such as road design requirements for different topographical conditions (valley bottoms, ridges, slopes), stream crossings and the design specifications for drainage structures.
· Annual labour requirements for harvesting and roading.. Arrangements for accommodation, health, safety and recreation of the workforce.
· The estimated cost of harvesting within each felling area and annual maintenance of the transportation system.
3.6.2 Recommended practices for tactical harvest planning
A Tactical Harvest Plan is a short-term plan, prepared by a team directly responsible for supervision of harvesting operations, that explains how and who will carry out the operations and when cutting will be undertaken in each annual cutting area. It should be linked through the Annual Plan of Operations with an approved forest management plan and should not be a separate planning statement. A Tactical Harvest Plan is formulated for the operational part of a year, for example, a dry season. It can apply to a single felling area or to a group of separate felling areas. The following basic steps are involved in tactical harvest planning:
· A pre-harvest inventory should be conducted to identify tree species, to estimate the size and volume of trees present and their position throughout a felling area. The pre-harvest inventory should extend over the whole area where harvesting is proposed. In the case of selection harvesting, trees to be cut should be identified, marked and numbered.
· A topographic survey, either on the ground or using remote sensing imagery, should be conducted during a pre-harvest forest inventory to provide information for mapping.
· Using field survey information, a detailed topographic map should be drawn at a scale of between 1:10,000 and 1:2,000 showing all topographic features that will influence logging, and also the boundaries of the harvest area. Streamside protection strips, scientific, wildlife and cultural zones and any other special reservations specified in a management plan should be mapped. Contour mapping can be prepared either by manual drafting methods or through the use of GIS technology. It is the experience of many companies who are managing tropical forests that an investment in good quality mapping can lead to reduced harvesting, reading and other infrastructure costs.
· A felling area should be divided into administrative units, termed cutting units, that can be identified on the ground and used to control a harvesting operation. A cutting unit should be limited to a single extraction method because cable, tractor, draught animal and helicopter systems each have different characteristics.
Specific planning requirements are:
- Tactical harvest planning should be based on harvesting prescriptions set out in a forest management plan. The volume and/or number of trees per hectare to be extracted and the number of seed trees per hectare that are to remain should be specified.
- A cutting and log extraction plan should comprise a part of the harvest plan and should be undertaken using the topographical and tree position map. It can also be generated using vertical and oblique GIS imagery. The plan should be prepared jointly by forest planners and loggers and must be practical and realistic. The location of landings, skid trails (if ground skidding is to be used), cableways (if cable extraction systems are to be used), haul roads and feeder roads should be shown. Where possible, directional felling should be indicated.
· Harvesting equipment should be specified and a general operations schedule formulated, using actual or estimated production rates. Work studies may be necessary to determine appropriate production rates.
· A harvesting schedule should be prepared setting out the anticipated timing of harvesting in different felling areas. It should be flexible and able to be quickly modified, when necessary. For example, it should anticipate the onset of a rainy season, irregular wet season conditions, severe storms, roading problems, protection of specific endangered animals during breeding, fire hazard conditions (and wildfires) and periodic heavy seedfalls.
· Preparation of a harvesting schedule should, where appropriate, be prepared in consultation with local communities who might be affected by harvesting. The harvest of NWFPs and the dependency of local communities upon these for subsistence, employment and income generation should be considered. Examples are collection of rattan, fruit, resins and medicinal plants.
· Any legal requirements, such as right-of-way easements or specific local authority consents concerning roading, rivers, or aviation permits (for helicopter logging) should be obtained and listed.
3.7 Further reading
Alder, D. 1992. Simple Methods for Calculating Minimum Diameter and Sustainable Yield in Mixed Tropical Forest in "Wise Management of Tropical Forests". Oxford Forestry Institute, University of Oxford.
Alder, D. 1995. Growth Modelling for Mixed Tropical Forests. Tropical Forestry Paper No. 30, Oxford Forestry Institute, University of Oxford.
Armitage, Ian P. 1997. Practical Steps Contributing to Sustainable Tropical Forest Management for Wood Production With Special Reference to Asia. Special Paper to XIth World Forestry Congress, Antalya, Turkey.
Brasnett, N. V. 1953. Planned Management of Forests. Alien & Unwin, London.
Davis, K. P. 1966. Forest Management. Second Ed. McGraw-Hill Inc., USA.
Dickinson, M. B., Dickinson, J. C. & Putz, F. E. 1996. Natural Forest Management as a Conservation Tool in the Tropics: divergent views on possibilities and alternatives. Commonwealth Forestry Review. Vol. 75 (4), Oxford Forestry Institute, Oxford.
FAO. 1977. Planning Forest Roads and Harvesting Systems. Forestry Paper No. 2, Rome.
FAO. 1984. Intensive Multiple-Use Forest Management in Kerala. Forestry Paper No. 53, Rome.
FAO. 1989. Management of Tropical Moist Forests in Africa. Forestry Paper No. 88, Rome.
FAO. 1989. Review of Forest Management Systems of Tropical Asia. Forestry Paper No. 89, Rome.
FAO. 1993. Management and Conservation of Closed Forests in Tropical America. Forestry Paper No. 101, Rome.
FAO. 1993. Common Forest Resource Management - an annotated bibliography of Asia, Africa and Latin America. Community Forestry Note No. 11, Rome.
FAO. 1994. Mangrove Forest Management Guidelines. Forestry Paper No. 117, Rome.
FAO. 1995. Planning for Sustainable Use of Land Resources: towards a new approach. Land and Water Bulletin No. 2, Rome.
FAO. 1996. FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. Rome.
FAO. 1996. Planning For Forest Use and Conservation: Guidelines for Improvement. A "Working Paper". Rome.
Ford-Robertson, F. C. (Ed). 1971. Terminology of Forest Science, Technology Practice and Products: Multilingual Forestry Terminology Series No. 1. Society of American Foresters, Washington, D.C.
Johnston, D. R., Grayson, A.J. Bradley, R. T. 1965. Forest Planning. Faber & Faber, London.
Leuschner, William A. 1984. Introduction To Forest Resource Management. Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University. John Wiley & Sons.
Ong, R. and Kleine, M. 1995. DIPSIM: an Empirical Individual-tree Growth Simulation Model. FRC Research Paper No. 2, Forest Research Centre, Forest Dept, Sabah, Malaysia.
Vanclay, J. K. 1989. A Growth Model for North Queensland Rainforests. Forest Ecology and Management, Vol. 27 (3-4).
Vanclay, J. K. 1989. Modelling Selection Harvesting in Tropical Rain Forests. Journal of Tropical Forest Science Vol. 1 (3).
Vanclay, J. K. 1991. Review: Data Requirements for Developing Growth Models for Moist Tropical Forests. Commonwealth Forestry Review. Vol. 70 (4), No. 224.
Vanclay, J. K. 1992. Species Richness and Productive Forest Management. In "Wise Management of Tropical Forests", Proceedings of the Oxford Conference on Tropical Forests, OFI, University of Oxford.
<section>8</section>
Guidelines for implementation of forest management operations
1 Implementation of forest management plans
2 Implementation of harvesting operations
3 Implementation of post harvest operations
4 Further reading
1 Implementation of forest management plans
Neither the planning process, of itself, nor the approval of plans, will necessarily lead to the successful implementation of plans. Effective implementation depends upon a good level of understanding and acceptance by government officials, forest managers, forest workers, machinery operators, rural communities and others who will be involved in the task of implementation. No less importantly it also requires:
* A firm commitment to allocate funds, staff and other resources for the duration of a plan to enable prescriptions to be implemented.
* An appropriate organization structure and the appointment of people having appropriate knowledge and experience for specific, well-defined positions that are relevant to plan implementation.
* Training to ensure that people appointed to all positions are up-to-date with procedures, techniques and practices.
* A commitment to regularly monitor progress in plan implementation and to amend annual programmes when necessary.
2 Implementation of harvesting operations
2.1 Reading
2.2 Training
2.3 Harvesting operations
2.4 Landing operations
2.5 Log measurement (scaling)
2.6 Transport operations
2.7 Harvesting assessment
The following guidelines are suggested for implementing harvesting operations. Reference has been made to the FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice in regard to principles and some aspects of forest harvesting practice. Readers should refer to the model code of practice for detailed explanations on forest road engineering, cutting, extraction, landing and transport operations and the forest harvesting workforce.
2.1 Reading
Forest roads are an important aspect of tropical forest management because of their high cost and the adverse environmental impacts that can be caused in respect of soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses. If unregulated, forest roads provide access to people, leading to forest damage through slash and bum agriculture. Roads should be designed and built by engineers who understand the need to minimise soil disturbance, maintain proper drainage and avoid stream crossings. Tropical forest roads are usually classified into two groups - haul roads and feeder roads.
* Haul (or Arterial) Roads/Haul roads form the transportation network over which the logged harvest is transported from landings to a mill or to an intermediate shipping point, such as a log pond or transhipment yard. Haul roads are permanent, should have an all-weather running surface and should be sufficiently wide to enable two vehicles to safely pass. They are also used for other management purposes, such as protection and silviculture.
* Feeder (or Secondary) Roads: Feeder roads are located in a cutting area and form the outer ends of the haul road network. They provide access for workers and machinery to the cutting area and reduce skidding and forwarding distances. Feeder roads are normally only temporary and are abandoned following logging.
The principles of forest road engineering that should be considered are:
* Roads should provide convenient low-cost access for the transport of logs and should also benefit forest communities.
* Access to roads built through forest land where the management objectives are watershed and biodiversity conservation, wildlife or scenery protection, or the conservation of cultural or religious values should be strictly regulated.
* The total road length, grades and curves should be minimised in order to reduce the erosion potential of roads, to reduce needless deforestation and to cut road construction and maintenance costs. Road density will depend on the forest type, topography, the cost of road construction and maintenance and the cost of log extraction. In general, because of the generally low volume of harvestable logs per hectare in selectively managed tropical forests, the optimum road density is lower than where clearcutting is practised.
* Feeder road density is related to skidding distance as follows:
where:
D = feeder road density in km/ha
a = a "road efficiency" factor, usually between 5 and 9;
4 - 5 for flat land,
5 - 7 for hilly land,
7 - 9 for steep terrain,
9 or more for very steep, rough terrain
s = the average skidding distance in metres
This relationship can be used for estimating average skidding distance when the road density is known, or for estimating road density when average skidding distance is known. Details of optimum feeder roading spacing, road density and skidding distance relationships are explained with examples in Annex 4. Although common sense needs to be shown in the use of the feeder road/skidding relationship it is a useful working guide.
* Road construction should be consistent with good design and maintenance practices, minimising road and landing areas while providing adequate roadside clearings to permit roads to dry quickly after heavy rains.
* Soil erosion associated with road construction and maintenance should be minimized, thereby reducing sedimentation in streams and damage to stream ecosystems. Minimise cutting and filling and utilise natural drainage patterns in road design.
* Roads and landings should be kept away from streams and from streamside buffer (protection) strips. Where a stream crossing is needed the crossing structure should be designed on the basis of a site survey. Minimise stream disturbance during construction.
* When culverts are used for cross-drains or stream crossings, their size and spacing should be determined by local rainfall intensity and water runoff rates.
* Where practicable, roads should only be built during dry season conditions and should be allowed to stabilise through the next rainy season. Roads must be allowed to dry out thoroughly before being used by heavy machinery.
* Where possible, avoid areas of wet soils and high erosion risk; roads are expensive to build and to maintain in such areas.
* As a general guide, the average forest road width should be restricted to the minimum that will allow log transport to be carried out efficiently and safely. This will reduce forest loss and the potential for soil erosion. As a guide, the maximum clearing width should not be more than 10 metres for major roads nor more than 8 metres for minor roads.
* Road grades should be kept as low as possible, consistent with the need to provide adequate access to a forest. Maximum grades of eight to 12 per cent are suggested, except for short lengths of road where steeper grades are needed to provide access to higher ground. A ruling gradient of five to eight per cent is suggested for main and secondary roads. Formulae for conversion of slopes between slope per cent, degrees and gradients are shown in Annex 8.
* Where practicable, avoid mixing horizontal and vertical curves during road line planning and construction.
* Good maintenance of road surfaces, roadside drains and culverts is needed to protect roads and to ensure that they can continue to be useable for post-harvest silviculture and for future log harvests.
* Feeder roads that are not expected to be used again until the next harvest cycle can be closed to prevent their use by local communities or others. Road closure can be achieved by ripping the surface and planting shrubs or grass.
2.2 Training
All agencies involved with the management and harvesting of logs should make and implement arrangements for effective training of logging crews. The aim is to increase and maintain the professional skills, work performance, and work quality of workers, and to develop and maintain an awareness of social and environmental issues. In its simplest form, training can be "on-the-job" guidance on proper logging practices provided by supervisory personnel. It is also desirable that workers attend practical courses on safe harvesting practices. These should be repeated each year.
The following general training guidelines are suggested:
* All field personnel who are to be involved in log extraction that requires heavy machinery and suspended loads should be trained in the need for operational safety and working cooperatively as a team. Instruction should cover the need for an understanding of the role of each person in the team and their job and the need to practice good working methods.
* Field and aircraft personnel to be involved with helicopter log extraction should be trained in operational safety involving aircraft and suspended loads, radio communication between personnel and the need to practise good working methods.
* Training in fire prevention and control should be mandatory at all levels of organisation so that all personnel, including rural communities, know their role in the event of a wildfire. It should be in the form of short courses and practical training exercises. People who have not received some training should not be allowed to fight forest fires. Topics should include:
· The safety of people and equipment, including the use of fire safety clothing,
· The use of tractors, pumps, hoses and other equipment,. Methods of communication on a fireline,
· Simulated practical fire safety exercises to test that institutional arrangements, knowledge amongst personnel and equipment are able to cope with a forest fire emergency.
2.3 Harvesting operations
Pre-Felling Treatment
As road construction progresses ahead of cutting, it may be necessary to undertake pre-felling treatment within a felling area. Pre-felling treatment comprises cutting of the stems of large, climbing plants which have stems, branches and foliage in the forest canopy. The purpose is to cause climbers to die, allowing the stems to decay so they break during felling. Not to do so can lead to accidents during cutting and to tree damage because branches can be torn from residual trees. General pre-felling treatment guidelines are as follows:
* Climber Cutting: Climbers that bridge across the crowns of trees to be harvested or will influence the fall of a tree should be cut one to two years in advance of cutting. Depending upon the silvicultural system, climber cutting can be combined with cruising. It can be performed by a small crew of two or three who work systematically through forest where climbers have been noted during pre-harvest inventory. Climber stems are cut near the ground, using a bushknife, axe or powersaw.
* Rattan: Rattan stems can be cut and extracted on a commercial basis by the concession holder if this is appropriate. Alternatively, extraction can be offered or contracted to local communities.
Cutting
Cutting includes all activities undertaken to fell and prepare trees for extraction, including felling a standing tree, measurement to determine best log lengths, limb removal and cross-cutting to form logs.
The following principles, practices and standards should be applied in cutting:
* Forest land and trees that are not shown in a harvest plan, or marked otherwise as trees not to be felled, should not be cut, and the felling operator should be aware of such disposition.
* Operations should be safe for workers and others in the vicinity. Good worker supervision and good worker health are essential. Appropriate safety equipment must be worn. Chainsaws and other equipment must be properly maintained.
* Cutting should be carried out by personnel who have been trained in the correct use of chainsaws and safety equipment, such as protective clothing, and trained to interpret labels on trees that indicate which trees should and should not be felled.
* Chainsaws or crosscut saws should be used for felling and for crosscutting to form logs. Axes should not be used because of the wastage of wood that occurs. Directional felling should be practised to reduce damage to residual trees, saplings and seedlings, especially those that are expected to become future crop trees.
* Only trees that have been labelled and numbered, for harvesting, at the stump and at "dbh" height should be cut. Cutting crews should be trained to recognise labelled harvest trees and be properly supervised to ensure that only these trees are cut. Cruising labels should remain on stumps for post-harvest monitoring. Trees that are labelled as being seed trees must not be cut or damaged during felling operations. Checks should be made on a logging landing and during post-harvest checking to monitor whether reserved trees have been cut.
* The identity of all trees that have been measured and labelled for harvesting (during cruising) should be maintained through to log formation. The following guidelines are suggested:
· A feller should carry a copy of cruising map showing the location and numbers of trees to be cut.. A cutter should remove each cruising label from the side of a fallen tree that has been cut and firmly attach it (using a flat-head nail) to the log butt.. The duplicate section of the label should be removed by the feller as a record of each tree that has been cut.
· The duplicate section of each label should be handed to the harvesting crew supervisor at the end of each day for use later in a harvest assessment of the cutting area. A record of the tree numbers cut each day should be maintained by the harvesting crew supervisor. This is a practical monitoring requirement to ensure that only trees labelled for cutting (the "compulsories"), are in fact cut.
* Practical guidelines for directional felling are:
· Cutting crews should be trained to carefully select the felling direction. On flat or slightly sloping land each tree to be cut should be felled either towards or away from skid trails or cableways, depending upon local experience, topography and the type of logging system being used. Directional felling simplifies log extraction and markedly reduces forest damage and overall logging costs.
· Trees should not be felled directly down steep slopes unless the downhill lean is so great that directional felling is unable to pull the tree in another direction. Felling across a slope or along a contour, will reduce the momentum of a falling tree and minimise breakage and damage to nearby trees.
· Where possible, trees should be felled in the direction of canopy gaps and alongside skid trails to reduce forest damage.
· It is desirable to direct the fall of a tree towards the crown of previously felled trees. This reduces both impact damage and damage to surrounding forest.
· Trees that are too difficult, too dangerous or that upon felling would cause too much damage to the remaining vegetation, should not be cut at all.
· The same applies for rare tree species or that are found few in numbers in the area to be harvested.
· The final assessment and decision on whether or not to fell a tree should always be made by the cutter.
* Tree felling should cause minimal damage to soils and watercourses. Trees should not be felled across streams where there is no streamside protection strip in order to minimise damage to the watercourse, to streambanks and to vegetation. National or local regulations concerning streamside conservation should be observed.
* Operations should maximise the volume of wood that can be profitably utilized from each felled tree and maximise the value of logs that can be prepared for extraction. Cutting crews should be trained to follow proper log making procedures. The whole tree should be measured prior to crosscutting and log lengths determined according to market or mill requirements.
* Log formation involving the cutting of branches should take place within the forest in order that nutrients in foliage can be retained within the forest ecosystem. Branches should not be removed from a forest. This practice also reduces damage to the soil and to the remaining vegetation.
* Penalties should be imposed on felling crews for careless working practices that lead to cutting or damage of future crop trees or those reserved as seed trees. Penalty arrangements should be included in management contracts that are specific to the local situation. Frequent operational monitoring is necessary in order to detect cutting damage and to identify who caused it.
Extraction
The choice of extraction method and equipment selection will depend on topography, soils and climate, tree size, number and volume, the silvicultural system being applied as a basis for sustainable management of a forest and on the economics of the specific management and harvesting operation. The following guidelines for log extraction using different extraction systems should be adapted and applied to local forest situations:
· The safety of all personnel involved in log extraction is the foremost consideration in logging. Good training of logging crews is necessary to minimise accidents.
· Minimise damage to residual trees, to other vegetation and to soils and watercourses. Select the type of log extraction system that will minimise soil compaction and soil disturbance and also minimise runoff of water and soil erosion.
· Thoughtful and comprehensive harvest planning linked to a system of operational control to ensure that a plan is followed and adapted as required in response to changing conditions.
· Delivery to a landing or roadside of all logs prepared for extraction without loss of tree identity and without significant loss of volume or deterioration in quality.
· Achievement and maintenance of high productivity in the use of personnel and equipment.
· Maximise wood production during extraction. Two effective steps are:
- Extraction of "forest residues" as an additional income source, especially for forest dependent communities,
- Minimisation of logging waste through careful cutting, tree measurement and log formation.
Extraction must be continuously and closely supervised to ensure that safety and all technical aspects of a harvesting plan are being followed as proposed. In addition, animal skidding should be supervised to ensure that animals are not being abused.
· Ground Skidding Extraction:
· Wheeled Skidders: Wheeled skidders are the primary means of log extraction in sustainably managed tropical forests. Skidders are preferred to crawler tractors for ground extraction of logs because their rubber tyres, ability to easily manoeuvre within a forest and to lift log butts off the ground can minimise soil and tree damage. Skidders are specifically designed for log extraction and are more suitable for harvesting than are crawler tractors. They should have a powered winch. "High-flotation" tyres or dual wheels mounted on wheeled skidders increase the effective tyre width where they are in contact with the ground, thus spreading the machine weight and its load over a larger surface area, reducing pressure on the soil and reducing soil compaction and disturbance.
· Tracked Skidders: Tracked skidders are preferred to wheeled skidders and crawler tractors, especially for extraction of small to medium sized logs on forest soils that are easily compacted, because they cause minimal damage to residual trees and soils. Tracked skidders have the ability to move the load forward onto the machine for better weight distribution over the tracks. Low ground pressures lead to relatively little disturbance of soils and ground vegetation, which is an important feature for protection of seedlings and saplings and for soil conservation.
· Crawler Tractors: Crawler tractors are often used for skidding as well as for road construction and maintenance. They have the advantage of being effective for log extraction from steep slopes if properly used, even if equipped with only a single drum winch. In spite of the damage that can be caused to soils, residual trees, poles, saplings and seedlings through insensitive use, crawler tractors are likely to continue to be important for log extraction in steep terrain and where rainfall is high. Effective training of operators and careful supervision is necessary.
· Size and Power of Skidders: Skidders of the appropriate size and power configuration for a specific operation should be selected. The blade width should be between two and three metres. Machines should have a powered winch, with at least 50 metres of wire rope, and an arch that will lift log butts clear of the ground. These features help to minimise damage to residual trees, ground vegetation and soils.
· Steep Slopes: Avoid steep slopes in ground skidding operations. As a general rule, the maximum slope should be about 30 per cent, except over short distances (less than 100 metres). Ground skidding on steep slopes greatly increases soil disturbance and erosion, reduces operating efficiency and leads to faster depreciation on skidders. Log butts should always be lifted above the ground during skidding. Steeper slopes should be logged by aerial or cable systems that cause much less physical environmental damage.
· Skid Trails: A carefully designed and supervised system of designated skid trails should always be used for log extraction. The following guidelines are recommended:
- Skid trail routes and density should be indicated in the harvesting plan and flag-marked within a forest. The aim is to extract logs causing the least possible damage to residual vegetation. Marking skid trail routes can assist the felling crew to align trees along skid trails. This practice reduces felling damage and extraction costs.
- Skid trails should be as straight as possible to minimise soil and vegetation damage. Sharp comers should be avoided in order to protect trees and smaller plants growing nearby.
- Skid trail formation using a blade should be kept to a minimum. Manual cutting of skid trails is much to be preferred.
- Skidders should always remain on a skid trail. Rope should be manually pulled from a skidder to each log that is to be extracted to avoid the need for skidders to leave a skid trail. This practice minimises soil disturbance, soil compaction, and damage to residual trees, poles, saplings and seedlings. Skidder ropes should be at least 50 m long.
- Skid trails and skidders should not be allowed within streamside protection strips defined in a management plan or in national or local regulations. Skid trails and skidders should not cross gullies or streams unless it is absolutely unavoidable. If crossing a stream cannot be avoided, the crossing should be on solid rock or on an installed culvert.. Uphill Skidding: Uphill skidding is to be preferred to downhill skidding because it tends to cause less damage to soils and vegetation and also leads to more dispersed runoff of surface water. Logs being skidded uphill are more easily controlled, although uphill pulling does require more power and is more expensive. The choice of either uphill or downhill skidding in a harvesting plan needs to be evaluated and specified in a tactical harvesting plan in respect of the prevailing local forest conditions.
· Cable Extraction:
· Cable Log Extraction in Hill and Swamp Forests: Cable log extraction is only justified in sustainably managed tropical forests that are growing on long steep slopes or hilly terrain where log harvesting is technically and economically justified and watershed conservation is not impaired. It is also appropriate for log extraction in swamp forests. Cable extraction can be operated in conjunction with tractors for harvesting in previously logged forests where there is low and variable stocking. It does however have the advantage that it is less expensive than helicopter logging.
· Skyline Cable System: Only the skyline cable log harvesting system should be permitted for selection harvesting in sustainably managed tropical forests because it is much less damaging to the forest structure than is the high-lead cable system. The high-lead system should not be allowed. A summary of aspects of skyline logging studies made in Malaysia are shown in Case Study 7.
· Log Extraction Using Draught Animals:
· Animal Skidding of Logs: Draught animals - specifically water buffaloes and elephants - are effective for extraction of small to medium sized logs on both flat and slightly hilly land. Animal skidding causes relatively low compaction and disturbance to soils and minimal damage to residual trees and smaller plants.
· Planning:
- Extraction distances should be short, not more than 200 metres and preferably down slope.
- Depending upon the type of animal being used, a maximum slope of 20 to 30 per cent for downhill skidding and 10 to 15 per cent for uphill skidding are suggested.
- Depending upon climatic conditions, terrain and log size, draught animals may not be able to work every day and may require relatively short days, no more than four hours. A reserve of animals (20 to 30 per cent) is desirable in order to maintain log production continuity.
· Ground Preparation: Skidding paths should be laid out and undergrowth vegetation cut to provide easy access for animals. Undergrowth should be manually cut close to the ground and thrown clear of the path. Stumps and old logs that could be an obstacle or a danger to animals should be cut low or removed. Stones should be rolled aside.
Case Study 7: Summary of Results of Skyline Logging Studies in Malaysia
A. Results of a Soil Disturbance Study After Harvesting with A Skyline Yarder
Soil Disturbance Class
Area (%)
No disturbance
Litter layer disturbed
Top layer exposed
Subsoil exposed
Subsoil heavily disturbed
B. Skyline Yarding Costs for Three Operational Skyline Systems
(based on an average harvestable volume of 40 m^3/ha on a set-up of 10 ha)
System price (RM)
Work days/year
MOH/year
Production/MOH (m^3)
Labour cost (RM/hr)
Litre diesel/MOH
Interest (12% per year)
Insurance (1% of price)
Repairs
Fuel & Oil
Labour cost
Total Costs/MOH
Total Costs/m^3
Note: MOH == Machine Operating Hours
Source: The Malaysian-German Sustainable Forest Management Project
· Working Practices:
- Sledges and skidding pans can increase the productivity of animal skidding through reducing ground friction with logs and should be used if this is practicable.
- Cutting should be coordinated with skidding, both operations proceeding together towards a log landing. This working practice enables animals to walk on clear skid paths, helps to avoid accidents and increases logging productivity.
- Animals must be well cared for, fed, watered and rested regularly.
- When a skidding operation has been completed, cross-drains should be cut across skidding paths to divert surface ground water into the adjacent forest thereby reducing soil erosion.
· Helicopter Extraction:
· Rationale: Helicopter log extraction is justified in sustainably managed tropical forests for four reasons:
- where forests are growing on hilly land, close to stream buffer zones or on swampy land where the use of ground-based logging systems and roading could lead to unacceptable damage to soils, watercourses or to forest structure.
- where it leads to the most economic extraction of logs to landings, given the high production rate of aerial extraction, the high value of wood, the low roading density, construction and maintenance costs, the absence of skidding trails and minimal real costs for overcoming environmental damage caused by ground-based environmental damage caused by ground-based log
- where logs are inaccessible to ground-based extraction, such as across a gorge or above a long steep slope.
- where it is wished to limit entry of "slash and bum" farmers to a forest where the social pressure to use land for unsustainable agriculture is both a forest protection and management risk.
· Planning: Helicopter log extraction needs to be thoroughly planned and should involve teamwork by foresters, harvesting and helicopter management personnel. A harvesting plan should incorporate some flexibility to enable adjustments to be made in the event of rapidly changing working conditions. Planning should be carefully integrated with ground-based logging where there are economic, environmental or management benefits linking the use of both systems.
Case Study 8: Use of Elephants for Logging in Sri Lanka
The elephant has long been used in Sri Lanka for logging, before mechanised logging was introduced. As experience has accumulated, the elephant has come to be recognised as being very effective for logging, both in terms of cost and environmental sensitivity. It is in the context of environmental management of forests that the following advantages of using elephants have been identified:
· Under forest conditions the elephant has the advantage of working in its natural environment and is familiar with the topography and trees. The elephant is an adaptable animal and this feature is an advantage when they are used for logging.
· An elephant operates between a stump site and a landing using a track of about one metre in width, causing less loss and disturbance to forest than does a tractor.
· The initial investment for a trained elephant in 1991 was between US$ 10,000 and U$ 15,000, compared with US$ 150,000 or more for a tractor. The average monthly running cost for an elephant is of the order of US$ 520, compared with US$ 795 for a skidder.. The foreign exchange requirement for buying and running an elephant is nothing but is considerable for buying a tractor, spares and fuel.
· The use of elephants brings socio-economic benefits to rural communities through providing employment and food supplies for elephants. Elephants used for logging are slower and less efficient than machinery, resulting in lower productivity, but causing less damage to the forest ecosystem.
Log Identification and Labelling
The following guidelines for log identification and labelling are suggested:
· The identity of trees that have been cruised and labelled for harvesting should be maintained through to log formation and delivery, at least to the landing.
· Log loaders should ensure that cruising labels are firmly attached to the butt of the first log and that secondary labels are painted onto the large end of upper logs cut from the same tree. Skidder or tractor drivers should remove each cruising label that has been attached to the log butt by a cutter and carry these during log extraction to a landing. Each label should be handed to log scaling personnel on the landing. In the case of helicopter logging the identity of logs should be advised to log scaling personnel by the loader using two-way communication radio as each load is extracted to a landing.
Case Study 9: Experience of Helicopter Logging in Tropical Forests
In 1996 the ITTO featured an article in its newsletter, Tropical Forest Update, (Vol. 6, 3) on helicopter logging in tropical forests. This case study summarises the main technical and managerial advantages and disadvantages of helicopter logging over other systems:
Advantages:
· fewer trees and lower volumes per ha are cut and ground-based skidders are absent leading to reduced damage to surrounding trees,
· no exposed ground surface inside a logging area due to the absence of skid trails or cableway corridors,
· the combined use of helicopter and tractor logging can reduce road density by about half compared to conventional tractor methods,
· reduced environmental damage and limited forest access to squatters,
· because helicopter logging is expensive, only high quality logs are extracted, reducing gap size and causing less disruption to forest structure,
· there is negligible increase in stream turbidity compared to conventional methods due to factors listed above; watershed quality is higher,
· logs can be extracted which are otherwise inaccessible due to difficult terrain and from environmentally sensitive areas where ground-based and cable systems are undesirable or their use is not possible,
· helicopters work during the day and are serviced at night; productivity is high,
· in one study in mixed hill dipterocarp forest helicopters extracted 13 to 15 times more volume per day than a tractor; the production rate is high,
· the time between felling and delivery at roadside is short, so logs may fetch a higher price for freshness and superior quality.
Disadvantages:
· increased pressure for log extraction in remote nature reserves and in other area s of high environmental sensitivity,
· very low road densities may increase future land management activity costs,
· if the regeneration requirements of high-value species that are extracted by helicopter are not suited to small canopy gap sizes they may decline in abundance over time,
· highly trained rather than low skilled local labour is required,
· effective monitoring of operations may be hampered by the fact that helicopter logging can take place in inaccessible places,
· helicopter logging has a relatively high fatality rate; great focus on safety is needed.
· Log labels, painted onto log ends, should be based upon the tree label. Cruising labels should be returned to a planning forester for use in a harvest assessment of the cutting area. The planning forester should match the duplicate tree labels collected by a cutter with those carried by the skidder or tractor driver as a part of the harvesting monitoring system.
Penalties for Forest Damage Caused During Log Extraction
Penalties should be imposed on extraction crews for careless working practices that lead to damage to residual trees during extraction, especially trees identified and labelled as future crop trees or reserved as seed trees, and also to natural regeneration. Each forestry agency should make penalty arrangements that are specific to the prevailing local situation. Frequent monitoring is needed to be able to detect extraction damage and to identify who caused it. Payment of a bonus should also be considered when good quality work has been completed.
2.4 Landing operations
The following practices should be applied in the design, construction and efficient operation of landings for log trimming, sorting and loading:
· Safety: The safety of all personnel is the foremost consideration in the conduct of landing operations and the safety and protection of all personnel and equipment working on a landing or nearby should be safeguarded. Effective training of logging crews is necessary to minimise accidents.
· Location and Number of Landings: Where possible, landings should be located on slightly sloping ground. A gradient of about 2 per cent is often followed. Landings should be sited away from streams to minimise soil runoff. The number of landings should be kept to a minimum to reduce the loss of productive area and to minimise costs.
· Size of Landings: Landings should be as small as possible, bearing in mind the need for storage and sorting of logs, vehicle turning and loading.
- Where large logs are being handled and a knuckle-boom loader is being used for loading, landings can be as small as 20 m × 25 m (500 m^2).
- Helicopters and cable logging systems require larger landings. A typical landing area for these systems is of the order of 40 m × 30 m (1,200m^2).
- Where landings are not needed, logs can be decked temporarily on roadsides and loaded onto trucks from there. This reduces the loss of forest, soil runoff and costs of landing operations. The use of knuckle boom loaders or self-loading trucks enables logs to be loaded directly from roads.
· Quality Log Handling: All logs should be delivered to a landing and transferred to the transport system without loss of log identity and without significant loss of volume or deterioration of quality.
· Site Protection from Spillage of Fuel and Lubricants: Care should be taken to prevent spillage of fuel and lubricants during refuelling and servicing of machinery. The refuelling area must be placed away from streams and earth ridges should be constructed to contain any spillage.
· Site Restoration: When landings are no longer needed they should be cleared of debris, including oil cans and machinery parts, compacted soil should be deep ripped and they should be planted using nursery-raised seedlings. Tree species selected should comprise those that are ecologically dominant in the locality and are expected to be commercially important as part of the next main crop.
2.5 Log measurement (scaling)
All logs should be measured, or scaled, at landings in order that log volumes can be calculated. The measurement of log production in relation to a production target prescribed in a forest management plan is based upon consistently accurate log length and diameter measurements for deriving log volumes which is a critical indicator of sustainable management of a forest.
There are a variety of measurement methods used to estimate log volume. The choice should be made on the basis of value and log size, the scale of harvesting, the required accuracy, or as a negotiated part of a sale or management agreement. Whatever scaling system is used it must be fair to the buyer and to the seller of wood. The following practices and standards are suggested for scaling operations in tropical forests involving large logs:
· Responsibility: The forest owner as the seller of forest produce should be responsible for measuring log production. This approach is preferred to others because the owner is able to maintain firm control over the scaling procedure. In practice, the owner may not always have the personnel and supporting facilities to enable continuous scaling to be undertaken. Where this occurs, as it does on many large forest concessions, the responsibility for scaling should be delegated, as a condition of license or concession contract, to the concession holder, subject, however, to check-scaling by the forest owner.
· Scaling Practices: The following guidelines can be adapted to prevailing local conditions for scaling of logs:
- Log identity should be painted onto both ends of every log and it should correspond with the cruising label tree number and the species code. Log identity, recorded as a code number, should be tallied against the tree number, taken from the cruising label. The species code should also be tallied.
- Log length is assumed to be equal to the axis of the log and is measured using a logger's tape in metres and tenths of a metre along the surface. The tape must be kept parallel to the axis. The total log length should be measured and no allowance made for trim. Any trim taken off log ends should be paid for by the buyer, not the seller. This feature should be made clear in the sale and purchase agreement.
- Log diameter used for log volume derivation is mid-length diameter, measured over-bark, using a diameter tape or callipers at a point midway from the log ends. Any debris on the log, such as mud or loose bark, should be removed from the point of diameter measurement and the tape should be kept at right angles to the axis of the log. Log diameters from circumferences, measured using a tape, should be recorded in centimetres and tenths. A bark allowance, or twice the average bark thickness, should be subtracted. Bark allowances should be determined by separate studies for each species, or groups of species. The resulting under-bark diameter is usually rounded to the nearest even diameter class. Two examples are shown in Table 14.
Table 14: Application of a Bark Thickness Allowance
Example 1
Example 2
Species
A
B
id-length diam. (over bark)
93.6 cm
81.8 cm
educt bark allowance
3.0 cm
4.0 cm
90.6 cm
77.8 cm
ally to nearest even cm
90 cm
78 cm
- Log measurements should be tallied against the log number.
- Log volumes should be calculated using a volume table based on cylinder volumes computed using Huber's Formula, defined as follows:
In practical terms the formula can be simplified by replacing p /40 with 0.0785398; Huber's formula then becomes:
V = d^2 l 0.0785398
where:
V = log volume,
d = is the mid-length log diameter without bark,
l = log length
The log medium length cross-sectional diameter is also measured as the average of the small and large end diameters, under bark. This is the practice in parts of Africa.
Where exact log volumes are required, a log volume table based upon sectional measurement of logs can be used. It enables log volumes to be estimated from measurements of log length and the average diameter of the small end of logs. A volume table is calculated from a representative population of logs spanning the range log lengths and diameters of one species or of species groups that are being produced from a specific locality. Log volumes used to construct a volume table are calculated using Smalian's formula. It is applied to each section of log from under-bark measurements at the butt, 1.5 m, 3 m, 6 m, and so on from the butt until the small-end of the log is reached. Smalian's formula is defined as follows:
V= (d^2+D^2) l[s] 0.03927
where,
d^2 = small end diameter (under bark)
D^2 = large end diameter (under bark)
l[s] = log with length l[s]
p /80 = 0.03927
V = log volume
· Check Scaling: An essential feature of scaling practice is check scaling of the work of the scaling team. It should preferably be conducted by a two-person team led by a planning forester, or a qualified person who is directly supervised by a forester. Check scaling should be conducted regularly, but at randomly selected times. It should be a routine aspect of monitoring of log measurement practice.
Where a forest management unit is being managed by a concession holding company, or by an NGO on behalf of customary owners, the check scaling team should comprise company or NGO supervisory staff. Government forestry officials should conduct separate checks on scaling quality where the forest land is in State ownership. Check scaling should involve monitoring of the following three aspects of the scaling procedure:
- Log labelling and numbering practices, ensuring that log identity is clearly painted onto both ends of every log.
- That log identity is tallied against the corresponding tree number, taken from the cruising label.
- Measurements of log length and diameter and allowances for rot.
The extent of check scaling will depend upon the confidence limits imposed by a forestry authority or set by the management of a concession company or cooperative. As a working guide there should not be more than a+/- 1% difference in calculated volumes between the scaling report and check scaling of the same batch of logs. Check scaling data should be processed in the same way as the main scaling data to ensure that valid comparisons can be made. The reasons for consistent differences between check scaling and scaling should be examined and discussed with the scaling team leader with a view to eliminating the differences.
2.6 Transport operations
Although log transport does not influence the management of tropical forests it can have an adverse impact on the forest environment and on the business operations of a company. It is for this reason that guidelines on log transport operations are provided. The aim should be to deliver logs safely to a point of destination without significant loss of volume and without adverse impacts on the forest environment. The following practices and standards should be applied in log transport operations in tropical forests:
· Safety: Good training of drivers in log loading, including "tie-ing down" of loads, daily care and maintenance of vehicles and careful driving is necessary to minimise accidents.
- Trucks should never be overloaded and the load must be evenly distributed.
- Loads must be secured by binders that are of sufficient capacity to prevent logs from falling off the truck if a load should move during transport.
- Roads being used by logging trucks should be posted with warning signs, especially where trucks enter main roads.
· Road Maintenance:
- Roads being used for heavy log transport should be properly maintained in order to minimise erosion of the road surface and edges and for the safety of all road users. The need for adequate grovelling and grading should be planned and undertaken as a matter of practical road management where roads are being regularly used by logging trucks.
- Roads should not be used, especially by loaded trucks, after heavy rain where there is a risk of serious road surface damage. Although local conditions can vary widely it is often advisable to allow a road surface to dry out for several hours before being used again for log transport. A waiting period to enable a road to dry will often reduce road damage markedly. Earth roads should not be used at all during periods of heavy rainfall.
· Refuelling: The same rules apply as for refuelling logging equipment.
2.7 Harvesting assessment
A harvesting assessment is a systematic check made in the field during or following harvesting to determine the degree to which the operation is or has followed a harvesting plan and has complied with its objectives. It is an essential aspect of monitoring of the operational performance of a forest manager. A harvesting assessment provides information about the quality of operations, including the volumes cut and the condition of a forest following harvesting. It may be carried out while an operation is in progress (in-progress assessment), or after it is completed (post-harvest assessment). The following guidelines should be applied in forest harvesting assessments:
· Qualified Personnel: Assessments should be carried out by qualified planning and supervisory staff in the presence of operational personnel who are directly responsible for harvesting activities.
· Objectives: The extent to which operational performance has complied with the objectives of a tactical harvest plan should be assessed by examining key aspects of the plan.
· "In-progress" Assessment: An "In-progress Assessment" should monitor aspects of harvesting performance that need to be checked frequently. It should be a continuous or semi-continuous activity. Specific topics that should be checked are:
- That location and standards of roads, landings and skid trails compare with those specified in a tactical harvest plan. The use of GPS equipment can assist with checking road location.
- That the harvest comprises only trees that have been cruised and labelled for cutting and that residual trees remain and are undamaged. Check that trees that were marked "not to be cut" but have not been felled, damaged or destroyed. If no, determine whether disciplinary action and imposition of penalties on those responsible is required. Check if trees that should have been cut have been left.
- That protected areas, such as streamside buffer strips and places of cultural importance, remain undisturbed.
- That directional felling, cross-cutting and log-making requirements are being complied with.
- That all logs have been extracted and transported from landings. Ensure that no logs have been left behind.
- That equipment and working practices conform with local safety requirements.
- That soil disturbance is being kept to a minimum.
- That fuel, oil and other possible contaminants are effectively contained and any spills have been properly disposed of.
- Whether roads have been closed, where specified.
- The effectiveness of directional felling for avoiding damage to residual trees.
Consideration should be given to applying penalties to harvesting crews where poor working practices are consistently observed.
· "Post-harvest" Assessment: A post-harvest assessment should monitor aspects of harvesting performance following an operation. It need not be carried out immediately but after sufficient time has passed for the environmental impacts caused by harvesting to become clear. This might be from six months to one year after harvesting has been completed. Specific topics to be checked are:
- The survival status of damaged trees, especially labelled "mother" trees.
- A comparison of the location and standards of roads, landings and skid trails with specifications in the harvest plan.
- The extent and long-term effects of soil disturbance caused by log extraction, and determination of remedial action if any. What remedial action is required?
- Whether protected areas, such as streamside buffer strips, have remained undisturbed,
- Whether landings have been cleared of logging and mechanical debris and, where necessary, have been drained to prevent ponding of water. Check also whether landings need to be ripped for establishment of nursery raised tree seedlings.
- Assess whether oil and other contaminants have been properly disposed of and what remedial action is required.
· Reporting: The results of harvest assessments should be reported to the relevant authorities and to logging crews who carried out the work. Where it is appropriate a report should make recommendations for remedial action, for financial payments to personnel for work meeting specified performance criteria and penalties for poor performance. Questions of specific performance criteria, rewards and penalties should be determined by the management agency in relation to prevailing local conditions.
3 Implementation of post harvest operations
3.1 Forest protection
3.2 The participation of forest communities in forest protection
3.3 Post-harvest silviculture operations
3.1 Forest protection
Sustainable forest management can not be achieved in the absence of a firm commitment and action to effectively protect a forest management unit. Policies and legislation establishing a permanent forest estate, providing secure forest tenure, permanent definition and maintenance of forest boundaries, an operational capability to protect forests from fire and cooperation with forest communities, all contribute towards achieving effective forest protection. The following guidelines should be adapted to local forest conditions.
Forest Guards
Forest guards have an essential role for patrolling forest boundaries, roads and tracks and the interior of forest compartments to observe and monitor whether unauthorised operations may be taking place.
· Guards should work closely with harvesting, inventory and silviculture crews who also operate in a forest management unit.
· Guards should be trained for their duties, including in public relations and in fire control. Where it is practicable, they should have earlier security experience. Distinctive uniforms are essential in order that guards are easily identified when patrolling in a forest.
Fire Prevention and Control
An effective capability should be organized and maintained in a condition of operational readiness in order that a rapid and effective response to forest fire emergencies can always be made.
· Fire Plan: When wildfire is perceived as a possible problem a fire plan for the prevention and control of fires should be prepared for a forest management unit, or specific parts of it, as a requirement of a forest management plan. Following approval, the fire suppression plan should be annexed to and form a part of the general management plan. Action to be taken by staff and workers if an accidental fire occurs should be clearly outlined in a fire plan, including the use of available equipment, the necessary manning strength in anticipation of a fire outbreak and the efficient clean-up and patrol of a fire area to prevent recurrence. Each fire plan should specify the following:
- The lines of command, control and communication amongst all personnel. A senior fire control officer (a fire boss), responsible to a chief forester for a forest management unit should be appointed. The fire boss could be a permanent officer having fire control responsibilities as a part of the job that also involves wood production.
- Definition of the area to be protected on a topographical map at a 1:50,000 scale. Several copies of a fire control map should be available to operational staff to assist with communication. It should show:
* Road and track access routes for vehicles, and aircraft landing points.
* Location of existing water points and proposals for construction of new water points.
- Vegetation fire hazard class map, identifying "levels of risk" for each broad vegetation zone.
- An equipment resources statement and specifications for procurement of new fire control equipment.
- A programme of public relations, education and advertising directed at strengthening public awareness of the need for protection of forests from wildfire.
· Communications: Radio and telephone arrangements should be provided to enable a fire control organisation to work efficiently to help prevent fire and to assist in suppressing fires quickly. Telephone and portable radio systems are also valuable for general communication for other forest management operations.
· Fire Danger Rating System: A fire danger rating system should be developed that is suited to the physical conditions of a province or to a forest management unit. Fire danger ratings show defined levels of fire danger, such as low, moderate or high, and are useful for explaining forest fire problems to local communities, to other sections of the general public and for putting forest staff on alert.. Records: A register and supporting maps should be established and maintained by a forest manager, recording the location, dates, reasons, areas and vegetation types lost or damaged by wildfires.
3.2 The participation of forest communities in forest protection
Where forest communities have a traditional dependence upon tropical forests which are being managed for wood production, their participation in the overall management process is important for achieving effective forest protection. Dialogue between representatives of local communities and forest managers is essential in reaching an understanding of the respective interests, and concerns, of each side and from which the foundations of forest protection can be developed. The following guidelines can be adapted to the prevailing local conditions for protection of a forest management unit:
· Sensitivity: Consultations with forest communities need to be positive, constructive and conducted with sensitivity and care using traditional as well as official discussion processes.
· Informality: Consultations should be informal, conducted in the local languages, and be as easily understood as possible. It will be through informal and frequent discussion that the aspirations of local people may best be determined and understood thereby providing a firm basis for effective forest protection arrangements.
· Buffer Zones: Through community consultation, promote an understanding and acceptance of the use of buffer zones as a management and protection tool in localities where forest communities interact with wood production operations.
- Buffer zones should be developed within the context of specific forest management plans. The aim is to encourage investment in agriculture, agroforestry and other perennial crop systems and to discourage utilization of forests for which firm protection is needed.
- The definition of buffer zones is a part of a wider strategy for classifying forest land where multiple use and protection of forests is contemplated. A medium to long term time horizon is necessary.
- Buffer zone development might be enhanced through the transfer of long-term land use and conditional management rights over buffer zones.
· Road Closure After Harvesting: Feeder roads that are not expected to be used again until the next harvest can be closed to prevent their use by local communities. Road closure practices can include ripping the surface and planting short rotation tree crops, shrubs or tall grass.
· Helicopter Logging: The reduced impacts on soils and forest vegetation that can be achieved through helicopter logging can have a protective effect on forests in relation to community relationships, as follows:
- Low road densities associated with helicopter log extraction reduces opportunities for squatters to encroach on forests and practise "slash and bum" agriculture,
- Low impact harvesting causes little damage to medicinal, food and other plants that are of traditional value to forest communities.
3.3 Post-harvest silviculture operations
General Guidelines
Silvicultural operations should be implemented in accordance with specific prescriptions set out in an approved management plan for a forest. The type and purpose of tending operations to be applied in each compartment, or sub-compartment, should be determined by diagnostic sampling. Tending decisions may also be based upon the conclusions of studies that have been made to gain a better understanding of forest ecology problems which are considered to be barriers to the effective practice of silviculture.
Responsibility for the implementation of silvicultural tending should be with the director of forest operations in the forestry agency, concession or a cooperative.
Operations being implemented should be part of a silvicultural system that has been designed to contribute towards the achievement of the management objectives of a forest. Silvicultural treatments should be applied within one or two years of harvesting, before regrowth makes movement difficult. Specific post-harvest silviculture operations can include:
· Enrichment planting using nursery-raised seedlings or forest transplants.
· Release weeding, or forest cleaning, of undergrowth to reduce competition to existing seedlings, or to seedlings that might become established from seedfall.
· Liberation cutting of dense stands of trees and poles of commercial and non-commercial species.
Guidelines for Enrichment Planting and Release Weeding
The objective of enrichment planting and release weeding is to establish an acceptable stocking density of commercial tree species in a severely degraded and heavily logged forest.
* Planning
· General enrichment planting standards should be expressed in the forest management plan.
· Specific proposals should be set out in the annual operational plan, based on diagnostic sampling. Compartments, timing of planting, and species to be planted should be specified.
* Species to be Planted
· Species should be selected from a list set out in the forest management plan. Importance should be placed on species comprising the forest type where enrichment is proposed and those having commercial potential for wood production.
* Forest Practices
· Planting lines or spots should follow contour.
· Planting lines should be at least 1.5 m wide.
· Secondary vegetation larger than 6 cm diameter within a planting line or spot should be girdled. Vegetation outside the planting line or spot which will affect the planting site should be girdled.
· Generally, the best time for planting is near the beginning of the rainy season.
· The success of establishment should be evaluated in the forest regularly by field inspection of planted trees.
· Weeding should be carried out to keep transplanted trees free of competing plant growth. The need for weeding should be determined by field inspection.
Guidelines for Silvicultural Tending
The objective of silvicultural tending is to create or maintain favourable conditions for the growth of potential crop trees by removing competing vegetation. This is called liberation. A PCT is a species having wood of commercial value that is selected from the residual stand after logging and is tended to form the next crop of harvestable trees.
* Selection Criteria for a Potential Crop Tree
· A PCT should be a listed timber species for the locality, known to grow to loggable size (over 50 cm dbh). From an economical point of view, listed species should be defined by the forestry authority and should be shown in two lists, preferred species and acceptable species. Protected species should be listed separately and should include rare or endangered species and fruit trees.
· It should be at least 5 cm dbh. A cluster of small trees may be equivalent to one PCT, providing the cluster has three or more individuals between 2 m in height and 5 cm dbh. There should be more than five individuals if less than 2 m in height.
· A PCT should have a vigorous, well-developed crown.
· It should have a straight, clear stem with no visible defects or injuries and should be a stable tree without a pronounced slant.
· A tree standing on the edge of a steep slope, a road cutting or within 20 m of a watercourse should not be selected.
· It should not be under the shade of another selected PCT.
* Selecting between Two Potential Crop Trees
· When a choice between two trees has to be made select the tallest tree having the larger diameter.
· If both PCTs are of the same size select the preferred species over the acceptable species. If both are either preferred or acceptable species, select the tree having the longer bole. If both are equal in all respects, select the tree with the most uniform spacing.
· Select the PCT which is least likely to be damaged by the falling of a poison-girdled tree.
* Liberating a Potential Crop Tree
· Except for protected species, all trees competing directly with a selected PCT for overhead light should be removed. Trees whose crowns are well below those of a PCT need not be cut.
· Individuals of preferred or acceptable species which are defective may be removed. Individuals of pioneer species may be removed if it is considered that they will compete with a PCT. Trees whose stem or branches may be or are rubbing a PCT should be removed.
It is not the purpose of these Guidelines to provide more specific guidance on the technical aspects of silviculture that can be applied in the management of tropical forests. Readers should consult relevant references on silviculture, included in the following section.
4 Further reading
Brasnett, N. V. 1953. Planned Management of Forests. Alien & Unwin, London.
Davis, K. P. 1966. Forest Management. Second Edition. McGraw-Hill Inc., USA.
Dykstra, D. P. & Heinrich, R. 1996. FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. Rome.
FAO. 1989. Management of Tropical Moist Forests in Africa. Forestry Paper No. 88, Rome.
FAO. 1989. Review of Forest Management Systems of Tropical Asia. Forestry Paper No. 89, Rome.
FAO. 1993. Management and Conservation of Closed Forests in Tropical America. Forestry Paper No. 101, Rome.
FAO. 1995. Elephants in Logging Operations in Sri Lanka. Forest Harvesting Case Study No. 5, Rome.
FAO. 1996. Addressing Natural Resource Conflicts Through Community Forestry. Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Dept, Rome.
Ford-Robertson, F. C. (Ed). 1971. Terminology of Forest Science, Technology Practice and Products: Multilingual Forestry Terminology Series No. 1. Soc. American Foresters, Washington, D.C.
Hutchinson, Ian D. 1991. Diagnostic Sampling to Orient Silviculture and Management in Natural Tropical Forest. Commonwealth Forestry Review, Vol. 70 (3), No. 223.
ITTO. 1996. Helicopter Logging Lifts off in Sarawak. Tropical Forest Update, Vol. 6, (3).
Johns, A. G. 1997. Timber Production and Biodiversity Conservation in Tropical Rain Forests, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Johnston, D. R. Grayson, A.J. Bradley, R. T. 1965. Forest Planning. Faber & Faber, London.
GTZ-FD, Peninsula Malaysia. 1995. Development and Application of Operational Standards for Sustainable Forest Management in Peninsula Malaysia. Project Doc. No. 6, Kuala Lumpur.
<section>9</section>
Guidelines for monitoring, reporting and review of tropical forest management operations
1 Principles of management control
2 Monitoring, recording and reporting of operational achievements in tropical forest management
3 Reporting
4 Review of forest management activities
5 Further reading
1 Principles of management control
1.1 Management should be responsive to changing needs
1.2 Approaches towards monitoring and reporting
1.1 Management should be responsive to changing needs
Management of tropical forest resources needs to be responsive and adaptable to changing knowledge and needs. Even the most carefully planned arrangements should be modified as new information becomes available and good management requires early recognition of the need for modification. In the absence of formal and systematic monitoring a problem may not be recognised until it is too late to make meaningful changes. Monitoring refers to the comparison of actual performance against the target. The aims of monitoring, analysis and reporting on progress towards the achievement of management objectives are:
· to control forest operations, including the performance of contractors or concession companies or other agencies working under contract or licence in the forest;
· to identify under- or over-achievement, to determine the causes and to take action to rectify the situation and to adjust the Annual Plan of Operations if necessary;
· to detect inefficiency or fraud;
· to provide information for the future revision of the plan;
· to provide information for the evaluation of the management plan or its prescriptions.
1.2 Approaches towards monitoring and reporting
Two main approaches for monitoring operational performance are:
· Periodic Monitoring: Periodic monitoring involves making comparisons between physical achievements and programme targets and between financial expenditure and budgets at the end of specified time periods, for example, monthly, three-monthly or longer intervals.
· Continuous Monitoring: Continuous monitoring is applied frequently to specified key indicators which enables information on plan implementation to be collected often, such as at weekly intervals. Continuous monitoring provides a forest manager with the means of applying close control over forest operations enabling frequent comparisons to be made between planned programmes and inputs of resources with actual achievements and inputs. This is increasingly important in both State and company enterprises where budget constraints in forest management require tight expenditure control.
Monitoring operational achievements based on the implementation of prescriptions set out in the forest management plan, recording achievements and reporting these to a director of forest operations establishes a basis for transparent accountability of management. The prescriptions in a forest management plan must be clear so that progress can be measured and reported.
Regular maintaining of forest management targets, through comparison with physical achievements and budgets, enables appropriate corrective action to be taken. This is an essential practical aspect of tropical forest management and also of business management. From a practical point of view it is desirable that monitoring of operations be integrated as far as possible with other production control systems in order to reduce costs.
2 Monitoring, recording and reporting of operational achievements in tropical forest management
2.1 The use of "key" topics for monitoring operational performance
2.2 Responsibility for monitoring
2.3 Monitoring guidelines
2.1 The use of "key " topics for monitoring operational performance
Management activities in natural tropical forests are extensive in the sense that wood production takes place over large areas, in a range of forest types and typically involves a diversity of operations. Although all operations being carried out under an approved management plan should be capable of being monitored, some are more meaningful than others.
Although the exact monitoring needs of each forest management unit will be specific to that forest there are a number of "key" topics which can often be applied as indicators of operational performance at the forest level. For example, some "key" topics are forest boundary definition, forest protection, log-volume production, outputs of specific silvicultural operations, unit costs and community development activities. It is these operational topics that should be monitored regularly and accurately. Staff resources are usually limited and, linked to the extensive scale of operations, it is desirable that operational monitoring be applied mainly to the most meaningful topics.
A summary of "key" topics that can be used as indicators for monitoring operational performance of a forest management unit, together with quantifiable features and monitoring frequency are summarized in Table 15. The use of these topics provides a basis for operational monitoring that is able to be adapted to local prevailing conditions. Unit costs referred to in Table 15, are also "key" topics to be monitored.
2.2 Responsibility for monitoring
Responsibility for monitoring, that is for the collection of the figures and for comparison of output with target, will be done at different levels of supervision. It is important that even junior supervisory staff are aware of the targets and can take corrective action if there is under-achievement, without having to wait for more senior staff to react. Reporting and summarising will be done at different hierarchical levels too, but detailed analysis will be done at more senior levels. Monitoring of operational progress should be given the same emphasis, or priority, as applied to other operational activities. It is no less important than these operations.
Forest-dependent people having an interest in the future of a managed forest should be given an opportunity to help monitor performance in order to help minimise any conflicts that might arise.
Table 15: A Summary of "Key" Topics for Monitoring Operational Performance of Tropical Forests
Key Sections Monitored
Key Topics
Monitoring Mechanisms
Frequency
Boundary Definition
Surveyed boundaries
Maps; Forest verification
Annually
Boundary Maintenance
Boundary length maintained
Forest verification
Annually
Pre-Harvest Inventory
Location; Area; Inventory records
Maps; Records/check cruising
Each cruise
Cutting Plan & Post-harvest Assessment
Location; Area; Log volumes; Numbered trees
Maps; Check scaling/Forest verification
Monthly, weekly or daily
Diagnostic Sampling
Location; Area; Inventory records
Records/Forest verification
After each cutting plan
Silvicultural Tending
Management plan prescriptions
Records/Forest verification
Monthly
Road Construction
Length; Road types
Forest verification
Monthly
Forest Security & Protection
Management plan prescriptions
Records/Forest verification
Monthly
Technical Staffing
Staff recruitment & resignations
Employment records
Annually
Environmental Management
Management plan prescriptions
Records/Forest verification
Annually
Rural Communities Development
Management plan prescriptions
Records/Forest verification
Bi-annually
Continuous Forest Inventory
PSP Establishment; PSP Remeasurement
Records/Forest verification
Annually
2.3 Monitoring guidelines
Actual expenditure against budgets and actual unit costs against target costs should be monitored for all of the following activities described under Key Topics below.
· Key Topic: Concession or Forest Reserve Boundary Definition
Boundary definition adjacent to neighbouring concessions or forest reserves involves physical marking of boundaries on the ground and formal land surveying. Monitoring can be carried out through an examination of new maps to ensure that new forest boundaries are defined but must also be supported by on-the-ground checking of selected portions of boundaries.
The length and location of new surveying where boundaries are adjacent to other concessions should be noted to verify that boundary definition reporting by a concession company or cooperative is accurate. Boundary definition monitoring should be carried out at least annually and will require funding and logistical resources to enable it to proceed. An example of a design for a table for monitoring forest boundary definition is shown in Annex 14.
· Key Topic: Concession or Forest Reserve Boundary Maintenance
Physical, "on-the-ground" examinations of boundaries is the most effective mechanism for reliably monitoring the maintenance of boundaries. It is only through field monitoring that careful maintenance of boundary lines, pillars and notices can be reliably verified. Boundary maintenance monitoring should be carried out at least annually.
Recent aerial photographs or satellite imagery, or both, covering boundary zones with neighbouring concessions or forest reserves may be of some help for monitoring boundary maintenance but their effectiveness depends on image quality (such as resolution and cloud cover) and also on their age. Images are unlikely to be useful for more than 12 months.
The value of aerial photographs or satellite imagery is primarily a guide for indicating where on-the-ground monitoring should be focused rather than being relied on as a definitive monitoring tool. An example of a design for a table for monitoring forest boundary maintenance is shown in Annex 14.
· Key Topic: Pre-Harvest Inventory (100% Cruising)
(a) Location and area of forest cruised
Maps showing the location and areas of a full pre-harvest inventory (100% cruise) provide the basis for monitoring but it should be carried out in conjunction with (b), accuracy and precision, of a cruise. GPS technology may assist with the definition of areas cruised and may also be able to be used for monitoring. "Open-to-the-sky" visibility, such as roads and forest openings, will be necessary for GPS equipment to be used.
(b) Accuracy and precision of the cruise
Monitoring of a pre-harvest inventory should be undertaken by check-cruising areas of forest selected at random and subsequently making data comparisons between cruise and check-cruise inventories for the identical localities. There is no alternative to an "on-the-ground", forest based check cruise for monitoring the quality of a 100 per cent pre-harvest inventory.
In order to decide the minimum effort which should be devoted to a check-cruise to be satisfied with its accuracy and precision a pilot field study in different forest conditions is desirable in order to examine the effects of forest types, volumes, stocking and other characteristics on cruise accuracy and precision. Check-cruising should be carried out by trained field staff who are at least as familiar as concession staff with species identification and mensurational practices. Monitoring should be carried out on every pre-harvest inventory.
· Key Topic: Felling
(a) Location and area of forest to be cut
Maps showing the location and areas of forest where harvesting has been approved in a management plan (expressed by compartments, or sub-compartments) provide a sound basis for monitoring. Monitoring should involve verification that a cutting plan can be authenticated against the data from a 100 per cent cruise made prior to cutting. Reliable maps showing the cruise location and the cutting plan must be available. Computer generated maps derived from a GIS would, if available, be helpful for this aspect of monitoring. Monitoring should be carried out in conjunction with (b) and (c) to follow.
(b) Maximum stocking to be cut, by forest types
Monitoring of the maximum number of trees per hectare which may be harvested involves two elements:
· That a cutting prescription is appropriate to the ecological characteristics of the forest type, or types, found in a specific forest to be harvested,
· That cutting is consistent with the cutting prescription.
Two approaches can be followed, as follows:
· Sampling. Monitoring to ensure that operational cutting is within a prescribed stems per hectare cutting range can be achieved through ground-based sampling in areas of forest selected at random and subsequently by making comparisons between prescriptions and monitoring data for the identical localities where logging has been undertaken.
· Individual tree monitoring. A more intensive basis of monitoring can be achieved by comparing, in the forest, the stumps of each tree measured and numbered during cruising with the tree distribution map and the tree list that have been formed using cruising data. The tree list of numbered trees should be compared with the numbers of trees recorded during the felling and log extraction. This approach provides the basis for a "chain-of-custody" record of trees to logs.
Monitoring should be carried out monthly, at least initially, but may be less frequent if justified by consistently good operational performance.
(c) Volumes, by forest types, comprising the annual cut:
The most critical aspect of log volume monitoring is check scaling of logs by a state forestry agency or other authority having responsibility for a forest management unit. Monitoring should be carried out at least monthly and should involve random checks on the accuracy of log measurements made and reported by a concessionaire or other agency who has operational responsibility for a forest. An example of a design of a table for monitoring the location, area and volumes of wood cut is shown in Annex 14.
· Key Topic: Silvicultural Operations
(a) Technical specifications
Monitoring the applicability of technical specifications for silvicultural operations, specifically weeding, enrichment planting, thinning and climber cutting, should be undertaken by "on-the-ground" random sampling within compartments where operations have been applied and by making comparisons between specific prescriptions and parallel achievements.
(b) Location, area and sampling intensity for each phase of silviculture
Monitoring of the location and area for each phase of silviculture should be undertaken by making comparisons of maps forming part of the prescriptions in a management plan with the actual record of achievements, linked to field verification that map and compartment records are correct. A field study in different forest conditions should be made in order to determine sampling patterns and the minimum effort which should be placed into this aspect of monitoring in order to be satisfied with its accuracy and precision.
· Key Topic: Diagnostic Sampling
Maps and inventory records showing the location, areas and mensurational characteristics of forest where diagnostic sampling has been prescribed in a management plan will provide the basis for monitoring. It will involve verification from "on-the-ground" visits that diagnostic sampling records can be authenticated against the diagnostic sampling prescriptions set out in an approved management plan.
· Key Topic: Forest Security and Protection
Comparisons between numbers of guards and fire crew specified in a management plan and the numbers employed by a company (as revealed from a check of a staff employment register) is a good basis for monitoring but should also be linked with the management agency's training programme for these two staff groups in terms of the number and content of training activities. Training of staff is essential if confidence is to be maintained in the quality of the forest security and protection service operated by a concession company or other forest management agency.
· Key Topic: Forest Road Construction
Monitoring of road location, length and type of road surface (all weather or dry weather only) should be achieved by "on-the-ground" inspections. GPS technology has considerable potential to supplement ground monitoring and is a useful technical aid. "Open-to-the-sky" visibility which is practicable on forest roads will enable these to be mapped accurately by a forest manager and subsequently verified during monitoring using GPS assistance.
New aerial photographs and satellite imagery showing recently built roads can be helpful for road construction monitoring, at least in terms of location (in specific places) and in road length. The use of imagery alone cannot be relied upon as a definitive monitoring tool.
· Key Topic: Technical Forest Staffing
Comparisons made between the numbers of each category of university graduates and operational technical staff that are specified in a management plan and the numbers of the corresponding categories who are employed by the forest manager should be used as a basis for monitoring. Staff employment can be monitored from checks against recruitment and resignations in a forest manager's staff employment register.
· Key Topic: Environmental Management
(a) Socio-economic issues (including impacts of logging on rural communities)
(b) Physical issues (including soil and water conservation and erosion control)
Monitoring of progress for both (a) and (b) should involve examinations of a forest manager's records or reports of achievements and also physical, "on-the-ground" inspections in a forest with comparisons with management plan prescriptions for each activity. Programmes prescribed in a plan should be defined in quantifiable terms in order that monitoring will be unambiguous, such as numbers of activities each having clear objectives, specific locations, specific time frames and specific implementation arrangements.
· Key Topic: Rural Communities Development
(a) Settlement of Permanent Farmers
(b) Economic Development
(c) Infrastructure Development
(d) Social and cultural development
Monitoring should involve "physical" examinations of activities within forests and comparisons with corresponding management plan specifications for each activity. Inspections should be linked to the forest manager's records or reports of achievements.
Rural community development programmes must be defined in a management plan in quantifiable terms to enable monitoring to be both unambiguous and clear. For example, prescriptions could specify the numbers of activities, specific locations for them and specific time frames. Forest dependent people having an interest in the future of a managed forest should be brought into the monitoring process and invited to help monitor managerial performance in order to help minimise conflicts that might arise.
· Key Topic: Continuous Forest Inventory
Monitoring of CFI should involve examinations of the forest records of new PSP establishment and remeasurements of established PSPs, linked to "on-the-ground" verification of plot management within a forest. Field inspection will enable comparisons to be made with prescriptions expressed in a management plan with actual achievements. Monitoring should also ensure that field data are entered into a PSP database.
3 Reporting
3.1 Responsibility
3.2 Reporting frequency
3.3 Reporting formats
3.4 Maintaining permanent records of achievements
3.1 Responsibility
The information generated by a monitoring system should be reported regularly to a Director of Forest Operations, an Officer-in-Charge or to a Director of Forest Management, depending upon the ownership and organization structure of the forestry agency or company.
Reporting should be both written and oral in order that specific problems, unexpectedly good achievements or any other aspects of management are able to be discussed and any necessary action that is required can be taken quickly.
An Officer-in-Charge or a District Forester should summarise each periodic report and transmit the findings and recommendations to a Conservator of Forests or to the board of a concession company, depending upon the organization structure of the forest management unit.
3.2 Reporting frequency
The frequency of reporting should be related to the nature of the topic being reported on. Reporting should be at least monthly, weekly or even daily in the case of log harvesting where close control of output, location of logging and trees being cut should be followed closely. Other topics can be reported upon less often, at monthly, three-monthly, six-monthly or at annual intervals, depending upon the sensitivity of the "key" topic in the management pattern of the agency or concession company.
3.3 Reporting formats
A convenient way of reporting achievements for many forest operations is to use a tabular format that summarizes operational prescriptions on one side of the form and operational achievements on the other. A simple example is illustrated in Table 16. This format is easily modified and extended to meet specific local forest management reporting requirements.
Reporting of harvesting, local community development and environmental matters cannot usually be reported in a simple tabular format. Separate and more detailed tabular formats that are specific to the needs of each topic should be used for reporting achievements. Examples are shown in Tables 17 (a), (b) and (c) respectively. They can easily be modified and extended to meet specific local forest management reporting requirements.
3.4 Maintaining permanent records of achievements
The preparation and maintenance of permanent records of forest operations is an essential feature of forest management. Permanent records and costs of what activities took place, when and where, provide valuable information for forest management planning in the future. Permanent records are an accumulation of both knowledge and experience and they form an historical record for later reference which is as important for future forest planning as is information collected in a forest today.
Table 16: A Simple Tabular Format for Reporting Operational Forest Management Performance
Operational Prescriptions
Operational Performance
Activities
Dates
Dates
Achievements
Concession Boundary Definition
· Compartments or blocks
(a)
(b)
Pre-Harvest Inventory (100% cruise)
· Compartments or blocks
(a)
(b)
Silviculture
1. Enrichment Planting
· Compartments
(a)
(b)
2. Climber Culling
· Compartments
(a)
(b)
3. Thinning (1st, 2nd phase, etc)
· Compartments
(a)
(b)
Diagnostic Sampling
· Compartments
(a)
Records should be maintained in a compartment history register or in a computer-based compartment records system. Responsibility for maintaining records should rest with the Director of Forest Operations but making regular data entries can be delegated to a specific forester who will have this task listed in the job description. Specific guidance and an example of a manually maintained compartment records form is illustrated in Table 6, Part II, 1 - Guidelines for Defining Forest Resources.
4 Review of forest management activities
4.1 Periodic review of management plan implementation
4.2 Mid-term management review
4.3 Final management review
4.1 Periodic review of management plan implementation
Although progress in the implementation of specific prescriptions, specially "key" topics, comprising a management plan should be regularly reviewed during the year as a part of the process of maintaining control over the business management of the forest, it is also helpful for a more comprehensive review to be made periodically during the term of a plan. Short-term trends in progress in plan implementation can be gauged after a period of two, three or more years, depending upon the topic, and such trends should be used in a review of management plan implementation.
4.2 Mid-term management review
Using data generated through the monitoring system but also relying upon frequent observations of staff who regularly work in a forest, a forest manager and the management team should conduct a mid-term management review to evaluate the operation of a management plan. A plan having a 10 year term should be reviewed in the fifth year, a 20 year plan should be reviewed in the tenth year but could also be reviewed in the fifth and fifteenth years. Flexibility is needed in the timing of a review, depending upon local circumstances. A mid-term review is basically an exercise in making value-judgements on the progress in plan implementation. It should examine the effectiveness of forest management performance against approved prescriptions and against implementation schedules of a sequence of related actions.
Where changes in the implementation of specific prescriptions appear to be both significant and consistent from one year to the next it is important that the review team should examine the reasons for these. Prescriptions and timing schedules may need to be revised if approved programmes appear to be unrealistic. The forest manager should secure new approval for a management plan if major amendments are made to it which will affect the timing and direction of management and, the operational budget on the expected revenue flow from harvesting. In addition to evaluating progress in implementing a plan a mid-term review should also examine the relevance and practicality of specific prescriptions and, where necessary, propose amendments.
4.3 Final management review
Towards the end of the term of a management plan, usually in the final year, a more comprehensive review of the operation of the plan should be undertaken. The final management review should be conducted in the same way as for a mid-term review but covering the full period of a plan. It should examine the effectiveness of management performance against the objectives, prescriptions, implementation schedules and budgets. The final review forms a platform, or foundation, for the preparation of the next management plan.
Table 17 (a): Cutting (Harvesting, Felling) Report
Localities and Resources Categories
Operational Prescriptions
Operational Performance
Specifications
Dates
Dates
Achievements
A. Areas and Forest Type or Species Group "A"
· Compartments/Sub-compartments:
(a)
(b)
· Volumes (and max. sp/ha, from selective harvesting)
(a) volumes
(b) stems/ha
B. Areas and Forest Type or Species Group "B"
· Compartments/Sub-compartments:
(a)
(b)
· Volumes (and max. sp/ha, from selective harvesting)
(a) volumes
(b) stems/ha
C. Areas and Forest Type or Species Group "C"
· Compartments/Sub-compartments:
(a)
(b)
· Volumes (and max. sp/ha, from selective harvesting)
(a) volumes
(b) stem/ha
Table 17 (b): Local Communities Development Report
Rural Development Activities
Operational Prescriptions
Operational Performance
Specifications
Dates
Dates
Achievements
A. Permanent Farmer Settlement
· Paddy farming:
(a) number families settled
(b) area - ha.
· Irrigation:
(a) No. dams constructed
(b) irrigation channels (km)
· Fishponds constructed (No.)
· Dry land farming:
(a) number
(b) area - ha.
· Extension proposals (No.)
· Other Activities
B. Economic Development Issues
· Labour employment (No.)
· Home industries:
(a) types
(b) number established
· Cooperatives developed (No.)
· Electricity (No. houses)
· Community buildings (No.)
· Other Activities
C. Social and Cultural Development Issues
· Schools (No. established)
· Scholarships (No. awarded)
· Health clinics (No. establish.)
· Sports facilities (No.)
Table 17 (c): Environmental Forest Management Report
A. Socio - economic Issues:
(a) Proposal Name:
(b) Location:
(c) Achievements: [summarise the progress being made, including prominent difficulties. Notable achievements and whether amended inputs are desirable]
B. Cultural an d Historical Issues:
(a) Proposal Name:
(b) Location:
(c) Achievements: [summarise the progress being made, including prominent difficulties. notable achievements and whether amended inputs are desirable]
C. Soil and Water Conservation Issues:
(a) Proposal Name:
(b) Location:
(c) Achievements: [summarise the progress being made, including prominent difficulties, notable achievements and whether amended inputs are desirable]
D. Biodiversity Issues:
(a) Proposal Name:
(b) Location:
(c) Achievements: [summarise the progress being made, including prominent difficulties, notable achievements and whether amended inputs are desirable]
E. Scenery and Recreation:
(a) Proposal Name:
(b) Location:
(c) Achievements: [summarise the progress being made, including prominent difficulties, notable achievements and whether amended inputs are desirable]
5 Further reading
Armitage, Ian P. 1997. Practical Steps Contributing to Sustainable Tropical Forest Management for Wood Production With Special Reference to Asia. Special Paper to XI World Forestry Congress, Antalya, Turkey.
Anthony, Robt. N. & Herzlinger, Regina. E. 1980. Management Control In Non-Profit Organizations. Graduate School of Business Admin. Harvard University; Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Illinois, USA.
Brasnett, N. V. 1953. Planned Management of Forests. Alien & Unwin, London.
Johnston, D. R. Grayson, A.J. Bradley, R. T. Forest Planning. 1965. Faber & Faber, London.
<section>a</section>
Annexes
Annex 1: Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
Annex 2: The use of a planimeter and the dot-grid for area measurement from maps
Annex 3: Pilot survey for deriving permanent sample plot numbers for a continuous forest inventory
Annex 4: Some details of empirical procedures for determination of the allowable cut
Annex 5: Examples of text showing how forest management plan prescriptions can be drafted
Annex 6: An example of an annual plan of operations
Annex 7: Relationships between feeder road spacing, feeder road density and skidding distance
Annex 8: Conversion of slopes between degrees, slope percentage and gradients
Annex 9: Costs in tropical forest management
Annex 10: Examples of stumpage appraisals based on export log prices
Annex 11: Economic analysis as a forest management tool
Annex 12 Tables of discount multipliers
Annex 13: Example of an environmental impacts checklist for production forest management
Annex 14: Examples of tables that can be used for monitoring and reporting of some forest operations - adaptation to specific local needs may be required
Annex 1: Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management
A. Inter-Governmental initiatives for action at regional and national levels following UNCED
B. FAO Fact Sheet: Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management1
C. A Summary of forest management unit level indicators2
A. Inter-Governmental initiatives for action at regional and national levels following UNCED
Since UNCED, criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management have been formulated through several international, national and non-governmental processes. These include:
· The Helsinki Process, which focuses on the development of criteria and indicators for the sustainable management of European forests, including boreal, temperate and Mediterranean-type forests. European countries have agreed upon six common criteria, 27 quantitative indicators and several descriptive indicators for sustainable forest management.
· The Montreal Process has been implemented as a follow-up to the Seminar of Experts on Sustainable Development of Temperate and Boreal Forests (Montreal, Canada, 1993). The initiative focuses on the formulation of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in temperate and boreal forests outside Europe. The ten original participating countries, now increased to 12, have agreed on a set of seven, non-legally binding criteria and 67 indicators for sustainable forest management for national implementation.
· The Tarapoto Proposal of Criteria and Indicators for Sustainability of the Amazon Forest, as adopted in February 1995 in Tarapoto, Peru, in a meeting held under the auspices of the Amazon Cooperation Treaty. Within the framework of the Tarapoto initiative, seven criteria and forty-seven indicators have been identified and proposed for national level implementation in the eight participating countries. Criteria and indicators were also identified for the forest management unit level (four criteria and 22 indicators) and of global concern (one criterion and seven indicators).
· The UNEP/FAO Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in -Dry-Zone Africa (Nairobi, Kenya, November 1995), identified seven criteria and 47 indicators for sustainable forest management. These have been submitted to the 27 participating countries concerned for review, comments, agreement and implementation. This set of criteria and indicators were endorsed by the Tenth Session of the African Forestry and Wildlife Commission, held in South Africa in November/December 1995.
· In the FAO/UNEP Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management (Cairo, Egypt, October 1996), experts from 30 countries identified seven criteria and sixty-five indicators for sustainable forest management, which were subsequently submitted for consideration and endorsement to the 12th Session of the Near East Forestry Commission (Cairo, October 1996).
· The FAO/CCAD Expert Meeting on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management in Central America was held in Honduras (Tegucigalpa) in January 1997. Known as the Lepaterique Process of Central America, it developed four criteria and 40 indicators at the regional (Central American) level and eight criteria and 52 indicators at the national level for the consideration of countries in the region. The Expert Meeting elaborated a seven-point Declaration, each point referring back to the criteria defined, for the consideration of the Heads of State of the seven CCAD. This regional meeting was complemented by two FAO/CCAD supported sub-regional meetings and seven national seminars on country-level implementation.
B. FAO Fact Sheet: Criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management^1
^1 FAO Forestry Information Notes: "Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management"; February 1997.
Forest management encompasses administrative, economic, legal, social, technical and scientific action which affects natural forests and plantations. It implies varying degrees of planned human intervention aimed at safeguarding and maintaining the forest ecosystem and its functions, while favouring socially, environmentally or economically valuable species for the improved and sustained production of goods and environmental services. In technical terms, forest management implies the formulation and implementation of forest management plans which help control and regulate harvesting and sustainable use of specified goods and/or which promote and maintain the environmental functions of the forest. This is achieved through silvicultural and protective measures applied in varying intensity to sustain or to increase the social, ecological and economic value of present-day and subsequent generations of the managed forest stand.
Sustainable forest management is commonly viewed as one of the most important contributions which the forestry sector can make to programmes aimed at the sustainable development of nations. In this regard. Chapter 11 of UNCED, "Combating Deforestation" and the "Forest Principles" strongly emphasised the need to reconcile the productive functions with the protective, environmental and social roles which all types of forests fulfil.
Prior to UNCED, guidelines for the sustainable management of natural tropical forests had been elaborated in 1990 under the auspices of the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO), followed by the definition of ITTO criteria for monitoring of sustainability in tropical moist forests, published in early 1992. In 1993, these were supplemented by guidelines for the establishment and management of planted tropical forests, and by guidelines on the conservation of biological diversity in tropical production forests.
Following UNCED a number of national, regional and ecoregional initiatives have been taken to develop common criteria by which sustainable forest management can be defined, and to specify related indicators which can be quantified or described and regularly monitored to evaluate the overall effects of forest management interventions, with a view to their gradual improvement. Inter-Governmental activities in this respect have been conducted mainly within the framework of a number of major international processes as described in Annex 1-A.
FAO's Forestry Department has been involved in, or instrumental in catalysing and helping pursue, all the above international initiatives on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management in accordance with its mandate and priorities, and in line with the Organization's role as Task Manager for Chapter 11 of Agenda 21 of UNCED and focal point for the issue among UN Agencies in the work of the Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests (IPF) of the Commission on Sustainable Development.
In an FAO/ITTO Expert Meeting held in Rome in February 1995, a review was made of possibilities and desirability to harmonise ongoing initiatives related to criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. While there was general agreement on the need to ensure exchange of information, know-how and experience between ongoing initiatives to ensure comparability between them and to avoid wasteful duplication of efforts, the meeting stressed the need to allow ongoing initiatives to pursue their aims unimpeded, reflecting the different environmental and socio-economic conditions from which they have sprung.
The above, general conclusion, was also reached at the Inter-Governmental Seminar on Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management, organized by the Government of Finland in support of the work of the IPF, known as the ISCI Seminar (Helsinki, Finland, August 1996). Participants in the ISCI Seminar, held in collaboration with FAO, included representatives of the ongoing initiatives on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management and of implementing countries, as well as other concerned governmental and non-governmental organizations. The meeting helped further international dialogue and advance related issues in preparation of the final sessions of the IPF in September 1996 and February 1997.
C. A Summary of forest management unit level indicators^2
^2 In this comparative summary: "yes" means that the indicator is mentioned explicitly in the initiative, "+" means that the indicator is not fully expressed although it may have been implicitly considered, "no" signifies that there is no explicit or implicit reference to the indicator.
1. EXTENT OF FOREST RESOURCES AND GLOBAL CARBON CYCLES
ITTO^3
TARA
CIFOR
ATO
CCAD
INDICATORS
* Area of Forest Cover
yes
yes
* Wood Growing Stock
no
* Successional Stage
no
* Age Structure
no
no
no
* Rate of Conversion of Forest to Other Use
no
no
yes
2. FOREST ECOSYSTEM HEALTH AND VITALITY EXTERNAL INFLUENCE INDICATORS
ITTO
TARA
CIFOR
ATO
CCAD
* Deposition of Air Pollutants
no
no
yes
no
no
* Damage by Wind Erosion
no
no
no
FOREST VITALITY INDICATORS
* Incidence of Defoliators
no
no
no
* Reproductive Health
no
no
no
no
FOREST INFLUENCE INDICATORS
* Insect/Disease Damage
yes
no
no
* Fire and Storm Damage
no
* Wild Animal Damage
no
no
no
ANTHROPOGENIC INFLUENCE INDICATORS
* Competition from Introduction of Plants
no
no
no
no
* Nutrient Balance and Acidity
no
no
no
no
* Trends in Crop Yields
no
no
no
^3 ITTO: International Tropical Timber Organization; TARA: Tarapoto Process; CIFOR: Center for International Forestry Research; ATO: African Timber Organization; CCAD: Comisión Centroamericana de Ambiente y Desarrollo (Central American Commission for Environment and Development).
3. BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY IN FOREST ECOSYSTEMS
ITTO
TARA
CIFOR
ATO
CCAD
ECOSYSTEM INDICATORS
* Distribution of Forest Ecosystems
no
no
no
no
* Extent of Protected Areas
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Forest Fragmentation
no
* Area Cleared Annually of Endemic Species
* Area and Percentage of Forest Lands with Fundamental Ecological Changes
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Forest Fire Control and Prevention Measures
no
no
no
no
yes
SPECIES INDICATORS
* Number of Forest Dependent Species
no
no
no
* Number of Forest Dependent Species at Risk
no
yes
yes
* Reliance of Natural Regeneration
yes
yes
yes
* Resources Exploitation Systems Used
* Measures in situ Conservation of Species at Risk
no
GENETIC INDICATORS
* Number of Forest Dependent Species with Reduced Range
no
no
4. PRODUCTIVE FUNCTIONS OF FORESTS
ITTO
TARA
CIFOR
ATO
CCAD
INDICATORS
* Percentage of Forests/Other Wooded Lands Managed According to Management Plans
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Growing Stock
yes
yes
yes
* Wood Production
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Production of Non-Wood Forest Products
yes
no
yes
yes
* Annual Balance Between Growth and Removals of Wood Products
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Level of Diversification of Sustainable Forest Production
yes
yes
yes
* Degree of Utilization of Environmentally Friendly Technologies
yes
yes
yes
yes
5. PROTECTIVE FUNCTIONS OF FORESTS
ITTO
TARA
CIFOR
ATO
CCAD
INDICATORS
* Soil Conditions
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Water Conditions
yes
yes
yes
* Management for Soil Protection
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Watershed Management
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Areas Managed for Scenic and Amenity Purposes
no
no
yes
* Areas and Percentage of Forest Lands Managed for Environmental Protection
* Infrastructure Density by FMU Category
no
no
yes
no
yes
6. SOCIO-ECONOMIC FUNCTIONS AND CONDITIONS
ITTO
TARA
CIFOR
ATO
CCAD
INDICATORS FOR ECONOMIC BENEFITS
* Value of Wood Products
* Value of Non-Wood Products
no
* Value from Primary and Secondary Industries
no
no
no
no
* Value from Biomass Energy
no
no
no
* Economic Profitability of SFM
yes
yes
yes
* Efficiency and Competitiveness of Forest Products Production, Processing and Diversification
no
no
yes
* Degree of Private and Non-Private Involvement in SFM
yes
* Local Community Information and Reference Mechanisms in SFM
no
no
no
yes
INDICATORS FOR THE DISTRIBUTION OF BENEFITS
* Employment Generation/Conditions
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Forest Dependent Communities
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Impact on the Economic Use of Forests on the Availability of Forests for Local People
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Quality of Life of Local Populations
yes
yes
yes
yes
* Average per capita Income in Different Forest Sector Activities
* Gender-focused Participation Rate in SFM
yes
7. POLITICAL, LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
ITTO
TARA
CIFOR
ATO
CCAD
INDICATORS
* Legal framework that ensures participation by local governments and private landowners
yes
yes
* Technical and regulatory standards of management plans
yes
yes
* Cadastral updating of the FMU
yes
no
yes
yes
* Percentage of investment on forest management for Forest Research
no
no
no
yes
* Rate of investment on the FMU level activities: regeneration, protection, etc.
yes
yes
yes
* Technical, Human and Financial Resources
no
yes
Annex 2: The use of a planimeter and the dot-grid for area measurement from maps
This annex provides examples in the use of planimeter and dot-grid methods for area measurement on maps as described in Part 11, Section 1.2.1: Practical Methods for Measurement of Areas from Maps.
Planimeter Measurement of Area
Areas measured on a map are scaled up according to the map scale, as follows:
MA=Pu* Ms^2* 0.00001
where,
MA = mapped area (square metres),
Pu = planimeter reading (number of units),
Ms = map scale.
For example, a planimeter reading of 114 (the difference between "beginning" and "end" readings on the planimeter's vernier) on a map having a scale of 1:25,000 equals an area of 712,500 square metres. This can easily be converted to hectares by dividing by 10,000, giving an area of 71.25 hectares. Using the vernier reading of 114, the area is computed as follows:
712,500sq.metres = 114* 25,000^2 * 0.00001
The area is converted to hectares by dividing 712,500 by 10,000, giving 71.25 hectares. The benefit of this approach is that small areas (results expressed in square metres) as well as large areas (results expressed in hectares) can be calculated.
Dot Grid Measurement of Area
The dot grid sheet is placed on an irregularly shaped part of a map, such as a forest type, and the number of dots which occur within the area to be measured are counted. The map scale must be known. There are two procedures for converting an average dot count to area, as follows:
(a) Where a square grid has been printed on a map, as in national topographical maps, for example, 1:50,000 scale maps.
* derive the area of each grid-square from the scale of the map. For example, a 1:25,000 scale map may have grid-squares printed at 400 metre intervals. Thus the area of each grid-square is 0.4 km × 0.4 km = 0.16 km^2, or, 0.16 km^2 × 100 = 16 ha.
* the area, in hectares, of a dot-grid count on a map is calculated using the following formula:
where,
MA = mapped area (hectares)
D = the average number of dots counted on a map,
d[c] = number of dots per cm^2 on the dot grid
G = grid-square area (hectares).
* this a worked example using the following assumptions:
- a 1:50,000 scale map having grid-squares printed at 400 metre intervals, the area of each grid-square is 16 ha.
- a dot grid having 36 dots per grid, i.e. 6 dots x 6 dots on each side of a grid-square.
The area of a piece of land having and a dot-grid count of 74 is derived as:
Map Area (ha) = (74/36)* 16 = 32.9 ha
(b) Where there is no grid-square on a map:
* derive the area, in hectares or square metres, of each square centimetre of the dot-grid according to the map scale that is being used, as follows:
D[1]= Ms^2/10000
D[2]= Ms^2/100000000
where:
D1 (m^2) and D2 (ha) = dot-grid area (m^2 or hectares)
Ms^2 = map scale.
* the area of a dot-grid count of an irregular area on a map, in hectares, is calculated using the following formula:
where,
MA = area in hectares
D = the average number of dots counted on a map
d[c] = number of dots per cm^2 on the dot-grid
D[g] = dot-grid area (hectares).
* This is a worked example using the following assumptions:
-a 1: 5,000 scale map; the area of each square centimetre, in hectares, is 5,000^2, 100,000,000 = 0.25 ha
- a dot grid having 25 dots per square centimetre, i.e. 5 dots × 5 dots on each side of a square centimetre.
The area of a piece of land on a map having a scale of 1:25,000 having a dot-grid count of 129 is derived as:
Map Area (ha) = (129/25)* 0.25= 6.66 ha
Annex 3: Pilot survey for deriving permanent sample plot numbers for a continuous forest inventory
This annex provides basic guidance for planning a pilot survey for deriving the numbers of permanent sample plots which should comprise a continuous forest inventory. A pilot survey should be planned and conducted where there is insufficient data about a particular forest from earlier inventory data.
A pilot field study in representative parts of a forest where a continuous forest inventory is proposed should involve five or more temporary plots, each 1 ha in area. These should be established and measured in the same manner as for permanent plots described in this handbook.
The coefficient of variation for volume should be used to provide a guide to the number of PSPs required because volume is the variable of greatest management interest. The coefficient of variation (CTv) is calculated as:
where,
SE[v] = the standard error of the mean volume calculated in the pilot study,
x[v] = the mean calculated volume.
The standard error of the mean volume (SEv) is calculated as:
where,
d = the standard deviation of the mean calculated volume in the pilot study,
n = the number of pilot study samples.
The confidence interval (CIv) of the mean volume is calculated as:
CIy = x[v] ± tSE[v]
where,
t = Student's "t" statistic for (n-1) degrees of freedom.
The number of PSPs (N) required to achieve a specified level of precision in a forest inventory can be calculated from the equation:
where,
p = the acceptable limit of precision, e.g. for 5%, p =0.05
This is the most simple but not the only approach for deriving Permanent Sample Plot numbers.
Annex 4: Some details of empirical procedures for determination of the allowable cut
This annex provides some details on empirical procedures for determination of the allowable cut that, because of their detailed nature, are not explained in Part II, section 3.6.1. The four procedures are:
* A combination of area and the felling cycle.
* A combination of area, volume and the felling cycle.
* A combination of volume and forest increment.
* A consideration of volume only.
A. A Modification of the Area, Volume and the Felling Cycle Yield Determination Procedure Applied in Philippines Dipterocarp Forests
This procedure recognises the variability in size and distribution of large trees in different forest types and considers an estimate of the volume which can be cut, derived from a yield table.
Two separate formulae can be applied depending upon whether a forest is being managed under a management plan, or whether a management plan is not in operation. The AAC formulae are as follows:
* For forests not having an approved management plan:
where
V[o ]= 25% of Vol A (70 to 80 cm dbh) + 55% of Vol B (60 to 70 cm dbh) + Vol C(> 80 cm dbh)
f = recovery factor (a factor of 0.7 is commonly used)
n[z ]= felling cycle (in years) × 2
* For forests having an approved management plan:
where
V[r] = the volume (m^3) which can be cut, determined from yield tables.
In either of the area, volume or felling cycle methods the AAC may exceed the sustainable yield for a limited period in an overstocked forest, such as a natural forest which has not previously been cut, during an adjustment to an equilibrium level of production. Conversely, the AAC in an under-stocked forest should be less than the sustainable yield, to allow for restructuring towards larger and older size classes. Local research is necessary to determine the desirable amount of over - and under-cutting and the theoretical structure of a normal forest.
The question of which trees should be cut is determined not by the yield determination formula but by the stocking, species composition and diameter class distribution characteristics of a specific forest management unit and the silvicultural system being applied. The characteristics of a forest are determined by a 100 per cent inventory in those compartments where cutting is proposed.
Yield planning can also be determined on the basis of five-year felling blocks. Five consecutive, annual cutting areas which are physically adjacent to each other can be grouped together into a felling block. Volume data derived from a complete (100 per cent) or a partial (5 or 10 per cent) inventory covering a five-year felling block are also grouped and a yield for the five-year period can be calculated. This approach provides some flexibility, year by year, in managing a harvest.
B. The Cotta Yield Determination Procedure Based on a Combination of Volume and Forest Increment
An alternative method of yield determination which requires a confident knowledge of increment but avoids the need to derive a theoretical normal forest structure is the Cotta Method. It enables the allowable cut for a forest being managed under an irregular shelterwood silvicultural system to be determined. The method is applied to a specific area of a forest, such as a periodic block, having a known volume of wood and where harvesting is planned over a specified number of years.
In equation form the Cotta Method is as follows:
where:
I[p] = volume increment (m^3) for a specified area of forest and for a specified number of years, known as the regeneration period,
V[comm] ^= the average volume (m^3) of commercial species above a specified stem diameter for a specified area of forests
P[years] ^= the length of the regeneration period, in years.
This method has been used for many years for yield regulation in irregular shelterwood forests in India.
Annex 5: Examples of text showing how forest management plan prescriptions can be drafted
This annex provides several examples of text on how forest management plan prescriptions can be written and presented. In order to give emphasis and to show that prescriptions are clear instructions for action they can be written in bold, bold and italics or in CAPITALS.
Example 1:
Authority and Date of Plan Approval
[Name of forest] forest reserve is managed by the Conservator of Forests, acting under the authority of the Minister of Forests.
Administering Authority
This management plan will be administered by the Divisional Forest Officer, [name of district] District.
Term
The term of this plan will be ten years commencing 1 January, 1993 and concluding on 31 December, 2002.
Example 2a:
FIRE PROTECTION:
TO EFFECTIVELY PROTECT THE FOREST FROM WILDFIRE AND FIRES WHICH MIGHT OCCUR AS PART OF SHIFTING CULTIVATION OR OTHER AGRICULTURAL LAND CLEARING BY TAKING THE FOLLOWING STEPS:
* IMPLEMENTING A FOREST FIRE PREVENTION AND CONTROL PLAN FOR THE [specified] DISTRICT,
* HOLDING NOT LESS THAN ONE SHORT COURSE EACH YEAR FOR TRAINING REPRESENTATIVES OF RURAL COMMUNITIES ADJOINING THE FOREST IN BASIC FIRE SUPPRESSION PRACTICES.
* PUBLIC EDUCATION DURING THE DRY SEASON, USING POSTERS, RADIO, TELEVISION, NEWSPAPERS AND TALKS TO SCHOOLCHILDREN AND VILLAGES ON THE DANGERS OF WILDFIRE TO FORESTS AND PEOPLE WORKING AND LIVING IN FORESTS.
Example 2b:
Fire suppression plans for the [forest name] will be prepared not later than [specific date] and, upon approval by the Operations Director [or other senior person], will be annexed to and become a part of this Management Plan. Each plan will specify the following:
* Definition of area supported by a topographical map at 1:50,000 scale;
* Access routes by vehicle, road and track network, aircraft landing points;
* Location of existing water points and proposals for construction of new water points;
* Vegetation fire hazard class map, identifying "levels of risk" for each broad vegetation zone;
* Equipment resources statement and specifications for procurement of new equipment;
* Specific training arrangements for company and other appropriate personnel;
* A programme of public relations and education will be carried out during each dry season directed at strengthening public awareness of the need for protection of forests from wildfire.
Example 3:
COMMUNITY CONSULTATION AND COOPERATION:
In cooperation and consultation with members of rural communities having a traditional interest in [specified] forest, active steps will be taken to secure effective forest protection from wildfire and forest degradation through encouragement of active community participation in the implementation of this plan through the following activities:
* Conducting one workshop in [nominated] districts each year to promote awareness on the importance of forest protection from clearance and fire,
* Preparation of not less than two forest conservation and protection leaflets and one poster which are specific for this [specified] forest.
Example 4:
Land Management:
· Primary mapping support for implementation of prescriptions in this Management Plan shall be the [national series, 1:50,000 scale, series x, y, and z. Extracts of [national series] maps are attached to this plan.
· Detailed maps shall be generated using GIS technology by the [concession company or other nominated agency], as required, in order to support the intent of specific prescriptions referred to in this Management Plan.
· New aerial photography will be acquired not later than 31 March [year] to facilitate geographic, ecological and forest protection planning. Photography will be acquired which is consistent with industry standards applying at the time, and will also be compatible with remote sensing techniques in use at the time.
Example 5:
Biological Diversity Conservation:
· Existing knowledge on biological diversity amongst plants and animals in the [forest name] forest will be collated, summarized and documented, on contract, not later than 31 December 1999. for a specific date]. This work will identify and make recommendations for:
* New Special Protection Areas or modifications to existing areas;
* New biodiversity studies within the forest.
· New studies directed at expanding knowledge on biological diversity amongst plants and animals within the forest for nominated parts of the forest] will be invited not later than 30 June of each year from universities, research institutions and from other suitably qualified agencies and from individuals. Funding may be provided from year to year by the [company or government forestry agency] in order to support contract implementation of this prescription.
Example 6a:
ANNUAL ALLOWABLE CUT:
THE MAXIMUM ANNUAL CUT FROM NATURAL FORESTS COMPRISING [name] FOREST [reserve or concession] WILL BE 9.800 CUBIC METRES [or a specified volume] COMPRISING:
* LOGS: 5,000 CUBIC METRES
* FUELWOOD/PULPWOOD 4,800 CUBIC METRES
Example 6b:
* THE MAXIMUM ANNUAL ALLOWABLE CUT OF ALL LOG TYPES WILL BE: 10,000 cubic metres
* THE MINIMUM ANNUAL ALLOWABLE CUT OF ALL LOG TYPES WILL BE: 7,500 cubic metres.
Example 7:
Logging - General Prescriptions:
* During the term of this management plan logging will be permitted only in compartments [to be listed].
* Selection cutting practice will be applied in accordance with approved Ministry of Forestry Manual Instructions for Harvesting in Natural Forests.
* A minimum cutting cycle of 35 years will be followed for all selection logging harvesting.
* No tree having a dbh less than 60 cm will be permitted to be cut.
Example 8:
MONITORING AND REPORTING:
* PROGRESS IN IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS MANAGEMENT PLAN WILL BE MONITORED AND REPORTED ON AT 31 DECEMBER [or at a specified date] EACH YEAR.
* REPORTS OF ACHIEVEMENTS MADE UNDER THIS MANAGEMENT PLAN WILL BE FORWARDED TO THE DEPUTY CONSERVATOR OF FORESTS, WORKING PLANS BRANCH AT HEADQUARTERS NOT LATER THAN 1 FEBRUARY OF THE FOLLOWING YEAR [or at a specified date].
Annex 6: An example of an annual plan of operations
An Annual Plan of Operations is derived from an approved long-term management plan and should operate for only one year. A general structure, or format, for an Annual Plan of Operations, based on the use of tables, is shown in this annex and can be adapted to specific local forest management situations.
In this example, only the first page and pages for selected specific topics are shown in order to show general principles of how an annual plan can be developed.
FORMAT for an ANNUAL PLAN of OPERATIONS
Basic Reference Information:
Forest Name or Concession:
Name:.......................................................................
Location:....................................................................
Long-term Management Plan:
Forest Name:.............................................................................................
Period of Operation: 19/...... to 20/.......
Date of Plan Approval:...............................................................................
Long term Goal:
Objectives:..................................................................................................
Area:
Total Forest Area:.....................................................
.................ha
Productive Forest:......................................................
..................ha
Non Productive land:...................................................
..................ha
Protected Forest Area:...............................................
...................ha
AAC (Wood):
Maximum:.........................................m^3......................
..................ha
Minimum:.........................................m^3.......................
...................ha
AAC (Non-wood):
Maximum:...................................... m^3 or kg.............
...................ha
Minimum:...................................... m^3 or kg...............
..................ha
Other Forest Data:......................................................................................
Forest Boundary Definition Plan (it can be adapted for Boundary Maintenance)
Boundary Feature
Total Boundary Length
Last Year
Plan for the Current Year
Plan
Achievements
Km %
Km
Km %
Km %
1. Natural Boundaries:
1.1 Rivers
1.2 Shorelines
1.3 Ridges (hills/mountains)
1.4 Other Natural Boundaries
(specify)
2. Formed Boundaries:
2.1 Roads
2.2 Other Forests
* Protection Forests
* Nature Reserves
* National Parks
* Wildlife Reserves
2.2 Other Concessions
2.3 Other Tenures
Totals:
Pre-Harvest Inventory (100% Cruising) Plan
Location and Area of Inventory
Achievements Last Year
Plan for the Current Year
Cruising Dates
1.1 Block Name, or number
1.2 Compartment numbers
1.3 Areas Surveyed
2.1 Block Name, or number
2.2 Compartment numbers
2.3 Areas Surveyed
3.1 Block Name, or number
3.2 Compartment numbers
3.3 Areas Surveyed
Total Area Surveyed (Cruised)
Notes:
* This table should be supported by a map showing proposed inventory locations.
** Flexibility in the use of this table is suggested as the needs of different forests will differ depending on individual circumstances.
Cutting Plan
Location of the Compartment
Last Year's Achievements
Cutting Plan for this Year
Vol. (m^3)
Area (ha)
No. of Trees Cut
Vol. (m^3)
Area (ha)
No. of Trees Cut
Note: This table should be supported by a harvesting map showing proposed cutting locations.
Silviculture (Tending) Plan:
Location of the Compartments
Achievements of Previous Year
Planned for this Year (ha)
Area (ha)
1. Operation I, e.g. weeding (to be defined for each forest management area)
2. Operation II, e.g. thinning {to be defined for each forest management area)
3. Operation III, e.g. 2nd thinning (to be defined)
Annex 7: Relationships between feeder road spacing, feeder road density and skidding distance
Examples of the use of the Feeder Road Density/Skidding relationship:
where;
D = the feeder road density in metres per ha.
s = the average skidding distance in metres.
a = a "road efficiency" factor, varying between:
5 and 9, depending on terrain;
4 - 5 for flat land,
5 - 7 for hilly land,
7 - 9 for steep terrain,
9 or more for very steep, rough terrain.
Example 1: A road density is 80 metres (0.08 km) per ha in undulating topography, where the factor a = 6. The average skidding distance is:
s=6/0.08 = 75 metres
Example 2: If the average skidding distance is 200 m (0.2 km) in hilly topography where the "road efficiency" factor is estimated to be 6.5, the feeder road density is estimated to be:
D= 6.5/0.2= 32.5m per ha
Annex 8: Conversion of slopes between degrees, slope percentage and gradients
This annex shows how slopes expressed in one unit of slope can be converted to another.
· Slope % = tangent (slope in °)*100
examples:
(a) a slope of 36.4% = tan. 200 × 100
(b) a slope of 30.5% = tan. 170 × 100
· Slope ° = cotangent (slope in %/100)
examples:
(a) a slope of 7.97% = cot.(14.0/100)
(b) a slope of 21.8% = cot.(40.0/100)
· Slope %= Gradient* 100
where, gradient is expressed as a fraction, e.g. 1:4, or 1/4
examples:
(a) a slope of 25% = (1/4)*100 = 0.25*100
- for a gradient of 1:4
(b) a slope of 12.5% = (1/8)*100= 0.125*100
- for a gradient of 1: 8
Gradient = 100/Slope %
examples:
(a) a gradient of 1 in 15 (or 1: 15)
=100/15=6.6% slope
(b) a gradient of 1 in 20 (or 1: 20)
= 100/20 = 5% slope
Annex 9: Costs in tropical forest management
A. Determination of the Point of Minimum Total Cost
This example shows how the minimum total daily cost for an enrichment planting operation can be determined. In this example, the sum of two cost elements - the average cost of walking per day (from an access road) and the average cost of planting per day - are minimized. The assumptions are:
(a) The planting crew comprises 10 people.
(b) The payment rate per person is $0.50 per hour ($5/hour for the 10 person crew).
(c) The average labour cost for enrichment planting is $2.00 per ha.
(d) The total distance walked each day is a two-way trip and increases by 400 meters each day.
(e) The area planted per crew member per day decreases by one hectare per day as the walking distance increases by 400 meters per day.
Col. 1 - a physical unit (meters), changing by a constant amount.
Col. 2 - a physical unit (time), changing by an amount that is related, in this example, to Col. 1.
Col. 3 - crew size (10) × $5 ($0.50 × 10) × fraction of an hour (y minutes/60)
Col. 4 - a physical unit (area), changing by an amount that is related, in this example, to Col. 1.
Col. 5 - area planted/day/10 person crew × $2 per hour. Col. 6-Col. 3+ Col. 5.
From inspection, we see the total daily cost of walking time from a roadside to a planting site increasing as the distance walked increases. The area planted each day and the daily cost of planting steadily decreases as the walking distance increases. The minimum total daily cost ($15.83) is obtained when the crew walk about 700 meters to reach the planting area, a two-way trip of about 1,400 meters. This minimum daily cost of $15.83 is derived as follows:
{$0.50/hour x 10 (crew size)} × {fraction of an hour (70 min/60 min)}+ {$10 (planting cost/crew/day)} = ($5 × 70 min/60 min)+ $10 = $15.83
Total Distance Walked per person/day (meters)
Time Walked per person/day (minutes)
Total Walking Cost. per day/crew ($)
Area Planted/crew/day (ha)
Planting Cost per crew/day ($)
Total Cost per day ($) col.(3)+ (5)
Another output of the analysis is the sensitivity of the total cost to deviations from the minimum cost point. In this example, there is little real change in total cost when the distance walked increases to about 2,200 meters. It appears that the total daily cost increases steeply from this point. This minimum cost point should only be used as a general guideline as other practical management issues, such as the reading spacing and rate at which planting need to be achieved, must also be considered.
B. Break-even Cost Analysis
An example of break-even cost for manual and bulldozer road construction that involves some cut-and-fill work. The assumptions are:
(a) The variable cost of manual labour is $0.60/m^3
(b) A fixed cost for the manual method is $10 for installing a simple lunch camp.
(c) The variable cost of bulldozer work is $0.30/m^3
(d) A fixed cost of moving a bulldozer and fuel trailer to the site is $120.
(e) Machine work is method 1 (C1) and manual work is method 2 (C2).
Using the equation:
the break-even point is O = 367 per m^3. It is derived as follows:
O = (120 - 10), (0.60 - 0.30) = $367 per m^3.
It becomes increasingly more cost-efficient to use a bulldozer when the volume of fill moved exceeds $367 per m^3. Conversely, manual construction can be expected to be more cost-efficient if the volume of fill is less than 367m^3.
Annex 10: Examples of stumpage appraisals based on export log prices
A. A Simple Example
This simple example illustrates how a stumpage appraisal can be carried out based upon log export prices. It shows how fixed and variable costs both contribute towards the cost structure of the stumpage appraisal.
Price and Cost Variables
Price and Average Costs ($/m^3)
Costs ($/m^3)
Variable Costs
Fixed Costs
Export Price of Logs
Less port handling charges
Less road transport costs
- road construction
- transport overhead
- hauling, loading
- normal profit on capital
Log Value on Roadside/Landing
Less log production costs
- logging overhead
- felling and awarding
- normal profit on capital
Derived Stumpage Value
$113/m^3
B. A Comparative Example
This example illustrates how a stumpage appraisal can be used to compare the derived stumpage values, based upon log export prices, for two separate options, when the price and cost variables are different for each option.
Price and Cost Variables
Price and Aver age Costs ($/m^3), Option A
Price and Average Costs ($/m^3), Option B
Export Price of Logs
Less port handling charges
Less road transport costs
- road construction
- transport overhead
- hauling, loading
- normal profit on capital
Log Value on Roadside/Landing
Less log production costs
- logging overhead
- felling and yarding
- normal profit on capital
Derived Stumpage Value
$113/m^3
$122/m^3
C. A Stumpage Appraisal Based on Plywood Production
This example illustrates how a stumpage appraisal can be derived from the market prices of processed products. In this example, the prices of plywood and pulp chips are used. The same approach can be applied to sawn timber.
Price and Cost Variables
Values ($/m^3) Products
Values ($/m^3) Logs
Selling Price of Plywood
Equals selling price of plywood/m^3 of logs used (recovery factor; 0.5 m^3/m^3 of logs)
Selling Price of Pulp Chips
Equals selling price of chips/m^3 of logs used (recovery factor; 0.3 m^3/m^3 of logs)
Equals selling price of plywood and chips per m^3 logs used
Less plywood manufacturing costs converted to a per m^3 of log input basis
Less log handling, hauling, logging costs
Equals Conversion Return
Less allowance for profit and risk (on logging and plywood manufacture)
Equals Appraised Stumpage Value
$68/m^3
Annex 11: Economic analysis as a forest management tool
A. A Practical Example of Discounting
Discounting can be used for finding future values of the present values of costs or benefits. Using the basic formula for discounting shown in Chapter 4, the steps involved in discounting a future value to a present value are as follows:
where:
PV = present value.
FV^n = a future value in year;
i = discount rate.
n = number of years.
Assuming an interest rate of 6 per cent, the present value of a $ 1,000 payment occurring three years from now is calculated as follows:
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
PV = $1,000 * 0.8396 = $839.60
B. An Example of a Spreadsheet Designed for a Tropical Forest Management - Discounted Cash Flow Analysis - PART I
TITLE OF ANALYSIS
YEAR
ITEMS
REVENUE
AMOUNTS (m^3 or kg/ha)
Non-wood Products (kg/ha)
Sawlogs (m^3/ha)
Veneer Logs (m^3/ha)
VALUES ($/m^3 or kg)
Non-wood Products ($/kg)
Sawlogs ($/m^3)
Veneer Logs ($/m^3)
BENEFITS ($/ha)
Non-wood Products ($/ha)
Sawlogs ($/ha)
Veneer Logs ($/ha)
REVENUE ($/ha)
COSTS ($/ha)
Planning
Planting (inc. Treestocks)
Release Weeding
Thinning
CFI
Climber Cutting
Log Harvesting
Non-wood Harvesting
Diagnostic Sampling
Road Maintenance
Fire Protection
Watershed Management
Admin-Overheads
TOTAL COSTS ($/ha)
NET CASH FLOW ($/ha)
NET PRESENT VALUES:
Discount Rates
Values
B. An Example of a Spreadsheet Designed for a Tropical Forest Management - Discounted Cash Flow Analysis - PART II
TITLE OF ANALYSIS
YEAR
ITEMS
REVENUE
AMOUNTS (m^3 or kg/ha)
Non-wood Products (kg/ha)
Sawlogs (m^3/ha)
Veneer Logs (m^3/ha)
VALUES ($/m^3 or kg)
Non-wood Products ($/kg)
Sawlogs ($/m^3)
Veneer Logs (($/m^3)
BENEFITS ($/ha)
Non-wood Products ($/ha)
Sawlogs ($/ha)
Veneer Logs ($/ha)
REVENUE ($/ha)
COSTS ($/ha)
Planning
Planting (inc. Treestocks)
Release Weeding
Thinning
CFI
Climber Cutting
Log Harvesting
Non-wood Harvesting
Diagnostic Sampling
Road Maintenance
Fire Protection
Watershed Management
Admin. Overheads
TOTAL COSTS ($/ha)
NET CASH FLOW ($/ha)
NET PRESENT VALUES:
Discount Rates
Values
Annex 12 Tables of discount multipliers
A. Years 1 to 10
Rate %
B. Years 11 to 20
Rate %
C. Years 21 to 30
Rate %
D. Years 31 to 40
Rate %
Annex 13: Example of an environmental impacts checklist for production forest management
Potential Negative Impacts
Mitigating Actions That Can Be Taken
Direct: Logging
1. Soils
· Erosion: disturbance of the forest understory and soil occurs, increasing susceptibility to soil erosion.
1. Avoid logging in the rainy season; establish criteria for logging: on slopes and near water; clearly mark areas that should be. not be harvested
· Slope Stability: roadcuts across sloping land and clearing of vegetation on slopes can result in landslides.
· Supervise, logging to reduce damage and encourage rapid regeneration.
· Nutrient Loss: loss of nutrients from log harvesting and increased soil leaching; exposed, disturbed soils where vegetation has been removed.
· Use low impact harvesting equipment and methods; minimise skid: trail distances
· Temperature: large increase in temperature following removal of forest canopy; causes loss of soil organisms or drying of soils leading to reduced seedling regeneration.
· Locate log landings in well drained, easily accessible areas downslope so a straight skid trail can be followed. Restore land by grading and reseeding disturbed areas
· Structure: compaction and loss of organic matter leads to changes in soil structure, reduced infiltration, water holding capacity, aeration and root penetration, also laterization.
· No whole-tree harvest in areas of low nutrient levels.
2. Vegetation
· Species composition: species diversity is decreased by selective harvesting of the "best" trees. Soil conditions and sunlight regimes created by different harvesting methods influences ecological forest conditions.
· Collect information or sponsor research on plant community dynamics; collect biology and silviculture of forest types.
· Consider, or study, the applicability of different silvicultural systems.
· Choose a silvicultural system that will achieve regeneration and sustainable wood production and will minimise forest damage.
· Weeds: opening of the forest canopy resulting in weed invasion, impeding natural regeneration and reforestation operations.
· Establish reserves of ecologically significant species/forest types, ensuring that areas are sufficiently large to conserve biological diversity, ecological processes, cultural and historically significant characteristics.
· Slash: logging debris can be a fire hazard and can impede regeneration of preferred tree species.
3. Air
· Dust: Logging activities and log transport on unscaled dirt roads can generate large amounts of dust in dry season conditions.
· Avoid creating open areas of land and avoid/prevent/control fires.
· Plan log transport routes to avoid population centres in the dry season.
4. Wildlife
· Fisheries: sedimentation, nutrient loading, streamflow and temperature changes can be caused by logging leading to changes in fishstocks.
· Make an inventory and/or collection of research results on wildlife species present in a target area.
· Wildlife habitat: habitat disruption, loss of tree and shrub species on which wildlife depends: can lead to disruption of migration patterns.
· Plan harvesting intensity, methods and timing based on above information.
· Presence of people and machinery: disturbance of wildlife through roading, logging and log transport operations.
· Ascertain presence or absence of endangered and migratory species through contact with wildlife professionals in government, NGOs and universities.
Poaching: increased wildlife poaching due to better access to people.
5. Water
· Extremes of flow: soil infiltration and water holding capacity of harvested forest land is reduced, leading to pronounced runoff and flooding when the season arrives and also to low water flows in dry season conditions.
· Maintain vegetation as buffer zones adjacent to all water bodies.
· Assess impacts of harvesting operations on sediment and nutrient loading and on stream flows; assess methods for reducing these impacts.
· Ground water recharge: rainwater recharge of aquifers is reduced because of increased runoff.
· Provide adequate waste disposal facilities.
· Develop/adapt and follow procedures for the use and storage of chemicals, fuel and lubricants in order to reduce the likelihood of water and soil pollution.
· Ponding and stagnation: land form changes, water course 'obstruction and soil compaction can cause localised ponding and water stagnation, increased sedimentation alters natural aquatic biology and water course features.
· Increased temperature: opening of the forest canopy adjacent to water body increasing water temperature can alter aquatic biological conditions
· Contamination: pollution from petroleum products, herbicides and organic wastes associated with logging operations. Turbidity due to increased sediment loading can alter sunlight penetration in a forest, affecting aquatic plants and damaging fish species.
6. Social and Cultural
· Local economic and social customs: impacts on labour market and labour availability for food production; a shift to a more cash-based economy, alteration of daily living patterns and political power structure changes can occur.
· Incorporate local communities into management planning and plan implementation.
· Develop appropriate local infrastructure to handle the needs of greater local populations, inc. health care, education, law enforcement.
· Land tenure and traditional forest uses: huntina gathering and traditional exploitation of forest resources can be disrupted; limitation of access to forest resources by local populations of people.
· Protect all significant cultural places, traditional land and resource use patterns.
· Establish clear, long-term jurisdiction over the forest area to avoid unlawful harvesting of logs, settlement and fires. Monitor public health and take action to control disease problems.
· Infrastructure and social services: overloading of infrastructure and social services by the arrival of forest workers (and families) and settlers can lead to a range of social problems, inc. crime and diseases.
Indirect: Logging
· Increased access: roads that are built into forest areas can provide access to people and lead to unwanted and uncontrolled population migration, leading to social and technical forest management problems.
· Take action to close roads following harvesting; provide incentives to discourage people from migrating to forests where a planned forest management programme is in force.
Annex 14: Examples of tables that can be used for monitoring and reporting of some forest operations - adaptation to specific local needs may be required
1. Boundary Definition
Boundary Features
Total Boundary Length
Monitoring Report
Prescription
Achievements
Cumulative
Km
Km
Km
Km
1. Natural Boundaries:
* Rivers (to be specified)
* Coastlines (where relevant)
* Ridges (hills/mountains)
* Other Natural Boundaries
(if present; to be specified)
2. Formed (Artificial) Boundaries:
2.1 Roads/Permanent Tracks
(to be named)
2.2 Formed Boundaries With State Forests
* Protection Forests
* Nature Reserves
* National Parks
* Wildlife Reserves
2.3 Formed Boundaries With Other Forest Management Units
2. Boundary Maintenance
Boundary Features
Total Boundary Length
Monitoring Report
Prescription
Achievements
Km
Km
Km
1. Natural Boundaries:
* Rivers (to be specified)
* Coastlines (where applicable)
* Ridges (hills/mountains)
* Other Natural Boundaries
(if present; to be specified)
2. Formed (Artificial) Boundaries:
2.1 Roads/Permanent Tracks
(to be named)
2.2 Formed Boundaries With State Forests
* Protection Forests
* Nature Reserves
* National Parks
* Wildlife Reserves
2.3 Formed Boundaries With Other Forest Management Units
3. Tending Operations (including weeding, climber cutting and liberation)
Silvicultural System Applied: (to be specified)
Compartment Numbers
Prescription (ha)
Tending Achievements (hit)
Totals
January/March
April/June
July/September
October/December
Release Weeding
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
Climber Cutting
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
etc.
Thinning
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
etc.
4. Cutting/Harvesting Achievements
Silvicultural System Applied: (to be specified)
Compt No.
Pre-harvest Inventory
Cutting Plan Achievements
Area (ha)
Vol. (m^3)
January - March
April - June
July-September
October -December
Area
Vol
Area
Vol
Area
Vol
Area
Vol
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
etc.
<section>b</section>
FAO technical papers
FAO FORESTRY PAPERS
1 Forest utilization contracts on public land, 1977 (E F S)
2 Planning forest roads and harvesting systems, 1977 (E F S)
3 World list of forestry schools, 1977 (E/F/S)
3 Rev.1 World list of forestry schools, 1981 (E/F/S)
3 Rev.2 World list of forestry schools, 1986 (E/F/S)
4/1 World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade 1-Vol. 1, 1977 (E F S)
4/2 World pulp and paper demand, supply and trade -Vol. 2, 1977 (E F S)
5 The marketing of tropical wood in South America, 1976 (E S)
6 National parks planning, 1976 (E F S")
7 Forestry for local community development, 1978 (Ar E F S)
8 Establishment techniques for forest plantations, 1978 (Ar C E* F S)
9 Wood chips - production, handling, transport, 1976 (C E S)
10/1 Assessment of logging costs from forest inventories in the tropics - 1. Principles and methodology, 1978 (E F S)
10/2 Assessment of logging costs from forest inventories in the tropics - 2. Data collection and calculations, 1978 (E F S)
11 Savanna afforestation in Africa, 1977 (E F)
12 China: forestry support for agriculture, 1978 (E)
13 Forest products prices 1960-1977, 1979 (E/F/S)
14 Mountain forest roads and harvesting, 1979 (E)
14 Rev.1 Logging and transport in steep terrain, 1985 (E)
15 AGRIS forestry -world catalogue of information and documentation services, 1979 (E/F/S)
16 China: integrated wood processing industries, 1979 (E F S)
17 Economic analysis of forestry projects, 1979 (E F S)
17 Sup.1 Economic analysis of forestry projects: case studies, 1979 (E S)
17 Sup.2 Economic analysis of forestry projects: readings, 1980 (C E)
18 Forest products prices 1960-1978, 1980 (E/F/S)
19/1 Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species-Vol. 1, 1980 (E)
19/2 Pulping and paper-making properties of fast-growing plantation wood species-Vol. 2, 1980 (E)
20 Forest tree improvement, 1985 (C E F S) 20/2 A guide to forest seed handling, 1985 (E S)
21 Impact on soils of fast-growing species in lowland humid tropics, 1980 (E F S)
22/1 Forest volume estimation and yield prediction -Vol. 1. Volume estimation, 1980 (C E F S)
22/2 Forest volume estimation and yield prediction - Vol. 2. Yield prediction, 1980 (C E F S)
23 Forest products prices 1961-1980, 1981 (E/F/S)
24 Cable logging systems, 1981 (C E)
25 Public forestry administrations in Latin America, 1981 (E)
26 Forestry and rural development, 1981 (E F S)
27 Manual of forest inventory, 1981 (E F)
28 Small and medium sawmills in developing countries, 1981 (E S)
29 World forest products, demand and supply 1990 and 2000, 1982 (E F S)
30 Tropical forest resources, 1982 (E F S)
31 Appropriate technology in forestry, 1982 (E)
32 Classification and definitions of forest products, 1982 (Ar/E/F/S)
33 Logging of mountain forests, 1982 (E F S)
34 Fruit-bearing forest trees, 1982 (E F S)
35 Forestry in China, 1982 (C E)
36 Basic technology in forest operations, 1982 (E F S)
37 Conservation and development of tropical forest resources, 1982 (E F S)
38 Forest products prices 1962-1981, 1982 (E/F/S)
39 Frame saw manual, 1982 (E)
40 Circular saw manual, 1983 (E)
41 Simple technologies for charcoal making, 1983 (E F S)
42 Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries, 1983 (Ar E F S)
43 Forest revenue systems in developing countries, 1983 (E F S)
44/1 Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 1. Examples from eastern Africa, 1983 (E F S)
44/2 Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 2. Examples from southeastern Asia, 1984 (E F S)
44/3 Food and fruit-bearing forest species - 3. Examples from Latin America, 1986 (E S)
45 Establishing pulp and paper mills, 1983 (E)
46 Forest products prices 1963-1982, 1983 (E/F/S)
47 Technical forestry education - design and implementation, 1984 (E F S)
48 Land evaluation for forestry, 1984 (C E F S)
49 Wood extraction with oxen and agricultural tractors, 1986 (E F S)
50 Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa, 1984 (E F)
50/1 Changes in shifting cultivation in Africa - seven case-studies, 1985 (E)
51/1 Studies on the volume and yield of tropical forest stands - 1. Dry forest formations, 1989 (E F)
52/1 Cost estimating in sawmilling industries: guidelines, 1984 (E)
52/2 Field manual on cost estimation in sawmilling industries, 1985 (E)
53 Intensive multiple-use forest management in Kerala, 1984 (E F S)
54 Planificación del desarrollo forestal, 1984 (S)
55 Intensive multiple-use forest management in the tropics, 1985 (E F S)
56 Breeding poplars for disease resistance, 1985 (E)
57 Coconut wood - Processing and use, 1985 (E S)
58 Sawdoctoring manual, 1985 (E S)
59 The ecological effects of eucalyptus, 1985 (C E F S)
60 Monitoring and evaluation of participatory forestry projects, 1985 (E F S)
61 Forest products prices 1965-1984, 1985 (E/F/S)
62 World list of institutions engaged in forestry and forest products research, 1985 (E/F/S)
63 Industrial charcoal making, 1985 (E)
64 Tree growing by rural people, 1985 (Ar E F S)
65 Forest legislation in selected African countries, 1986 (E F)
66 Forestry extension organization, 1986 (C E S)
67 Some medicinal forest plants of Africa and Latin America, 1986 (E)
68 Appropriate forest industries, 1986 (E)
69 Management of forest industries, 1986 (E)
70 Wildland fire management terminology, 1986 (E/F/S)
71 World compendium of forestry and forest products research institutions, 1986 (E/F/S)
72 Wood gas as engine fuel, 1986 (E S)
73 Forest products: world outlook projections 1985-2000, 1986 (E/F/S)
74 Guidelines for forestry information processing, 1986 (E)
75 Monitoring and evaluation of social forestry in India - an operational guide, 1986 (E)
76 Wood preservation manual, 1986 (E)
77 Databook on endangered tree and shrub species and provenances, 1986 (E)
78 Appropriate wood harvesting in plantation forests, 1987 (E)
79 Small-scale forest-based processing enterprises, 1987 (E F S)
80 Forestry extension methods, 1987 (E)
81 Guidelines for forest policy formulation, 1987 (C E)
82 Forest products prices 1967-1986, 1988 (E/F/S)
83 Trade in forest products: a study of the barriers faced by the developing countries, 1988 (E)
84 Forest products: World outlook projections - Product and country tables 1987-2000, 1988 (E/F/S)
85 Forestry extension curricula, 1988 (E/F/S)
86 Forestry policies in Europe, 1988 (E)
87 Small-scale harvesting operations of wood and non-wood forest products involving rural people, 1988 (E F S)
88 Management of tropical moist forests in Africa, 1989 (E F P)
89 Review of forest management systems of tropical Asia, 1989 (E)
90 Forestry and food security, 1989 (Ar E S)
91 Design manual on basic wood harvesting technology, 1989 (E F S) (Published only as FAO Training Series, No. 18)
92 Forestry policies in Europe -An analysis, 1989 (E)
93 Energy conservation in the mechanical forest industries, 1990 (E S)
94 Manual on sawmill operational maintenance, 1990(E)
95 Forest products prices 1969-1988, 1990 (E/F/S)
96 Planning and managing forestry research: guidelines for managers, 1990 (E)
97 Non-wood forest products: the way ahead, 1991 (E S)
98 Timber plantations in the humid tropics of Africa, 1993 (E F)
99 Cost control in forest harvesting and road construction, 1992 (E)
100 Introduction to ergonomics in forestry in developing countries, 1992 (E F I)
101 Management and conservation of closed forests in tropical America, 1993 (E F P S)
102 Research management in forestry, 1992 (E F S)
103 Mixed and pure forest plantations in the tropics and subtropics, 1992 (E F S)
104 Forest products prices 1971-1990, 1992 (E/F/S)
105 Compendium of pulp and paper training and research institutions, 1992 (E)
106 Economic assessment of forestry project impacts, 1992 (E/F)
107 Conservation of genetic resources in tropical forest management - Principles and concepts, 1993 (E/F/S)
108 A decade of wood energy activities within the Nairobi Programme of Action, 1993 (E)
109 Directory of forestry research organizations, 1993 (E)
110 Proceedings of the Meeting of Experts on Forestry Research, 1993 (E/F/S)
111 Forestry policies in the Near East region - Analysis and synthesis, 1993 (E)
112 Forest resources assessment 1990 - Tropical countries, 1993 (E)
113 Ex situ storage of seeds, pollen and in vitro cultures of perennial woody plant species, 1993 (E)
114 Assessing forestry project impacts: issues and strategies, 1993 (E F S)
115 Forestry policies of selected countries in Asia and the Pacific, 1993 (E)
116 Les panneaux à base de bois, 1993 (F)
117 Mangrove forest management guidelines, 1994 (E)
118 Biotechnology in forest tree improvement, 1994 (E)
119 Number not assigned
120 Decline and dieback of trees and forests - A global overview, 1994 (E)
121 Ecology and rural education - Manual for rural teachers, 1995 (E S)
122 Readings in sustainable forest management, 1994 (EFS)
123 Forestry education - New trends and prospects, 1994 (E F S)
124 Forest resources assessment 1990 - Global synthesis, 1995 (E F S)
125 Forest products prices 1973-1992, 1995 (E F S)
126 Climate change, forests and forest management -An overview, 1995 (E F S)
127 Valuing forests: context, issues and guidelines, 1995 (E F S)
128 Forest resources assessment 1990 -Tropical forest plantation resources, 1995(E)
129 Environmental impact assessment and environmental auditing in the pulp and paper industry, 1996 (E)
130 Forest resources assessment 1990 - Survey of tropical forest cover and study of change processes, 1996 (E)
131 Ecología y enseñanza rural - Nociones ambientales básicas para profesores rurales y extensionistas, 1996 (S)
132 Forestry policies of selected countries in Africa, 1996 (E/F)
133 Forest codes of practice - Contributing to environmentally sound forest operations, 1996 (E)
134 Estimating biomass and biomass change of tropical forests -A primer, 1997(E)
135 Guidelines for the management of tropical forests - 1. The production of wood, 1998 (E)
136 Managing forests as common property, 1998 (E)
Availability: April 1998
Ar - Arabic
C - Chinese
E - English
I - Italian
F - French
P - Portuguese
S - Spanish
Multil - Multilingual
* Out of print
** In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Sales and Marketing Group, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
