<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study: Country Report - Indonesia. Country Report - Indonesia </title>
<section>1</section>
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
INFORMATION NOTE ON ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
At its sixteenth session held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Asia Pacific Forestry Commission, which has membership open to all governments in the Asia Pacific region, decided to carry out an outlook study for forestry with horizon year 2010. The study is being co-ordinated by FAO through its regional office in Bangkok and its Headquarters in Rome, but is being implemented in close partnership with governments, many of which have nominated national focal points.
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess from this the likely direction of its evolution and to present its likely situation in 2010. The study involves assessment of current status but also of trends from the past and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Working papers have been contributed or commissioned on a wide range of topics. They fall under the following categories country profiles, selected in-depth country or sub-regional studies and thematic studies. Working papers are prepared by individual authors or groups of authors on their own professional responsibility, therefore, the opinions expressed in them do not necessarily reflect the views of their employers, the governments of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission or of the Food and Agriculture Organization. In preparing the substantive report to be presented at the next session of the Asia Pacific Forestry Commission early in 1998, material from these working papers will be an important element but will be blended and interpreted alongside a lot of other material.
Working papers are being produced and issued as they arrive. Some effort at uniformity of presentation is being attempted but the contents are only minimally edited for style or clarity. FAO welcomes from readers any information which they feel would be useful to the study on the subject of any of the working papers or on any other subject that has importance for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector. Such material can be mailed to the contacts given below from whom further copies of these working papers, as well as more information on the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Study, can be obtained:
Rome:
Mr. Mafa Chipeta
Bangkok:
Mr. Patrick Durst
Senior Forestry Officer
Regional Forestry Officer
Policy and Planning Division
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
Forestry Department
Maliwan Mansion
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Phra Atit Road
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Bangkok 10200
Rome, 00100, ITALY
THAILAND
Tel: (39-6) 5705 3506
Tel: (66-2) 281 7844
Fax: (39-6) 5705 5514
Fax: (66-2) 280 0445
Email: <mafa.chipeta@fao.org>
Email: <Patrick.Durst@fao.org>
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Forestry problems, challenges and opportunities are different from one country to another. The only similar thing is that the global forestry objective is to achieve sustainable forestry development. In this sense, one country's experience in achieving this objective, for instance, can have valuable lessons for other countries so that all countries can more rapidly complete the learning process in developing and utilising their forests. The forestry role of one country would hence yield interesting aspects from both economic and environmental points of view. In the face of global economy and free trade issues in the immediate future, the exchange of experience will have special meaning, particularly for countries in the Asia Pacific region.
On the basis of the idea stated above, the regional outlook study provides a useful opportunity for Indonesia to firstly inform others about its present situation and possible important experiences in developing the forestry sector as required by the Asia Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC) and, secondly, for learning of other countries experiences in the sector. To Indonesia the opportunity may yield good lessons in further planning its future forest and forestry development path, especially towards the year 2010 and beyond.
<section>3</section>
2. CONTEXT
2.1. The Indonesian Economy and the Role of Forestry
2.2. Long Term Objectives and Goals
2.3. Indonesian Forestry: A Regional Context
2.4. Issues
2.1. The Indonesian Economy and the Role of Forestry
Indonesian forestry plays an important role in increasing economic development partly through foreign exchange earnings, job and business opportunities, as well as acceleration of development for remote regions. In the 1980's decade, forest-related employment accounted for about 5.4% of the total labour force (MoF, 1991). In this period, the forestry sector contributed an average 16% of total foreign exchange earnings annually and 27% of non-oil export earnings. These figures were relatively sustained at least until 1994, when foreign exchange from forestry sector was about US$4.2 billion.
During the last two years (1995-1996) the forestry sector contributed an average 3.85% of total gross domestic product (GDP) which in 1995 was about Rp. 454,514.1 billion, and in 1996 had increased to Rp, 532,630.8 billion. Both these GDP figures decrease slightly when calculated on non-oil basis, namely Rp. 417,705.8 billion (1995) and Rp. 490,316.6 billion (1996). In this two-year period, the growth rate of the total GDP is about 18.91% (1995) and 17.19% (1996), while for non-oil-based, the GDP growth rate is respectively 19.79% and 17.38%^1. In the same period, the corresponding GDP growth rate for the forestry sector was about 7.15% (1995) and 6.67% (1996).^2
^1 The basis for GDP growth estimation reported here appears to differ from that generally used by the Asian Development Bank, the estimates of which suggest GDP growth at 8.1 % in 1995 and 7.9% in 1996.
^2 1996 Statistical Year Book of Indonesia. Central Bureau of Statistic (data was recalculated).
Indonesia's population growth rate is decreasing; in 1992 the population was about 184.49 million and it just reached 196.81 million in 1996. A study by Capricorn Consult Inc. projected that the population will become 211.20 million by the year 2000. The average annual growth rate of population during this period (1992-1996) is around 1.6% (Table 1). Compared to the 1980's decade rate of around 2.12%, this reduced figure shows a good achievement by Indonesia in managing her population, mainly through success of family planning programmes. Average per capita income of Indonesian has grown from US$80 in 1967 to US$650 in 1990 and to US$1,155 in 1996^3 although following recent turmoil, the latest data (1998) indicate that average per capita income has decreased to US$610^4 based on assumptions that economic growth is zero, inflation rate is 20%, population growth rate is 1.6%, while exchange rate is US$1.00 to Rp. 5000.
^3 Calculated on the basis of 1 US$=Rp. 2400, before monetary crisis of 1997-98.
^4 KOMPAS Daily, Tuesday February 17, 1998 p. 2.
Table 1 - Indonesian Population 1992-1996 (million)
Year
Population
Source: Central Bureau of Statistic, 1996 except for the year 2000 cited from Capricorn Indonesia Consult Inc.
MoF believes that sustainable development of wood and non-wood forest products can provide 6 millions to 8 millions job opportunities by the year 2000. Should industrial growth be uncontrolled, however, resource sustainability would be seriously affected in the longer-term. Hence, it is also realised to be extremely important to Indonesia to manage its forest resource in such way as to ensure resource sustainability over time. To accommodate this idea, MoF has also committed itself to implementing sustainable forest management (SFM) scheme encouraged by International Tropical Timber Organisation (ITTO), under which Indonesia intends to attain sustainability in terms of economic, ecological and social functions of forests. The recent economic turmoil, however, will result in more and more uncertainty in predicting the achievement of all goals and commitments in the future. The turmoil also requires that Indonesians work harder and harder for a better future.
2.2. Long Term Objectives and Goals
Considerable development of Indonesian forest and forestry was initiated 30 years ago. Forestry became one of the lead sectors for development and during this period Indonesian forestry has constituted a very essential sector of the Indonesian economy. The forestry sector contributes to employment, the development of backward and remote areas, foreign exchange revenues, and generates goods for other sectors of the economy. In short, directly and indirectly, forests greatly contribute to the social and economic welfare of the country. Indonesian forests provide raw materials to a large number of industries so that forest and wood-based industries have domestic and export markets and provide significant multiplier effects.
The Major Guidelines for National Development of Indonesia (GBHN) indicate that Indonesia forest resources should be utilised in a rational and sustainable way with regard to their environmental role and the needs of future generations. The specific goals of Indonesian forestry are related to: (a) environmental conservation, (b) economic growth, (c) social welfare, (d) reduction in unemployment, (e) trade-off in involvement of private, public and co-operative sectors especially in economics activities, (f) promotion of investment and economic growth in less developed regions, and (g) attention to global environmental issues.
The more specific goals of Indonesia forest resource management have been centred upon: (a) develop the outer islands so as to relieve population pressure in Java and Bali; (b) utilise forests, including plantations, for national development; (c) develop more productive man-made forests and convert degraded-unproductive areas to produce more wood; (d) generate livelihood opportunities for forest communities and the rural population through the multiple-use management of forests; and (e) conserve natural resources to benefit present and future generations.
In implementing these policies, the MoF derives the programmes on the basis of some items of legislation. Some legislation relevant to forestry development are Act No. 5 of 1967 - the basic forestry law; Act No. 4 of 1982 - the basic environmental management law; and Act No. 5 of 1990 - the conservation of natural living resource and their ecosystems. Under the Act No. 5 of 1967, the Government of Indonesia (GOI) through the Ministry of Forestry (MoF) holds authority to control, manage, and administer the forest resource. The Act No. 5 of 1967 basically determined that forest resource development be directed to: (a) water regulation, (b) flood and erosion prevention, (c) wood and non-wood production, and (d) source of income. The Act also covered the sustained yield principle and the rights of present and future generations to access to and hence benefit from the forest.
In fact, the policies on forestry are mainly based on national development objectives defined under a 25-year long-term national development plan (Pola Dasar Pembangunan Jangka Panjang (PJP) further detailed in a 5-year national development plan (Pelita). Indonesia is now in the period of the second long-term national development plan (PJP II) from 1994 to 2019, under which the national objectives are directed to economics, environmental, religion, culture, national defence and security, as well as politics. In the beginning of this period, particularly during the ongoing Pelita VI (1995-2000), the objectives of forestry sector emphasise sustainability, conservation, people's participation in forestry activities, poverty alleviation as well as economic and political stability. This would be further implemented consistently in the future.
How far all these long-term objectives can be achieved now depends greatly on success of the government in handling the recent monetary and confidence crisis. In facing the crisis, the government is now preparing some strategic and practical responses to hold the targets and objectives unchanged partly through implementation of the 50-point Letter of Intent agreed upon with the IMF.
2.3. Indonesian Forestry: A Regional Context
Indonesian forest products exports came of age in the early 1980s and are showing the growing pains of a sector set on a rapid course of improvement in terms of foreign exchange earnings and of employment through value-added processing. Second only to oil-based exports in 1989, forest product exports bring annually between US$3 and 3.5 billion of gross foreign exchange earnings - slightly more than 50% of the US$6 billion of positive balance of visible trade for the nation.
A common perception is that appropriate policies and strategies have succeeded in giving Indonesia rapid development of very positive international trade trends and the achievement by Indonesia of its rightful position as a world leader in trade of tropical forest products.
The phenomenal development in economic and trade growth in the East Asia Region (including China) and South East Asia has given positive impetus to Indonesia's foreign trade. Additionally, the Republic of Korea, Taiwan Province of China, China's Hong Kong SAR, and Singapore and other ASEAN member countries have until recently shown quite high economic growth. The position of Indonesia in the regional econo-political constellation in Asia has benefited from the performance of these economies; however, Indonesia faces the challenge of cost-competitive labour from the developing countries in this region. The development challenge is likely to be harder in the future considering that, like Indonesia, some other ASEAN countries are now suffering from the recent economic and monetary crisis.
ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) has wide implications for the national economy and economic relations among ASEAN member countries, some of which export similar forest products to Indonesia; this must be anticipated and considered in determining the policy of national economic development including in forestry. AFTA would then be used to strengthen solidarity and enhance the spirit of ASEAN to increase the bargaining power of its member countries towards the future free market under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and successor arrangements under the World Trade Organization.
One of the problems of GATT which will put South countries under pressure is the issue of trade related aspects of intellectual property rights (TRIP). TRIP is perceived to be mainly meant as an effective mechanism to slow down technology transfer. The implementation of GATT will open the market access of forest products industries in the international market. In the open market system, only, high quality products will (easily) sell and these can be produced only by countries with qualified human resources. Given the recent economic crisis situation in some Asian countries, such as the Republic of Korea, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and also Indonesia, competition to attract foreign investors will get tighter. Indonesian forestry industry therefore has difficulties to specify precisely its orientation to the future, since almost all economic sectors in the country are now still looking for the easiest solution for relieving the effects of the crisis through economic and
political reform.
In addition to being mainly a wood source, it has been realised that Indonesian forests have a number of multiple functions, including: (a) as a storage of germ plasm of great diversity, a storage (in the form of wood) for carbon, and producer of non-wood products; (b) as protector of the life-supporting ecology, through the hydrological, carbon/oxygen, and nutrient cycles; (c) maintaining the existence of biodiversity and the ecosystem; and (d) as a resource for research, education and nature appreciation through tourism and recreation services.
The functions and uses of forest will be continuously enjoyed if the management pays due respect to principles of sustainability. The mission of forestry development in Indonesia is to carry out management of forest resource for the needs of present and future generations, through wise utilisation with due respect to the multiple functions of the forest. Ecotourism is one of the major forms of sustainable utilisation of the forest being continuously developed in Indonesia. It will be developed more in both Nature Recreation Parks and Hunting Parks. There are 34 established National Parks ready for developing ecotourism areas; ecotourism will also be developed in production and protection forests. Ecotourism is likely to be another major avenue of forest utilisation in the near future.
In supporting conservation objectives, Indonesia is also involved and actively participates in the implementation of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) and Ramsar Convention protecting wetlands. Indonesia ratified the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and also hosted the third Conference of the Parties of the convention. Besides, Indonesia has also been intensifying the maintenance of its allocated 49.5 million hectares totally protected area (TPA) in order to conserve its wildlife ecosystem richness. It consists of protection forests and conservation areas to include national parks, nature reserves, game reserves, hunting parks, and grand forest parks. In line with the spirit of UNCED, Indonesia has also made serious efforts to implement continuously the integrated conservation and development programme approach in the management of national parks.
2.4. Issues
The forest fires which repeatedly occurred between August - November 1997 have been a major environmental issue to Indonesia because of their global impacts. It has been reported that the disturbance of smoke and haze from the fires spread widely over some neighbouring countries mainly Singapore and Malaysia. In this period the fires burned thousands of hectares of forest and plantation land in the two major islands of the country, Sumatera and Kalimantan. Some valuable help came from Malaysia to fight the fires ass rapidly as possible. All the efforts and the changes of weather have allowed significant progress in gradually terminating the fires. Again, forest concessionaires and tree crop plantation have been considered to be major contributors. They have been a key factor increasing the possibility of the fires to occurs. One of the implications is that the fires set back the implementation of forest management according to SFM requirements. Facing the issue, the
government implement some practical efforts to cope the fires and reduce the impact.
In the first week of February 1998 new forest fires started and burned some 6,200 Ha of East Kalimantan forest land. The most recent information indicates that in order to overcome the fires in Indonesia, the government through the Agency for Technological Investigation and Application (BPPT) is seeking international co-operation. Together with Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) Indonesia is going to design an integrated forest fires protection system and will carry out mapping to classify forest areas having potential for serious forest fires. Meanwhile, with Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia is going to establish a forest fire information system. The first cooperation will be implemented over two years beginning this year (1998).^5
^5 Kompas Daily, February 18, 1998.
In addition, the GOI also maintains a National Team for Forest Fire Control. To anticipate the occurrence of forest fire during the dry season, every year, the GOI launched a Forest Fire Awareness Campaign led by several cabinet ministers related to forestry. There was no major forest fire occurrence during the 1995, but serious forest fires occurred in 1997 partly because of long-dry season and El-Nino effects. Forest concessionaires and tree crop plantations, however, have been considered to be major contributors to the starting of fires.
Population pressure on forest areas is still an issue; pressure is expected to be more serious over time. The government, however, is continuously intensifying many social-related forestry programme such as forest village development scheme (PMDH), community-based forest management, and people's participation in forest management. In 1995, forest disturbance considered to be caused by the pressure of people is shown in Table 2.
Table 2 - Forest Disturbances in 1995
No.
Type of Forest Disturbances
Area (Ha)
Forest land encroachment (stealing)
Illegal occupancy
Overlapping forest utilisation
Illegal cutting
Forest fires
Total
Source: 1995 Forestry Statistics of Indonesia. Secretariate General of Ministry of Forestry (recalculated)
The village development scheme (PMDH) is a kind of legal arrangement for the involvement of local communities in forest management. The scheme involves forest concessionaire, the dwellers and/or local communities, local government, and the Ministry of Forestry (MoF) itself. Under this scheme, forest concessionaires have obligation to care for the local communities through creation of activities designed and determined by them by fully involving local communities participation and responding to its aspirations. Besides, the PMDH programme together with other similar activities like social forestry were also designed to alleviate property (tenure) problems. It is reported that as of July 1996 there are 475 units of prospective PMDH implemented, covering 689 villages around the country and involving no less than 62,723 households of villagers (MoF, 1996).
The recent monetary and economic crisis is another major issue being faced by Indonesia. The crisis has had negative impacts on the confidence of people in the Indonesia currency (Rupiah), market structure, and even in the political stability. The exchange rate of the US dollar to the Rupiah has recently been considered to reflect irrational behaviour of local and international speculators; to cope with the crisis, Indonesia has signed a 50-points Indonesia - IMF memorandum called "Letter of Intent" indicating the necessary liberalisation and structural reform steps to be taken by Indonesia in financial, economic as well as political spheres.
The conditions requested by the IMF cover various economic and monetary aspects containing an economic recovery package programme, namely: (a) the recovery of the financial sector, (b) fiscal policies, (c) monetary policies including policies related to currency exchange rates, and (d) structural adjustment.
Structural adjustment is basically aimed at increasing the national efficiency and the competitiveness of the Indonesian economy. It partly covers: (a) gradual reduction of import duty tariffs, (b) gradual reduction of exports barriers including export tax, (c) review of investment and expenditure in the public sector including government expenditure for state-owned companies and strategic companies. Privatisation will continue, including the privatisation of government banks after mergers have been completed.
There are at least eight articles of the IMF memorandum directly related to the forestry sector, namely articles 10, 12, 36, 37, 38, 40, 42, and 50. All these articles basically call for so-called forestry reform including liberalisation in forest industry and trade. The articles are mainly aimed at increasing the national forest industry efficiency and its competitiveness in the future international market. The articles also underline the importance of intensifying the implementation of the principles of sustainability forest management. In short, the eight articles substantively require three key points, namely:
· create consistency and transparency specifically in decision-making processes regarding utilisation of forests as a public goods,
· open competitive market mechanism^6, and
^6It is understood that among key liberalisation measures will be freedom to export logs (Editor).
· strengthen property rights in forest utilisation to make it more clearly defined. The most important thing to Indonesia now is then how all these point can completely be taken into account in formulating policies regarding production forest utilisation and future export market mechanisms, especially for plywood industries.
<section>4</section>
3. INDONESIAN FORESTRY: STATUS AND TRENDS
3.1. Forest Resources
3.2. Environmental Initiatives
3.3. Wood-based Industries
3.4. Non-wood Forest Product
3.5. Services of the Forest
3.1. Forest Resources
Based on the latest (1996) data, the present area of state natural forest lands covers 139.5 million hectares, consisting of 113.8 million hectares as permanent forest lands and 25.7 million hectares convertible forest lands. The permanent forest lands consists of 30.7 million hectares of protection forests, 18.8 million hectares of conservation forests (national parks, nature reserves, etc.) and 64.3 million hectares of production forests. Over 3.068 million hectares of forest lands had been converted to agricultural crop land and 0.93 million hectares for transmigration. The conversion is likely to be gradually eliminated in the near future because of environmental reasons.
The permanent forest land has been largely demarcated in the field. As of September 1996, MoF has established 226,865 kilometres of boundaries, of which 163,273 kilometres outer forest boundaries and 63,529 kilometres were concessions boundaries. Compared with 1989 when the length of forest boundary was only 51,019 kilometres, the achievement on forest boundary establishment during the last 6 years (1990-1996) has more than tripled or equivalent with 320 percent increase (Table 3). It is intended that the trend continue in the future in line with the efforts to implement sustainability scheme which partly requires certainty or assurance of tenure for forest land.
Table 3 - Forestry Boundary Establishment in Indonesia (as of September 1996)
No.
Year
Forest Boundary Completion (Km)*
Concession Boundary Completion (Km)
Total (Km)
Up to 4th Five Year Development Plan (Pelita IV)
Fifth Five Year Development Plan (Pelita V)
Sixth Five Year Development Plan (Pelita VI) **
TOTAL
Ministry of Forestry (1996)
Notes: * Outer and function forest boundaries; ** up to September 1996
The production forests, with total area of 64.3 million hectares, for instance, mostly fall into four vegetation types: mixed hill forests, peat swamp forests, fresh-water swamp forests and tidal forests (mangrove). Most production forests (73%) consist of mixed hill forests located up to 1,300 meters above sea level with the most important commercial species being, among others, Meranti (Shorea spp.). Keruing (Dipterocarpus spp.), Kapur (Dryobalanops spp.), Mersawa (Anisoptera spp.), Agathis (Agathis spp.), Ramin (Gonystylus bancanus), and Merbau (Intsia spp.).
As of March 1996 there were 483 units of concessionaires being operated covering 56.14 million hectares in natural production forest lands. The number of concessionaires and their area are decreasing compare to the 1990's figure when Indonesia had 575 concessionaires covering around 60 million hectares. Consistent with serious efforts on enforcing the law, the number of concessionaires are likely to be limited in the future. It is reported that in the coming five years the number of concessionaires are going to be reduced further through mergers, with the number declining to only 50 concessionaires throughout the country.
Besides, Indonesia is also continuously developing plantation forest under its timber estate development programme (TE), community forest development programme, and community mangrove forest development programme. The programme are mainly aimed at anticipating log shortage from natural forests as well as being a strategic effort to rehabilitate secondary and logged-over areas. Moreover, the programme is also directed at reducing social problems and the people pressure on the forest area.
The TE development programme has been implemented since 1983; until 1991, there were only two kinds of TE programmes, namely TE for pulp and TE specifically allocated for supporting plywood industries. In 1992, TE was also combined with transmigration development programme called TE-Trans (HTI-Trans). Starting in 1993 there is also a TE-like programme named "priority trees". TE therefore has four types of development programme. As of 1995, all TE development programmes covered an area for about 1.75 million hectares (Table 4); TE development programmes are to be continuously implemented in the future for social and environmental reasons and are targeted to have achieved about 6.4 million ha TE by the year 2000.
Table 4 - Timber Estate Development Programme (1989-1995) (Ha)
Year
TE-Pulp
TE-Plywod
TE-Trans
Priority Trees
Total
TOTAL
Source: 1995 Forestry Statistic Indonesia. Secretariate General of Ministry of Forestry, Indonesia (recalculated)
Data for 1995 indicate that community forests covered 637,750 Ha distributed in all provinces in the country except Jakarta Special District. The distribution of community forests around the country is shown in Table 5.
Data for 1995 also indicate community mangrove forest development for last the five years. Until 1995, the development covered 18,009 Ha and no less than 108 sampling units as shown in Table 6. The development is likely to be further implemented continuously as, like other community forests, it has been designed for social and environmental reasons.
Table 5 - The Distribution of Community Forest Area (1995)
No.
Province
Area (Ha)
No.
Province
Area (Ha)
Aceh Special District
East Nusa Tenggara
West Sumatera
West Kalimantan
North Sumatera
Central Kalimantan
Riau
South Kalimantan
Jambi
East Kalimantan
South Sumatera
North Sulawesi
Bengkulu
Central Sulawesi
Lampung
South Sulawesi
West Java
South-East Sulawesi
Central Java
Maluku
Yogyakarta Special District
Irian Jaya
East Java
Jakarta Special District
Ball
East Timor
West Nusa Tenggara
TOTAL
Source: Directorate General of Reforestation and Land Rehabilitation, Ministry of Forestry (1995)
Table 6 - Community Mangrove Forest Development (1991-1995)
Development
Total
Sampling Unit (units)
Mangrove Forest Plantation (Ha)
Source: 1995 Forestry Statistics Indonesia. Ministry of Forestry
The condition of most forest area can be assessed from the figures of existing critical land. The Ministry of forestry calculates that the critical forest land during the sixth five year development plan (PELITA VI) has reached serious proportions, namely 25.03 million Ha consisting of 17.52 million Ha outside forest area and the balance (7.51 million Ha) inside forest area as detailed in Table 7. There is a possibility of success in many efforts on land rehabilitation which give reason to hope that the amount of critical land will drop significantly in the near future.
Table 7 - Estimates of Critical Land before and after PELITA VI
Location of Critical Land
Area of critical land by time period (approximate)
By end of PELITA VI
PELITA VI
PELITA VII and beyond
TOTAL (Ha)
Inside forest area
Outside forest area
TOTAL
Source: 1995 Forestry Statistics Indonesia. Ministry of Forestry
(Note: Pelita VI spans 1994/1995 - 1999/2000; Pelita VII will start in year 2000/2001;
all figures have been rounded off - Editor)
3.2. Environmental Initiatives
With regard to its forest management and utilisation, Indonesia is seriously giving attention to environmental matters. As mentioned earlier, Indonesia actively participates in the implementation of the CITES of wild flora and fauna and the Ramsar Convention. The country ratified the CBD in 1994 and Indonesia also hosted the third COP of the convention in May 1995. Furthermore, Indonesia has also been intensifying the maintenance of its allocated 49.5 million hectares totally protected area (TPA) in order to conserve its wildlife ecosystem richness. The TPA consists of protection forests (30.7 million hectares) and conservation areas (18.8 million hectares) to include national parks, nature reserve, game reserve, hunting parks, and grand forest parks.
Serious efforts have been maintained to implement the integrated conservation and development programme approach in the management of national parks. It is consistent with the spirit contained of UNCED 1992 outcomes. Currently (1996) there are 34 national parks covering 10.154 million hectares land and sea/water areas (Table 8).
Table 8 - National Parks in Indonesia (up to 1996)
No.
National Parks
Location
Area (Ha)
NATIONAL PARKS
Gunung Leuser
Aceh; N. Sumatera
Kerinci Seblat
W. Sumatera, vie.
South Bukit Barisan
Bengkulu; Lampung
Berbak
Jambi
Bukit Tiga Puluh
Riau; Jambi
Siberut
W. Sumatera
Way Kambas
Lampung
Gunung Gede Pangrango
W. Java
Halimun
W. Java
Ujung Kulon
W. Java
Alas Purwo
E. Java
Baluran
E. Java
Bromo Tengger Semeru
E. Java
Meru Betiri
E. Java
Bali Barat
Bali
Gunung Rinjani
W. Nusa Tenggara
Kelimutu
E. Nusa Tenggara
Komodo
E. Nusa Tenggara
Bentuang Karimun
W. Kalimantan
Wakatobi
N. Sulawesi
Bukit Baka Bukit R
W & C. Kalimantan
Gunung Palung
W. Kalimantan
Tanjung Puting
C. Kalimantan
Kutai
E. Kalimantan
Lore Lindu
C. Sulawesi
Rawa A. Matumohai
SE. Sulawesi
Bogani Nani W
N. Sulawesi
Manusela
Maluku
Wasur
Irian Jaya
Bunaken
N. Sulawesi
Kep. Seribu
Jakarta
Cendrawasih
Irian Jaya
Karimun Jawa
C. Java
Taka Bone Rate
N. Sulawesi
TOTAL
Source: MoF (1996). Progress Towards Sustainable Management of Tropical Forests (Objective Year 2000)
Note: National Park No. 30-34 printed bold are Marine National Parks.
Ujung Kulon and Komodo National Parks which have been certified by the IUCN as the World Heritage Sites are given priority in management. Gunung Gede Pangrango, Tanjung Puting, Lore Lindu and Leuser National Parks which have been designated by the UNESCO as Biosphere Reserves are also maintained with the maximum attention possible. Berbak National Park and Danau Sentarum Wildlife Reserve which have been designated as Ramsar sites are also given special attention. Three conservation areas, Wasur National Park in Irian Jaya among them, are being proposed to be Ramsar site too. The number of protected wildlife species is still the same, 538 species including 15 marine species. Indonesia has bred and cultivated more than 40 species of wildlife, including 12 wildlife protected species.
Some foundations were created to strengthen financing of various conservation measures are actively contributing to the conservation efforts in the country. They include the Wallacea Foundation to support the management of Bogani Nani Warta Bone National Park in Sulawesi; Leuser International Foundation to support Gunung Leuser National Park in Sumatera.
In line with sustainable forest management scheme, MoF enacted Decrees No. 252 of 1993 and No. 576 of 1993 concerning the Criteria and Indicators (C and I) of Natural Production Forest Sustainability at National Level. These were followed by the issuance of MoF Decree No. 610 of 1993 concerning Sustainable Management of Natural Production Forest at Management Unit Level. Furthermore, the Director General of Forest Utilisation enacted Decree No. 208/1993 concerning Technical Guidance on C and I for Management Unit Level. The basic structure of these decrees are consistent with the ITTO C and I; the C and I have been used in considering applications for the extension of concession permits. Additionally, the Association of Indonesian Forest Concessionaires (APHI) established a Timber Concession Guidance Committee to, among others tasks, supervise the concessionaires in the application in the field of the C and I of sustainable forest management. In 1994/1995 the committee, in
co-operation with some universities, conducted thorough performance assessment of 61 timber concessions. For the working year 1996/1997 it was planned to assess. 180 concessions but only 40 of them were completed. It was observed that the issuance of the C and I has improved the concession performance.
Moreover, Indonesia Ecolabelling Institute (LEI) which was established in 1994 as a third independent body, is actively preparing the concept and implementation of C and I of sustainable forest management at the forest management unit level in the short run. Consistent with this, the GOI is also establishing a forestry accreditation committee called Technical Accreditation Committee (KAIT) composed of members from relevant forestry institutions including NGOs under coordination of the MoF.
3.3. Wood-based Industries
As of year 1995 there are at least 494 units of concessionaire-wood-based industry in Indonesia. These consist of 303 sawmill units with total annual capacity of 8.3 million cu m; 113 plymill units with total annual capacity of 10.9 million cu m; and 78 blockboard mills with total annual capacity of 1.5 million cu m. Besides, there are 2,094 units of non-concessionaire wood-based industries consisting of 2,024 units of sawmill (total capacity 10.67 million cu m/year), 7 units plymill (total capacity 146,650 cu m/year), 24 units of blockboard mill (total capacity 427,650 cu m/year) and 39 units of particleboard mill with total annual capacity of 2.7 million cu m. Details on this are in Table 9.
Table 9 - Wood-based Industries in Indonesia (1995)
Industry
Concession
Non Concession
Units
Capacity (cu m)
Units
Capacity (cu m)
Sawmill
Plywood
Blockboard
Particle Board
TOTAL
Source: Capricorn Indonesia Consult Inc. 1997
Total production of plywood in 1995 was 10.65 million cu m, while total production for blockboard and particleboard were respectively, 1.28 million cu m, and 1.17 million cu m. Data on total wood-based panels production for the last five years (1991-1995) are shown in Table 10 indicating that total production of wood-based panel industries has tended to decrease during the period. This trend is mainly because of significant decrease in plywood production^7.
^7 Of particular interest in terms of structural shift in the panels industry is increase of particleboard from 4% of panels in 1991 to nearly 9% in 1995. Total output has grown 229% while that of all panels has increased only 8% (Editor).
Table 10 - Total Production of Wood-based Panel Industries (1991-1995)
Type of Panel
Plywood
Blockboard
Particleboard
Total Wood-based Panel
Growth (%)
Source: Capricorn Indonesia Consult Inc. 1997
Total production of logs and sawn timber for the last 5 years (1991-1995) shows significant fluctuations as well as overall significant decrease in production tend to decrease significantly, primarily after 1992. (Table 11). This phenomenon is probably in line with the claim that logs production during the period have been absorbed mostly by the national plywood industry so that national sawmill industries have experienced log/raw material shortage.
Table 11 - Timber Production (1991-1995)
Timber
Logs (cu m)
Sawn Timber (cu m)
Total
Growth (%)
Source: 1996 Statistical Year Book of Indonesia. Central Bureau of Statistics
As of 1995 Indonesia forest-based industries also consist of 52 pulp and/or paper mills producing newspaper, printing paper, kraft paper, corrugated, and tissue papers and boards.
Total annual capacity is 3.31 million tons (CIC, 1995). Production of pulp industries in five year period (1990-1994) is shown in Table 12.
Table 12 - Production of Pulp Industries (1990-1994)
Type of Pulp
Long Fibre (ton)
Short Fibre (ton)
Total (ton)
Growth (%)
Source: Capricorn Indonesia Consult Inc. 1997
Domestic consumption, export and import of wood-based products are shown in Table 13, while Table 14 indicates the corresponding figures for paper and paperboard as well as consumption for pulp.
Table 13 - Domestic Consumption, Export and Import of Wood-based Products (cu m)
Wood-based Products
PLYWOOD
Domestic Consumption
Export
Import
BLOCKBOARD
Domestic Consumption
Export
Import
PARTICLE BOARD
Domestic Consumption
Export
Import
Source: Capricorn Indonesia Consult, Inc. 1997
Table 14 - Domestic Consumption of Pulp; Domestic Consumption, Export and Import of Paper and Paperboard
Wood-based Products
PULP (Domestic Consumption)
Virgin Pulp
Used Paper
PAPER AND PAPERBOARD
Domestic Consumption
Export
Import
Source: Capricorn Indonesia Consult, Inc. 1997
3.4. Non-wood Forest Product
There are many non-wood forest product (NWFP) produced, traded and consumed in Indonesia of which those which are economically worth mentioning are rattan (Calamus spp.), resin, cayuput oil, turpentine, and gum resin - these are by far are the most important non-wood products. Production of all these NWFP is shown in Table 15.
Table 15 - Production of NWFP (1991-1995)
NWFP
Rattan (ton)
Gum Resin (ton)
Turpentine (ton)
Cayuput Oil (Itr)
Damar Resin (ton)
Source: 1996 Statistical Year Book of Indonesia. Central Bureau of Statistics
Indonesia has the most diverse rattan resources in the world and a major portion of the world's total rattan resource is found in Indonesia's forests. Rattan is socially and economically the most important NWFP. Rattan has excellent properties for furniture manufacturing and is extensively used by furniture industries in many countries. While marketed in the local market as a basic material for the furniture industry and smallholders handicrafts, rattan has a long-established reputation as an export oriented commodity.
Before the 1988 export ban of semi-processed rattan, about 170,000 to 180,000 tons of rattan were harvested annually, of which 60% was exported. This harvest level has left certain areas depleted of rattan stocks. The export ban of semi-processed rattan has resulted, however, in some dramatic changes in the rattan industry: the number of industrial units increased from 109 at the end of 1986 to 381 at the end 1988 increasing capacity from about 61,000 tons to 439,000 tons. At the same time, the development of rattan plantations has been slow (partly because of rattan farmer are no longer interested in rattan plantation for some reasons); the total area of rattan plantations is about 21,400 hectares. As a result, the production of rattan has tended to decrease significantly, as shown in Table 15.
Additionally, other NWFPs are recognised to be cayuput oil, gum resin, and damar resin. Resin tapping is carried out to a great extent in Java by the state-owned corporation, Perhutani. Besides, small scale resin tapping by private companies take place in the province of North Sumatera and Aceh. In Java about 30,000 hectares of pine (Pinus spp) plantation were brought under resin tapping by 1980. In this period resin production amounted to 15.5 thousand tonnes to yield about 10 thousand tonnes of rosin and 1,400 kilo litres turpentine. The area brought under resin tapping has grown steadily and reached 73,500 hectares in 1988. Consistent with this figure, the production of resin has also shown a steep increase: the production amounted to 45,200 tonnes representing more than three times increase over 1980 production level. The level of 1993 production was a peak level, since then the production level has significantly decreased (Table 15).
Other non-wood products which are currently utilised are also of fauna and flora products. Currently being utilised and harvested directly from the wild or through captive breeding are 135 species of reptiles, 16 species of mammals, 99 species of birds, 71 species of corals, 40 species of amphibians, 2 species of fishes, 3 species of arthropods, 1 species of tree ferns, 17 species of butterflies, and 2 species of agar woods. The foreign exchange from this utilisation is estimated to be about US$6 million annually.
Development of captive breeding programmes is being boosted in order to meet market demands as well as ex-situ conservation. About 40 species are currently in the programme involving 133 captive breeder companies. In the future, the wild harvest will tend to decrease as the result of habitat losses and the success of captive breeding programme. The programme developed mainly for commercial purposes is also directed to improve the welfare of the people surrounding the habitat. Sustainable fauna and flora utilisation will be directed towards the increase of value added such as export of only finished products, diversification of species and commercial efficiency.
3.5. Services of the Forest
Forest resources in Indonesia are also utilised for non-timber services purposes. In this sense, some forest areas are specifically designated for research, education as well as recreation purposes. All national parks, for instance, are also directed to accommodate such purposes. Besides, some other forest areas are already designated for serving such purposes as well, namely Grand Forest Parks (GFP). As of 1995, there were at least 9 GFPs in Indonesia. The name, location, and area of the GFPs are listed in Table 16.
Table 16 - Grand Forest Parks in Indonesia (1995)
No.
Name of Grand Forest Park
Location
Area (Ha)
Dr. Mochamad Hatta
West Sumatera
Bukit Barisan
North Sumatera
Wan Abdul Rachman
Lampung
Ir. H. Juanda
West Java
R. Soeryo
East Java
Sultan Adam
South Kalimantan
Ngurah Rai
Bali
Murhum
South-east Sulawesi
Palu
Central Sulawesi
Source: 1995 Forestry Statistic of Indonesia. Secretariate General of Ministry of Forestry.
<section>5</section>
4. THE FUTURE
4.1. Supply vs Demand
4.2. Future Development
4.3. Implications
4.1. Supply vs Demand
On the basis of Table 10, the growth of wood-based products is around 4%. This figure seems to be caused by shortage of natural logs. Table 17 illustrates the log demanded by wood-based industries. The demand for logs seems to be continuously increasing over time and this is likely to continue as the wood market is going to be more open in the future.
Table 17 - Wood-based Industries Log Demand
Wood-based Industries
Logs for Sawn Timber *
Logs for Plywood **
Logs for Woodworking ***
TOTAL
Source: Capricorn Indonesia Consult, Inc. 1997
Remarks:
* based on calculation 2 cu m log/cu m sawn timber
** assumption: other wood-based panels use sawn limber, other products waste, etc.
*** based on calculation 1.35 cu m log/cu m woodworking
Compared to the log production (Table 11), it is clear that wood-based industries experienced log shortages in the period and this situation is consistent with an increasing incidence of illegal cutting. Additionally, the log shortage experienced for sawn timber (see also Table 11) is considered to be a logical consequence of unfair domestic log market mechanism which favours plywood although it is understandable because the plywood in that period and even up to now is the major (and single) priority product for export purposes.
Based on Table 12, it is estimated that the prediction of production and consumption of pulp in Indonesia by the year 2000 is as given in Table 18.
Table 18 - Prediction of Production-Consumption of Pulp (1995-1999)
Description
Consumption (ton)
Production (ton)
Balance (ton)
Source: Capricorn Indonesia Consult, Inc. 1997
Table 18 suggested that there is increasing trend in balance of pulp in domestic market considering to be potential supply for export market. It is a good opportunity to open a new market segment, especially for helping domestic pulp mills are not integrated with downstream industry.
On the basis of the figure above, and considering that the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement takes effect in 2003, a world free market comes into effect in 2006 as well as IMP demands among others to eliminate export tax gradually, the structure of wood-based industries is expected to change dramatically. All kinds of wood-based industries would face a similar challenge and could seek opportunities to become a "winner" in exports. They have to fight to become winners and competition is expected to be more and more serious as players from other countries are also freely involved in the same markets. Under this scenario, one thing that will most probably occur is that environmental and social problems could increase significantly.
Facing the above potentially unstable future, Indonesia is going to hold consistently to the implementation of the principle of sustainability already stated in GBHN. Under this commitment, all possible structural change would be required to operate within imposed limits. The key point is that the future log production from natural forests will be based strictly on natural carrying capacity expressed as the amount of annual allowable cut. Besides, Indonesia would intensify continuously the establishment of forest plantations such as TE, community forests, and community mangrove forests. To achieve realistically all this, Indonesia would involve all possible stakeholders to actively participate in all steps of the forest development process.
4.2. Future Development
Indonesia is one of the key forestry countries of the Asia-Pacific region and the world. Ideally, a vision of the future developments would have been prepared but the preparation of this document has occurred at a time of particularly high uncertainty. The country has just agreed upon some substantial policy reforms for the economy as a whole, some (such as the proposed liberalisation of the log market) with direct bearing on forestry; the currency has devalued precipitously; many industries have become dislocated. The Ministry of Forestry will need to respond to these rapid changes in addition to recent decisions which give it responsibility for caring for estate crops like rubber, palm oil, tea, etc. In view of this situation, it is best to await a return to more settled conditions before outlining what the future may hold for the forestry sector.
The phenomena and scenarios illustrated above suggest some implications partly that it is the time to rapidly reform the structure of wood-based industries by providing all industries similar opportunities to develop their industries in a more fair and competitive market atmosphere. It is also necessary for the industry to strengthen its capability and efficiency to get a better bargain in world markets while not forgetting to remain with the bounds of SFM.
The establishment of forest plantations would be intensified through strengthened human resources to speed up the programme. The programme itself is aiming to compensate for log shortage from natural forests as well as to serve as a strategic effort to rehabilitate secondary forest and logged-over areas. In other senses, the programme is also designed to reduce social problems and people pressure on the forest area that will be more serious in the future.
Another possible alternative is to actively promote diversification of forest utilisation, with a view to sustainability; in other words, it is time to intensify non-timber forest utilisation as a complement to timber harvesting. Ecotourism is one prospective choice of such forest utilisation in the future, with the basic idea behind ecotourism being "saving nature by selling it".
The perfect implementation of the above ideas will make it possible to achieve suitable trade-offs between the present and future generations' needs in terms of forest resources. To implement all the above ideas, Indonesia will adopt appropriate supportive policies as well as relevant financial resources.
4.3. Implications
The likely future conditions illustrated above have implications that are very important for Indonesia. Firstly, there is need to implement structural change in forest-based industries partly to assure reform of the log market and trade mechanism that takes into account a future where world market mechanisms are more influential. Secondly, strongly encourage all forest-based industries to have their product produced efficiently and sustainably so that they can increase their competitiveness in the future world market. Thirdly, since efficiency is a key idea in this context, it is also necessary to create consistency and transparency especially in decision-making processes regarding utilisation of forest as public goods. Fourthly, property rights in forest utilisation must be strengthened and made more clearly defined in future. Finally, relevant policies and actions will be directed to support all these things and make it possible for them to be further implemented. Possible
policies and actions will be based on in-depth and comprehensive research and development activities.
<section>6</section>
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Capricorn Indonesia Consult Inc. 1997. Study on Industrial and Trade of Wood-Based Panels in Indonesia 1995. (originally in Indonesia Language). Jakarta-Indonesia.
Capricorn Indonesia Consult Inc. 1997. Study on Industrial and Trade of Pulp and Paper in Indonesia 1995. (originally in Indonesia Language). Jakarta-Indonesia.
Central Bureau of Statistics. 1997. 1995 Statistics of Forest Concession Estate. Jakarta-Indonesia.
Central Bureau of Statistics. 1997. 1996 Statistical Year Book of Indonesia. Jakarta-Indonesia.
Data Consult Inc. 1998. The Background to and Implementation of Economic Reform. Indonesian Commercial Newsletter. XXIII (January 1998). Jakarta-Indonesia.
Kompas Daily. 1998. This Year Percapita Income is US$610. February 17, 1998 (p. 2) Jakarta-Indonesia, (originally in Indonesia Language).
Kompas Daily. 1998. BPPT Making Local Forest Fire Mapping. February 18, 1998 (p. 12) Jakarta-Indonesia, (originally in Indonesia Language).
Ministry of Forestry. 1997. 1995 Forestry Statistics of Indonesia. Secretariate General of Ministry of Forestry. Jakarta-Indonesia.
Ministry of Forestry. 1997. 1995 Forestry Indonesia. Jakarta-Indonesia
Ministry of Forestry. 1996. Country Paper: Indonesia. Progress Towards Sustainable Management of Tropical Forests. Jakarta-Indonesia
<section>7</section>
List of Working Papers already released
APFSOS/WP/01
Regional Study - The South Pacific
APFSOS/WP/02
Pacific Rim Demand and Supply Situation, Trends and Prospects: Implications for Forest Products Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/03
The Implications of the GATT Uruguay Round and other Trade Arrangements for the Asia-Pacific Forest Products Trade
APFSOS/WP/04
Status, Trends and Future Scenarios for Forest Conservation including Protected Areas in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/05
In-Depth Country Study - New Zealand
APFSOS/WP/06
In-Depth Country Study - Republic of Korea
APFSOS/WP/07
Country Report - Malaysia
APFSOS/WP/08
Country Report - Union of Myanmar
APFSOS/WP/09
Challenges and Opportunities: Policy options for the forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/10
Sources of Non-wood Fibre for Paper, Board and Panels
Production: Status, Trends and Prospects for India
APFSOS/WP/11
Country Report - Pakistan
APFSOS/WP/12
Trends and Outlook for Forest Products Consumption, Production and Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region
APFSOS/WP/13
Country Report - Australia
APFSOS/WP/14
Country Report - China
APFSOS/WP/15
Country Report - Japan: Basic Plan on Forest Resources and Long-Term Perspective on Demand and Supply of Important Forestry Products
APFSOS/WP/16
Country Report - Sri Lanka
APFSOS/WP/17
Forest Resources and Roundwood Supply in the Asia Pacific
Countries: Situation and Outlook to Year 2010
APFSOS/WP/18
Country Report - Cambodia
APFSOS/WP/19
Wood Materials from Non-Forest Areas
APFSOS/WP/20
Forest Industry Structure and the Evolution of Trade Flows in the Asia-Pacific Region - Scenarios to 2010
APFSOS/WP/21
Decentralisation and Devolution of Forest Management in Asia and the Pacific
APFSOS/WP/22
Commentary on Forest Policy in the Asia-Pacific Region (A Review for Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Papua-New Guinea, Philippines, Thailand, And Western Samoa
APFSOS/WP/23
Asia Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook: Focus On Coconut Wood
APFSOS/WP/24
Ecotourism And Other Services Derived From Forests In The Asia-Pacific Region: Outlook To 2010
APFSOS/WP/25
Technology Scenarios in the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector
APFSOS/WP/26
In-Depth Country Report - India
APFSOS/WP/27
People and Forests: Situation and Prospects
APFSOS/WP/28
Non-Wood Forest Products Outlook Study for Asia and The Pacific: Towards 2010
APFSOS/WP/29
Opportunities for Forestry Investment in Asia and the Pacific Through Carbon Offset Initiatives
APFSOS/WP/30
Country Report - The Maldives
APFSOS/WP/31
Country Report - Vietnam
APFSOS/WP/32
Country Report - Nepal
APFSOS/WP/33
Country Report - The Philippines
APFSOS/WP/34
Regional Study on Wood Energy Today and Tomorrow in Asia
APFSOS/WP/35
The Status, Trends and Prospects for Non-Wood and Recycled Fibre Sources in China
APFSOS/WP/36
Outlook, Trends and Options with Special Reference to Legislation, Institutions and Capacity Building (A Review for Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, Myanmar, Japan and Vietnam) (Draft)
APFSOS/WP/37
Perspectives of Environmental Civil Society Organisations on Forestry in the Asia-Pacific Region: Outlook To 2010
APFSOS/WP/38
Country Report - Laos
APFSOS/WP/39
ICIMOD
APFSOS/WP/40(A)
FAO Outlook Study On Wood Based Panels Production, Consumption and Trade in the Asia Pacific Region 1996 to 2010
APFSOS/WP/40(B)
FAO Outlook Study On Wood Based Panels Production, Consumption And Trade In The Asia Pacific Region - 1996 To2010 - China Section Study On China's Wood-Based Panel Market Outlook For The Years 2000-2010
APFSOS/WP/41
Scenarios For Extra- And Inter-Sectoral Developments Of Forestry Outlook Study For Asia And The Pacific
APFSOS/WP/42
Country Report - Forestry Of Mongolia
APFSOS/WP/43
Statistical Profile
APFSOS/WP/44
Urban Forestry
APFSOS/WP/45
Country Report - Indonesia
D/W8303
