<title>Mobilizing Science for Global Food Security. Report of the CGIAR Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology. SDR/TAC:IAR/98/7.1</title>
<section>1</section>
TAC COMMENTARY ON THE REPORT OF THE CGIAR PANEL ON PROPRIETARY SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
TAC is grateful to Timothy Roberts, Panel Chair, and to members of the Panel that prepared the report on the future role of the CGIAR in proprietary science and technology. The Committee particularly appreciates the wealth of synthesized information on the protection of intellectual property (IP) as it relates to the CGIAR and the broad spectrum of opinions reflected in the report. The report significantly advances our understanding of the issues confronting the CGIAR with respect to intellectual property rights (IPR).
TAC recognizes that the Panel's Terms of Reference were difficult to satisfy, given the diversity of views on the issues and the uncertainty of the legal environment. Against that background, TAC supports the recommendations made, but wishes that the Panel had reviewed more fully the advantages and disadvantages of various policy options.
In what follows, TAC first reaffirms specific areas of agreement, expands on some points made by the Panel, and then supplements aspects of the Panel's recommendations.
Reaffirming Panel Observations
The Panel made several observations aimed at setting a context for their recommendations:
 IPR will have an ever-stronger influence on the CGIAR's access to the IP of others (see below: Expanding on Panel Observations).
 IPR can be significant in managing the IP developed by the centers (both improved germplasm and enabling technologies) and in supporting center commitments for genetic resources held in trust (see Expanding...).
 The CGIAR must attend closely the evolution of international agreements on genetic resources, e.g., the obligations under the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the International Undertaking for Plant Genetic Resources.
 In the future, other rights, which the Panel has called alternative rights regimes (e.g., farmers' rights and national sovereignty) may become dominant considerations for some classes of genetic resources.
 To manage effectively the three broad groups of material of concern to the CGIAR (that in trust; IP belonging to others, and IP developed by the centers) access to relevant legal and negotiating counsel is essential. (see below: Supplementing the Recommendations).
 CGIAR centers are now using biotechnology-based IP belonging to others (see Supplementing...).
 The CGIAR has an interim working document "Guiding Principles for CGIAR Centers on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources" which orients current work (see Supplementing...).
Expanding on Panel Observations
The Panel was charged to deal with proprietary science; it concentrated its attention on patents and plant variety protection. TAC accepts the idea that the CGIAR must be concerned with genetic resources held in trust, the IP developed by others, and the IP-developed by the centers; and that some situations will favor the application of legal rights to IP developed by centers. The Panel set out criteria which could guide the CGIAR in deciding about protecting intellectual property emerging from its work. These suggest several situations in which such protection might be conducive to attaining CGIAR goals:
 to assure ready access to the IP by others,
 to support public and private partnerships,
 to facilitate commercialization, utilization and technology transfer,
 to assure that center-developed IP might be traded for the protected IP of others, and
 to generate revenue
With respect to IP emerging from the work of the CGIAR, and where publishing is not thought to offer adequate protection, TAC joins the Panel in favoring the arguments for acquiring protection in three situations: access, partnerships, and technology transfer. TAC notes that establishing protection through patents is costly and that protecting rights claimed can entail heavy costs. TAC went on to consider arguments against claiming IPR for tradeables and for revenues. Three concerns were prominent. One was that encouragement in those areas might lead to the diversion of effort from the System's primary goals with relatively low probabilities of success (to judge by the success rates of others). The second was that such pursuits might threaten working relationships with primary partners in the south. The third was that the economic surpluses on which revenues would be based might better be transferred to producers and consumers than to the CGIAR.
TAC's conclusion, like that of the Panel, is that center research and development should not be undertaken explicitly for the purpose of generating IP for trade or for revenue. Even so, and recognizing that such circumstances will be exceptional, center research aimed explicitly at CGIAR goals might lead to IP that could be traded or could generate income, were it protected. In such cases, and where publishing does not offer adequate protection, TAC believes CGIAR policy should permit an assessment of patenting while assuring that advantages and disadvantages (e.g., see above) are accounted for.
Like the Panel, TAC did not discuss in detail the arguments some make about ethical issues, following the Group's MTM97 suggestion to look to the findings of the Genetic Resources Policy Committee (GRPC). TAC did, however, note that, for the CGIAR, the ethics of the case for IPR are rooted in the CGIAR's people-centered strategies for poverty alleviation. TAC notes that biosafety, another theme of abiding concern in the biotechnology arena, is treated in its commentary on the findings of the General Biotechnology Panel.
Supplementing Panel Recommendations
TAC supports much of the first recommendation, especially the need to base policy on the goals of the CGIAR. TAC believes that the recommendation should be expanded to include:
1. more emphasis on the need to take into account commitments made by the CGIAR to duties that will emerge from the implementation of international agreements, e.g., CBD, dealing with genetic resources;
2. more emphasis on the need for all decisions about protection for CGIAR - developed IP to be made on a case-by-case basis;
3. the possibility to decide about protection for IP developed in direct pursuit of CGIAR goals but seen to further CGIAR goals if used to trade for the protected IP of others or for revenue.
In the case where revenues ensue from CGIAR IP, TAC's view is that such revenues (net of the costs centers incur in obtaining protection) should be assigned to a freestanding agency, e.g., a foundation, whose objective would be to ensure that obligations emerging from international agreements are met and to support research consistent with CGIAR goals.
In deciding about protection for center-developed IP:
1. Decisions should be decentralized to centers.
2. Center decision-making should be strongly supported by expert legal and negotiating counsel, especially that provided by a centralized service (see below), in addition to whatever expertise centers access directly.
3. For all such decisions, the underlying logic should be made transparent.
TAC supports the Panel's second recommendation, notes the urgency of the matter, and notes that the experience gained from reviewing and normalizing present CGIAR use of the IP of others will help the CGIAR to assess its future options and policies. TAC favors more emphasis on the management of legal and negotiating expertise for dealing with others whose IP is of interest to the CGIAR, for the IP emerging from the CGIAR efforts, and/or for materials in trust.
With respect to the third recommendation. TAC agrees with the points made there. Moreover, TAC notes the tentative tone of the present "Guiding Principles..." and wonders if events during the years since its first drafting do not favor a more positive view about the role of IP and a more neutral view about IPR as the CGIAR pursues its goals. The CGIAR will carry out its mandate in a world in which proprietary claims are evolving rapidly; to perform effectively for the poor will require great sensitivity to the issues and opportunities emerging from intellectual property.
Beyond this, given its understanding about the concerns of others, TAC recommends a review of circumstances under which the use of material transfer agreements (as required by the agreements with FAO about genetic resources held in trust) will ensure that access to the original genetic resources (as distinct from products derived from those materials, e.g., improved varieties or isolated and assayed genes) held in trust can be maintained in the public domain and readily available to all. TAC recognizes that cross-cutting concerns will emerge as international treaties incorporating national sovereignty and farmers' rights are implemented (e.g., CBD), and that CGIAR policy must be reviewed in the light of such concerns.
<section>2</section>
Executive Summary
Introduction
Increasingly knowledge, and its application, is becoming proprietary. This impacts on all research and development. The CGIAR has always aimed to produce-international public goods, available freely for all to use. How should the system respond to these changes in the management and application of knowledge?
Proprietary rights, in agricultural biotechnology and equally in germplasm are being claimed by both private firms and public institutions. They include patent rights; plant variety rights; and contractual rights arising from material transfer agreements (MTAs). There are also other rights, as yet not so clearly defined as intellectual property: obligations imposed (or to be imposed) by the CBD; Farmers' Rights; and traditional resource rights. We term these "alternative rights regimes".
Our Panel, to advise on these matters, was deliberately constituted with a range of expertise and viewpoints. Because our views differ strongly, we can neither endorse the current systems of rights nor oppose them. The same goes for biotechnology: generally, or in specific applications. But we have been able to agree on some practical steps that the Centres should now take.
The Panel's Work
Our mandate assumes that Centres may want to use at least some proprietary technology. To find out more, we made some brief surveys
 To what extent are CGIAR mandated crops already affected by proprietary claims? We surveyed the broad pattern of trade in harvested crops between developed and developing countries.
 What are Centres doing already? We polled seven of the Centres about their detailed use of proprietary science.
 Will owners make their proprietary science available? We asked some owners of proprietary agricultural biotechnology (private companies and universities) about their willingness to license their technology to the CGIAR and its clients.
Proprietary Science of Others
We are concerned by the results of our poll of Centres. In nearly half the cases in which the Centres were using proprietary biotechnology, they were uncertain whether the results of their research could be applied freely (or at all). In such cases, the process or product used was believed covered by a patent, in at least some countries: or material (germplasm or vectors) used had been obtained under an MTA for research use only. Use by the Centres' clients of the results of such research may only be possible with the permission of the owners of the technology, in such countries and under such conditions as they allow. Without such permission, the Centres, or their clients, may be sued.
These cases need professional investigation, to check if there is a problem and to help resolve it. Even if their own actions are lawful, Centres cannot release material which may be subject to constraints on use without, as a minimum, warning recipients fully of possible problems. Also, lack of experience in IP hinders the Centres in obtaining access to proprietary technology. Centres must have access to skilled professional advice on intellectual property: we recommend setting up a central function to offer this service. This will be a significant expense.
Access to Proprietary Science
Will owners of intellectual property be prepared to make it available for the use of the poor? In our very limited survey, they said they would. We cannot take this encouraging response at face value. Owners will hardly act against their own interests. However, some factors give hope. There are reasons why owners may benefit from licensing their technology, even at no cost (demonstration of the technology, creation of demand, provoking introduction of regulations, development of partnerships). Owners will not license, however, where losing control of the technology damages them, technically or financially. Ability to segment markets is crucial. The CGIAR cannot hope to acquire rights to technology for use on behalf of the poor, if the resulting products then compete in commercial markets, forcing prices down.
Proprietary Science of Centres
The Agreements between FAO and the CGIAR oblige Centres to exclude intellectual property protection over "in trust" germplasm, so no question arises about this. However, developments may, and sometimes should, be protected. The overriding principle here is that such protection should only be applied for if it furthers the mission of the CGIAR, and subject to the proviso that such developments must be accessible, and if possible delivered, to the poor.
Subject to this overriding requirement, there are several situations in which protection might be appropriate. We discuss these. We do not believe that generating income should ever be the main reason for seeking protection. Some of us believe that it will sometimes be appropriate to protect 'bargaining chips'.
After discussing the appropriate IP policy for Centres, we reviewed the existing policy. Most of us find it broadly in line with our conclusions, though with some differences in emphasis.
Organisation
We suggest how the CGIAR centres should organise themselves to receive intellectual property advice from a central IP function. The long-term aim will be to develop complementary expertise in individual Centres. The central function must report at a high level, to give it support for implementing difficult decisions.
Implications
We have not been able to reach consensus about implications of our findings. We list some options. Some think that the CGIAR system should seek to influence policy at world level. In TRIPs and the CBD the needs of poverty alleviation, food production, food security, and the conservation of agricultural biodiversity may not get the emphasis they deserve. The CGIAR should be a voice for agriculture, and a voice for the poor. Others doubt whether the CGIAR can reach persuasive conclusions on policies to be followed, and are concerned that such intervention may damage the CGIAR's ability to give the poor technical help.
<section>3</section>
Recommendations
1. In dealing with proprietary science, the CGIAR must be guided by its mission. How it advances the mission will determine the need for:
 Access to the proprietary science of others;
 Protection of the CGIAR's developments;
 Preventing misappropriation by others of CGIAR material held in trust;
 Selection and design of research programs.
Above all, research and development should never be undertaken as part of a strategy to, or simply in the hope that it will, generate either cash to support CGIAR work, or bargaining chips for acquiring rights to technology from others. On protection, Panel members are divided: some would never approve seeking protection primarily to produce bargaining chips, while others would find it appropriate in certain situations.
2. The CGIAR must promptly acquire relevant expertise to enable it to deal confidently with technology transfer, intellectual property and alternative rights regimes. It should, as a minimum, set up a central office to deal with such matters, with a manager reporting at high level. An immediate review of current proprietary science used by the Centres should be undertaken, so that any irregular situations can be put right as appropriate. It is needed to ensure that the Centres can deliver to clients the benefits of the research they undertake.
3. The Centres' existing Guiding Principles on IP should be revised, formalised and enforced. Most of the Panel is reasonably happy with the existing Guidelines, having independently arrived at similar conclusions, but feels that some inaccuracies need to be corrected and some changes of emphasis made. In particular, decisions to seek IP protection should be governed by clear mission-based rules. Unless this is done. Centres will follow inappropriate and inconsistent policies, causing confusion, legal liability and loss.
<section>4</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The Panel recognizes that its mandate is not to offer advice on whether or not the CGIAR ought to increase its use of proprietary technology or of biotechnology in general, nor is it to judge whether the current proliferation of intellectual property claim is beneficial or detrimental to the ultimate aims of the CGIAR. However, the Panel holds a range of views on these matters, and the various interpretations by different Panel members of the relationship of the CGIAR mandate to intellectual property and to biotechnology yield differing emphases with regard to recommendations about how the CGIAR ought to deal with intellectual property issues in agriculture. While some Panel members believe that the CGIAR can further its mission by helping to "break the taboo" against the use of intellectual property by public institutions, others feel equally strongly that the CGIAR's mission would be better served pointing out the dangers of the increasing use of intellectual property to
the poor, and to the ability of public and other institutions to cany out and deliver research that will benefit the poor
In spite of this wide divergence of views, the Panel has been able to reach consensus on a number of general points and practical conclusions.
<section>5</section>
2. SITUATION
For the purpose of this report, proprietary science means any process or product derived from scientific and research and development (R&D) activities that is legally owned or protected by intellectual property rights.
There are various established forms of intellectual property applied to scientific and research developments, and these may include patents, plant breeder's rights, trademarks, copyrights and trade secrets. There are also developing alternative rights regimes, including Farmers' Rights, traditional resource rights, sui generis property regimes at national and local levels, collective property rights, and systems for managing resource use and access that are not based on property rights. Some of these are not fully implemented, so that it is uncertain how they will work in practice: for example, the implications of the rights of the States to regulate access to their genetic resources and information are still being discussed by parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity. Others are not yet well defined: these include rights which are under negotiation in the process of the revision of the FAO International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
Agriculture (Farmers' Rights ^1). Both intellectual property rights and alternative rights regimes can potentially impact the way IARCs co-operate with national programmes and other partners in developing countries, and must be taken into account by the CGIAR system in developing policies and guidelines on this subject.
1 The concept of Farmers' Rights, as it is stated by FAO resolution 4/89, means "rights arising from the past, present and future contribution of farmers in conserving, improving, and making available plant genetic resources". There are many views on the true meaning of Farmers' Rights, and how to implement them.
The increased utilization of biotechnology and the strengthening and enforcement of intellectual property rights throughout the world have dramatically influenced the collaboration among research institutes in both nature and intensity. A recent survey among university scientists conducting projects funded by the private sector reveals that 12% of them reported that industry support generated a trade secret from their university research; 24% said that their results could not be published without the previous consent of the sponsor; 44% said that, at least to some extent, industry support undermines intellectual exchange; 70% said that, at least to some extent, such support shifts towards too much emphasis on applied research; and 30% admitted that the future commercial application had influenced the choice of research topics ^2.
2 Editorial. The Lancet 342 (8885), December 11, 1993
Research and development in biotechnology are now seen by some in the international scientific community to be important for the integration of both conventional and biotechnological breeding activities for food production. Data compiled by the International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications (ISAAA)^3 show that during 1986 to 1997, approximately 25,000 transgenic crop field trials were conducted by 45 countries on more than 60 crops and 10 traits. Of this total, 15,000 field trials were conducted during the first 10 year period, and 10,000 in the last two years. The global acreage planted with transgenic crops has changed from 7.0 million in 1996 to 31.5 million in 1997. Main transgenic crops in terms of the 1997 acreage are soybean (40%), corn (25%), tobacco (13%), cotton (10%), canola (10%), tomato (1%) and potato (<1%). The most frequent traits being incorporated into plant varieties in the US are herbicide tolerance (30%), insect resistance (24%),
product quality (21%), viral resistance (10%) and fungal resistance (4%). Traits such as marker genes, selectable markers, bacterial resistance and nematode resistance accounted for the other 4% of applications. The significance of these trials is disputed: for some, they suggest that the technology is useful and safe, while others doubt their utility and are concerned that safety cannot be guaranteed and that environmental impacts are not fully understood.
3 James, C..1997. Global Status of Transgenic Crops in 1997. ISAAA Briefs N 5. ISAAA: Ithaca, NY. 31 p.
Due to the changing intellectual property environment, the issue of Farmers' Rights, and the advancement of biotechnologies, the CGIAR at its ICW96 adopted a set of guiding principles on intellectual property and genetic resources for its Centres, for their use on an interim basis (see Appendix D-1). Among other principles, it is stated that "The Centres will not claim legal ownership nor apply intellectual property protection to the germplasm they hold in trust, and will require recipients of the germplasm to observe the same conditions, in accordance with the agreements signed with FAO" ^4. It is understood that, based on this principle, genetic resources accessions delivered by the Centres from their 'in trust' collections are to be sent to users under Material Transfer Agreements (MTAs) imposing such obligations: this practice appears to be followed in most, but not all, cases.
4 Hawtin, G and Reeves, T. 1997 Intellectual Property Rights and the Access to Genetic Resources in the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). Paper presented to the workshop on Intellectual Property Rights III - Global Genetic Resources: Access and Property Rights. 4-6 June, 1997, Washington, D.C., USA.
In a series of informal interviews conducted for the Panel, private companies responded that the CGIAR should be a forum for discussion about IPR and public use issues on a world-wide basis, and it should bring the interests of the private sector into the discussions. The CGIAR Centres should continue to adapt technologies to regional needs and act as a technology conduit to access proprietary technologies. These private sector interviewees also believe that the role of the CGIAR will diminish unless ways are found to access proprietary technologies. However, they believe that as the Centres get involved in IPR and their enforcement, they should not try to become businesses but, rather, continue to serve the public interest. Another set of questions responded to by technology transfer officers at selected US land grant universities revealed that they are not aware of ever having received a request for proprietary materials from any CGIAR Centre. However, all acknowledged
that it is likely that there are direct scientist-to-scientist exchange of materials that occur informally. All these universities would be willing to make proprietary materials available to the centres under standard MTAs (i.e., limited to research use, no transfer to third parties, new inventions must be reported, and ownership is based on inventorship).
The use of biotechnology at selected CGIAR Centres was investigated by ISNAR in a study commissioned by this Panel ^5 The purpose of this study was three-fold: 1) to provide an assessment of the extent to which proprietary applications of biotechnology (technologies and materials) are being used at the IARCs; 2) to identify the potential legal implications regarding use of these proprietary technologies and materials, and 3) to provide a synthesis of findings and recommendations which stimulates further discussions. These technologies and materials were grouped according to their crop applications in cereals, non-cereals and other, and in eight categories as follows: transformation systems; promoter genes, insect-resistance genes, disease-resistance genes, selectable markers genes, genetic markers, diagnostic probes, and others.
5 Appendix C-1. ISNAR - The Use of Proprietary Biotechnology Research Inputs at Selected CGIAR Centres. Report of an ISNAR Study Commissioned by the CGIAR Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology.
The results, based on responses from seven IARCs ^6, show that some Centres are using "state-of-the-art" proprietary technology. A total of 166 applications of proprietary technologies being used were identified, according to the following: 45 selected markers (17 cereals, 26 non-cereals and 2 others), 35 promoters (18, 14 and 3), 29 transformation systems (12, 14 and 3), 19 insect-resistance genes (8, 11 and 0), 11 disease-resistance genes (6, 5 and 0), 10 genetic markers (4, 4 and 2), 3 diagnostic probes (0, 0 and 3), and 14 other applications (6, 6 and 2).
6 An essential condition for conducting the survey in a timely manner was the explicit guarantee of confidentiality. For that reason, IARCs are not identified in this report.
The majority of the categories of proprietary technology used by IARCs are protected by patents, though may be not in the countries where the CGIAR's clients operate. Concerning the permission for use, authorizations were mainly formalized by means of MTAs, licenses and sublicenses. It is worth mentioning that for nearly 40 research applications, the type of permissions were not known or lacking in the questionnaires. The survey also showed the need for immediate action by the IARCs to determine whether, and if so how, they need to revise or renegotiate licenses on the use of patents and other categories of protection. Also, where results are derived from proprietary science, some IARCs anticipate difficulties in dissemination, especially in the case of improved varieties or germplasm of mandate crops. Some Centres are also expecting to file for protection of new products. Examples are the potential patenting of an improved crop line with virus resistance; apomixis; and one
vaccine. In addition, licensing is being considered for 11 different types of diagnostic probes.
A preliminary analysis of trade flows (imports and exports) for CGIAR research crops showed relatively minor proportions of such crops being exported from developing to developed country markets. This indicates that, while there will be specific difficulties in particular cases, problems of intellectual property infringement (by crops protected in developed but not in developing countries) may generally not be too serious (and for some crops, non-existent). This could of course change in the future. ^7
7 Eran Binenbaum and Brian D. Wright. On the significance of South-North trade in IARC crops. Study commissioned by the Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology, CGIAR, 1998.
In conclusion, some Centres may be operating in a risky situation due to limited information and knowledge of IPR management and are in need of immediate IPR consultation for at least half of the technologies and materials identified. Also, Centres are relying primarily on MTAs generally issued for research purposes and not for development activities. Also, Centres are often unfamiliar with the implications of proprietary technologies regarding possibility for liability and implications for collaborative research.
<section>6</section>
3. RATIONALE
3.1 Access to Proprietary Science of Others
3.2. Intellectual Property Protection for the CGIAR Developments
The Panel has agreed that proprietary science can impact, positively or negatively, the effectiveness of the CGIAR in addressing its mission. Currently, most of these impacts are inhibiting its effectiveness. If properly managed proprietary science can provide benefits, otherwise opportunities are being missed.
3.1 Access to Proprietary Science of Others
Given the fact that the IARCs are already using proprietary technologies and materials in their research programmes, there are significant risks in not obtaining the rights to use these properties in applications important to the mission of the CGIAR. The primary risk of unauthorized use is not the threat of legal action against the IARCs, but rather the reluctance of intellectual property owners to share potentially useful properties with the Centres in the future. In order to obtain authorized access to such properties, the CGIAR will need expertise in the management of technology transfer and related intellectual property issues. Establishing such a function will require significant personnel and financial resources. This may require diversion of resources (money, staff, effort) from work more directly related to the CGIAR's mission. Further, to the extent that these activities would require such diversion, there is a risk that donors, partners and clients will object.
On the other hand, there are a number of potential advantages from the establishment of CGIAR expertise in managing issues relating to intellectual property rights and alternative rights regimes. Such expertise will assure that the CGIAR has an effective voice in international discussions concerning these issues where they affect the utilisation of genetic resources. It will also be helpful in maintaining good relationships with various institutional and private partners, by demonstrating that the CGIAR recognizes and respects the rights of these partners in the territories where they are entitled to such protection. Good working relationships with these partners will be key to obtaining future access to technologies and materials which may be important to the CGIAR mission. In the event that the CGIAR cannot obtain authorized access to specific rights or resources, the IARCs will avoid making research investments in the development of technologies and materials which they
cannot distribute. In the event that access to a specific resource is acquired for one centre, the CGIAR technology transfer staff should be able to negotiate for multi-centre access to that resource.
If and to the extent that the CGIAR centres decide to use proprietary science, the following recommendations can be made based on the findings of the ISNAR study and the Panel's discussions. There is a need to:
(i) Acknowledge the use of proprietary technologies and materials by the IARCs.
(ii) Review MTAs with regard to research, development and dissemination. There needs to be a system wide policy concerning MTAs with regard to their review and execution.
(iii) Provide legal advice now for those areas noted as needing immediate attention, and increase awareness of legal implications regarding improved materials and genetic resources for the CGIAR system.
(iv) Provide diverse expertise in intellectual property and alternative rights regimes for CGIAR centres.
(v) Rectify, where necessary, the current situation by either negotiating appropriate (preferably, multi-centre) access to proprietary science, or abandoning its unauthorized use.
3.2. Intellectual Property Protection for the CGIAR Developments
The guiding principle for seeking protection for CGIAR developments must be that such protection will only be sought if and when it furthers the mission of the CGIAR. Furthermore, access and delivery of CGIAR-owned proprietary science to the poor must be guaranteed to the fullest extent possible. The same expertise developed for obtaining access to others' proprietary science can be applied to the protection of technologies and materials developed by the IARCs, should the CGIAR decide to apply for intellectual property protection in any particular case.
There are several notable risks to be considered. Obtaining protection will require substantial expenditures which may result in the diversion of funds from other activities. To the extent that there are any financial returns from licensing such properties, it is unlikely that such returns would be sufficient to cover the costs of the programme for many years. There is also a concern that the capability to obtain intellectual property rights might skew the research agendas of the centres. Most importantly, some CGIAR partners view proprietary science arising from public money, or applied to living material, as being inconsistent with the CGIAR mission, or even unethical.
However, if a mission-oriented approach to seeking intellectual property rights is properly managed, there are a number of potential benefits. The ability to license such rights can facilitate technology transfer when a private partner is needed to accomplish this goal. In joint ventures, such rights provide a basis for reserving rights to the CGIAR for the delivery of jointly owned properties to the poor. CGIAR ownership can be used as a means of market segmentation to assure access to those who cannot afford to pay for new technologies. In some cases, ownership could be used to obtain access to technologies and/or materials developed and protected by others, but essentially derived from CGIAR properties (e.g., the addition of a single gene to a CGIAR-developed plant variety). Intellectual properties could be used to attract local investments, as well as to facilitate capital formation in the countries where the centres are located. Finally, in the event that a licensed
property becomes commercially successful, revenues generated could be used to support the work of the centres, and potentially, to provide returns to the original sources of germplasm, as mandated by the CBD.
For most of the Panel, generating income will never be the main reason for seeking protection. This must be clear, or it will be a constant temptation to divert the energies of the Centres away from their mission. Only a few developments generate income, and it is not easy to predict which, but all cost money to protect. This does not mean that if money is offered, it must be refused.
A minority of the Panel believes strongly that significant developments of the Centres should be protected if they offer good prospects of financial reward. The money generated should be used for the mission, and for remunerating sources of germplasm (there are many possibilities, including paying farmers who preserve biodiversity, royalties to communities of origin, supporting research into in situ conservation benefiting the poor, etc.). Not to protect such developments is to waste useful resources.
<section>7</section>
4. STRATEGY
4.1. How does the CGIAR motivate owners to share proprietary technology?
4.2. Respect for Patents
4.3. How does the CGIAR decide when to seek Protection for its Technologies and Materials?
Whether the Centres are seeking to use the proprietary science of others, or to protect their own developments, the same fundamental criterion applies: will what they do advance the mission of the CGIAR? If not, it is a diversion, either wasteful of effort or even dangerous.
Examples of science that the Centres have already found useful are molecular markers and diagnostic probes. Work in crops of less or no commercial importance (e.g. yams, cowpea, cassava) will be particularly relevant.
In the event that the Centres decide that they need access to proprietary technology of others to deliver benefits to the poor, how can they negotiate such access? Will it be freely available?
4.1. How does the CGIAR motivate owners to share proprietary technology?
4.1.1. Current Situation
4.1.2. Why should companies license?
4.1.3. When will companies be unwilling to license?
4.1.4. How can markets be segmented?
4.1.1. Current Situation
It is perhaps remarkable that the two main sources we consulted ^8 did not suggest major difficulties for the CGIAR in getting access to proprietary technology: at least for non-commercial outlets isolated (segmented) from commercial markets The International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications (ISAAA) was established to help developing countries obtain the benefits of biotechnology. Its President, Dr. C. James, told us that he had not had any experience of being refused access to others' biotechnology, whereas in the Panel's survey (Appendix C-2) both industry and universities expressed general willingness to negotiate licenses.
^8 It should be noted that the views of ISAAA and those who answered the Panel's surveys are mostly of people from the North, from research organizations and from the private sector. We did not seek out the views of farmers, indigenous organizations or scientists in the South not linked in some way to NARS or the CGIAR.
These opinions, from two sources only, must clearly be treated with caution. Part of Dr. James's skill in arranging deals no doubt lies in carefully preparing these in advance: he would not ask for licences that he thought there was no chance of getting. Similarly, the Panel's surveys were conducted anonymously, and asked staff at working (rather than policy) level about generalities. If a particular item of important technology had been considered, or different staff polled, answers might have been different. Nevertheless, for whatever weight may be put on them, the results are encouraging.
4.1.2. Why should companies license?
There are several reasons why owners would be prepared to make technology available to the CGIAR for use in developing countries, either freely or on concessional terms
Firstly, it is an opportunity to demonstrate to the world that the technology works and has advantages. This is of course balanced by a risk that the demonstration fails, not showing any advantage (or, much worse, actually doing harm ^9) causing the technology, and its owner, to be discredited.
^9 While no responsible company will run a substantial risk of an introduction doing significant irreparable harm, of course all other parties concerned with any introduction of this nature must check for themselves that such harm will not result. This is because there are disagreements about what risks exist and how serious they are, and in the nature of things the owner of the technology may tend to underestimate rather than overestimate these.
Secondly, where GMO technology is in question, offering to demonstrate usefulness in the country can help to prepare it for wider applications of genetic technology, by encouraging the putting in place of legal regulations on safety and intellectual property.
Thirdly, companies will be interested in forming partnerships with developing country partners. The CGIAR may be able to help them with this. Licensing will be a way for companies without a market presence in a particular country to introduce themselves and become known, and for those who already have such a presence, to strengthen and extend it.
Fourthly, philanthropic motives should not be overlooked. Companies as such may not have such motives, but their managers often have. Such managers typically believe very strongly in the benefits of what they are doing, quite apart from its potential for profits. They are very willing to share these benefits with fellow human beings, provided it does not cost them too much. This brings us to a crux.
4.1.3. When will companies be unwilling to license?
From the Panel's survey (Appendix C-2), it will be seen that companies are unwilling to license if it leads to their losing control over the licensed technology. Lack of control may cause technical problems: for example, in the case of Bt corn it could result in the companies being unable to ensure a suitable management regime that would minimise the build-up of insect resistance. It will also cause major commercial problems if the licensed technology is used to compete with the licensor in profitable markets.
A necessary condition for commercial owners to be willing to license their technology at all will be the ability for them to segment markets. If owners can retain profitable markets, where farmers find it pays them to buy improved seed at a premium price, they will be able to license those who need the technology but cannot afford to pay for it. However, if they cannot segment markets, so that what they provide free or cheaply to the poor is then sold on, and competes with them in commercial markets, they will lose the latter and go out of the business of innovation. If they cannot segment markets, they can only supply at one price, which will be more than the poorest can afford. (See Appendix D-4: also Lanjouw, 1997).
4.1.4. How can markets be segmented?
Technology markets can be segmented in two main ways, by product or by territory. Both depend on intellectual property rights, in varying degrees.
ISAAA gave us an example of product segmentation. They brokered a deal ^10 between Monsanto and the Mexican government to license Monsanto's antiviral GM technology for use in potatoes. The technology was made available, free of charge, to Mexico for use in two locally grown potato varieties. There is no export market for these varieties, and little trade in them in Mexico, so they would not compete in markets in which Monsanto could charge an economic price. Here the segmentation was probably not dependent primarily on IP rights, so much as the difficulty of transferring the technology out of the varieties in which they were sold. Similar arrangements can be visualised in other crops, particularly crops which are of more importance for subsistence than for trade (e.g., plantain, cassava, consult also the crop statistics given in Appendix C-3).
^10 This deal is cited solely as an example of the circumstances in which owners may be willing to license proprietary technology. The Panel is not judging any other merits it may have or problems it may pose.
However, if proprietary technology is to be used widely for the benefit of the poor, it will be used in at least some crops that have substantial trading value. If markets for these are to be segmented, owners contend it will need to be done by formal intellectual property, typically patents or plant variety rights. ^11 Such property can be made available under limited license, and not (say) for export. It is implied that export could then be prevented by use of IP rights in the importing country.
^11 MTA's are not enough here. While MTA's make life just as difficult for large organizations as formal IP, they are of little use in this situation. This is because the remedy against breach of an MTA is primarily against the organization who signed it, rather than the person (or chain of people) who obtained material from them. If material gets out in breach of an MTA, there is often little to be done, even when it is known exactly what happened (not the usual case). For a patent, however, the source of the material typically does not have to be proved: only what it consists of.
The CGIAR may be able to take advantage of this situation to procure access to proprietary science for use in developing countries.
4.2. Respect for Patents
Two somewhat polarised views have been expressed about how Centres should regard patent rights to technology of other parties. According to the first, the Centres do not need to concern themselves unduly. They are using patented technology, but for research purposes; this is at least within the spirit of the patent laws, if not necessarily the latter in all cases. The owners of the technology are in many cases aware of this and have not objected; in any case owners are unlikely to sue, because of the bad publicity it would cause them.
A second view is based on ethics. It is that the Centres, as bodies supported largely by public funds, have a duty to behave in an exemplary manner. This means that they must fully respect all rights of all parties, including intellectual property rights. If a patent has been granted on a technology, that indicates it is proprietary, and permission is required to work with the technology. According to this view, the possible invalidity of a patent, or even the fact of its non-existence in certain territories, so giving no legal rights in those territories, would be irrelevant.
In our opinion, the second view is closer to the attitude the Centres should take. It may be true (we have not taken detailed professional advice) that in most countries most research work on patented inventions is covered by a 'research exemption'. But there are probably exceptions. In any case, research is not the main problem. The Centres are producing products for use by their clients. If their clients are not free to use those products, because of the methods or starting materials employed in producing them, the work of the Centres is wasted.
It will not do, therefore, to be casual about intellectual property. Even if the Centres are not sued themselves (and owners of IP who felt that their rights were being flouted might not be so complacent as has been suggested), their clients are at risk. While they have no obligation to police the private rights of commercial companies. Centres must not waste their energies in producing products which cannot be exploited for legal reasons.
However, this does not mean that all patents have to be respected everywhere without regard to other considerations.
Firstly, a patent is granted by a national authority in respect of a specific territory. The principle of territoriality is well recognised. Each country grants patents in respect of its own territory, as part of its national sovereignty. No country, or patentee, expects a patent in one country to give world-wide rights. There is no legal or ethical basis for ceding rights to a patentee outside the territory for which the patent is granted.
Secondly, a patent is a restriction on the freedom of others, and as such must be carefully scrutinised. Patent offices have the prime responsibility to do this, but they are neither omniscient nor infallible. It can happen that a patent is granted which ought not to have been ^12. Where it is clear that this has happened, it is wrong to collude in the patentee's unjust claims. A policy of accepting all patents at face value would be unjust. This is quite different from encouraging the Centres to take technical or legalistic objections to prima facie valid rights.
^12 To give examples of patents which may fall into this category risks being gravely unjust. However, examples are necessary in order to make our meaning clearer. We quote two patents which have excited widespread comment and concern. Both are currently being reviewed by the issuing office: the results of the reviews may indicate whether the concern was justified.
US Patent 5,401,504 on turmeric for wound healing
US Patent 5,159,135 on all genetically transformed cotton
Another possibly useful distinction is between bare patent rights and technology packages. Where the Centres co-operate directly with technology owners, and receive from them know-how, samples, vectors, as well as patent rights, they are receiving a package of technology, and clearly will regard that package as the property of the owner, to be used only as the owner allows. However, a patent in itself does not give full ownership of technology, only specific rights in the territory in which it is granted: the legal right granted must be given full credit, but there is no basis for treating the patent as morally equivalent to absolute and universal ownership of the technology.
4.3. How does the CGIAR decide when to seek Protection for its Technologies and Materials?
4.3.1. Would intellectual property protection facilitate and/or ensure delivery of benefits to the poor?
4.3.2. Would intellectual property protection be necessary to ensure access to benefits for the poor?
4.3.3. Could intellectual property protection provide rights in a fundamental new technology and/or material which could be used to obtain access to others' intellectual property?
4.3.4. Is partnering with other institutions required to further develop the technology and/or material?
4.3.5. Can delivery and access to the poor be accomplished by publishing or otherwise making the technology and/or material publicly available?
Currently it is the exception rather than the norm for the CGIAR to seek protection for its developments. This may well continue: what is important is that each instance of protection be justified by agreed criteria.
The CGIAR needs to establish a set of mission-based criteria for determining when it would be appropriate for the centres to seek intellectual property rights for their developments. Based upon the current guiding principles, these criteria could be set forth as a series of questions, as follows:
4.3.1. Would intellectual property protection facilitate and/or ensure delivery of benefits to the poor?
In any situation where a private sector partner would be needed to deliver benefits, and where that partner must make substantial investments to further develop the invention or material, then the availability of intellectual property rights can provide an incentive to make such investments. One example would be the development of a new vaccine. This situation might also exist for certain agricultural equipment, where the private partner must incur the costs of manufacture, especially if the potential market is small or geographically isolated. Another example, in the opinion of some Panel members, would be in plant variety development. There are several examples of known varieties with valuable properties which are not in use. Even when a breeding programme is complete, making plant varieties available for sale needs some further investment in demonstration and seed production. Joint ventures with small private companies (under conditions ensuring maximum distribution at
minimum price) could promote such investment: some protection for the varieties would encourage the private partner to take part.
4.3.2. Would intellectual property protection be necessary to ensure access to benefits for the poor?
In some cases, intellectual property protection could be used to obtain access to technologies or materials protected by others, but essentially derived from CGIAR developments. For example, a single gene could be transferred into a CGIAR-developed plant variety. Protection of the original variety would provide a legal basis for obtaining access to the improved variety. Rights to the variety can also provide a means for market segmentation, based upon territories, thus enabling the CGIAR to make the improved variety accessible to those who cannot afford to pay.
4.3.3. Could intellectual property protection provide rights in a fundamental new technology and/or material which could be used to obtain access to others' intellectual property?
An example of such a fundamental new technology would be the gene(s) for apomixis, which would be of value to multiple potential private partners. Such technologies could be used as bargaining chips to gain access to privately-owned intellectual properties. Ownership of such technologies by the CGIAR also provides a means for market segmentation.
We are talking here of technologies which arise in the course of research directed to the CGIAR's mission. We do not consider that research specifically directed to generating such technologies, specifically for use as bargaining chips, could be justified.
4.3.4. Is partnering with other institutions required to further develop the technology and/or material?
Many potential partners, including the NARS, will be interested in obtaining intellectual property rights for improvements and further developments made in joint ventures. CGIAR rights provide a way to reserve rights for certain mission-oriented applications.
4.3.5. Can delivery and access to the poor be accomplished by publishing or otherwise making the technology and/or material publicly available?
If the answer to this question is clearly "yes," then protection should definitely NOT be sought. The technology or material should be made publicly available as soon as possible, and as widely as possible, in order to prevent others from obtaining ownership of similar developments. If the answer is maybe, based upon uncertain responses to the preceding questions, then judgement is required: application for protection should sometimes be made in order to keep all options open. If the answer is clearly "no," based upon affirmative responses to the preceding questions, then protection should be sought in order to further the mission of the CGIAR.
<section>8</section>
5. ORGANIZATION
5.1. Access to Others' Proprietary Science
5.2. Proprietary Science developed by CGIAR Centres
The following outline of a possible organizational plan is intended to demonstrate, as specifically as possible, the personnel resources, expertise and policy guidance needed for an effective intellectual property management programme. The two aspects of such a programme:
1) access to others' proprietary science, and
2) protection of new developments made by the CGIAR Centres,
are considered separately to underscore the differences in the resources required for each activity. However, it is anticipated that any programme developed would begin with a centralized resource centre and would require a local liaison at each Centre.
Clearly, the expense of setting up and running the function will be substantial. To fund this, either additional resources will have to be raised, or resources will have to be diverted from existing projects.
5.1. Access to Others' Proprietary Science
This aspect of the intellectual property management programme could be effectively managed by a centralized, dedicated managerial function. Effective management would require the following:
(i) Input from the centres concerning technologies to which they or their clients need access. The management role would be to research the ownership of the technologies, make contact with the owners, and obtain information regarding the terms under which the technologies would be made available.
(ii) Policy guidance regarding what terms would be acceptable to the CGIAR and to each centre. The management role would be to negotiate agreements with the proprietary technology owner(s) which are within the policy guidelines established by the CGIAR.
(iii) Sample or model agreements to use for future negotiations with the same owner for the same or similar technology. The management role would be to maintain a database of all agreements with all centres and to ensure that all centres obtain access to proprietary technologies under similar terms. Some of the agreements previously negotiated by ISAAA might serve as useful models.
(iv) Staffing for the centralized managerial function. This should include a coordinating manager familiar with intellectual property issues and experienced in negotiating license agreements. Support staff will be needed to create and maintain the agreements database.
(v) Legal advice regarding both intellectual property law and contract law in various jurisdictions. This can probably best be done with outside counsel which has established working relationships with a number of international associates. It would be difficult for inside counsel to give advice regarding so many different jurisdictions.
(vi) The co-ordinating manager should report to the highest level.
5.2. Proprietary Science developed by CGIAR Centres
This aspect of the intellectual property management programme would require both local and centralized management. Effective management would require the following:
(i) Clear direction from the CGIAR concerning the goal(s) of intellectual property protection. From a management viewpoint, it works best to have one clear, overriding goal to guide the decision-making process.
(ii) Decision-making guidelines based on the goal(s) established by CGIAR. These guidelines would be used by both local and central management.
(iii) Policies regarding ownership of inventions made by CGIAR/centres employees. These policies would have to operate on a local basis within applicable local contract law.
(iv) Policies regarding invention reporting by CGIAR/centres employees. Again, these policies would have to operate locally, but there should also be a reporting requirement from all of the centres to the centralized managerial function. These policies must be effectively communicated to employees.
(v) Evaluation criteria, established by the CGIAR and based upon the guiding principles, for determining which inventions should be protected. The evaluation procedure should include a review of the technical merit, a protectability review in various jurisdictions, and a determination whether protection will help achieve the mission of the CGIAR. Evaluation committees should employ uniform, consistent standards and should include members with technical expertise as well as legal expertise. Such committees should probably operate on a local level, with guidance from the centralized managerial function.
(vi) Specialized counsel to file applications in various jurisdictions. This can probably best be done with outside counsel which has established working relationships with a number of international associates. However, inside counsel at the central management level would probably be needed to co-ordinate and supervise this activity, and to provide legal advice to the centres on an ad hoc basis.
(vii) "Marketing" staff to publicize the availability of proprietary technologies from the CGIAR. This staff could either be local, centralized or both, and would be responsible for identifying and contacting potential licensees.
(viii) Co-ordinating manager(s) familiar with intellectual property and experienced in license negotiations. Again, these managers could be both local and/or central and would be responsible for negotiating agreements which are within CGIAR policy guidelines. In most universities which have intellectual property management offices, the marketing, negotiations and management functions are combined in one office.
(ix) Support staff to create and maintain inventions and agreements databases. This could be a centralized function. The staff would need some understanding of international intellectual property law.
(x) Support staff to monitor continually license agreements for compliance with terms. This could be a centralized function. The staff would need some understanding of international contract law.
(xi) The co-ordinating manager(s) should report to the highest level.
(xii) Periodic portfolio reviews, both at the local and central levels. Due to the financial costs associated with prosecuting and maintaining intellectual property rights in multiple jurisdictions, periodic portfolio reviews will be needed to keep such costs at a minimum.
<section>9</section>
6. UNRESOLVED ISSUES
6.2. Different Viewpoints
We have largely confined ourselves to practical recommendations, for two reasons. Firstly, the CGIAR has to deal with an existing situation, rather than an ideal one. Secondly, while we have been able to reach a fair measure of agreement over what should be done in the existing situation, we disagree markedly as to what an ideal situation should be.
We have debated such questions as to whether the CGIAR should campaign against all intellectual property on life-forms, or whether it should promote extension of IP to promote innovation, transfer and adoption of useful technologies. These are not issues that our Panel can hope to resolve, though we think it worth while to set out some of the positions below, particularly as some aspects of them may be unfamiliar to some readers.
The Panel did not debate the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), but notes that, in addition to the benefit-sharing issues mentioned by Dr. Juma in Appendix D-2, the CGIAR has a vital role in helping to stem the dangerous pace of genetic erosion worldwide by aiding in the implementation of CBD Articles 8 and 9, the in situ and ex situ conservation of biodiversity, which include agricultural biodiversity. The in situ and ex situ conservation of agricultural biodiversity are mutually interdependent, and both are linked to the continuation of cultural diversity, which is addressed by CBD Article 8J calling for the protection of the traditional practices relevant to biodiversity of indigenous and local communities.
Though such issues are unresolved, this does not mean they are unimportant. To stimulate the debate, and reinforce the claims of agriculture on the world stage, a number of the Panel members believe the CGIAR has a unique opportunity to act in world councils as a voice for the poor. The CGIAR needs to carry the debate forward in appropriate committees, arrive at considered conclusions and present these to international bodies such as TRIPs, the CBD. the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and UPOV, using its concrete experience, and its moral authority as an international public institution serving the poor.
The unresolved issues are illustrated by three divergent viewpoints, as presented below.
6.2. Different Viewpoints
6.2.1. Viewpoint 1
6.2.2. Viewpoint 2
6.2.3. Viewpoint 3
6.2.1. Viewpoint 1
Some Panel members believe strongly that advanced biotechnology and the development of transgenic crop varieties are central to the goal of increasing food production in developed and developing countries, and that only in the context of strengthened intellectual property regimes will these proceed efficiently. On this basis, they conclude that at least some of the IARCs ought to increase their own activities in these areas and ought actively to seek access to the proprietary science of others and to make it available, with due intellectual property protection, to their clients. This would call for substantial increases in the capacities of the CGIAR and its centres to gain access to and to manage proprietary science.
In addition, from this perspective, the strengthening of intellectual property rights, and the promotion of the 'intellectual property paradigm' more broadly, is something which the CGIAR can and ought to encourage. In this view, this will help to create the context of incentives and regulations that is necessary for the advance of agricultural research by the private sector and for the distribution of the benefits of proprietary science via international markets, as well as, to a lesser degree, via the CGIAR and other public institutions. Failure to extend IP, or (worse) weakening of existing rights, will not increase exchange of germplasm or transfer of technology, but rather will inhibit it. Proprietary technology will not disappear, but be protected in other forms (e.g., trade secrets) which are much more inimical to widespread dissemination than patents or plant variety rights.
In this view, the CGIAR should support the extension of IP under TRIPs and campaign against proposals for 'universal exhaustion' ^13 of patent rights, which will prevent commercial owners from segmenting markets.
^13 "Exhaustion" of the patent right takes place when a product is lawfully sold under the protection of a patent. The buyer is free to use it and sell it on, because the patentee has had his profit. Typically, the buyer only has this right in the country where the product was sold: but under 'international exhaustion' the buyer may sell anywhere.
For one statement from this viewpoint, see Appendix D-7.
Proponents of this view consider that it would be sensible for the CGIAR to seek to develop 'bargaining chips' from protection of the Centres' improved germplasm. To protect this, plant variety protection is most appropriate, but only available if Centres release finished lines, rather than breeding material.
Some who hold this view are gravely concerned about the idea of the CGIAR acting as a 'voice for the poor'. They believe this would inevitably polarise the CGIAR's supporters; put at risk its scientific credibility; and undermine its ability to continue its enormously valuable technical contribution to the welfare of the poor.
6.2.2. Viewpoint 2
In this view the primary work of the CGIAR is achievable for the most part without a major shift of emphasis toward the use of proprietary science. From this perspective, the increasing use of proprietary property in agricultural research and development is a fact of life, whether regrettable or beneficial, to which CG centres need to adapt; and use, insofar as possible, to further their missions.
However, in this view, the very substantial costs of increasing CGIAR capacity to manage intellectual property must be weighed carefully against potentially competing needs of an arguably underfunded CGIAR system. Even more worthy of careful comparison with the foregone benefits of alternative uses of CG resources would be the costs to IARCs of seeking and defending greatly expanded protection of their own innovations, whether to prevent their appropriation by private claimants, although such 'defensive' protection should be sought in some cases, or for use as 'bargaining chips' to obtain the proprietary science of others.
Those who adopt this viewpoint typically feel the proper scope of patents is limited to commercial activities and are concerned that research activities are being unreasonably inhibited. They therefore consider that it would be worthwhile to campaign for a clearer definition of the 'research exemption' under patent law. They also agree with Viewpoint 1, that the CGIAR should campaign against proposals for "universal exhaustion".
6.2.3. Viewpoint 3
A third view considers that the most 'advanced' agricultural science, and that most central to the CGIAR mission of alleviating hunger and poverty and serving the majority of farmers, is not 'industrial' biotechnology and the development of transgenic plant varieties. Rather, it is the better understanding, improvement, and adaptation to various developing country conditions of sustainable, diversity-based agricultural systems, and the related management of genetic, crop, soil, and other agricultural resources. Such science does not exclude the use of biotechnology, but calls for a process-driven approach involving high inputs of local knowledge and the fruits of participatory research. In this view, the CGIAR's comparative advantage will lie increasingly in this area, and becomes even more important in the context of the larger trend toward the privatization of research institutions world-wide and the growing influence of private, product-oriented, market-led, profit-driven
priorities on the research agendas of public institutions. The CGIAR need not become involved with proprietary science: it should only make research investments in technologies that the private sector is not investing in, and for which the only 'market' is the poor.
From this viewpoint, the proliferation of intellectual property rights and the 'intellectual property paradigm' is in itself a barrier to accomplishing the CGIAR mission because:
(i) Proprietary claims frequently entail the private appropriation of the values of crop varieties and technologies, developed by farming communities or by public institutions, by others whose contribution to the improvement of the plant materials or process is minor or nil;
(ii) Proprietary claims can and already do inhibit the open exchange of biological materials and traits, and impede the sharing of scientific and traditional knowledge, and can thus have a chilling effect on innovation and creativity at the local, national, and international levels. This is detrimental to the goal of improving the well-being of those unable to afford to purchase privatized technologies, varieties and their products (poor consumers and small-scale farmers) as well as to the effectiveness of researchers in beleaguered public institutions working on their behalf; and
(iii) The broadened application of intellectual property to agriculture already shifts research and extension agendas in the direction of products that are profitable in larger-scale markets and/or produced by large transnational firms. This process accelerates the replacement of diversity-based farming systems, and eco-social contexts in which they survive, by monocultures and increased uniformity, both genetic and cultural, at the expense of diversity.
In this view, the CGIAR should point out the degree to which the increased use of intellectual property impinges on the CG system's ability to carry out its mandate, and the negative consequences of the standardised implementation of the TRIPs accord. It should actively oppose its possible extension to include requirements on all nations to extend uniform patent protection to plants and animals or to otherwise reduce the scope for the formulation and implementation of sui generis intellectual property regimes. (See Appendices D-5 and D-6). It should work in concert with others to establish an alternative IPR regime that will enable it to conduct its historic mission of making freely available varieties to the poor and to developing countries.
For one statement from this viewpoint, see Appendix D-6.
<section>a</section>
7. RECOMMENDATIONS
The Panel has made three recommendations as follows:
(i) In dealing with proprietary science, the CGIAR must be guided by its mission. How it advances the mission will determine the need for:
 Access to the proprietary science of others;
 Protection of the CGIAR's developments;
 Preventing misappropriation by others of CGIAR material held in trust;
 Selection and design of research programmes.
Above all, research and development should never be undertaken as part of a strategy to, or simply in the hope that it will, generate either cash to support CGIAR work, or bargaining chips for acquiring rights to technology from others. On protection, Panel members are divided: some would never approve seeking protection primarily to produce bargaining chips, while others would find it appropriate in certain situations.
(ii) The CGIAR must promptly acquire relevant expertise to enable it to deal confidently with technology transfer, intellectual property and alternative rights regimes. It should, as a minimum, set up a central office to deal with such matters, with a manager reporting at high level. An immediate review of current proprietary science used by the Centres should be undertaken, so that any irregular situations can be put right as appropriate. It is needed to ensure that the Centres can deliver to clients the benefits of the research they undertake.
(iii) The Centres' existing Guiding Principles on IP should be revised, formalised and enforced. Most of the Panel is reasonably happy with the existing Guidelines, having independently arrived at similar conclusions, but feels that some inaccuracies need to be corrected and some changes of emphasis made. In particular, decisions to seek IP protection should be governed by clear mission-based rules. Unless this is done. Centres will follow inappropriate and inconsistent policies, causing confusion, legal liability and loss.
<section>b</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Panel would wish to thank warmly all the many people who helped in its work, including (but without derogating from the generality of the foregoing):
Members of the TAC Secretariat, in particular Shellemiah Keya, Adriana Pierconti and Irmi Braun, for their efficient arrangements;
the TAC Chair, Don Winkelmann, for continual encouragement and understanding, and his assistant Barbara Harrelson;
Cary Fowler, for advice on the CGIAR system;
Manuel Lantin and Rosina Salerno, who hosted the first meeting at the World Bank, and took part in it;
the Faculty of the University of California, Berkeley, who hosted the second meeting so hospitably, as well as to Emy Peterson and Emery Rowe for administration at that meeting;
ISNAR, in particular Joel Cohen who, as well as attending the second meeting in Berkeley and advising on the final report, carried out the use survey, with the help of Cesar Falconi, John Komen and Michael Blakeney; and to Stein Bie for authorising and encouraging the efforts of his ISNAR colleagues;
Eran Binenbaum who co-authored the survey for the Panel on crop movements, and Bonwoo Koo who presented it to the Panel;
ISAAA, its Chair Clive James, who attended the second meeting, and gave us a presentation and the benefit of ISAAA's experience: and its Director Anatole Krattiger; and all who took time and trouble to respond to our surveys.
Our special thanks go to Don Plucknett, Panel Secretary and Rapporteur, for diligently recording our meetings, as well as contributing his own extensive knowledge of the CGIAR system and its history: also for organising and hosting, with his associate Robert Kagbo, the meeting at which the Report was finally put together.
Finally, the Chair would like to thank all Panel members for their joint and several contributions: their hard work, in and between meetings; the patience, courtesy and frankness with which they put, and heard, very disparate views; their tolerance of each other and of him; and for their noble efforts (often successful) to stick to the point.
Tim Roberts
2 April 1998
<section>c</section>
REFERENCES
Altieri, M. 1997. The CGIAR and Biotechnology: Can the Renewal Keep the Promise of a Research Agenda for the Poor? Report of the NGO Committee Chair, CGIAR Mid-Term Meeting, May 26-30, 1997. Cairo, Egypt.
Barton, J. H. and Wolfgang E. Siebeck. 1991. Intellectual Property Issues for the International Agricultural Research Centres: What are the Options? Manuscript, CGIAR Secretariat, The World Bank, Washington, D. C.
Barton, J. H. and Wolfgang E. Siebeck. 1992. Intellectual Property Issues for the International Agricultural Research Centres. Issues in Agriculture, No. 4. CGIAR, Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, 1818 H St., N.W., Washington, D.C. 52 pp.
BIOTASK and ISNAR. 1991. Biotechnology Policy and the CGIAR: Proceedings of a Workshop. The Hague, 2-6 September, 1991. 36 pp.
CGIAR. 1990. Biotechnology in the International Agricultural Research Centres of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research. A Statement by Centre Directors. CGIAR Mid-Term Meeting, The Hague, the Netherlands, 21-25 May, 1990.
CGIAR. 1994. Report of the Intellectual Property Rights Panel, September 15, 1994. International Centres' Week, 1994.
CGIAR Private Sector Committee. 1997. Strengthening CGIAR-Private Sector Partnerships in Biotechnology: A Private Sector Committee Perspective on Compelling Issues. Paper presented at CGIAR Mid-Term Meeting, 26-30 May, 1997, Cairo, Egypt.
Cohen, Joel I. 1994. Biotechnology Priorities. Planning, and Policies. Research Report No. 6, International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR), The Hague, The Netherlands. 49 pp.
Hardon, J. J. Intellectual property protection and genetic resources. Paper to be published in Crop Networks. Searching for New Collaborative Structures in Genetic Resources Management. Th. van Hintum, L. Frese and P. Perret, eds., IPGRI, Rome.
Hawtin, G. and T. Reeves. 1997. Intellectual Property Rights and Access to Genetic Resources in the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). Paper presented to the Workshop on Intellectual Property Rights III - Global Genetic Resources: Access and Property Rights. 4-6 June, 1997, Washington, D.C., USA.
ICRISAT. 1991. Managing Intellectual Property Rights at the International Agricultural Research Centres. Report of a Workshop. 19-21 November, 1990, ICRISAT, Pantancheru, India.
Lanjouw, Jean 0. 1997. The Introduction of Pharmaceutical Product Patents in India: "Heartless Exploitation of the Poor and Suffering"?, NBER working paper no. 6366
Persley, Gabrielle J. 1990. Beyond Mendel's Garden: Biotechnology in the Service of World Agriculture. C.A.B. International.
The World Bank and CGIAR. 1997. Bioengineering of Crops: Report of the World Bank Panel on Transgenic Crops. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
<section>d</section>
Appendix A - Terms of Reference for the Panel
Expert Panel: Proprietary Science and Technology
The Panel will:
1. Identify and examine issues of major concerns to the CGIAR in the area of proprietary science and technology and in the context of ongoing deliberations in the Convention on Biological Diversity, the FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, and World Trade Organization (TRIPS).
2. Provide advice and recommendations on immediate and/or long-term needs with respect to such issues as:
- further refinement/resolution of CGIAR Guidelines for IPR
- a central legal capability within the CG for advising centers on proprietary matters
- documenting and studying existing center or inter-center experiences in proprietary matters
- tracking proprietary negotiations within the CGIAR for assessing future implications.
3. Prepare a draft strategy for addressing proprietary issues in the CGIAR in the short, medium, and long-term and suggest a framework within which future proprietary negotiations should occur consistent with accepted CGIAR policy and mandate.
4. Prepare a report and recommendations to be presented to TAC for commentary and for subsequent consideration by the Group at ICW97.
<section>e</section>
Appendix B - Panel Members and Participants
Expert Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology
Mr. Timothy Roberts (Chair)
13 Spring Meadow
Bracknell
Berks RG12 2JP
UK
Fax: (44-1344) 869 059
Phone: (44-1344) 422 902
E-mail: twr@compuserve.com
Dr. Miguel A. Altieri
Professor of Agroecology
ESPM-Center for Biological Control
201 Wellman Hall #3112
Berkeley, CA 94720-3112 USA
Fax: (1-510) 642 0875 or 7428
Phone: (1-510) 642 9802
E-mail: agroeco3@nature.berkeley.edu
Dr. June Blalock (Ms.)
Coordinator, Licensing Program
Office of Technology Transfer
Agricultural Research Service
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Room 415, Bldg. 005, BARC-W
Beltsville, MD 20705-2350 USA
Fax: (1-301) 504 5060
Phone: (1-301) 504 5989
E-mail: DJB@ars.usda.gov
Dr. Stephen Crespi CPA EPA
Patent Consultant
British Technology Group Limited
101 Newington Causeway
London SE1 6BU
UK
Fax: (44-171) 403 7586
Phone: (44-171) 403 6666
Phone: (44-1243) 824026 (H)
E-mail: scoleman@btgplc.com
Private address:
16 Kenlegh
Bognor Regis
West Sussex, UK PO21 3TS
Dr. R.N. (Sam) Dryden, Jr.
Big Stone Partners
1634 Walnut Street, Suite 301
Boulder, CO 80302-5400 USA
Fax: (1-303) 449-9699
Phone: (1-303) 449-9696
E-mail: bigston1@ix.netcom.com
Dr. Robert Horsch
Director of Technology/General Manager
Agracetus Campus, Monsanto Company
8520 University Green
Middleton, WI 53562 USA
Fax: (1-608) 836 9710
Phone: (1-608) 836 7300 (Ext. 242)
E-mail: robert.b.horsch@monsanto.com
Dr. Calestous Juma
Executive Secretary
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity
World Trade Centre
393 St. Jacques Street, Office 300
Montreal, Quebec, Canada
Fax: (1-514) 288 6588
Phone: (1-514) 288 2220 (Switchboard)
E-mail: CJuma@compuserve.com
Dr. Bernard Le Buanec
FIS/ASSINSEL
Chemin du Reposoir 7
1260 Nyon, Switzerland
Fax: (41-22) 361 9219
Phone: (41-22) 361 9977
E-mail: fis@iprolink.ch or assinsel@iprolink.ch
Dr. Marcio de Miranda Santos
Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuria
Departamento de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento
SAIN Parque Rural-Final Av W3 Norte
70770-901 Braslia-DF-Brasil
Fax: (55-61) 347 2061
Phone: (55-61) 340 5518
E-mail: marcio@sede.embrapa.br
Dr. Silvia Salazar
Apartado 8-5750-1000
San Jose, Costa Rica
Fax: (506) 244 2427
Phone: (506) 244 3240
E-mail: silvias@cariari.ucr.ac.cr
Courier address:
Silvia Salazar
Santo Tomas de Santo Domingo de Heredia
Frente al Hotel Bougainvillea
Tapia Blanca, porton gris #3
Phone # for courier: (506) 244 32 40
Dr. Gary Toenniessen
Deputy Director, Agricultural Sciences
The Rockefeller Foundation
420 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10018-2702 USA
Fax: (1-212) 852 8442
Phone: (1-212) 852 8336
E-mail: GToenniessen@rockfound.org
Dr. Kathy McAfee (Ms.)
Department of Geography
University of California at Berkeley
501 McCone Hall
Berkely CA 94720
USA
Fax: (1-510) 642 3370 *
Phone: (1-510) 527 3589 (Home/Office)
E-mail: kmcafee@uclink.berkeley.edu
* please advise her by phone that fax was sent at this #
Mailing address (Home/Office):
3 Sunset Drive
Kensington, CA 94707
USA
Dr. Brian D. Wright
Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics
University of California at Berkeley
207 Giannini Hall, #3310
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310
Fax: (1-510) 643 8911
Phone: (1-510) 642 9213
E-mail: wright@are.berkeley.edu
Resource Person:
Dr. Cary Fowler
NORAGRIC
Tivoli Building, Room 223
Agricultural University of Norway
P.O. Box 5001
N-1432 Aas
Norway
Fax: (47-64) 940760
Phone: (47-64) 949824
E-mail: Cary.Fowler@noragric.mlh.no
E-mail: C-Fowler@cgnet.com
Panel Secretary:
Dr. Donald L. Plucknett
Agricultural Research and Development International
7127 Little River Turnpike, Suite 205 A
Annandale, Virginia 22003
USA
Fax: (1-703) 941 1936
Phone: (1-703) 354 5423
E-mail: donpluckn@aol.com
<section>f</section>
Appendix C - Panel Studies
Appendix C-1 - ISNAR The Use of Proprietary Biotechnology Research Inputs at Selected CGIAR Centers
Appendix C-2 - June Blalock. Interviews With Selected Commercial Companies and Universities
Appendix C-3 - E. Binenbaum and B. Wright. On the Significance of South-North Trade in IARC Crops
Appendix C-1 - ISNAR The Use of Proprietary Biotechnology Research Inputs at Selected CGIAR Centers 1
^1 Study conducted by Joel I. Cohen (Project Manager, ISNAR Intermediary Biotechnology Service; study coordinator), Cesar Falconi (Economist, ISNAR-IBS), John Komen (Information Specialist, ISNAR-IBS), and Michael Blakeney (Murdoch University School of Law, Australia).
Acknowledgments
I. Executive Summary
II. Purpose and Methodology
III. Context for Biotechnology and IPR at the IARCs
IV. Analysis of Information
V. Legal Analysis and Options
VI. Summary, Conclusions and Implications
VII. Recommendations
Selected References
Report of an ISNAR Study Commissioned by the Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology for the CGIAR
DRAFT VERSION
Please do not cite or circulate
29 January 1998
International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR)
P.O. Box 93375
2509 AJ The Hague
The Netherlands
Tel: (31) (70) 349-6100
fax: (31) (70) 381-9677
email: ISNAR@cgnet.com
Acknowledgments
ISNAR wishes to extend its sincere appreciation to the Director Generals and contact persons at the IARCs without whose full collaboration this study would not have been possible. The timeliness, clarity, and preciseness of their responses contributed greatly to increasing the study's significance, especially as each center knew the short time frame given to ISNAR. This meant that the material sent to each center required immediate attention. The time and care taken to complete this material was evident from the quality of the information received.
The study sought to distill system-wide lessons and implications from the information collected. Thus, the focus of the study was moved away from the responding centers and their individual approaches in the use of proprietary materials to a summary analysis and set of recommendations. These were prepared in order to stimulate more direct and in-depth consideration of its findings and the issues posed.
To conduct this study, it was necessary to have the complete confidence of the centers as to how the information would be presented in the final report. ISNAR has given this concern great attention, and trusts that centers feel this report to be valuable, especially given the full cooperation provided, and the difficulties anticipated in retrieving this information. While the two tables themselves were brief and specific, collecting the background information for each center's relevant program was often complicated.
The authors would also like to acknowledge the advice and assistance provided by Tim Roberts, Gary Toenniessen, Sam Dryden, Rob Horsch, Don Winkelmann and Stein Bie. Also, thanks to the CGIAR Secretariat for providing financial support.
I. Executive Summary
This report presents the findings and conclusions of a study regarding the use of proprietary applications of biotechnology at selected CGIAR centers. The Proprietary Science and Technology Panel of the CGIAR commissioned ISNAR to conduct the study in November 1997, to gain an understanding of the current technologies and practices employed by the various centers. The purpose of the study is to: (1) provide an assessment of the extent to which proprietary applications of biotechnology are being used at the IARCs; (2) present the potential legal implications for consideration by the IARCs regarding use of the identified proprietary technologies and materials; and (3) give a synthesis of findings and recommendations in order to stimulate further discussion of the study.
ISNAR conducted a rapid survey among 7 CGIAR centers regarding the application of proprietary research inputs, and prospects for generating proprietary products from these inputs. Every center responding to the survey currently uses proprietary inputs (technologies and materials) for biotechnology research. In total, the centers reported using 45 discrete proprietary inputs in a total of 166 individual applications. Selectable marker genes, promoters, and transformation systems show the broadest utility across centers.
While the utility in a broad range of applications is evident, the legal implications for their use and distribution of resultant products are not always clear. The findings of the study indicate that for a substantial number of these applications of proprietary technology, there is no clear knowledge or information regarding their intellectual property protection (IPP). In addition, it is shown that a large number of these tools have come to the centers without written agreement, leaving the centers' legal responsibilities unclear. Thus, the use of proprietary materials and technologies poses a clear challenge to the CGIAR.
ISNAR also requested information on products expected to result from the application of proprietary inputs, whether any difficulties were anticipated regarding use and dissemination, and if centers are planning to take out any form of IPP for these products. A few centers have considered the implications of legal agreements for disseminating research outputs, and report a number of cases where they foresee some sort of distribution limitations due to contractual arrangements. On the question of seeking protection for research outputs, three were identified which may be patented and another 11 for which the use of other protective measures is anticipated.
Considering the findings of the survey, we recommend that the Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology examine the following points:
 Where several centers are using the same proprietary tools, it may be advantageous to collaborate in the acquisition of such technologies;
 For those applications of proprietary tools which permission for use is unclear, immediate legal advice must be arranged;
 Actual experiences regarding the use of material transfer agreements and licenses should be analyzed and exchanged among centers, and possibilities for standard formats explored;
 The legal implications of, and possible restrictions on disseminating the products resulting from proprietary technologies deserve further research;
 Guidelines managing intellectual property at individual centers should be reviewed, and possibilities for a system-wide policy or guidelines considered;
 Given the limited familiarity regarding the implications of using proprietary technology, the CGIAR should create more awareness on this subject and develop expertise for managing intellectual property, system-wide and at individual centers.
II. Purpose and Methodology
Background and purpose
During the past few years, the CGIAR has discussed how to best use biotechnology when addressing CGIAR research objectives. At the CGIAR Mid-Term Meeting in May 1997, two expert panels were established to explore this question, one panel on General Issues in Biotechnology, and one on Proprietary Science and Technology. The latter panel was set up to deal with the legal issues and ramifications of proprietary science and the complex partnerships that have arisen. The panel felt that gaining an understanding of the current technologies and practices employed by the various centers would be an important first step in this process. Therefore, in November 1997, the CGIAR Proprietary Science and Technology Panel requested ISNAR to conduct a review of the use of proprietary applications of biotechnology at selected CGIAR centers.
The purpose of the study is three-fold:
 To provide an assessment of the extent to which proprietary applications of biotechnology (technologies and materials) are being used at the IARCs.
 To present the potential legal implications for consideration by the IARCs regarding use of the identified proprietary technologies and materials.
 To give a synthesis of findings and recommendations in order to stimulate further discussion of the study.
Methodology
Considering the above mentioned conditions and purpose of the study, ISNAR decided to conduct a rapid survey among CGIAR centers regarding the application of proprietary research inputs, and prospects for generating proprietary products from these inputs. A list of relevant proprietary technologies and materials was constructed by contacting several technical experts. Following this review, the technologies and materials were grouped into eight categories as follows:
 Transformation systems;
 Promoter genes;
 Insect-resistance genes;
 Disease-resistance genes;
 Selectable marker genes;
 Genetic markers;
 Diagnostic probes;
 Others.
Two concise survey tables were developed to determine which proprietary ^2 technologies or materials from the categories above are being used at the centers. On the first table, respondents were asked to provide more information on specific applications, the means by which intellectual-property protection is provided (patents, plant breeders' rights, or other means), and how the center obtained permission for research (e.g., license, or material transfer agreement). On the second table, information was requested on the research products to be derived from the technologies or materials identified, the dissemination of results from this research, and if any intellectual-property protection was to be sought by the center itself.
^2 For the purpose of this study, proprietary technologies or materials refer to those which are privately owned, managed or protected through some sort of intellectual property. This means that IPP for the technology or material must exist in at least one country, taking into account the territorial implications of IPP.
In consultation with the Panel Chair and with TAC, ISNAR selected 7 centers to complete the survey, reflecting a balance between research on cereal crops, non-cereals, and livestock. The selected centers were initially contacted during the first week of December 1997, by approaching their respective Directors General and subject-matter specialists. All 7 centers returned their completed survey forms during the second half of December. The data received were organized using database management software, facilitating the analysis of qualitative information. Separate records were generated for specific proprietary technologies and materials reported by each center. This method of data entry created many individual records, which helped to ensure the uniqueness of data from centers having multiple crop or research mandates.
A note on confidentiality
An essential condition for conducting the survey in a timely manner was the explicit guarantee of confidentiality. Therefore, specific information collected from each IARC is not presented in this report. Rather, the study focuses on its findings regarding system-wide trends and recommendations for the use of proprietary science. Applications of proprietary technology have been categorized under general headings such as "cereal", "non-cereal", and "other", to avoid showing direct relationships between the findings presented in this report and an individual center.
III. Context for Biotechnology and IPR at the IARCs
Recent discussions on IPR in the CGIAR have been primarily driven by two related developments, (1) the increasing importance of biotechnology in centers' research; (2) the growing position of the private sector in international agricultural research.
Since the early 1980s, the IARCs have invested in building up their infrastructure and human-resource capacity for biotechnology research. Annex 1 provides examples of specific IARC-based biotechnology initiatives. By now, most IARCs have specialized units or divisions for molecular biology and other techniques covered by the term "biotechnology". Annex 1 illustrates the wide range of collaborative activities in biotechnology that they have initiated. According to recent TAC figures (TAC, 1997), the centers are spending about US$ 24 million per year on biotechnology research. Of that amount, about 27% is related directly to livestock (primarily animal health). Roughly 15% of the total expenditures go to genetic engineering. It is safe to state that, for the CGIAR client countries, the IARCs have become a key player in agricultural biotechnology. Although combined R&D investments in agricultural biotechnology may be small compared to leading private-sector companies, the
IARCs have developed an extensive network of research collaboration with advanced research institutes, public and private, in industrialized countries and developing countries. During the 1997 CGIAR Mid-Term Meeting and International Centers' Week, the chairman of the CGIAR has stated that the centers' capacity for biotechnology research must expand.
Together with a growing involvement in biotechnology, concerns have been expressed at CGIAR meetings about intellectual property rights. Since 1980, intellectual property protection for agricultural inventions has been strengthened. A growing number of countries include the possibility to protect living material under their patent laws. Plant breeders' rights have been introduced and/or strengthened. The resulting possibilities to legally protect agricultural innovation has stimulated the involvement of the private sector in agricultural research. In addition, many advanced public research organizations and universities routinely protect their research results. This situation may create difficulties for the IARCs in accessing, using or protecting relevant technology.
Discussions on IPR in the CGIAR have been many, and will not be repeated in this report. To date, no general policy or guidelines regarding IPR have been issued by the CGIAR. In 1992, the CGIAR adopted a "working document" on genetic resources and intellectual property, containing guidelines on IPR management. The working document reaffirms that the resources maintained in the gene banks at the centers should be freely available, and that the centers should not seek legal protection for their innovations unless it is absolutely necessary to ensure that developing countries have access to new technologies ("defensive patenting"). The centers should not seek intellectual property protection for income-generating purposes and will not view potential returns from intellectual property protection as a source of operating funds. The document also states that any intellectual property right acquired by a center should be exercised without compromising in any manner whatsoever the
fundamental position of the CGIAR regarding free access by developing countries to knowledge, technology, materials, and genetic resources (CGIAR, 1992).
Policies regarding IPR may vary among individual IARCs, as they are autonomous organizations. A few centers have drafted their own IPR guidelines, which basically follow the principles laid down in the CGIAR working document.
IV. Analysis of Information
Utility of proprietary technologies and materials
Every center responding to the survey currently uses proprietary inputs (technologies and materials) for biotechnology research. Table 1 lists the complete range of the proprietary technologies and materials used by the centers, their means of protection, and the specific number of applications reported in center research programs. In total, 45 discrete technologies and materials were reported, covering the eight technology categories introduced above. As most centers apply these technologies and materials in several mandated commodities, we recorded 166 specific applications of proprietary research inputs. Of the eight technology categories surveyed, selectable marker genes, promoters, and transformation systems show the broadest utility across centers (Figure 1; Table 1). This clearly demonstrates the role which proprietary technologies and materials have assumed in research at the IARCs, as is true for advanced research centers globally.
While some applications are being clearly applied in a "research only context," other technologies and materials become part of germplasm or other products suitable for release to the national agricultural research institutes, NGOs, other partners, or even directly to farmers. The wide-spread importance of specific selectable markers (BAR, GUS), promoters (CaMV/35S), transformation systems, and of AFLP genetic markers is evident, while in other cases, more center-specific needs are apparent, such as for insect and disease resistance.
Similarities and differences among centers with regard to the use of these materials and technologies are seen through "center profiles". These profiles also help visualize relative degree of emphasis and differences among multi-crop and single-crop centers (Figure 1). Most but not all centers are using proprietary genetic markers, a set of disease- and insect-resistance genes, and some centers have integrated these technologies more than others across their mandated research portfolio.
Figure 1. Center profiles indicating use of proprietary technologies and materials
Table 1. Proprietary technologies and materials covered by survey.
Technology category
Specific tool
Protected through
(as reported by responding Centers)
# of applications reported
Selectable markers
(7 tools reported; 45 applications)
BAR
patent
GUS
patent; other
kanamycin
patent; N.K.
hygromycin
patent; N.K.
HPT
patent
PAT
patent
other
other
Promoters
(7 tools reported; 35 applications)
CaMV/35S
patent; N.K.
maize ubiquitin
patent; N.K.
rice actin 1
patent; other; N.K.
wound-inducible sucrose synthase
patent
PEP carboxylase
patent
pith-specific
N.K.
other
patent; N.K.
Transformation systems
(5 tools reported; 29 applications)
Agrobacterium
patent; N.K.
biolistic
patent; N.K.
PEG
N.K.
electroporation
N.K.
other
N.K.
Insect-resistance genes
(6 tools reported; 19 applications)
Cry I ab
patent
Cry I ac
patent; N.K.
Cry I b
patent
CpT1
patent
soybean trypsin inhibitor
N.K.
pigeonpea trypsin inhibitor
N.K.
Disease-resistance genes
(7 tools reported; 11 applications)
Xa 21
patent
coat protein
patent; other
RIP
patent
pathogen-derived
patent
antifungal protein
patent
stilbene synthase
patent
other
other
Genetic markers
(3 tools reported; 10 applications)
AFLP
patent; N.K.
RAPD
N.K.
micro-satellite
N.K.
Diagnostic probes
(3 tools reported; 3 applications)
DNA hybridization
N.K.
ELISA
N.K.
PCR primers
N.K.
Others
(7 tools reported; 14 applications)
snowdrop lectin gene
patent
antisense
N.K.
bacterial gene codon
patent
granule bound starch synthase
patent
starch branching enzyme
patent
bacterial
patent
eukaryotic
N.K.
N.K. = not known
Utility across research categories
In Table 2, the various technologies and materials are sorted by their use in relation to mandate crop or other types of research, by grouping the information collected into three research categories. These groups provide a means to analyze the information without revealing individual center responses. The categories were defined as follows, based a list of possible research targets for the CGIAR centers:
Cereals: maize, rice, wheat, sorghum, finger millet and pearl millet
Non-cereals: beans, cassava, tropical forages, potato, sweet potato, chickpea, cowpea. pigeonpea, groundnut, lentils
Other: diagnostics, livestock health, microbial systems, general developments
These findings reveal an almost equivalent use of inputs among centers working on either cereal or non-cereal crops, with fewer applications recorded for the non-crop centers and programs. The distinction reflects the significant degree of emphasis placed on crop research in the CGIAR system. The information, as shown in the individual center profiles (Figure 1) clearly indicates the wide-spread utility of and reliance on this range of inputs across the system.
Table 2. Applications of proprietary technologies and materials by research category.
Technology category
# of applications per research category
Cereals
Non-cereals
Other
TOTAL
Selectable markers
Promoters
Transformation systems
Insect-resistance genes
Disease-resistance genes
Genetic markers
Diagnostic probes
Others
TOTAL
Means of protection and permission for use
Figures 2 and 3 show the means of protection given to the technologies and materials analyzed in the survey, and how permission for use was obtained by centers. While not all of these proprietary inputs pose difficulties regarding intellectual property or for the dissemination and use of resulting products, it is appropriate for centers to explore any potential difficulties in this regard.
As indicated in Figure 2, in more than 30% of the applications of proprietary technology, centers indicated that they have no clear knowledge or information on the type of IPP provided for a particular proprietary tool. Thus, a high potential exists for infringement of legal conditions regarding the use of these proprietary technologies and materials. In addition, Figure 3 indicates that more than 35% of the applications are done without written agreement, leaving the center unclear as to its legal responsibilities, or as to how the use of the proprietary tool has been achieved.
Figure 2. Proprietary technologies and their means of protection. -
Figure 3. Proprietary technologies and their permission for use.
Note: In some cases, permission for use is covered in more than one way, e.g., a combination of MTA and license. For these cases, the first way of permission mentioned was used for the graph.
Combining the results presented in Figures 2 and 3, it is possible to suggest degrees of legal attention or concern warranted by the use of these technologies (Table 3). Immediate legal attention should be considered when the information on protection and permission are unknown or when there is no written approval for the use of proprietary technologies. About 40% of the total technologies and/or materials identified appear in this category, which constitutes a potentially risky situation for the CGIAR system. As a consequence of not understanding or taking into account the legal conditions of the use of proprietary technologies, the access to such technologies could be restricted or diminished with regard to national program partners.
Table 3. Potential for legal advice needed by CGIAR centers regarding use of proprietary technologies and materials
Need immediate attention
Need further investigation
Low immediate concern
Protection and Permission
Means of protection
Permission for use
Means of protection
Permission for use
Means of protection
Permission for use
N.K,
N.W.A.
N.K.
License
Patent
License
N.K.
N.K.
N.K.
Sublicense
Patent
MTA
Patent.
N.K.
N.K.
MTA
Other
MTA
Patent
N.W.A.
Other
N.K.
Other
N.W.A.
Number of applications in these combinations
MTA = material transfer agreement;
N.W.A. = no written approval;
N.K. = not known.
Potential difficulties for specific technologies
Some technologies and materials pose more difficulties than others with regard to permission for use. As seen in Figure 4, when permission for use has been obtained, it is generally achieved through MTAs, licenses or a sublicense. However, for each technology category, except diagnostic probes, the centers are using a number of technologies and materials without written agreement, or for which permission is not known. Permission to conduct research using the majority of technologies has been obtained through MTAs or licenses. While obtaining permission for research is the general rule, exceptions do exist. For example, with transformation systems where the permission to use specific systems (PEG/protoplasts and electroporation) is not clear. Similar problems exist for the use of selectable markers, genetic markers, and various insect and disease resistance genes. However, it should also be noted that MTAs may secure permission for research, but do not generally confer
permission for use and dissemination. Thus, review of each individual MTA is crucial to achieve clarity regarding IPP implications for the centers.
Figure 4. Agreements and potential difficulties regarding permission to use proprietary technologies and materials
Expected products and concerns regarding dissemination
The information received was next analyzed with regard to expected products and difficulties anticipated for their dissemination. In addition, indications of whether or not any form of IP is expected to be sought by the IARCs was requested. The purpose for using these technologies is to develop an output, such as improved mandate crops, animal health products, new genetic constructs, or new research methodologies. The survey results indicated a total number of 58 outputs or products in these categories. Restrictions may also exist for the use, dissemination or further production of these outputs, based on the fact that the proprietary inputs have IPP. Responses from the centers regarding these issues are presented in tables 4, 5, and 6.
More than 40% of the responses indicate that centers do not have enough information or knowledge to anticipate difficulties in the post-research use and dissemination of outputs generated from proprietary technologies. Consequently, one could imagine that some outputs developed with proprietary technologies will encounter problems with use and dissemination, especially if exports occur to countries where the technologies have IPP. Many centers have yet to take into account the extensions of protection and permission requirements of such technologies.
A few centers have considered the implications of legal agreements for disseminating research outputs, with 14% of the responses foreseeing some sort of limitations. For example, a contractual arrangement between a private multinational, as owner of the input technology, and one center indicates that outputs can be distributed only among specific countries. There is an ex-ante understanding of the restrictions and limitations for the dissemination in this case, and it should be studied further by the CGIAR.
Table 4. Products expected from the application of proprietary tools
Product category
# of expected products reported
(total = 58)
Examples
Improved mandate crops
Improved cereal and non-cereal varieties with enhanced insect-, fungal-, and virus resistance
Diagnostics
Diagnostic tests for tropical livestock diseases
Vaccines
Vaccine for East Coast Fever
Others
Transformation protocols; genetic markers
Table 5. Difficulties anticipated regarding dissemination or use of products because of proprietary or legal issues.
Product category
Difficulties anticipated: # of products reported
(total = 58)
None anticipated
Not known
Limitations possible
Under investigation
Improved mandate crops
Diagnostics
Vaccines
Others
IARC patents
The CGIAR, along with other institutions producing international public goods, is considering options to ensure that developments from center research programs will be able to reach intended beneficiaries. As recently stated in the "End-of-Meeting Report" from International Centers Week, 1997: "The CGIAR stands for free flows of germplasm and it has no profit motive. However, it may have to think of defensive patenting in order to stake out a claim and ensure access."
In this regard, information was also collected to assess the degree to which centers are planning to patent or otherwise protect inventions. As seen in Table 6, three outputs were identified which may be patented and 11 other outputs where the use of other protective measures is anticipated.
Table 6. Do Centers expect to file for registration or protection of new products?
Product category
Means of protection or registration
(total = 58)
Not anticipated
Not known
Yes: Patent or other means
Improved mandate crops
1 (patent)
Diagnostics
11 (other)
Vaccines
1 (patent)
Others
1 (patent)
V. Legal Analysis and Options
This section provides a "first look" at the information collected with regard to potential legal implications for both CGIAR centers and their NARS partners.
Using MTAs
As is indicated in Figure 2, the most common means used by the centers for obtaining legal arrangements for research using proprietary technologies is through Material Transfer Agreements (MTAs), followed by licensing. Such extensive use of agreements and licenses is certainly a new fact of life for the CGIAR system, and for publicly-funded agricultural research in general. The study did not attempt to collect information on the range of providers supplying material to the centers. No doubt many sources are involved, indicating the growing range of materials applicable to CGIAR research.
This study also did not review the type of MTAs being used by the centers. The simplest of such agreements takes the form of a letter accompanying the proprietary technology. In this situation there is a question as to whether a supply on unilaterally prescribed terms constitutes a binding agreement with the recipient.
MTAs may range from the simple letter agreement described above to a more compendious contract that sets out all the relevant terms for the use of proprietary technologies. Typical clauses may include: (a) use permitted for research purposes only; (b) obligation to share royalties or profits; (c) grant back to the supplier of any intellectual property rights generated from derivative material; (d) disallowance of patent applications for the supplied material; (e) maintenance of confidentiality of any trade secrets which are provided, or which may be generated by the acquirer; (f) deferment of publications to secure patenting; (g) acknowledgment of the supplier in connection with any publications; and (h) warranties for example in relation to biosafety clearances.
Given the various legal obligations (as discussed below) that are generated by MTAs, particularly those of the comprehensive contract type, the popularity of the MTA as a means of obtaining proprietary technologies, and, the likelihood that MTAs will be formulated and imposed by the technology supplier, the CGIAR system may wish to review and use standard formats for MTAs which help guide the CGIAR Centers in these complex matters. For example, a useful precedent for MTAs in relation to agronomic materials is the MTA suggested by Barton and Siebeck (1994) for the exchange of genetic resources.
Enforcement of obligations
Where legal obligations are imposed by MTAs, the relevant center must be in a position to honor its obligations under the agreement. For example, where the proprietary technology involves the supply of a trade secret and confidentiality obligations are imposed, the center must be in a position to police the confidentiality of the material supplied. This may involve the establishment of a secure system of operation and the placing of researchers and visitors under confidentiality obligations.
In the event of a default under an MTA, it will be the CGIAR center which will be the likely defendant to a legal suit and not the individual actually responsible for a relevant infringement. This is because it will be the center which is the signatory to the MTA.
Management of legal obligations
Given the increasing legal complexity involved in the supply of proprietary technologies, which may raise matters of contract law, intellectual property law, biodiversity and biosafety law, technology transfer and competition law (where restrictive provisions are imposed) it would be useful for a CGIAR center to have a person who is the primary legal administrator. This person would be responsible for ensuring the compliance of staff with any legal obligations generated by MTAs. Similarly, this administrator would be responsible for ensuring the compliance of a center with terms of any intellectual property licenses. The survey discloses that after MTAs, licenses are the commonest way of acquiring proprietary technologies. Therefore, it should be reiterated that MTAs, licenses and sub-licenses impose direct legal obligations upon the CGIAR centers. The large number of these agreements suggest that it may be prudent for the Director Generals to delegate the oversight of their
legal obligations to a legal administrator.
Management of proprietary tools
Where different CGIAR centers are using the same category of proprietary tools to obtain the relevant technology, it may be advantageous to cooperate in the acquisition of such technologies. For example, the survey indicates that CaMV/35S is clearly the promoter of first choice. In this situation the opportunities for coordination are self-evident. Precedents for such coordination have been seen for research collaborations supported by international biotechnology research programs such as the Agricultural Biotechnology for Sustainable Productivity (ABSP).
Management of IP obligations
Table 5 indicates that for the 58 products reported, no dissemination constraints due to legal arrangements are expected for 37% of them, while for 40% of these products, the centers reported not knowing if such constraints may exist. These statistics indicate the need for CGIAR centers and for the system: (i) to develop IP expertise to analyze potential limitations and (ii) to designate an officer to administer legal obligations. The necessity to develop a capacity to manage IP obligations may be incumbent in the constitution of the center.
For example, the IRRI Policy on Intellectual Property Rights provides that IRRI will apply for intellectual property protection under Principle 7 in exceptional circumstances "to ensure availability to developing nations of advanced biological technologies or biological materials" and under Principle 9 on new agricultural equipment. Principle 12 requires that "IRRI will devise, maintain and monitor employee policies on intellectual property rights... and policies or agreements to govern its relations with visitors and research collaborators". The implementation of principles such as these will obviously require an internal system of intellectual property management. The high percentage of applications reported in Table 3 and products in table 5 where IP implications are "not known", may suggest that there is work to do in this regard.
Similarly, the relatively small amount of intellectual property protection being sought by centers (Table 6) may be attributed to an unfamiliarity with IP issues, that suitable IP options are not yet developed and approved, as well as the traditional reliance on development of goods and services developed as international public goods.
The promulgation in April 1994 of the Agreement on Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs), as a membership obligation for countries joining the World Trade Organization, includes a requirement that signatory countries protect plant varieties through either patent protection or a sui generis system. Responses to the survey indicate that proprietary technologies and/or materials covered under PVRs have not been used by the centers. But, the presence of the mandatory obligation in the TRIPs Agreement concerning the introduction of this form of IP protection provides an additional reason for CGIAR centers to familiarize themselves with IP obligations.
The TRIPs Agreement also modifies the rules relating to compulsory patent licensing and contains a chapter concerning restrictive conditions in intellectual property licenses. These international legal developments make it incumbent upon CGIAR centers to understand their relations to these evolving global conditions.
VI. Summary, Conclusions and Implications
Proprietary inputs used extensively in center research. Information collected in this study indicates the extent to which CGIAR centers are using and integrating biotechnology as part of their ongoing research programs. The centers have moved from a time in the early to late 1980s when biotechnology was virtually non-existent, or limited to plant tissue and cell culture and other in vitro technologies, to a point where these associated technologies and materials are being used to develop a new generation of agricultural inputs, many focused on products arising from transformation (Table 1,3, 4; and Figure 1).
Extensive use of MTAs. Important contributions towards this work include proprietary technologies and materials, meaning that they have been developed and/or under protection by private sector research organizations. The extensive use of such materials means that as centers take on the transformation of mandate crops, the development of vaccines and diagnostic probes, and provide for marker-assisted breeding, that their dependence on licenses, MTAs, and other agreements with the private sector (Figure 3) becomes of greater importance.
Limited IPP sought by centers. Each center questioned indicated that it is using applications of proprietary biotechnology. Each center also has many avenues from which these materials and technologies are being received; although implications are for their eventual use and dissemination to center partners are not always clear. While the technologies received by centers are numerous, the number of resultant products that are expected to be patented by the centers is very low (Table 6).
Centers operating in a challenging and complex environment, highlighting need for increased IP consultations. The use of these materials and technologies pose a challenge to the CGIAR. While their utility in a broad range of applications is evident, the legal implications for post-research use and distribution are not always clear (Tables 3 and 5). To illustrate this point, selected examples where the permission for use of proprietary technologies and/or materials is not clear have been taken from the completed survey forms and compiled in Table 7.
Table 7. Selected examples of proprietary technologies and related dissemination concerns.
Example
Form of protection
Permission
Dissemination constraints
CaMV/35S
Patent
MTA
Possible, given recent rulings in favor of multinational company
Cry I ab
Patent
MTA/Sublicense
Unclear IPR position, non anticipated for poor farmers
AFLP marker genes
Patent
Under investigation
Bacterial gene codon
Patent
MTA
Unclear given current controversy
Agrobacterium
Patent
No written agreement
NK, to be negotiated
CpT1
Patent
No written agreement
NK, to be negotiated
Coat protein genes
Patent
No written agreement
AFLP markers
Patent
No written agreement
NK, to be negotiated
Kanamycin marker
Patent
No written agreement
NK, to be negotiated
Snowdrop lectin gene
Patent
No written agreement
NK, to be negotiated
Stilbene synthase
Patent
License
None reasonable foreseeable
PEP Carboxylase
Patent
License and MTA
Limited to certain countries need approval from multinational company
Xa 21 gene
Patent
MTA/Sublicense
Exclusion of certain countries
Bacterial gene codon modified for plant expression
Patent
License
NK
NK = not known
Some of the inputs identified have a more global use, while others are relevant to only one or two centers. No matter which, the extent of their use and the fact that some of these applications will become available to the NARS, NGOs and other partners through new products, argues for the need of consistent, system-wide legal advice.
Finally, there are a few implications from the study illustrating complexities for the centers regarding use of newer, more advanced technologies:
 Centers are usually certain as to the type of IPP provided for proprietary technologies, but they are not as clear with regard to receiving authorized use for these inputs;
 research at the centers has benefited from proprietary technologies and materials by virtue of the fact that they are in common use, but this also means that they are using "older generation" technologies or materials; and,
 centers not able to obtain authorized use could have more limited access to recent or improved technologies.
VII. Recommendations
Based on the information in this report, the following recommendations are made for the Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology:
1. Centers may wish to acknowledge the use of proprietary technologies and materials in their research programs as one means of demonstrating collaboration, and highlighting the scale of such contributions;
2. Given the limited familiarity regarding the implications of using proprietary technology, the CGIAR should create more awareness on this subject by developing system-wide and center expertise for managing intellectual property;
3. Where several centers are using the same proprietary tools, it may be advantageous to collaborate in the acquisition of such technologies;
4. Immediate legal advice must be arranged for those applications of proprietary tools which permission for use is unclear;
5. Review of experiences and conditions regarding material transfer agreements should be analyzed and exchanged among centers, possibilities for standard formats explored, and legal implications determined regarding possible restrictions on use and dissemination;
6. Given the range of proprietary technologies being used, guidelines for managing intellectual property at individual centers should be reviewed, and possibilities for a system-wide policy or guidelines considered.
Selected References
Barton, J.H., and W.E. Siebeck. 1994. Material Transfer Agreements in Genetic Resources Exchange - The Case of the International Agricultural Research Centers. Rome: International Plant Genetic Resources Institute.
CGIAR. 1992. CGIAR Working Document on Genetic Resources and Intellectual Property. Annex 3 in CGIAR Mid-Term Meeting 1992 - Summary of Proceedings and Decisions. Istanbul, May 19-22, 1992. Washington, DC: CGIAR Secretariat.
TAC. 1997. Added Information on Expenditures in Biotechnology in 1997. Prepared by the TAC Chairman for discussions on Biotechnology at ICW97, 28 October. Unpublished.
Appendix C-2 - June Blalock. Interviews With Selected Commercial Companies and Universities
ACCESS TO THE PROPRIETARY SCIENCE OF OTHERS
A preliminary informal survey of intellectual property owners was conducted to determine whether it would be possible to obtain authorized access to protected technologies and materials for applications important to the mission of the CGIAR. Five multinational corporations which own plant biotechnology-related intellectual properties in multiple jurisdictions were contacted, as well as five major U.S. land grant universities with extensive agricultural research programs. In order to obtain candid responses, the parties interviewed were assured anonymity. All interviewees have responsibilities for managing and licensing intellectual properties for their respective organizations. None have policy-making authority, although all have input into policy decisions regarding intellectual property matters.
The corporations were asked the following questions:
1 - Does your company have any ongoing or previous working relationship(s) with any CGIAR center(s)? If so, what type of relationship (s)? With which center(s)? If not, for what reasons?
2 - Does your company currently market products in any country(ies) where CGIAR centers are located [list provided]? In other developing countries? What are your marketing plans in these countries for the near future? Do you find intellectual property protection necessary and/or useful in these markets?
3 - Would your company be interested in/willing to cooperate with the CGIAR to make new technologies available to the world's poor?
4 - Under what general terms have you/would you be willing to make company-owned proprietary technology available to the CGIAR centers for research? For local distribution? For export to other countries?
5 - Would the availability of intellectual property rights for technologies/materials developed at the CGIAR centers make possible future working relationships with the centers more or less attractive to your company?
6 - What role, if any, do you see for the CGIAR centers in the development, transfer and distribution of new technologies/materials in the future?
The following is a compilation of the responses received;
Question 1
Those who responded yes were most likely to have worked with CIMMYT and/or IRRI. The types of agreements included materials transfer agreements for company-owned materials, research agreements and testing agreements using company-owned technology. There is one patent license currently under negotiation for center-owned technology. None were aware of any examples where germplasm or other materials had been received from any CG centers, although research managers might be better able to answer this question. Those who responded no to this question said that the centers are not viewed as an important source of either germplasm or technology by their company.
Question 2
All responded that they market products worldwide. There is most likely to be a strong marketing effort in South America, and least likely to be a strong effort in Africa. All companies indicated that they apply for IP rights in all countries where such rights are available and enforced. Where rights are not available, or not enforced, they do not market the latest innovations, and they do not develop new technologies for crops localized to these geographic areas. All agreed that it is essential to improve IP protection before can afford to make any major investments in these countries.
Question 3
All responded yes, and some are already cooperating with various CG centers. An important caveat is that it depends on the technology and the risk associated with uncontrolled distribution. There was much more concern about the appropriate management of herbicide or insecticide resistance than there was about the potential loss of IP rights. All said that they need assurances that there are effective mechanisms to prevent "trickle back" of protected materials into key markets.
Question 4
The primary issue is management and control of distribution (see response to Question 3). All are willing to make materials available under standard materials transfer agreements (no commercial use, no distribution to third parties), in principle. However, there is concern about the enforceability of these terms. They probably would not share the most valuable materials. All would be willing to make materials available for local distribution on a case by case basis, with proper controls. For example, distribution could be limited to locally adapted varieties only. Materials intended for export use would be subject to a commercial license agreement
Question 5
All said that the availability of IP rights for technologies and materials developed by the CG centers would make working with the centers more attractive. IP rights need only be obtained in important commercial markets, such that distribution to subsistence farmers could continues as always. Even if the company was only able to obtain a non-exclusive license, it would still have value because it would contribute to an "orderly marketplace." and the company could be assured that their competitors were no getting a "free ride." A couple of caveats: most public sector institutions overestimate what technology/materials will be commercially useful, and the CG centers will need a knowledgeable IP management/licensing staff to make such a program work. One suggestion was that the CG centers could transfer IP rights to the NARS for management
Question 6
The CGIAR should be a forum for discussion about IP rights and public use issues on a worldwide basis, and it should bring the interests of the private sector into the discussion. The CG centers should continue to adapt technologies to regional needs and act as a technology conduit to subsistence farmers. The role of the CG centers will diminish unless ways are found to access proprietary technologies. However, as they get involved in IP rights and enforcement, the centers should not try to become businesses. They should continue to serve the public interest
The universities were asked the following questions:
1 - When your university licenses intellectual property related to crop improvement, what public use exemptions are usually included in the agreement?
2 - Does your university normally (or has it ever), sought patent protection in the countries where CGIAR centers are located [list provided]? In other developing countries? If so, what public use exemptions are included?
3 - Has your university ever made proprietary technologies/materials available to any of the CGIAR centers? If so, under what terms? If not, why not?
4 - Has your university ever used university-owned intellectual property rights as bargaining chips to obtain access to another party's intellectual property? If so, what additional information can you provide? If not, are you aware of any examples where a public sector institution has used this approach?
The following is a compilation of the responses received:
Question 1
In exclusive and partially exclusive licenses, rights are retained for the university to do research, including with third party non-profit organizations. Where U.S. government funding is involved, rights are retained for U.S. government use. Use in developing countries is usually not an issue, because these countries are usually not included in the license agreement due to a lack of enforceable intellectual property rights. This issue is only explicitly addressed in cases where there is funding from the Rockefeller Foundation.
Some universities retain rights for state crop improvement associations for some crop varieties. This does not apply to utility patents.
Question 2
The answer is generally no, except for Mexico. Otherwise, IP rights are sought only in countries which are of commercial interest to the licensee. Licensees frequently want rights in South America, but seldom in Africa and Asia. Public use exemptions for subsistence farming and non-export production are seldom discussed in the license negotiation. Generally, this is viewed as an enforcement issue for the licensee. There is an operating assumption that the licensee would not enforce patent rights against subsistence farmers.
Questions 3
They have never received a request for proprietary materials from any CG center that they are aware of. However, all agreed there has probably been scientist to scientist transfer of materials. All would be willing to make proprietary materials available to the centers under standard materials transfer agreements (limited to research use, no transfer to third parties, new inventions must be reported and ownership is based an inventor ship). Other use, such as transfer to subsistence farmers, could be determined on a case by case basis, and would depend on rights already granted to a commercial licensee, the local availability of patent rights and assurances from the centers regarding distribution controls. Export would be the main concern.
Question 4
None of these universities has ever done a cross license, although several are under discussion currently. Because the universities are required to share revenues with inventors, there is concern about how to value (in monetary terms) a cross license for the purpose rewarding the inventors. Several universities have in-licensed technology to make a total IP package more valuable. This is also done to provide access to dominant patent rights for small company licensees. However, usually companies would prefer to negotiate directly with each other. Apocryphal examples of cross licenses for multimedia or software technologies were mentioned, but no details were available.
Conclusions
The general willingness of these intellectual property owners to provide access to their proprietary science is encouraging, but it does not in any way assure that access will be available to any particular property. Agreements will have to be negotiated on a case by case basis, dependent upon the owner, the particular property and the specific use intended by the IARC requesting access. However, it should be possible to obtain similar terms for all IARCs for a particular property.
Appendix C-3 - E. Binenbaum and B. Wright. On the Significance of South-North Trade in IARC Crops
1. The Issue
2. The Data
3. Discussion of Tables and Graphs
4. Conclusions
5. Tables and Figures
1. The Issue
An important issue confronting the International Agricultural Research Centers (IARCs) and the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) is whether intellectual property rights on technologies and genetic materials from developed countries might in the future jeopardize the free supply of those technologies and materials to IARCs. In particular, if developing countries ("the South") export to developed countries ("the North") IARC crops ^1 that incorporate technology or genes that are subject to Northern intellectual property rights, Northern suppliers might in the future take legal action to make IARCs or their clients pay for proprietary technology and genetic materials.
^1 Crops which are the focus of IARC research are for convenience denoted 'IARC crops'.
How big a problem might this be? In the long term, the answer depends in part on the future significance of sales of IARC crops in markets offering strong intellectual property protection for the relevant processes and products. In the near future, sales are in general most likely to encounter strong intellectual property rights in countries of the North, although stronger intellectual property protection is spreading to other countries under the provisions of the TRIPS ^2 agreement of the World Trade Organization (WTO).
^2 TRIPS stands for "Trade-related Intellectual Property Rights, Including Trade in Counterfeit Goods".
In predicting the likely volume of such sales, a good place to start is with recent trade data. Accordingly, this report, prepared as a broad overview prepared to inform the deliberations of the Expert Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology of the CGIAR, focuses mainly on the question: "How significant are exports from South to North of IARC crops, in absolute terms and relative to domestic production and to total exports?"
2. The Data
Raw data on agricultural trade and production were obtained from the FAOSTAT database, made available on the Internet by the Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) of the United Nations. Note that this data set does not provide bilateral (i.e., country-to-country) trade data. It does provide annual commodity-level production, export and import data for each country. Thus it will indicate United States wheat exports or Russian wheat imports, but not U.S. exports to Russia.
For this report we mainly used data for the year 1995. This is the most recent year for which FAOSTAT currently provides trade data. Thus, the tables are a one-year snapshot (with the exception of Table 5b). In general, this will suffice for our purposes, since most trade flows do not exhibit extreme year-to-year fluctuations. However, some do. ^3
^3 Table 5b and Figure 3c provide examples of large fluctuations.
The total quantity of imports on a worldwide basis should closely correspond to the total quantity of exports for a given commodity. Factors such as time lags in reporting, loss or destruction of traded goods en route and misclassification of a commodity between exporting and importing country can account for some of the differences. However, for a number of crops, percentage differences over 10% between world exports and imports were noted, suggesting significant data error. ^4 In order to maintain a degree of consistency between import and export quantities without embarking on a major data-correction exercise, we adjusted import data by multiplying all import figures by the ratio of world exports to world imports for the crop in question.
^4 In 1995, world net exports (exports minus imports) as a percentage of world exports, as reported in FAOSTAT, exceeded ten percent for the following categories: Beans, Dry; Beans, Green; Cow Peas, Dry; Jute; Millet; Pigeon Peas; Plantains; and Sweet Potatoes. Note that none of these commodities belongs to the top-ten of export commodities (ranked according to value of 1995 exports). (Note that in these footnotes, FAOSTAT crop categories are capitalized.)
3. Discussion of Tables and Graphs
Table 1 shows indicators of importance of selected crops in international trade. The table includes IARC crops as well as a few non-IARC crops. The latter, coffee, cocoa, grapes, jute, mangos and tea, are included for comparison purposes. ^5
^5 Some other important non-IARC crops, such as Sugar and Cotton, are not included in Table 1.
The table ranks crops according to value of world exports. Note that each border-crossing counts as trade. Sometimes commodities will be shipped from country A to country C via country B. In such cases, double-counting of exports and imports occurs. ^6 In the third column of the table, a measure of the value of world output is provided. In order to value output, we use export prices ^7. The fourth column lists world exports as a percentage of world output. Note that this percentage could conceivably be greater than 100 due to the aforementioned double-counting of exports. The fifth column lists value of output of developing countries, again valued at export prices. The sixth column shows output of developing countries as a percentage of world output.
^6 Thus, in a sense, our figures provide upwardly biased estimates of trade volumes. However, it may be argued that for our specific purposes our figures are useful. Problems related to proprietary technology and genetic materials are more likely to occur in cases of multiple border crossings.
^7 Since FAOSTAT does not report dollar value of production of agricultural commodities, a price index was calculated for each commodity as (dollar value of exports)/(quantity of exports), using world totals. This ratio was used as a price for valuing quantities of each commodity in dollars. The FAOSTAT data consistently report exports using the FOB (free on board) valuation standard. Since exported goods tend to be of higher quality than average, and since transportation costs from the production center to port are presumably included in export price, an upward bias in calculated values of production is likely. The export price index of Rice (FAOSTAT code 042) was used to compute the value of Rice, Paddy in world output.
The final column gives net imports - defined as imports minus exports - of developed countries as a percentage of output of developing countries. This statistic tells us how significant is the overall South-North trade flow for developing countries. If it is a large positive percentage, we know that a large fraction of Southern output is exported to the North. One should, however, be cautious in interpreting this statistic, especially where it assumes negative or small positive values. For instance, for soybeans the statistic has a value of -3.1 %. To conclude that Southern exports of soybeans to the North are insignificant would be a mistake. As we see in the market share tables (Tables 3-10), the United States and Brazil are major exporters of soybeans, while the European Union is a major importer. In fact Brazil is a major exporter of soybeans to Europe, even though the overall trade flow of soybeans is from North to South.
Of all the crops listed in Table 1, only bananas, coffee, cocoa, and tea display large positive percentages in the last column; however, the latter three are not of immediate interest to us because they are non-IARC crops. As for bananas, unfortunately our data do not distinguish between cooking bananas and dessert bananas. Cooking bananas are predominantly for local consumption, whereas the international market for dessert bananas is relatively very large. This is an important distinction for our purposes, because in fact dessert bananas can hardly be considered an IARC crop - IARC banana research ^8 focuses on cooking bananas. ^9 Thus we can conclude that for none of the IARC crops there is a clear overall tendency for trade flows to be from South to North.
^8 Two IARCs conduct Banana research: IPGRI/INIBAP (International Network for the Improvement of Banana and Plantain, a part of IPGRI, located in France) and IITA (International Institute for Tropical Agriculture, located in Nigeria).
^9 The research efforts of IPGRI/INIBAP and IITA are directed at cooking bananas (also known as "starch bananas"), not the dessert bananas (also called "sweet bananas") that dominate South-North trade.
Figure 1a shows a selection of eleven crops ranked according to value of world output. For each crop, it shows output and exports of the world and of developing countries, all in U.S. dollar terms. From this graph, it is evident that for most crops trade is dwarfed by output. In other words, the vast majority of IARC crop output is never traded across national borders.
Figure 1b displays only part of the information contained in figure la. It omits output and focuses entirely on exports. Among IARC crops, rice is by far developing countries' most significant export crop in value terms. In addition, Southern exports dominate international markets for cassava, groundnuts and beans.
Table 2 basically contains the same information as Table 1 (except for the fact that it omits non-IARC crops), but the crops are now arranged in a different way, namely by IARC ^10
^10 The classification by IARC relies in part on recent IARC reports. It is not exhaustive. As can be seen in the table, centers share responsibility for some crops.
Tables 3-10 and Figures 2-6 break world aggregates down into sub-aggregates for eight groups of countries: Low-Income Developing Countries ^11; Brazil; China; Rest of Middle-Income Developing Countries ^12; Transition Economies ^13; United States; European Union ^14; and Rest of Developed Countries ^15 There is one Table for each group. The Figures focus on developing countries.
^11 Our term "Countries" is not synonymous to "independent states". Developing Countries include Low-Income Developing Countries and Middle-Income Developing Countries. Low-Income Developing Countries include Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central-African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo Democratic Republic, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kiribati, Laos, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sudan, Tanzania, Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Yemen, and Zambia.
^12 Middle-Income Developing Countries include Brazil, China, and the Rest of Middle-Income Developing Countries, which include American Samoa, Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Aruba, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, Bolivia, Botswana, Bouvet Islands, British Indian Ocean Territory, British Virgin Islands, Brunei Darussalam, Cameroon, Canton Islands, Cayman Islands, Chile, Christmas Islands, Cocos Islands, Colombia, Congo Republic, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Dominica, Dominican Republic, East Timor, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Falkland Islands, Fiji, French Guiana, French Polynesia, French South Territories, Gabon, Gaza Strip, Ghana, Greenland, Grenada, Guadeloupe, Guam, Guatemala, Guyana, Heard and McDonald Islands, Honduras, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jamaica, Johnston Islands, Jordan, Kenya, Korea (North), Korea (South), Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Macau, Malaysia, Malta, Marshall Islands, Martinique,
Mauritius, Mayotte, Mexico, Micronesia, Midway Islands, Mongolia, Montserrat, Morocco, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands Antilles, New Caledonia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Niue, Norfolk Islands. Northern Marianas, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Phillipines, Pitcairn, Puerto Rico, Qatar, Reunion, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, South Georgia, Sri Lanka, Saint Helena, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Saint Vincent, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, Taiwan, Thailand, Tokelau, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turks and Caicos Islands, U.S. Virgin Islands, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, Wake Island, Wallis Island, Western Sahara, and Zimbabwe. Note that several Asian "tigers" as well as some oil-exporting countries (and perhaps some other countries like the Bahamas) might be more properly classified as high-income countries.
^13 Transition Economies include Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Moldova Republic, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, and Yugoslavia.
^14 The European Union includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and United Kingdom.
^15 Developed Countries include the European Union, the United States, and the Rest of Developed Countries. The Rest of Developed Countries include Andorra, Australia, Canada, Faeroe Islands, Gibraltar, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Liechtenstein, Monaco, New Zealand, Norway, San Marino, South Africa, Svalbard, Switzerland, and Vatican City.
Tables 3-10 provide market share measures for each of the eight groups. These were calculated using raw data from FAOSTAT on imports, exports and production, all measured in metric tons. ^16 We obtained data for these groups of countries by adding up values for constituent countries. This approach is appropriate for production. With trade data, aggregate exports and imports (as separate items) fail to differentiate between trade within a group of nations and trade to nations outside the group. Again, this is a consequence of the fact that FAOSTAT does not provide bilateral trade data.
^16 In some cases, we needed to make adjustments to commodity categories to make trade categories compatible with production categories:
(1) There is a single category of Cassava in production data, and three categories (Dried, Starch and Tapioca) in trade data. For the group trade data we used the Dried Cassava category.
(2) Only Green Coffee is represented in production data, while Green and Roast coffee are represented in trade data. Trade in Green and Roast Coffee is compared to production of Green Coffee.
(3) Groundnuts have a single category in production data but two in trade data (In-Shell and Shelled). Total (In-Shell and Shelled) Groundnut trade is compared to production of Groundnuts in Shell.
(4) Only Rice, Paddy is represented in production data, whereas trade data are for Rice (Total).
For each group of countries, we included only crops that are in one way or another significant. ^17 The columns of Tables 3-10 are largely self-explanatory, except for the sixth column. FAOSTAT does not provide consumption data. We calculated "consumption" (C) quantities from the accounting identity C = Y + M - X, using the available data for production (Y), exports (X) and adjusted ^18 imports (M). This approximation entails possible distortions due to commodity storage for consumption or export in a later period.
^17 Crops for which all four percentages are below 5 % are omitted from Tables 3 - 10.
^18 Recall that we adjusted imports to make aggregate world imports match aggregate world exports. Combined with our method for computing consumption, this implies that aggregate output equals aggregate computed consumption.
In Table 3, we see that dry beans account for more exports (in value terms) from low-income developing countries than all other IARC crops combined. Another salient fact is that though exports from the poorest countries dominate international markets for cow peas and pigeon peas, the size of these markets is very small compared to international trade in many other crops. Figure 2a demonstrates that what is true for developing countries in general, namely that exports are only a small fraction of output of IARC crops, holds a fortiori for low-income developing countries. In figure 2b ^19 we see that rice imports are by far the most significant feature of the poorest countries' trade in IARC crops.
^19 Compared with Figure 2a, Figure 2b contains no additional information; it omits production.
Table 4 highlights the fact that soybeans are the only IARC crop of which Brazil - a major player in several non-IARC crop markets - is an important exporter.
Table 5 a shows that Chinese producers have significant international market shares mainly in beans, groundnuts, and sweet potatoes. Interestingly, notwithstanding the enormous Chinese production of rice, Chinese rice exports were relatively very small, and net Chinese rice exports were even negative, in 1995. At this point, however, the reader should be mindful of the perils of a one-year snapshot. As we see in Table 5b and Figure 3c, Chinese rice exports exhibit large fluctuations; for example, in 1994, they were almost ten times as large as in 1995. Relatively small fluctuations in Chinese output lead to large fluctuations in exports or imports for a number of crops. This is due to the fact that - once again - trade is small compared to output, as is demonstrated in Figure 3a. Finally, as most vividly illustrated in figure 3b, not only for rice, but for all four most important crops ^20 in Chinese trade, exports were much smaller than imports in 1995. As we see in Figure
3c, China has been a major importer of wheat during the entire period 1986-1995.
^20 Rice, Wheat, Maize, and Soybeans.
Next, consider Table 6, which provides information about the category of middle-income developing countries excluding China and Brazil. This is a very large and disparate group of countries ^21 with a combined population of over two billion. Not surprisingly, the combined export market share of this group is significant for most IARC crops, most notably rice, cassava, groundnuts, and chickpeas. Net group exports of four of these five crops ^22 are positive.
^21 See footnote 11.
^22 Groundnuts being the exception.
In Figures 4a and 4b, Brazil is included in the group. ^23 Figure 4a shows - again - that for all IARC crops, the vast majority of output is not traded internationally, the most extreme case in point being yams - an important crop in terms of output, but negligable in terms of international trade. Note that rice group output (in value terms) is vastly larger than group output of any other IARC crop. As shown in figure 4b, the only IARC crop whose group exports (in value terms) come anywhere close to those of rice is bananas. (But, as we noted above, the type of bananas that is usually traded internationally is not an IARC research priority.) Moreover, bananas and cassava are the only major export crops listed here for which group exports are much larger than group imports.
^23 Only for Soybeans does this make a significant difference.!
Figures 5 and 6 show how world output and world exports, respectively, of some major IARC crops are divided among four groups of countries: low-income developing countries, ^24 China, middle-income developing countries, ^25 and the rest of the world. ^26
^24 See footnote 10.
^25 In Figures 4a, 4b, 5, and 6 Brazil is included in the category "Middle-Income Countries excluding China".
^26 The "Rest of the World" category consists of all Developed Countries and Transition Economies.!
Table 7 provides market share data for the transition economies. Wheat and barley are the only major export crops for this group. Wheat exports stand out in value terms, while barley is the only other major crop of which this group is a somewhat significant net exporter. Group output of wheat, barley and potatoes is significant relative to world output.
Tables 8, 9, and 10 provide market share data for three groups of developed countries. Here, we are especially interested in net imports. ^27 A measure of net imports is given by subtracting any percentage in the third column from the corresponding percentage in the fourth column ^28 Thus, taking into account volume of trade (in value terms), we see in Table 8 that the European Union is a significant net importer of maize, bananas, groundnuts, soybeans, dry beans, cassava, and sorghum. Interestingly, inspection of Table 10 reveals that the category of other developed countries (which excludes the U.S.A. and the E.U.) exhibits the exact same pattern.
^27 Note that if both imports and exports are large, it is likely that a large proportion of group trade is intra-group trade. This is especially true in the European Union, which is a geographically contiguous trading block. For example, most Potato trade of member countries of the European Union is with other member countries. The reader is also reminded that the last column of Table 1 provides information about aggregate net imports of all developed countries.
^28 The reader is reminded that we adjusted the raw imports data so that, by construction, aggregate world imports equal aggregate world exports.
Of these crops, maize and sorghum are not significant net export crops of developing countries; the United States dominate the international maize and sorghum markets. As for groundnuts and dry beans, combining information from Tables 8, 9, and 10, we see that although U.S. net exports of these crops are substantial, the combined net imports of the European Union and other developed countries are much larger. In the case of soybeans, the European Union and other developed countries are large net importers, while the United States dominate the international market. However, as reported above, Brazilian soybean exports are significant. From this data set, it is impossible to tell to what extent U.S. exports dominate other developed countries' import markets. Judging by FAOSTAT data, it may be that all of Brazil's exports go to developed countries, but it may also be that a large proportion of Brazil's exports goes to other middle-income developing countries. ^29 However, it is
well known that Brazil is a significant exporter of soybeans to developed countries. ^30 Finally, there is a very clear pattern in international cassava trade: cassava is mainly exported by middle-income developing countries (excluding Brazil and China) to the European Union. The international cassava market is of intermediate size. ^31
^29 We currently do not have this information because FAOSTAT does not provide bilateral trade data.
^30 In the early 1970s, Brazil quickly established itself as a Soybean exporter to Japan and the European Union. One should always keep in mind that markets are dynamic. In the future, other challenges to currently dominant crop exporters will no doubt arise.
^31 As Table 1 shows, world exports total a little over half a billion U.S. dollars.
Table 9 shows that the United States are a major net importer of bananas, plantains and yams. In these crops, international trade is clearly dominated by the category of middle-income developing countries, as can be seen in Table 6. As shown in Table 1, the international (predominantly non-IARC varieties) banana market is big, while international markets for plantains and yams are small.
We conclude our discussion of the tables and graphs with a few comments on rice. Rice is not only the world's most important crop in terms of output, but also the number one IARC crop in terms of developing countries' exports (see Table 6). However, most of these exports probably go to other developing countries (see also Table 3). Due to the lack of bilateral trade data in FAOSTAT, we are unable to quantify South-North rice trade here. From Table 8 we can infer that imports of the European Union's member countries from non-member countries comprise between 2.7% and 7.9% of world imports. Because U.S. net rice exports total 12.7% of world exports, a large proportion of E.U. imports may well be supplied by U.S. exporters. But we cannot exclude the possibility that total rice exports from developing to developed countries are significant. ^32
^32 Based on FAOSTAT, South-North Rice trade cannot exceed one billion U.S. dollars, and is likely to be substantially less and to comprise a number of distinct varieties.
4. Conclusions
It should be emphasized that the database used for this report, FAOSTAT, has some major limitations and flaws, the most important of which is its lack of bilateral trade data. ^33 Nevertheless, (mainly) on the basis of FAOSTAT it is possible to draw some conclusions regarding the importance of South-North trade in IARC crops.
^33 The currently available budget for this research project does not permit the purchase of COMTRADE, which is a data set offered by the United Nations Statistics Division. COMTRADE does provide bilateral trade data.
Of most IARC crops, only small percentages of world output are traded internationally. Notably, rice is perhaps the most important crop in the world, but only a small fraction of rice output is traded internationally. ^34
^34 Even so, Rice is the number four IARC crop in terms of value of world exports.
IARC crops exhibiting significant South-North trade flows include soybeans, dry beans, groundnuts, cassava, plantains, and yams, and perhaps rice ^35 Among these, rice and soybeans are the only crops whose international markets are very large ^36 relative to those of other crops. International trade in dry beans, groundnuts, and cassava is also sizeable. ^37 Dry beans are the only IARC crop for which exports from the poorest category of countries - the low-income developing countries - are noteworthy. Finally, plantains and yams are mostly exported from middle-income developing countries to developed countries, but these international markets are small. ^38
^35 Bananas are not included in this listing, because dessert bananas are not a major focus of IARC research. The international market for dessert bananas is very large and clearly dominated by exports from developing countries.
^36 Total world trade in both Rice and Soybeans exceeds seven billion U.S. dollars. Due to the lack of bilateral trade data in FAOSTAT, we are currently unable to exactly quantify South-North tradeflows of Soybeans and Rice.
^37 That is, between half a billion and one-and-half-billion U.S. dollars.
^38 That is, less than one hundred million U.S. dollars.
The recent trade patterns reported here have one clear implication. The poorest countries are unlikely to be greatly exposed in the near term to accusations of intellectual property rights violations by their exports of IARC crops to the North.
For middle-income countries, problems might occur in some of the seven crops listed above. Investment in bilateral trade data might provide a more accurate picture of their potential exposure. We suggest that the Expert Panel consider the feasibility of estimating threshold values for exports to the North below which serious exposure to intellectual property challenges is unlikely.
5. Tables and Figures
Table 1: Indicators of Importance of Trade, 1995 (Values in US$ 1,000,000)
Note that non-IARC crops appearing in this table are italicized.
Value of World Exports
Value of World Output
(at export prices)
World Exports/
World Output
Value of Output of Developing*
(at export prices)
Output of Developing*/
World Output
Net Imports of Developed*/
Output of Developing*
WHEAT
Coffee**
MAIZE
SOYBEANS
RICE**
BANANAS
BARLEY
Cocoa Beans
POTATOES
Tea
Grapes
BEANS, DRY
GROUNDNUTS**
SORGHUM
CASSAVA**
Mangos
LENTILS
CHICK-PEAS
BEANS, GREEN
Jute
PLANTAINS
MILLET
SWEET POTATOES
YAMS
COW PEAS, DRY
PIGEON PEAS
* See footnotes 11,12,14, and 15 for definitions of the Developed and Developing categories.
** Production data are for Coffee, Green; Rice, Paddy; Groundnuts in Shell; and Cassava. Trade data are for Coffee, Green and Roast; Rice (Total); Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell; and Dried Cassava.
Table 2: Indicators of Importance of Trade (crops are sorted by IARCs*), 1995 (Values in US$ 1,000,000)
Research Center
Value of World Exports
Value of World Output
(at export prices)
World Exports/
World Output
Value of Output of Developing**
(at export prices)
Output of Developing**/
World Output
Net Imports of Developed**/
Output of Developing**
CIAT
(Colombia)
RICE***
BEANS, DRY
CASSAVA***
BEANS, GREEN
CIMMYT
(Mexico)
WHEAT
MAIZE
BARLEY
CIP
(Peru)
POTATOES
SWEET POTATOES
ICARDA
(Syria)
WHEAT
BARLEY
BEANS, DRY
CHICK-PEAS
BEANS, GREEN
* IARCs (International Agricultural Research Centers) are in alphabetical order; crops for each IARC are ranked by Value of World Exports
** See footnotes 11, 12, 14 and 15 for definitions of the Developed and Developing categories.
*** Production data are for Rice, Paddy; Groundnuts in Shell; and Cassava. Trade data are for Rice (Total); Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell; and Dried Cassava.
Table 2 (continued): Indicators of Importance of Trade (crops are sorted by IARCs*), 1995 (Values in US$ 1,000,000)
Research Center
Value of World Exports
Value of World Output
(at export prices)
World Exports/
World Output
Value of Output of Developing**
(at export prices)
Output of Developing**/
World Output
Net Imports of Developed**/
Output of Developing**
ICRISAT
(India)
GROUNDNUTS***
SORGHUM
CHICK-PEAS
MILLET
PIGEON PEAS
IITA
(Nigeria)
MAIZE
SOYBEANS
RICE***
BANANAS****
CASSAVA***
YAMS
COW PEAS, DRY
IPGRI/INIBAP
(France)
BANANAS****
IRRI
(Philippines)
RICE***
WARDA
(Cote d'Ivoire)
* IARCs (International Agricultural Research Centers) are in alphabetical order; crops for each IARC are ranked by Value of World Exports
** See footnotes 11, 12,14 and 15 for definitions of the Developed and Developing categories.
*** Production data are for Rice, Paddy; Groundnuts in Shell; and Cassava. Trade data are for Rice (Total); Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell; and Dried Cassava.
**** The FAOSTAT database does not distinguish between cooking bananas and dessert bananas. IARC banana research focuses on cooking bananas which are predominantly for local consumption, rather than the dessert bananas that are traded internationally in large quantities.
Table 3: Market Share Data for Low-Income Developing Countries*, 1995
Group Exports
(US$ 1.000)
Group Exports per capita
Group Exports/
World Exports
Group Imports/
World Imports
Group Output/
World Output
Group Consumption/
World Output
BEANS, DRY
RICE**
SORGHUM
GROUNDNUTS**
BANANAS
MILLET
COW PEAS, DRY
CASSAVA**
PIGEON PEAS
LENTILS
YAMS
SWEET POTATOES
PLANTAINS
* For a listing of countries in Low-Income Developing category, see footnote 11.
** Production data are for Rice, Paddy; Groundnuts In Shell; and Cassava. Trade data are for Rice (Total); Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell; and Dried Cassava.
Table 4: Market Share Data for Brazil, 1995
Domestic Exports
(US$ 1.000)
Domestic Exports per capita
Domestic Exports/
World Exports
Domestic Imports/
World Imports
Domestic Output/
World Output
Domestic Consumption/
World Output
SOYBEANS
MAIZE
BANANAS
YAMS
BEANS, DRY
WHEAT
CASSAVA
Table 5a: Market Share Data for China, 1995
Domestic Exports
(US$ 1.000)
Domestic Exports per capita
Domestic Exports/
World Exports
Domestic Imports/
World Imports
Domestic Output/
World Output
Domestic Consumption/
World Output
BEANS, DRY
GROUNDNUTS*
SOYBEANS
RICE*
BANANAS
MAIZE
SORGHUM
LENTILS
SWEET POTATOES
POTATOES
MILLET
WHEAT
BARLEY
CASSAVA*
* Production data are for Rice, Paddy; Groundnuts In Shell; and Cassava. Trade data are for Rice (Total); Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell; and Dried Cassava.
Table 5b: Chinese Trade in Wheat and Rice, 1986-1995
Year
Wheat IMPORTS
(US$ 1000)
Wheat EXPORTS
(US$ 1000)
Rice IMPORTS
(US$ 1000)
Rice EXPORTS
(US$ 1000)
Table 6: Rest of Middle-Income Developing Countries* (excluding Brazil and China)
Group Exports
(US$ 1.000)
Group Exports per capita
Group Exports/
World Exports
Group Imports/
World Imports
Group Output/
World Output
Group Consumption/
World Output
RICE**
BANANAS
WHEAT
MAIZE
SOYBEANS
CASSAVA**
POTATOES
GROUNDNUTS**
BEANS, DRY
CHICK-PEAS
BARLEY
LENTILS
SORGHUM
PLANTAINS
YAMS
MILLET
SWEET POTATOES
COW PEAS, DRY
PIGEON PEAS
* For a listing of countries in Middle-Income Developing category, see footnote 12.
** Production data are for Rice, Paddy; Groundnuts In Shell; and Cassava. Trade data are for Rice (Total); Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell; and Dried Cassava.
Table 7: Market Share Data for Transition Economies* 1995
Group Exports
(US$ 1.000)
Group Exports per capita
Group Exports/
World Exports
Group Imports/
World Imports
Group Output/
World Output
Group Consumption/
World Output
WHEAT
BARLEY
MAIZE
POTATOES
BANANAS
MILLET
GROUNDNUTS**
* For a listing of countries in Transition Economies category, see footnote 13.
** Production data are for Groundnuts In Shell; trade data are for Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell.
Table 8: Market Share Data for European Union*, 1995
Group Exports
(US$ 1.000)
Group Exports per capita
Group Exports/
World Exports
Group Imports/
World Imports
Group Output/
World Output
Group Consumption/
World Output
WHEAT
MAIZE
POTATOES
BARLEY
BANANAS
RICE**
GROUNDNUTS**
SOYBEANS
BEANS, DRY
CASSAVA**
SORGHUM
PLANTAINS
MILLET
CHICK-PEAS
LENTILS
SWEET POTATOES
* For a listing of member countries of the European Union, see footnote 14.
** Production data are for Rice, Paddy; Groundnuts In Shell; and Cassava. Trade data are for Rice (Total); Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell; and Dried Cassava.
Table 9: Market Share Data for the USA, 1995
Domestic Exports
(US$ 1,000)
Domestic Exports per capita
Domestic Exports/
World Exports
Domestic Imports/
World Imports
Domestic Output/
World Output
Domestic Consumption/
World Output
MAIZE
WHEAT
SOYBEANS
RICE*
SORGHUM
GROUNDNUTS*
BEANS, DRY
BANANAS
BARLEY
POTATOES
LENTILS
MILLET
SWEET POTATOES
COW PEAS, DRY
PLANTAINS
YAMS
* Production data are for Rice, Paddy and for Groundnuts In Shell. Trade data are for Rice (Total) and for Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell.
Table 10: Market Share Data for Rest of Developed Economies* (excluding USA and European Union), 1995
Group Exports
(US$ 1.000)
Group Exports per capita
Group Exports/
World Exports
Group Imports/
World Imports
Group Output/
World Output
Group Consumption/
World Output
WHEAT
BARLEY
MAIZE
SOYBEANS
POTATOES
LENTILS
BEANS, DRY
GROUNDNUTS**
CHICK-PEAS
SORGHUM
MILLET
SWEET POTATOES
BANANAS
* For a listing of countries in the Rest-of-Developed category, see footnote 15.
** Production data are for Groundnuts in Shell; trade data are for Groundnuts, Shelled plus Groundnuts In Shell.
[Figure 1a] Production and Exports (World vs. Developing Countries), 1995
[Figure 1b] Exports (World vs. Developing Countries), 1995
[Figure 2a] Production and Trade (Low-Income Countries), 1995
[Figure 2b] Trade (Low-Income Countries), 1995
[Figure 3a] Production and Trade (China), 1995
[Figure 3b] Trade (China), 1995
[Figure 3c] Fluctuation of Chinese Trade in Wheat and Rice
[Figure 4a] Production and Trade (Middle-Income Countries excluding China), 1995
[Figure 4b] Trade (Middle-Income Countries excluding China), 1995
[Figure 5] Production by Groups of Countries, 1995
Rice
Wheat
Maize
Soybean
Sorghum
Cassava
[Figure 6] Exports by Groups of Countries, 1995
Rice
Wheat
Beans
Soybean
Groundnuts
Bananas
<section>g</section>
Appendix D - Background Papers
Appendix D-1 - Guiding Principles for the CGIAR Centers on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources 1
Appendix D-2 - Calestous Juma. Comments on the Convention on Biological Diversity and IPR
Appendix D-3 - Bernard le Buanec. Plant breeders' rights and farmers' rights - A complex debate
Appendix D-4 - Timothy Roberts. Market Segmentation
Appendix D-5 - Miguel Altieri. Third World Farmers and IPR
Appendix D-6 - Thammasat Resolution
Appendix D-7 - Agri-Food Statement
Appendix D-1 - Guiding Principles for the CGIAR Centers on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources 1
^1 This paper was adopted as an interim working paper by the CGIAR at its ICW'96 meeting, Washington, D.C. 1996.
BACKGROUND
The CGIAR is committed to the conservation and use of genetic resources in an expeditious, cost-effective and equitable manner. In recent years the CGIAR's activities have been increasingly conditioned by a rapidly changing intellectual property rights environment, the issue of Farmers' Rights and the growing importance of the private sector. In this context the CGIAR, at its Mid-Term Meeting, Istanbul in May 1992, agreed on a set of working principles on genetic resources and intellectual property. These were published in the proceedings of the meeting and were largely based on a set of guiding principles on plant genetic resources and related intellectual property rights issues adopted by the International Agricultural Research Centers in 1991.
Significant changes have occurred since the CGIAR decisions in 1992 that affect the exchange and use of genetic resources:
 The Convention on Biological Diversity came into force 29 December 1993;
 Centers signed agreements with FAO on 26 October 1994/bringing their germplasm collections under the auspices of FAO, as part of the International Network of Ex Situ Collections. Materials covered in these agreements referred to as "designated germplasm" ^2, are listed in the appendices to the agreements.
^2 The majority of materials currently held in Center genebanks has already been designated as coming under the agreement with FAO. Further material is being designated (as stocks are cleaned and multiplied) with the result that only those materials carrying special conditions imposed by the supplier would remain undesignated. (In 1996, such material accounts for less than 5 percent of the total holdings.)
 The Multilateral Trade Agreement which came into force 1 January 1995 embodies provisions on Trade Related Intellectual Property (TRIPS). As a result, many countries are now developing and enacting intellectual property rights legislation, including plant variety protection.
Against this background, the CGIAR convened a panel on intellectual property rights in September 1994 under the Chairmanship of Dr. M.S. Swaminathan. The report of the panel was endorsed at International Centers Week in October 1994. Based on the agreed recommendations made in this report and, pending the emergence of international consensus on a range of issues arising, the CGIAR Centers have revised their guiding principles on intellectual property. While it is envisaged that there may well be further revisions as changing circumstances warrant, the Centers consider it essential to clearly state these guiding principles for the benefit of the NARSs, donors, NGOs, the private sector and our other partners in research and development.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
1. The germplasm designated by the Centers is held in trust for the world community in accordance with the agreements signed with FAO. Through the agreements, official inter-governmental recognition is given to this role of the Centers, and FAO is to provide policy advice to the Centers in the execution of their responsibilities. The Centers agree to conserve, maintain, study, improve, and distribute germplasm world-wide for use in agricultural research and development. As trustees of the designated germplasm, the Centers also affirm their responsibility for safe and secure conservation of these genetic materials for present and future generations, including their duplication in at least one other location for safety.
2. Through their guiding principles on intellectual property protection, the Centers aim to promote ready access to both the designated germplasm and the Centers' research products, including biotechnological processes arising from their research.
NATIONAL SOVEREIGNTY
3. The Centers recognize that the acquisition of germplasm after the coming into force of the Convention on the Biological Diversity is subject to the provisions of the said Convention, and in particular to the sovereign rights of states over their genetic resources. The Centers will strive to reach an understanding on mutually agreed terms with national governments, either individually or collectively, facilitating the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the collection, conservation and utilization of such germplasm, besides providing ready access to these genetic resources.
FARMERS' RIGHTS
4. The Centers recognize the contributions of farming and indigenous communities to genetic resources conservation and enhancement. In order to convert this concept into reality the Centers are prepared to contribute to national and international efforts to develop appropriate policies and procedures for the recognition of Farmers' Rights. The Centers also recognize the expertise of many national and international NGOs on equity, gender, conservation and sustainability issues and where appropriate partnerships with them and others in order to integrate these concerns in research on genetic resources conservation and use.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION - DESIGNATED GERMPLASM AND CENTER RESEARCH PRODUCTS
5. The Centers will not claim legal ownership nor apply intellectual property protection to the germplasm they hold in trust, and will require recipients of the germplasm to observe the same conditions, in accordance with the agreements signed with FAO.
6. Plant Breeders' Rights. Materials supplied by the Centers, whether designated germplasm or the products of the Centers' breeding activities, may be used by recipients for breeding purposes without restriction. Recipients, including the private sector, may protect the products of such breeding through plant variety protection that is consistent with the provisions of UPOV or any other sui generis system, and that does not preclude others from using the original materials in their own breeding programs.
7. Defensive Protection by Centers. Based on the conviction that their research will continue to be supported by public funds, the Centers regard the results of their work as international public goods. Hence full disclosure of research results and products in the public domain is the preferred strategy for preventing misappropriation by others. Consequently, the Centers will not assert intellectual property control over derivatives except in those rare cases when this is needed to facilitate technology transfer or otherwise protect the interests of developing nations. In all such cases, the Centers will disclose the reasons for seeking protection.
8. The Centers do not see the protection of intellectual property as a mechanism for securing financial returns for their germplasm research activities, and will not view potential returns as a source of operating funds, hi the event that a Center secures financial returns as a result of the commercialization by others of its protected property, appropriate means will be used to ensure that such funds are used for furthering the mandate of the Center and the objectives of the CGIAR.
9. Any intellectual property protection of Centers' output will be done on behalf of the Centers and not individual scientists. All staff in the Centers will be required to disclose innovations and assign all rights on these to the Centers.
10. Patenting. We recognize that there is an increasing use of patenting in both the private and public sectors. Cells, organelles, genes or molecular constructs isolated from materials distributed by Centers may be protected by recipients only with the agreement of the supplying Center. Centers will only give such approval after consultation with the country, or countries, of origin of the germplasm where this is known or can be readily identified. This consultation would include consideration of an appropriate sharing of any benefits, whether bilateral or multilateral, flowing from subsequent commercial development of the protected material. ^3, and would require that the original material remains available for the public good.
^3 It is recognized that this requirement for the granting of permission by a Center before a recipient can take out patent protection represents a significant departure from the current position in which the Centers do not require any such permission. While this is not specifically required under the terms of the agreements signed with FAO, nevertheless the CGIAR feels that such a requirement is needed both to protect the interests of countries of origin and to bring CGIAR policy in line with the spirit of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). While the CGIAR Centers can not themselves be party to the Convention, it is nevertheless recognized that the majority of CGIAR members and partner countries have signed and ratified the CBD.
11. Center Access to Material Protected by Others. To promote the availability to developing nations of germplasm and scientific innovations that have been protected by others, the Centers may enter into agreements with the holders of such rights. Acceptance of any limitations on the distribution and use of derived and associated materials would have to be consistent with the goals and objectives of the CGIAR, and the benefits of such agreements should outweigh the potential disadvantages.
BIOSAFETY
12. The Centers will continue to give overriding importance to biosafety concerns and will follow collaborating country guidelines concerning biosafety.
GENERAL PROCEDURES
13. These Guiding Principles will be reviewed at regular intervals and revised as need be in the light of international developments. This revision will be carried out by the Center Directors Committee.
14. The Centers will adopt specific policies for the distribution and use of improved germplasm and biotechnological products following the above Guiding Principles.
Appendix D-2 - Calestous Juma. Comments on the Convention on Biological Diversity and IPR
Below are preliminary comments arising from the discussions and deliberations in the Convention on Biological Diversity regarding the Panel's Subgroup I (Protecting CGIAR's IP) and Subgroup VI (Other Questions), which will be preceded by a general comment.
General comments;
1. Intellectual property rights (IPRs) are mentioned in the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in Article 16. While Article 16 provides for a balance between the protection/recognition of existing IPR and the transfer of technology relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity as well as for technology related to genetic resources provided by countries of origin, the key provision related to impacts of IPRs on the Convention is Article 16 para. 5. It stipulates that IPRs should promote and not run counter to the objectives of the Convention. The objectives are conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of genetic resources.
2. IPRs have been discussed at various meetings of the Conference of the Parties (COP) and its subsidiary body. So far, no formal discussion has taken place and no decision reached yet about the impacts of IPRs on the objectives of the Convention. With respect to access to genetic resources and benefit sharing, there is a feeling that existing IPRs and its instruments, licensing and royalties, might be used to share benefits. As there is a wide range of views within the COP concerning the impact of IPRs, Decision III/17 of the third meeting of the COP called for case studies on the impact of IPRs on the objectives of the Convention. However, and as usual in the mid-term of the intersessional period, only a few case studies have been communicated to the Secretariat yet
3. The COP pays special attention to discussions in other fora concerning IPRs. The Secretariat has therefore asked for and been granted observer status to the Committee on Trade and Environment of WTO and is seeking observer status to the TRIPs Council of WTO. The COP wants to be kept informed about the recent developments in the protection of databases which have been initiated within WIPO.
4. Regarding the CGIAR system one could say that there is a similar concern within the forum of the CBD regarding IPRs as there is uncertainty on how IPRs will impact on the objectives of the Convention.
5. Another aspect within the CBD regarding IPRs - apart from the existing intellectual property rights and especially patents and plant breeders rights - are the discussions related to the protection of knowledge, innovations and practices related to indigenous and local communities embodying traditional lifestyles relevant for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity (Article 8 (j) of the Convention). There is a strong feeling from one part of the stakeholders within the CBD that there is a need to develop a sui generis system of protection as the current IPRs are covering sufficiently neither the approval of the holders of that knowledge nor the sharing of benefits with them.
6. The report of a recent Workshop on Traditional Knowledge and Biological Diversity, held in Madrid from 23 to 28 November 1997, as an intersessional activity by the COP, lists a whole range of options related to IPRs and a sui generis system to be considered by the COP to implementing Article 8 (j) (similar discussions are currently carried out within IPGRI regarding a sui generis system for landraces as an alternative to plant breeders rights). It also provides a list of options regarding participation of indigenous and local communities which is felt to be necessary when dealing with issues related to those major groups. Traditional knowledge and the implementation of Article 8 (j) will be further considered at the next COP in Bratislava, Slovakia, in May 1998.
7. Regarding material collected by the Centers and the sharing of benefit with the holders of the knowledge, it is not clear in which way the Centers are respecting the provisions of the Convention. Although IPGRI is currently doing research in the field of sui generis systems of protection, the CGIAR Centers might wish to adopt some interim policy regarding that issue. This is also true for material collected on the land/territory of indigenous and local communities. This is related to the CGIAR proprietary science, as a slice of that science might be due to the input of local and indigenous communities and the relationship of the CGIAR proprietary science to those groups and holders of knowledge has not been clarified.
8. It is not clear yet how benefit sharing by the Centers works with those communities. It is true that the Centers share benefits as they distribute germplasm widely to the NARs and to those approaching the Centers, but it is unclear how it reaches those in concreto who have been provided the genetic resources.
9. Protection of proprietary science might be a way to generate benefits which could be distributed to those having provided genetic resources and knowledge in the first place. As those will be most likely small scale farmers or indigenous peoples (who might be partly identical with farmers), legal protection might provide for incentives to continue to use traditional varieties or provide for some poverty alleviation.
10. The responsibilities of the Centres under the implementation of the Biodiversity Convention depend on the specifications by the COP and its subsidiary organs to the access and benefit sharing regime the Convention is setting up. So far, prior informed consent (approval of the holder of the knowledge) and mutually agreed terms which have to include some form of benefit sharing are qualifiers to access to genetic resources which has been legally unregulated on the international level before the entry into force of the Convention. The CG Centers could play a leading role in providing best practice how to handle those qualifiers without (yet) existing internationally binding laws or guidelines. Responsibilities might be set up by the COP over time; the deliberations within the CGRFA on the International Undertaking are closely interlinked with the negotiations under the Convention.
11. The CGIAR could play a leading role in providing best practice on access and benefit sharing as ex-situ collections. It can provide expertise how to best handle negotiations on access and benefit sharing arrangements and transfer agreements. This could provide useful information for other areas of genetic resources use which are not related to food and agriculture.
12. Policies that should be put forward are those which are promoting conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, protecting indigenous and local knowledge and promoting traditional lifestyles. Serious thought should be given to a legal protection of the knowledge which is both effective and practicable.
Appendix D-3 - Bernard le Buanec. Plant breeders' rights and farmers' rights - A complex debate
The debate on plant breeders' rights and on farmers' rights has been going on now for 20 years. It started at FAO in 1979 and resulted, in 1989, in the international recognition of farmers' rights by Resolution (5/89), defining them as "rights arising from the past, present and future contributions in conserving, improving and making available Plant Genetic Resources (PGR's), particularly those in the Centres of origin/diversity...". The Convention on Biological Diversity confirms this definition and since 1993, many lively debates have taken place at the international level on the definition of farmers' rights and on the necessary balance between these rights and those of plant breeders. Many authors consider these two rights incompatible, presenting arguments showing a substantial lack of knowledge of the plant breeders' rights system based on the UPOV Convention.
To allow an efficient debate, it is thus important to start with good premises and to make clear what are plant breeders' rights, which are intellectual property rights officialized through the 1961 UPOV Convention. This Convention was revised in 1972,1978 and 1991.
The UPOV Convention grants the breeder of a new, distinct, homogeneous and stable variety an exclusive right, limited in time (15 to 20 years), to exploit that variety for seed multiplication purposes. This right applies only to a new variety, hence to an improvement in comparison with other existing varieties, and not to the genome of the species as a whole. In no case does the plant breeders' right block access to a species for production or breeding purposes.
Why should the protected variety be distinct, homogeneous and stable? This is not at all for agronomic reasons but simply for the purpose of practical implementation of the right. Indeed, to implement the right, the protected object should be recognizable (distinction and homogeneity) and stable over time. In particular, homogeneity is not a characteristic sought for itself, even though the tendencies of some official bodies are moving in that direction. Furthermore, the homogeneity required by UPOV is relative, as confirmed by Article 8 of the Convention: "The variety shall be deemed to be uniform if, subject to the variation that may be expected from the particular features of its propagation, it is sufficiently uniform in its relevant characteristics."
The UPOV Convention also provides for exceptions to plant breeders' rights (Article 15):
 compulsory exceptions to be implemented by all UPOV member countries for:
- acts done privately and for non-commercial purposes;
- acts done for experimental purposes;
- acts done for the purpose of breeding other varieties and for the production and commercialization of such other varieties
- an optional exception, formerly known as farmers' privilege (not to be confused with the concept of farmers' rights mentioned above) and now called farm-saved seed: "Each contracting party may, within reasonable limits and subject to safeguarding of the legitimate interest of the breeder, restrict the breeders' right in relation to any other variety in order to permit farmers to use for propagating purposes, on their own holdings, the product of the harvest which they have obtained by planting, on their own holdings, the protected variety...".
Hence, plant breeders' rights defined through the UPOV Convention are very flexible, as they do not apply to subsistence farmers who would be interested in using modern varieties, they allow for derogations on a national or regional basis (European Union, Andean Pact) for the use of farm-saved seed and, finally, they permit free access to all protected varieties for breeding purposes.
Are breeders' rights and farmers' rights incompatible?
This question is difficult to answer in a general way because, although the definition of farmers' rights was adopted eight years ago, it was drafted in such a vague manner that, in spite of days and days of debates within international instances over the years, no agreement has yet been reached as to its content.
Some consider farmers' rights as the right to continue to dispose of sufficient genetic variability, to do their own breeding work and to use freely seeds harvested on their own holdings.
If one admits this interpretation, then, are these rights incompatible with plant breeders' rights?
 Availability of sufficient genetic variability: Even though there are improved varieties on the market, farmers may still continue using land races they have used for generations, if they so wish. The availability of improved varieties simply widens the variability at their disposal. However, the tendency to use improved varieties, if they show advantages, is to be noted. Nevertheless, there is no link between the possible decrease of variability and plant breeders' rights. The fact that a variety is private or public has no influence on biological diversity whatsoever. It can even be confirmed, without a major risk of error, that plant breeders' rights favour diversity by:
- better controlling dissemination of improved varieties;
- allowing competition between breeders and thus the availability of more varieties;
- preventing commercialization of "almost identical" varieties, by implementing the concept of essentially derived varieties.
This view is also held by the majority of or even all OECD countries at international meetings.
 Right to continue to do their own breeding work: Assuming that a large number of farmers are crossing varieties for breeding purposes, which is most unlikely, there is no provision in the UPOV Convention to prevent them from doing so, even using protected varieties. Nor are they prevented from freely using the new varieties obtained. In addition, if these new varieties are distinct, sufficiently homogeneous and stable (this is a question of common sense, otherwise how can they be recognized?), an application could be made for their protection.
 Free use of seeds harvested on their own holdings: As far as the poorest farmers in the least developed countries, i.e. subsistence farmers, are concerned, we have already seen that they are exempt from breeders' rights defined by the UPOV Convention. As to farmers integrated in a commercial chain, each country may, according to its economic and social situation, take special dispositions authorizing the use of farm-saved seed on a case-by-case basis, if appropriate. The only absolute restriction is the prohibition of selling farm-saved seed, which is not within the normal activities of a farmer, especially of a subsistence farmer.
If one admits the interpretation of farmers' rights as presented above, there is no incompatibility with plant breeders' rights and thus no need to modify plant breeders' rights in order to implement farmers' rights at the national level. Contrary interpretations are probably based on an erroneous analysis of the UPOV Convention, even in its 1991 version.
Farmers' rights are considered as a new intellectual property right yet to be defined. Nobody is currently in a position to state whether or not they are compatible with plant breeders' rights. Such rights, if their object were genetic resources, would certainly be complex because the owner would not be known precisely, the objects would be difficult to identify and, to be meaningful, those rights should be of very long or even undetermined duration, which is contrary to the current principles of intellectual property rights. They should not result in freezing the exchange of genetic resources for food and agriculture because their effect would be opposite to their initial aim.
Finally, some consider that farmers' rights should lead to the establishment of a fund (national level? global level?) aimed at improving conservation and use of biological diversity or even at financing development programmes. Nor is this incompatible with breeders' rights. However, one should be careful about perverse solutions that seem simple. In particular, proposals have sometimes been made to finance such a fund through taxes on commercial seeds. In this, there is nothing incompatible with plant breeders' rights. Nevertheless, this is paradoxical because if there were taxes on seeds, it would be the farmers themselves who would finally finance the fund deriving from their rights. Furthermore, such an approach would have a perverse effect it would favour the use of farm-saved seed, often of bad quality, to the detriment of professional seed, which is contrary to the wishes of many governments of developing countries.
Plant Breeding and the IARCs
1. As regards plant breeding, the situation of the CGIAR is not unique. The success of plant breeding at the world level, should it be public or private, has resulted from the free exchange of genetic diversity, new technology and information. The entry into force of the UPOV convention, first in developed countries, has not changed that situation, due to the breeders' exception. The adoption of the UPOV convention or of a Sui Generis System requested by the TRIP'S agreement, possibly shaped on the UPOV convention, by developing countries, won't change the situation. We have of course to insist on the necessity to have a breeders' exception like system in any sui generis system. The following developing countries are now members of the UPOV convention: Argentina, Chile, Columbia, Ecuador, Mexico, Paraguay, South Africa, Uruguay. Brazil has lodged an application for membership. Discussions are going on with India and China and probably other countries. Countries in
transition, such as Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, Ukraine, are also members of UPOV.
Two main changes have occurred, impacting on plant breeding and free exchange of germplasm:
 The development of molecular markers and genetic engineering tools since the early 1980's. Those tools are becoming essential and will be absolutely essential for plant breeding (and animal breeding) in the years to come.
The possibility of patenting biotechnological inventions could impact negatively on the free exchange of germplasm, even for research purposes, at least in some countries.
 The signing of the CBD in 1992, in which the concept of Plant Genetic Resources being a common heritage of mankind to be preserved and freely available for use, "for the benefit of present and future generations" is replaced by the affirmation that "States have sovereign rights over their own biological resources". The FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture has agreed that the "International Undertaking should be revised to be in harmony with the CBD". Even if that concept is perfectly acceptable, it has, at least as far as agriculture is concerned, perverse effects. (Some members of our panel indicated in our Washington meeting that the consequences were becoming disastrous for developing countries).
2. In developing countries most of the seed used is "farm saved seed". It is now generally agreed that, due to that situation, the seed used has bad or very bad quality with a very negative impact on agricultural productivity and food supply. Many developing countries, encouraged by the World Bank and other international organizations are trying to develop a seed production and distribution network (formal or informal. But if it is informally organized, is it still informal and will it improve the situation? hi that process many developing countries, still encouraged by the World Bank, are trying to develop a private seed sector.
3. If we want to, as far as possible, get away from criticism, we should avoid presenting our action as a defence of the CGIAR System, which, as such, would not be justified, but rather as a defence of the improvement of agriculture and food supply in developing countries.
4. Over the last thirty years the CGIAR System has been very successful, due to the fact that its institutional structure was well adapted to the global environment. The technical environment is evolving and has changed dramatically the last 10 years. We should avoid nostalgia for the old good times. As indicated by the panel, "radical change in the environment may require corresponding radical change in the CGIAR".
Conclusions
In order to address properly the issue of Proprietary science of others we need:
 Either a joint meeting with the panel of scientists or a written document from them.
 A survey regarding question G1 and G2.
 A consultation on the effect of patented genes/process of export of commodities.
Appendix D-4 - Timothy Roberts. Market Segmentation
The diagram illustrates the importance of market segmentation to a commercial innovator. A hypothetical price/volume curve for a genetically modified seed is shown. An owner of technology develops a new genetically modified seed. His marginal cost of production is c, at which price he can sell C bags, for a total return of $Cc. However, at this price he would not recover any of the fixed costs of doing research and development, including proving safety. To cover all sunk costs, he has to price instead at b, selling B bags, for a total return of $Bb. If competition prevents him selling at b, he will go out of business (or at least not make any further investment in innovation). He may be able to improve his return further, for example by selling A bags at price a, to recover an extra $A(a-b) of profit. A non-discriminating monopolist would do this, if marginal revenue equals marginal cost at output A. The producer can without affecting the bottom line sell some material at
his marginal cost c to third parties (e.g. peasant farmers) with no capacity to pay the commercial (developed country) price or to compete in commercial markets. This results in sales of the technology to (or at least use by) some of those who want or need it but are too poor to be prospective commercial clients. If on the other hand the poor farmers with the new technology have access to commercial markets, so that they can undercut commercial sales the company would otherwise profit from, the company is of course damaged.
Sales below marginal cost c cost the company more than they earn, and indicate unlikely philanthropy on the part of the corporation or its executives. However, it may be possible to license material for use: at a marginal cost to the licensor that is either negligible or very much smaller than the licensor's cost of production. This might make the product available to poor users at a cost to them as low as d.
In this way, the innovation can become available to more and poorer people - very much more than if the product can only be sold at b. Of course, people who buy at price a lose out - at the hands of the producer, who pockets an extra (a-b) for each bag they buy. As against this, D-B units go to poorer people who would not otherwise have access to the innovation. Apart from the producer, those who lose are the better off, and those who gain are the poor, including the very poor: so this seems to be a situation that the CGIAR should encourage.
However, to repeat, this will not happen unless markets can be segmented. If the producer licenses in open markets, prices will reduce through competition to between c and d. The producer will lose heavily - and be unwilling to license technology in future.
Appendix D-5 - Miguel Altieri. Third World Farmers and IPR
Despite the approval of the more restrictive 1991 UPOV Convention that makes plant breeders' rights more like patent protection and limits the right of farmers to trade protected seeds with their neighbors, farmers organizations and NGOs have maintained the basic assumption that the CGIAR research on plant and animal genetic resources ought to serve public and small farmers' needs, rather than private interests. However, given the changing nature of IPR, especially in the framework of GATT, whereby the US and other northern countries have attempted to impose their new rules of TRIPs, which forces all countries to honor northern interpretations of patent rights, all measures possible must be taken to secure CGIARs' public goals. If farmers need to be protected from the negative effects of a global regime of IPR, then it is the moral obligation of the CGIAR to engage in alliances aimed at preventing TNCs, international trade agreements and IPRs from destroying agricultural
biodiversity and undercutting farmers cultural diversity and socioeconomic development Presently, countries are under pressure to change IPR laws to conform with the TRIPs agreement of the GATT. Such rules will supersede national laws and allow privatization of Third Worlds' farmers knowledge and resources. The ability of companies to gain monopolies over formerly freely available genetic resources, including seeds, plants, animals and even microorganisms, may have devastating effects on both, rural communities and the protection of agrobiodiversity. The encroachment of IPR in the absence of mechanisms that protect small farmers and rural innovators, renders these regimes predators or "pirates" of indigenous knowledge and resources.
Many NGOs and even some governments have expressed concern that intellectual property rights for industry, as defined in the TRIPs agreement, will prevail over the traditional rights and rights holders recognized in the convention on Biological Diversity. Indigenous and local communities, according to the biodiversity convention, should share in the benefits derived from the use of their knowledge, and have the right to approve and be involved in plans to widen the use of their traditional innovations and practices. But the patent system affects the very cultural foundations of rural communities by inhibiting farmers from sharing their seeds and knowledge with each other. Prohibiting farmers to reuse the seeds yielded by their harvests and share their seeds with farmers in other communities will negatively influence local genetic improvement and in-situ conservation. The final result will be genetic uniformity and genetic erosion and its serious consequences on food security
and biodiversity conservation. In addition, the globalisation of plant patenting by the Uruguay Round TRIPs agreement will accelerate the rate at which market forces already encourage monocultural cropping with genetically uniform plant varieties - setting up ideal conditions for outbreaks and the spread of insect pests and diseases.
The CGIAR should openly endorse the concept of farmers' rights embraced in FAO's "International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources" which recognizes farmer's contributions to developing biodiversity and to share the benefits of their work. Many NGOs advocate of farmer's rights would hope that the CGIAR lobbies negotiators at the FAO so that the revised Undertaking will become a protocol of the Convention on Biological Diversity and thus, an integral part of the debate over the conflict between the convention and the TRIPs' agreement.
The CGIAR, NGOs and farmers organizations have a unique opportunity to work together to influence the evolution of IPR at the international level and to advance informed critiques and propose alternatives to existing IPR concepts and laws before 1999. Rural communities, people's organizations and NGOs around the world are making sure that the issues of farmers' rights, bioprospecting and biopiracy, alternatives to IPR and new forms of protection for rural communities and life patenting are seriously addressed at national, regional and global fora. If the mission of the CGIAR is still to promote food security in developing countries through sustainable agriculture, then its historical challenge is to join farmers and grassroots organizations in achieving the objectives of:
 preventing that farming communities are marginalized from the rewards and benefits of industrial intellectual property systems;
 achieving recognition for the intellectual integrity and innovation systems of rural communities and peoples;
 developing mechanisms to protect such indigenous intellectual integrity;
 implementing farmers' rights;
 ensuring that rural and indigenous communities receive compensation for their knowledge of plant genetic properties;
 restricting the right of TNCs to seize and patent resources of indigenous peoples;
 reversing the privatization of biotechnology and challenging the direction of currently privately led research.
It is time for the CGIAR to play a more active role in defining the future IPR scenarios so as to prevent that the free exchange of knowledge and resources does not give way to a monopoly vested in those who control capital and hence the resources for research. The fully developed science of the CGIAR of the XXI century must have an agenda determined by the needs of the rural people of the developing world. The future of biotechnology based research will be determined by power relations, and there is no reason why farmers, if sufficiently empowered/could not influence the direction of IPR and biotechnology so that it serves their needs.
Appendix D-6 - Thammasat Resolution
THE THAMMASAT RESOLUTION: Building & strengthening our sui generis rights
We, 45 representatives of indigenous, peasant, non-governmental, academic and governmental organisations from 19 countries, came together on 1-6 December 1997 at Thammasat campus just outside Bangkok, Thailand, for an international seminar on Sui Generis Rights co-organised by Biothai and GRAIN. We met to study, assess and develop our response to the increasing privatisation of biodiversity and local knowledge, especially as driven by the Trade Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) agreement of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and resulting legislation at the regional and national levels. We focused in particular on the sui generis rights option for intellectual property over plant varieties as imposed on all WTO member states by the TRIPS Agreement, as well as on other international agreements related to biodiversity such as the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD.).
In Thai, 'Thammasat' means 'knowledge of nature'. It also means 'justice'. The name of our venue is central to us. Indigenous peoples, farmers and local communities have, over millennia, nurtured and developed the biodiversity on which humanity now depends. Wisely using their knowledge of nature to create sustainable food and health systems based on sharing their knowledge and biodiversity with others. Such community systems are being destroyed by economic development under the guise of free trade, Green Revolution agriculture and the new biotechnologies, and globalisation. They are also being destroyed by the rampant pirating and monopolisation of biodiversity and related knowledge through the extension of intellectual property rights (IPR) to life forms.
Perhaps no country exemplifies our concerns about WTO-enshrined globalisation as our host country. At the time we were meeting, Thailand - and much of the rest of Southeast and East Asia - is going through a profound crisis resulting from years of economic growth founded upon fleeting speculative investment The currency tailspin which started last July is accompanied by destabilisation of markets, loss of employment and cutting of public spending, and results in a clear loss of control over our own economies and livelihoods with the IMF taking the steering wheel.
The WTO TRIPS Agreement obliges developing countries to provide some form of IPR on plant varieties by the year 2000. This may be done by patents or by some 'sui generis rights system - meaning, in Latin, a system 'of its own kind'. In 1999, one year before implementation, this provision will be reviewed and we are preparing ourselves for this review.
We reaffirm our total and frontal opposition to the extension of intellectual property rights to life forms, be it on humans, animals, plants, micro-organisms, or their genes, cells and other parts. We are also decidedly against biopiracy and the monopolisation of biodiversity-related knowledge through such IPRs.
Our understanding of sui generis rights in TRIPS
 The overall implication of TRIPS, and for that matter the whole of the WTO, is highly detrimental to peoples' economies, cultures and livelihoods.
 The sui generis provision of TRIPs gives WTO member states room to develop their own kind of IPR protection for plant varieties, and many nations are now changing their national IPR laws.
 While some people look at the sui generis option in TRIPS as a window through which other forms of rights over biodiversity can be articulated in legislation, it is our conviction that such rights will be linked to IPR and will result in new and further monopoly rights over plant varieties.
 The same is true of any sui generis rights option which could be developed and proposed under the TRIPS Agreements for local and indigenous knowledge.
The reaffirmation of our sui generis rights
 'Sui generis' perfectly describes the rights and systems we are struggling to defend - our 'own kind' of rights and systems. We recognise our sui generis rights to exist independently of the IPR-based sui generis systems promoted by the TRIPS Agreement.
 Our rights are inalienable; they existed long before IPR regimes were established. As legal, political, economic, social and cultural rights, they are part of peoples' sovereignty and therefore part of human rights.
 As community/collective rights, they are indivisible and intergenerational; they include Farmers' Rights and apply to Indigenous Peoples, peasant and family farmers, fisherfolk and other local communities which derive their livelihoods from biodiversity.
 Their place and expression is firstly at the local level, but they must also be recognised and guaranteed at the national and international levels.
 The rights that we are struggling to develop, defend and let flourish should never be misinterpreted as, or denatured into, intellectual property rights.
 Because peoples' rights are under tremendous threat, we see the promotion of such rights also as a tool for resistance against, and the rolling back of, the forces of monopoly.
It is on this basis that we will actively engage our societies from the village level through to our governments in the capitals to take part in the struggle for our sui generis rights, and on to the international level to oppose IPR on all forms of life. This implies a whole range of information, research, campaign and coalition building activities over the long term.
Some of the immediate tasks at hand are to:
 Demand the revision of TRIPS in order to allow for the full exclusion of IPR monopolies over life forms and biodiversity-related knowledge under the WTO.
 Reinforce the defense mechanisms of local communities who are highly vulnerable to unbridled bioprospecting and to the introduction of genetically engineered organisms.
 Support any calls by local communities for a moratorium on bioprospecting, and demand an immediate moratorium on genetically engineered organisms.
 Assert the primacy of international agreements on biodiversity, such as the CBD and FAO instruments, over TRIPS and other trade regimes, for the resolution of these issues.
 Reaffirm the original intent of the CBD for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and prevent the CBD from becoming a mechanism for transnational corporations to trade in biodiversity in the name of 'access' and 'benefit-sharing'.
 Mobilise a strong global movement engaging environmental, trade, agriculture, consumer, labour, health, food security, women's, human rights and all people's organisations in these campaigns.
In the spirit of justice and embracing all knowledge of nature, we commit ourselves to the Thammasat Action Plan and invite other organisations, movements and peoples to join us in the struggle to achieve this vision.
Bangkok, 5 December 1997
Appendix D-7 - Agri-Food Statement
INTERNATIONAL AGRI-FOOD NETWORK
Statement on Biotechnology and the Agri-Food Industry
Business organizations, grouped within the International Agri-Food Network (IAFN)*, are the driving force behind the technological progress being achieved in the agri-food sector. They thus have a major responsibility to ensure that their products meet the highest international standards of quality and safety. At the same time they must be open and transparent in their actions, providing meaningful information to consumers on their products in any areas of concern. In return, business expects to be able to operate in a stable environment, regulated by a framework of internationally agreed rules based upon recognized scientific and economic principles.
The roots of biotechnology date back some 12,000 years when women and men learned to select the best seeds for planting and to domesticate animals. Modem techniques of genetic improvement have allowed the agri-food sector to make spectacular progress. This can be seen in: plant and animal breeding, in cheese, beer and bread production, in the preservation of fruits and vegetables, and in many other areas.
Gene transfer technology - modem biotechnology - is a new and important tool for the agri-food industry. It allows researchers to transfer directly a desirable gene into an organism that they want to improve. Genes can even be introduced from other species, which is not possible with standard crossing. Gene transfer technology will allow researchers to make improvements in plants, animals and food products more rapidly, more precisely, and for a broader range of attributes than in the past.
The potential benefits of this technology are considerable. This potential must be developed responsibly to meet the challenges of a growing world population, a shrinking natural resource base and increasingly demanding consumers.
Already, this work is showing promise in
- eliminating allergy-causing substances in food products e.g. soybeans
- producing cooking oils with a lower saturated fat content
- breeding plants with a greater resistance to pests and diseases, and better adaptation to the needs of consumers
- developing food products which carry with them precious medicinal qualities.
The International Agri-Food Network believes that genetically modified organisms are capable of bringing real progress in meeting the needs of an ever-growing world population for affordable and wholesome foods in an environmentally sustainable way.
At the same time, the International Agri-Food Network is concerned that the products of biotechnology be safe for human health, for animals and for the environment. It is essential therefore that novel foods, seeds and animals are strictly controlled and rigorously tested, before being released onto the market or into the environment.
The implications of the use of biotechnology are global, so it is at this level that discussion must take place and balanced and responsible policy responses found. For its. part, the International Agri-Food Network will work to promote the following ten actions:
1. Conservation and access to genetic resources. The International Agri-Food Network supports the work to conserve the rich world heritage of genetic resources for the benefit of all mankind.
2. Increased investment in biotechnological research in order to:
(i) develop the great promise of genetically modified organisms, and
(ii) thoroughly understand and master the biological processes involved.
3. Rigorous and comprehensive regulatory systems to ensure the safety of genetically modified products.
4. International harmonization of testing and control procedures, based on sound scientific principles. Mutual acceptance of food and feed safety standards as "substantially equivalent" is necessary to avoid duplication of national approval processes.
5. Support for Codex alimentarius standards, guidelines and recommendations, which are based on internationally - recognized scientific analysis. Codex endorsements are made to ensure food quality and the safety of the food supply, and thereby facilitate fair international trade.
6. Labelling of products containing genetically modified material, only where the product is significantly different from conventional products. Any form of labelling should not attempt to establish a difference among products where none exists.
7. Reasonable time period to:
(i) carry out the necessary administrative procedures and,
(ii) assess the safety of genetically modified organisms.
8. Protection of intellectual property rights and harmonization at the international level. Biotechnological research for plant and animal breeding, or for the development of new products and processes, involves significant investments. Organizations involved in this research should be able to receive a reasonable return through the protection of intellectual property.
9. Fair licensing agreements. It is important that the results of gene transfer technology benefit all partners in the agri-food chain.
10. Special attention to the needs of the developing countries. Modem biotechnology has the capacity to contribute significantly to world food security. A framework should be established to enable the public and private organizations concerned to cooperate on an international basis, so that the benefits of biotechnology are brought to the traditional plants and animals of the developing countries. In this regard, developing countries possess an immense amount of traditional knowledge and genetic material which should be recognized.
* THE INTERNATIONAL AGRI-FOOD NETWORK (IAFN) fosters cooperation and understanding among international agri-food sector organizations, and takes joint action on items of common interest.
ASSINSEL -
International Association of Plant Breeders
CIAA -
Confdration des Industries Agro-Alimentaires de l'UE
COMISA -
Confdration Mondiale de l'Industrie de la Sant Animale
FIS -
International Seed Trade Federation
GCPF -
Global Crop Protection Federation
ICA -
International Co-operative Alliance
ICC -
International Chamber of Commerce
IFA -
International Fertilizer Industry Association
IFAP -
International Federation of Agricultural Producers
IMS -
International Meat Secretariat
<section>h</section>
Appendix E - List of Acronyms
Bt
Bacillus thuringiensis
CBD
Convention on biological diversity
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CGRFA
Commission on genetic resources for agriculture
CIAT
Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (Colombia)
CIMMYT
Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de Mas y Trigo (International Maiz and Wheat Improvement Centre, Mexico)
CIP
Centro Internacional de la Papa (International Potato Centre, Peru)
COP
Conference of the Parties
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organisation
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GMO
Genetically modified organism
IARC
International agricultural research center
ICARDA
International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (Syria)
ICRISAT
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (India)
ICW
International Centers Week
IITA
International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (Nigeria)
INIBAP
International Network for the Improvement of Banana and Plantain (France, part of IPGRI)
IPGRI
International Plant Genetic Resources Institute (Italy)
IPP
Intellectual property protection
IPR
Intellectual property right
IRRI
International Rice Research Institute (Philippines)
ISAAA
International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications
ISNAR
International Service for National Agricultural Research (Netherlands)
MTA
Materials transfer agreement
NARS
National agricultural research system(s)
NBER
National Bureau of Economic Research
NGO
Non-governmental organisation
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PGR
Plant genetic resources
R&D
Research and development
TAC
Technical Advisory Committee to the CGIAR
TRIPs
Agreement on Trade Related aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
UPOV
Union pour la Protection des Obtentions Vgtales (International Union for the Protection on New Varieties of Plants)
WARDA
West African Rice Development Association (Cote d'Ivoire)
WEPO
World Intellectual Property Organization
WTO
World Trade Organization
Centres in italics are part of the CGIAR
