<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.2</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo EDITORIAL
The first issue of Forest Energy Forum (known as FEF here in our Wood Energy Group) has now been distributed to over 2 000 subscribers worldwide and we have even had to make a reprint of another 500 copies! I wish to express my sincere thanks to our numerous colleagues who have sent their congratulations for the initiative and for their encouragement to continue.
In addition to the normal distribution, we are currently making arrangements for our own Forest Energy home page (within FAO's Web site: http://www.fao.org), from where, in the near future, you will also be able to access all issues of FEF and where you will be able to read about other issues and papers on wood energy - sorry, forest energy ....
Many important subjects are covered in this issue, among which: the Unified Wood Energy Terminology, Definitions and Conversion Factors (UWET), the World Forestry Congress held in Turkey in October 1997, the Kyoto Protocol and the Clean Development Mechanism and the Forum on "Forests and Energy" which took place in Germany in January 1998. [For more information on all these subjects, please see Special Features.]
Last year ended (and the biennium, since our budget covers a two-year period) with many wood energy activities successfully completed. The regional studies for the collection of statistical data on wood fuel consumption (under our initiative Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow [WETT]) in Europe and the OECD countries and in Asia have been completed and the results are being distributed [see under Publications for more information]. We have also been able to compile data for Africa and Latin America, in order to prepare our Wood Energy Information System, thanks to the generous and valuable contribution of Prof. Luiz Horta Nogueira, who has taken a sabbatical from his university to work with us within the framework of FAO's Academic Programme, and who has written about his experience [see under Points of View].
Thanks to the meticulous organization of my friend and colleague Torsten Frisk (who is the Senior Forestry Officer in our FAO Regional Office in Santiago, Chile), met the National Coordinators of the Latin America Technical Cooperative Network on Dendroenergy (LAND) in Havana, Cuba, from 3 to 6 November 1997. Together with the participants from the Grupo Latinoamericano de Energización Rural Sostenible (GLAERS), we discussed the multidisciplinary aspects of the utilization of biomass for the combined production of fuel and food. [For more information, please see Mr Frisk's contribution under Events of Interest.]
We have also been involved in the preparation of a paper for the World Energy Council (WEC), which will be a contribution to the Study on Energy in Developing Countries to be presented at the 1998 WEC Congress to be held in Houston, United States, from 13 to 17 September 1998. The paper provides a general description of wood energy systems with the aim of explaining the dynamics, the mechanisms and the actors involved within these systems and their interrelations within the forest and energy sectors. I hope it describes the importance of wood fuels to the forestry and energy sector and will give a greater visibility to wood energy issues in this important event. This paper will be printed by the Wood Energy Group in due course and will be available to those interested. [For more information on WEC, please see under Events of Interest.]
Finally, I am extremely happy with the level and type of contribution received from readers so far; however, I hope that for the next issues even more colleagues involved in forest energy will express their views, opinions and experiences (in English, French or Spanish) through FEF. We have created a special section, Points of View, which I hope you will feel free to use as a sounding board for any ideas, opinions or criticisms you may have. I look forward to hearing from you.
Miguel A. Trossero
FOR INFORMATION ON ANY ASPECT OF WOOD ENERGY OR FUELWOOD, PLEASE CONTACT:
M.A. Trossero
Senior Forestry Officer (Wood Energy)
Wood and Non-Wood Products
Utilization Branch
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy.
Tel.: (+39 06) 57054175
Fax: (+39 06) 57055618
E-mail: miguel.trossero@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/forestry.htm
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>2</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo SPECIAL FEATURES
COMBINED HEAT AND POWER GENERATION FROM BAGASSE AND EUCALYPTUS BY SUGAR MILLS IN NICARAGUA
FAO's Wood Energy Group, together with the Department of Science, Technology and Society, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the Netherlands, initiated the technical, economic, social and environmental analysis of "Combined heat and power generation from bagasse and eucalyptus by sugar mills in Nicaragua" within the framework of the FAO Academic Programme. [For more information on FAO's Academic Programme, please see under Points of View.]
Mr Richard van den Broek, an Assistant in Education at Utrecht University, visited Nicaragua to undertake the study and has prepared a paper describing the initiatives of two Nicaraguan sugar mills to sell power to the national grid, during the sugar cane harvesting season with bagasse as its principal fuel and outside this season with eucalyptus grown as a dedicated energy crop. An ongoing research (cofinanced by FAO) aims at assessing the environmental, micro- and macro-economic impacts of this type of power generation. This paper contains detailed information and data regarding different micro- and macro-economic analyses of the combined use of fuelwood and bagasse as fuel for the generation of approximately 27 MW of electricity and a comparative evaluation with the use of fuel oil. The supply of fuelwood is assured by 5 000 ha of eucalyptus plantations.
Power generation based on dedicated energy crops is not only an attractive option for the future but, looking at ongoing negotiations to sell power from the sugar mills to the national grid, it also appears to be a suitable and competitive alternative in Nicaragua at the moment.
Mr van den Broek also visited Honduras and Cuba to explore the potential use of this technical solution in other sugar-producing countries.
KYOTO PROTOCOL
While the European Union (EU) launched a White Paper for a Community Strategy and Action Plan to double the share of renewable energy in the total EU energy balance by 2010 from the present 6 to 12 percent, the Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework of the Convention on Climate Change met in Kyoto last December and adopted the Kyoto Protocol which aims to strengthen their countries' commitments to reduce/mitigate GHG emissions which are assumed to be the main threat to climate change. The conference devised the Clean Development Mechanism to assist countries in achieving their quantified emission limitation established by the protocol.
The Clean Development Mechanism opens new opportunities for the development of forestry and wood energy initiatives as major mechanisms for carbon sequestration and substitution.
It is time to work together to promote and accomplish forest energy initiatives not only to modernize and make more sustainable the traditional use of woody biomass for energy purposes but also to develop industrial forest energy as a competitive, cost-effective and environmentally friendly source of energy.
GLOBAL CLIMATE TREATY
FORMALLY ADOPTED
A treaty aimed at heading off a potentially catastrophic warming of the earth was formally adopted on Thursday after 11 days of frenetic debate that repeatedly threatened to derail the landmark pact. The treaty would require industrialized and former Soviet bloc nations to curb their emissions of heat-trapping gases early in the next century.
With a single pounding of the gavel, Hiroshi Oki, Japan's Minister for the Environment and chairman of the ministerial meeting that took up the treaty, signalled his judgement that a consensus had been reached on the treaty. No vote was taken.
The pact, if ratified, would require a 5.2 percent cut in greenhouse gases from 1990 levels during the years from 2008 to 2012.
The agreement was the result of two years of preparations capped by the 11-day conference, one day more than was originally scheduled. The effort was sparked by warnings that rising concentrations of carbon dioxide and other so-called greenhouse gases threaten to raise the earth's temperature and cause a variety of catastrophic climate changes, including more frequent droughts and floods and a rise in sea levels.
The talks nearly collapsed in the final 24 hours of deliberations, as developing countries objected to provisions on the buying and selling of pollution rights and developing-country commitments to emissions curbs, only hours after the United States, the European Union and Japan managed to iron out longstanding differences. (Source: Reuters press release, December 1997.)
"FORESTS AND ENERGY" FORUM
The Forum on "Forests and Energy", which was held in Schneverdingen, Germany, from 16 to 23 January 1998, was organized by the Alfred Toepfer Akademie für Naturschutz within the framework of the registered project of the World Exposition EXPO 2000 Hannover "Weltforum Wald". The forum focused discussions on the potential contribution of forests to the future energy demand and identified actions for its promotion and development.
In my opinion, this forum constituted one of the most specific (and timely, taking into account the recent meeting in Kyoto) events in which the forest contribution to the energy sector has ever been discussed. It was well organized, with contributions from important and highly qualified specialists from Europe and various developing countries, and the discussions in the different technical sessions were held in a frank, transparent and open manner with a high level of cooperation from all. The participants emphasized once again the multiple opportunities offered by forests and trees as environmentally friendly sources of energy. They mentioned the various barriers and constraints which need to be removed for their proper development, and especially the development of market opportunities through the removal of direct and indirect subsidies provided to conventional sources of energy and the "internalization of externalities".
This kind of event, in which the role of forests for carbon substitution and sequestration is discussed in depth, needs to be replicated in both developed and developing countries.
[FAO's Forestry Department is in the process of establishing an informal Task Force on Dendroenergy and CO[2] Substitution and Sequestration. More details will be given in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum.]
WORLD FORESTRY CONGRESS
The most important world event for the forestry sector was the Eleventh World Forestry Congress which took place in Antalya, Turkey, from 13 to 22 October 1997. Session 16, dedicated to "Wood fuels and biomass energy: from household to industry", was chaired by Dr Victor Villalobos, Vice-Minister for the Environment, Natural Resources and Fisheries, Mexico, with the assistance of Mr S.K. Pande, Additional Inspector-General of Forests, Ministry of Environment and Forests, India, as moderator, and Prof. Osman Sun, University of Sakarya, Turkey and Mr M.A. Trossero, FAO, as technical secretaries. The session summarized the present role of wood fuels as an energy source for the traditional residential sector and as an emerging modern energy option for the industrial, commercial and transport sectors. Nine participants, out of the 26 who presented voluntary contributions,were able to deliver their papers. Abstracts of two of the papers are presented below.
Wood fuels and biomass energy: from household to industry
Wood fuels and biomass are discussed regarding their present participation as energy sources responsible for a large share of the traditional residential sector and as an emerging modern energy option for the industrial, commercial and transport sectors. Examples for several developed and developing countries are listed showing the evolution of modern uses of wood fuels and biomass energy.
Future participation of these primary energy sources is forecast for two different situations. The first assumes that wood fuels and biomass will essentially continue to be used in households, mainly in developing countries, and very little effort, other than that currently under way, will be made by society to preserve natural forests. The expectation is that roundwood, fuelwood and charcoal demand will double by the year 2050 compared with 1990 and that severe shortages, mainly of fuelwood and charcoal, will occur in certain critical areas. The second situation assumes that modern uses of biomass energy will become so common owing to environmental concern - mainly about the high level of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere - that significant efforts from industrial and developing countries will make high-level technologies available for production and use of very large amounts of biomass. This forecast concludes that enough land and technologies exist for biomass energy
derived from forests, energy crops and plantation residues to fulfil up to half the energy needs by the year 2050. Under this situation, the majority of biomass energy will become available from biomass plantation, followed by biomass residues and finally by fuelwood from forests. Demand will occur mainly in the industrial and transport sectors.
(Abstract by: Jose Roberto Moreira.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Jose Roberto Moreira, Biomass Users Network (BUN), Rua Francisco Dias Velho 814, São Paulo, Brazil 04581-001.
E-mail: bun@eu.ansp.br
Gestion rationnelle des ressources forestières et approvisionnement
des villes en bois de feu - expérience du Burkina Faso
Ici, la dynamique d'urbanisation et le mode d'intégration des systèmes économiques rural et urbain ne sont pas encore arrivés à faire émerger un véritable secteur moderne d'exploitation des forêts pour l'approvisionnement urbain en combustible ligneux. Les modes de consommation urbains restent encore marqués par des habitudes rurales et l'exploitation forestière revêt les caractéristiques d'une économie de cueillette entretenue par un secteur informel (d'envergure nationale) d'exploitation du combustible ligneux pour l'approvisionnement des villes.
Le commerce du combustible ligneux, avec environ 20 milliards de FCFA (40 millions de dollars EU environ) de chiffre d'affaires annuel, serait l'une des principales causes d'une exploitation forestière plus ou moins irrationnelle du fait des déboisements induits à divers endroits du pays.
Les forêts naturelles des environs des principales villes comme Ouagadougou (capitale du pays) et Bobo-Dioulasso (ville industrielle) sont les plus dépréciées du fait de la proximité des villes et de l'impact de la demande urbaine en combustible ligneux.
Pour désamorcer cette tendance, le Gouvernement du Burkina Faso a entrepris dès le début des années 80 plusieurs actions avec l'appui de la FAO et du PNUD.
Parmi les différents domaines d'intervention identifiés, figure «le projet d'aménagement des forêts naturelles sur un rayon de 150 km autour de la ville de Ouagadougou» pour l'approvisionnement de ladite ville en bois de feu. Ce projet, démarré en 1986, est actuellement dans sa troisième phase d'évolution. Il a pour objectif essentiel de concilier la pression de la demande urbaine en bois de feu avec la nécessité de la gestion rationnelle et durable des forêts environnantes.
On le reconnaît par: i) sa méthodologie d'intervention quasiment unique en Afrique sahélienne; ii) ses réalisations sur les plans forestier, socio-organisationnel et économique; et iii) ses perspectives à la mesure des contraintes auxquelles il se heurte de plus en plus.
Après 10 ans d'activité, les acquis du projet touchent différents domaines:
Sur le plan environnemental. Environ 200 000 ha de forêts naturelles (villageoises pour la plupart) sur un rayon de 200 km autour de Ouagadougou sont en cours d'aménagement et de gestion forestière rationnelle avec la participation des populations rurales riveraines, soit une moyenne d'environ 20 000 ha par an. La simplicité du modèle d'aménagement forestier mis en &#156;uvre s'est révélée être à la bonne mesure des capacités d'assimilation des partenaires ruraux.
Sur le plan énergétique. Le bois de feu issu de ces chantiers forestiers en aménagement représente actuellement 20 à 25 pour cent de l'approvisionnement du marché de Ouagadougou, soit environ 200 000 stères de bois de feu, et devrait atteindre 40 à 50 pour cent dudit marché à partir de 1998. Dans un contexte national où plus de 90 pour cent du commerce de produits forestiers sont assurés par des circuits commerciaux d'un secteur informel difficile à appréhender, le fait d'arriver, par l'intermédiaire d'un projet forestier, à assurer de façon rationnelle et formelle la couverture du quart du marché de la principale ville du pays est un bon exemple pour l'ensemble des pays africains aux caractéristiques similaires à celles du Burkina Faso.
Sur le plan socioéconomique. La zone d'influence du projet concerne actuellement 250 villages, soit une emprise sur près de 50 000 ruraux, dont 52 pour cent constitués de femmes. La monétarisation rurale (induite par l'exploitation commerciale du bois de feu des forêts en aménagement, les revenus de type salarial au titre de la rémunération de la contribution rurale à certaines activités forestières et les profits tirés des microréalisations) a largement contribué à l'amélioration des conditions de vie des populations rurales, dans un contexte où les revenus agricoles (cultures vivrières et de rente) ne dépassent guère la couverture du besoin minimum pour la subsistance des populations. Le chiffre d'affaires annuel du commerce du bois des forêts en aménagement dans le cadre du projet est évalué à 320 millions de FCFA répartis entre la rémunération des bûcherons (120 millions de FCFA), la constitution d'un fonds pour des investissements villageois (40 millions de FCFA), la
taxe forestière au profit du Trésor public (60 millions de FCFA) et la constitution d'un fonds d'aménagement forestier (100 millions de FCFA).
Sur le plan organisationnel. Grâce au projet, 5 000 producteurs ruraux de bois de feu se sont constitués en Groupements villageois de gestion forestière (GGF) pour réaliser, en plus de l'exploitation commerciale du bois, des activités d'entretien et de restauration des forêts. L'Assemblée générale annuelle de l'Union des GGF définit le programme des activités et les budgets annuels avec l'appui des Services régionaux du Ministère de l'environnement et de l'eau. Le prix du bois à la production est fixé à 1 610 FCFA/stère, dont 610 pour la rémunération directe du producteur, 300 pour la taxe forestière, 200 pour le Fonds de roulement villageois et 500 pour le Fonds d'aménagement forestier (FAF). Le FAF, cogéré par les producteurs et les directions régionales du Ministère de l'environnement et de l'eau, est utilisé pour le financement des activités d'entretien et de restauration des forêts et pour la rémunération de type salarial d'une équipe technique permanente constituée
d'un ingénieur des travaux forestiers, d'un comptable, d'un commis de commercialisation, d'un animateur et d'un gardien. Chaque chantier forestier offre ainsi un emploi permanent à cinq personnes, dont un cadre et quatre agents formés sur le tas.
Grâce au Fonds de roulement villageois, plusieurs actions d'utilité communautaire, comme la réfection des écoles, le fonçage des puits, la réfection des forages villageois pour l'eau, la création des banques de céréales, etc., ont pu être réalisées.
(Résumé par: Alhioume Thiam.)
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: M. Alhioume Thiam, c/o FAO Representative, 01 B.P. 2540, Ouagadougou 01, Burkina Faso.
Télécopie: (+226) 310084;
mél.: FAO-BFA@field.fao.org
Resultado de la 16^a sesión - Combustibles leñosos y energía de la biomasa: de la familia a la industria
La reunión reiteró que los combustibles leñosos representan una fuente importante de energía para la generación de calor en las casas e industrias, tanto en los países en desarrollo como en los desarrollados, y subrayó que a pesar de los esfuerzos hechos en las últimas décadas para equilibrar la demanda y la oferta de los combustibles leñosos, el uso intensivo de estos combustibles en algunos países todavía origina mucha presión sobre los recursos forestales existentes, especialmente en los ecosistemas frágiles. La reunión observó que las organizaciones gubernamentales han proporcionado tradicionalmente asistencia para el desarrollo de fuentes para un mayor abastecimiento de combustibles leñosos y aconsejó que los nuevos enfoques que están siendo adoptados con éxito en las actividades de plantación de árboles realizadas por asociaciones y cooperativas de usuarios y cultivadores privados sin la intervención del gobierno, sean debidamente difundidos y ejecutados. La reunión
enfatizó que los combustibles leñosos son una fuente de energía localmente disponible, inocua para el medio ambiente y que no produce carbono, que permite la sustitución de las emisiones de carbono con la generación de energía y la producción de combustibles líquidos derivados, y que conduce al desarrollo de nuevas plantaciones de árboles tanto en suelos forestales como no forestales. La reunión subrayó que el uso exagerado de fertilizantes y de otros compuestos químicos utilizados en las plantaciones intensivas de árboles tiene que ser cuidadosamente controlado para evitar daños ambientales indeseables. Se observó que todavía tienen que ser eliminadas muchas barreras institucionales, técnicas, económicas y sociales para permitir el uso sostenible de los combustibles leñosos como fuente sostenible de energía, y se recomendó que las nuevas tecnologías procedentes de las investigaciones y de las actividades de desarrollo actuales en el sector forestal y energético podrían
hacer que la producción y el uso de los combustibles leñosos fueran más competitivos y eficaces desde el punto de vista de los costos y aconsejó su propagación y ejecución. La reunión señaló que los inventarios forestales tradicionales no están proyectados correctamente para la medición de la base de recursos forestales para los combustibles leñosos y aconsejó que se difundieran y aplicaran los nuevos modelos y enfoques para los inventarios forestales al efecto de calcular la base de biomasa para el uso energético de las tierras forestales y no forestales.
Se recalcó que, si bien los servicios silviculturales han sido las principales instituciones involucradas en los aspectos y problemas concernientes a los combustibles leñosos, actualmente las agencias energéticas están comprometiéndose cada vez más en este campo.
La reunión recomendó el desarrollo y establecimiento de nuevos enlaces de comunicación, con el fin de planificar y organizar el uso sostenible de la madera como fuente de energía inocua para el medio ambiente, en las políticas silviculturales y energéticas, y sugirió una serie apropiada de políticas fiscales, económicas y ambientales para la producción de bioenergía a nivel nacional y local y la conservación de los recursos forestales para fines energéticos.
EC-FAO JOINT PROGRAMME (1998-2000)
Data collection and analysis for sustainable forest management in ACP
countries linking national and international efforts
The European Commission (EC) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) share a common interest in advancing sustainable forest management (SFM) within the broad context of sustainable development. In cooperation with the African, Caribbean and Pacific countries that are signatories of the Lomé Convention (ACP countries), the EC and FAO are launching a three-year programme (1998-2000) to improve the quality and reliability of forestry data. The project will strengthen the capacity in selected ACP countries to gather and analyse key data, refine the methodology to collect information not previously recorded (such as trees outside forests, fuelwood, and non-wood forest products) and produce better assessments of likely developments in the forestry sector.
An expanded database that includes new information such as fuelwood and non-wood forest products will support intergovernmental efforts to formulate appropriate policies based on criteria and indicators of SFM. While some of this information is available in selected ACP countries, it is not available for all, nor is it available at a regional level. In order to collect this new information, new methods of data gathering must be developed and capacity built within the forestry sector to collect and manage the information.
UNIFIED WOOD ENERGY TERMINOLOGY,
DEFINITIONS AND CONVERSION FACTORS
(UWET)
We are still working on the preparation of the Unified Wood Energy Terminology, Definitions and Conversion Factors (UWET). I have received a good response from my colleagues here in the Forestry Department's Forestry Planning and Statistics Branch and much support from both public and private organizations at the national and international levels, especially from the Statistics Unit of the International Energy Agency (IEA). We are now planning to translate this terminology into all FAO official languages and will then test it in the preparation of the ACP project executed by FAO's Forestry Department and funded by the EC [see article above].
I also presented UWET at the Second IEA Expert Workshop on Biomass Energy: Data, Analysis and Trends which was held in Paris from 23 to 24 March 1998. [See under News and Notes for more information on IEA.] A more detailed account of UWET will be given in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum.
Miguel A. Trossero
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>3</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo NEWS AND NOTES
DEVELOPMENT OF A RICE HUSK FURNACE
The introduction of high-yielding and early maturing rice varieties in the humid tropics allows double or triple cropping where at least one harvest takes place during the wet season. Sun drying can no longer cope with this weather condition, resulting in high losses and low quality. Investigations have shown that low-temperature drying is the most promising alternative. However, in humid tropical countries, low-temperature drying requires a slight preheating of the ambient air by 6 to 9 K during adverse weather conditions. Kerosene burners, liquid petroleum gas burners and electric heaters are costly in operation and require fossil fuels which are not always available everywhere. Wood is becoming scarce and costly and efficient furnaces are expensive. Rice husk, a waste product of rice processing, is a cheap alternative. However, it is a difficult fuel and requires a specially designed furnace. The existing rice husk furnaces are smoky, labour-intensive and cannot keep a
constant temperature rise of the ambient air which is required for low-temperature drying or have a power output which can only be used economically at industrial-scale dryer units.
The newly developed rice husk furnace is a down-draught type which assures clean and almost complete combustion. The tested prototype achieved a power output of 10 kW and can be scaled up or down in a wide range. The resulting temperature rise varies by ±1 K without any control system. The combustion efficiency of the rice husk is 99 percent and furnace efficiency reaches 84 percent. An economic assessment of the new rice husk furnace indicates that it is the most economical preheating system for low-temperature drying in the Philippines. (Contributed by: C.M. Braunbeck.)
For more information, please contact: Mr C.M. Braunbeck, Krimmstrase 27, 67655 Kaiserslautern, Germany.
Fax: (+49 631) 891126;
e-mail: geobra@folz.de
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Mobil Corporation (the multinational oil company) made the decision to donate US$500 000 in support of tree planting projects because they have a major impact on reducing greenhouse gases. It also recognized that trees provide other important benefits such as restoring and maintaining habitat for threatened and endangered species, cleaning the air and water, beautifying the land and improving recreation. (Source: Climate News, 8 January 1998.)
Did you know that planting and growing 150 000 ha of forest will absorb 3 million tonnes of CO[2] per year from the atmosphere, equivalent to the emissions from a 600 MW coal-fired power station?
(Source: AIJ report of the IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, UK.)
Royal Dutch/Shell Group, the world's largest oil company, has decided to make renewable energy its fifth "core" business activity and has established Shell International Renewables (SIR) to invest in solar, bioenergy and sustainable forestry projects. Mr van Oorsouw, Head of Biomass and Wind at SIR, reported that US$500 million have been earmarked for investment in the near future. In the biomass area, SIR's activities will include the establishment of new plantations of fast-growing trees, such as eucalyptus, which can fuel power plants in rural areas of the developing world (large forestry plantations are now under development in Uruguay, Chile, Paraguay and the Congo). He also said that (for SIR) wood energy is rapidly becoming a cost-effective alternative; for this reason, pilot plants for the development of decentralized wood-based power are now being initiated. Shell has set a target to have such power plants generating a total of 250 MW installed by 2005, and company
executives also say that there are commercial prospects for large-scale power generation from biomass. Shell's new venture will be the single largest investment in renewable energy resources to date. (Source: Travel report by Miguel Trossero, February 1998.)
CENTER FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY AND SUSTAINABLE TECHNOLOGY (CREST)
CREST is developing a project, with the support of the US Environment Protection Agency (EPA), to document and post on the Internet case studies and positive results of state and local government activities that have resulted in reducing or preventing greenhouse gas emissions through energy efficiency and/or renewable energy technologies, better municipal planning and progressive sustainable energy and resource practices.
The general sectors on which the project is focusing are: Buildings/residential, Transportation, Industrial facilities, Municipal and public utilities and Agriculture. The results that are being sought include energy savings, cost savings, greenhouse gas savings and creation of jobs.
CREST would appreciate any relevant submissions of case studies, contacts, Web sites, other discussion groups or mailing lists or reports that might be useful in fulfilling this project. [See under Web Sites for more information on the various Internet addresses of CREST.]
Please send any hard-copy documents or electronic files to: Mr Jon Guth, Project Manager, CREST, 1200 18th Street, NW, Suite 900, Washington,
DC 20036, USA.
Fax: (+1 202) 887 0497;
e-mail: jsg@crest.org
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY
The International Energy Agency (IEA) is an autonomous body which was established in 1974 within the framework of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to implement an international energy programme. It carries out a comprehensive programme of energy cooperation among its member countries.
The basic aims of IEA include:
* cooperation among IEA participating countries to reduce excessive dependence on oil through energy conservation, development of alternative energy sources and energy research and development;
* cooperation with oil producing and other oil consuming countries with a view to developing a stable international energy trade as well as the rational management and use of world energy resources in the interests of all countries.
IEA Bioenergy is the short name for the international bioenergy collaboration within IEA. The work of IEA Bioenergy is structured in a number of Tasks, which have well-defined objectives, budgets and time frames. Four Tasks were covered during the period 1995-1997.
Bioenergy is defined as material which is directly or indirectly produced by photosynthesis and which is utilized, among other uses, as a feedstock in the manufacture of fuels and substitutes for petrochemical and other energy-intensive products. Organic waste from forestry and agriculture and municipal solid waste are also included in the common studies, as well as broader systems studies on techno-economical aspects and greenhouse gas balances of whole bioenergy systems.
Task XV - Greenhouse gas balances of bioenergy systems
The goal of Task XV was to analyse all processes involved in the use of bioenergy systems on a full fuel-cycle basis with the aim of establishing overall greenhouse gas (GHG) balances. The basis of the analysis of bioenergy systems is a comparison with conventional or traditional fossil fuels and other energy systems as a reference. Besides the scientific value of the results of this project, its recommendations are useful for decision-makers in order to gain a maximum of net GHG emission reduction from bioenergy projects.
The other three Tasks were: Task XII - Biomass production, harvesting and supply; Task XIII - Biomass utilization; and Task XIV - Energy recovery from municipal solid waste. (Source: IEA Bioenergy, Annual Report 1996.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Josef Spitzer, Operating Agency Task XV, Joanneum Research, Elisabethstrasse 11, A-8010 Graz, Austria.
Fax: (+43 316) 876320;
e-mail: josef.spitzer@joanneum.ac.at
or
Editor, IEA Bioenergy Newsletter, Forestry Department, University of Aberdeen, 581 King Street, Aberdeen AB24 5UA, UK.
Fax: (+44 1224) 272685;
e-mail: wsrg@abdn.ac.uk;
http://www.abdn.ac.uk/ieabioenergy/index.htm
SUPER TREES
Electric utility officials in droves are rediscovering wood as an important fuel source. But rising demand is outstripping supplies from industrial and sawmill waste. However, the utilities are not going to cut existing forests; instead, many are planning to grow their own. The strategy is to cover millions of acres around the country with fast-growing hybrids of various species known collectively as "super trees". These so-called "super trees" are any of a new selection of hybridized fast-growing alders, willows and poplars. "Hybrid vigour" is a term used to describe the fact that such cross-breeds possess much more rapid growth than their parents. Current selections are very hardy, with some producing growth up to 5 m per year as far north as Canada.
BY-PRODUCTS PUT TO GOOD USE
The Aracruz commitment to ensure the lowest environmental impact of its activities is leading to new, productive uses for residues from its pulp-making operations. One of the company's initiatives is a study, together with the Centre for the Development of Coffee Technology (CETCAF) in the State of Espirito Santo (Brazil), to determine the best uses of residues for coffee growers in that state. The three types of residues useful in soil chemistry correction and fertilization that are being studied by CETCAF for coffee plantation use are: ash (a fine residue resulting from burning eucalyptus tree bark in the pulp mill's biomass boilers); dregs (solid wastes deriving from the industrial liquor cooking process); and lime mud (a waste product removed from the mill's lime furnaces after an operating problem has shut them down). These products will be cheaper than lime which is currently being used. Dreg residue technology is being successfully used by farmers in the south of the
country on broccoli and peach crops, and the need for pesticides has declined. Since the quality and quantity of the crops using dregs are superior to those that do not, the idea is to adapt the practice to coffee farming.
Another initiative is a partnership with the Espirito Santo Federal University to adapt the use of dregs for use by the building industry. The concept is to produce high-resistance, low-cost bricks using the residue as the principal raw material. (Source: Aracruz News, No. 9, October 1997.)
Aracruz is the largest pulp and paper company in Brazil. For more information, please contact:
http://www.aracruz.com.br
Clean energy for the planet
Tiny, rugged power plants, known as "microturbine-generators" or, simply, microturbines, ranging in size from 30 kW to 200 kW, are to be commercialized in the United States and elsewhere. They will soon cost less than comparable diesel engines. This could be very good news for the conversion of biomass to electricity. Key modifications to the microturbines will adapt them to run on low-pressure biomass gas with a heat content well below 1 000 kcal/m^3.
Small biomass gasifiers have previously been coupled to diesel engines to make electricity. There are several difficulties with using diesel engines on such low-energy gas: the output of the engine drops, maintenance costs increase and, in most instances, the engine must be run in a dual-fuel mode, so that the biomass gas merely displaces some of the diesel fuel but does not eliminate its use.
The modified microturbine will eliminate most of the problems faced by diesels. It will run solely on biomass gas with no loss of output. The modification eliminates the fuel gas compressor, one of the highest maintenance components in the plant. The resulting plant will have only one moving part, use no lubricating oil and will be very simple to maintain. It will also have a higher tolerance for tar and particulates.
A prototype project, running a modified microturbine on biomass gas, is expected to be operational in California by late 1998. Following the prototype, several demonstration projects are planned, using thermal gasifiers, animal manure digesters and even landfill gas. The plants will be able to utilize biomass from sources previously considered to be too small or too weak for recovery. The project is being developed by Reflective Energies of California, together with other companies, universities and research institutes in the United States. (Contributed by: Mr Edan Prabhu, Reflective Energies.)
For more information, please contact Mr E. Prabhu, Reflective Energies, 22922 Tiagua, Mission Viejo, California, USA 92692-1433.
Fax: (+1 714) 380 8407;
e-mail: edanprabhu@msn.com
ENVOC (ENVIRONMENTAL VOCABULARY) - MULTILINGUAL THESAURUS OF ENVIRONMENTAL TERMS
EnVoc is the latest edition of the INFOTERRA Thesaurus of Environmental Terms. EnVoc (Environmental Vocabulary) has been revised to reflect emerging environmental concerns and new technologies, especially in the field of environmental information. Originally produced 20 years ago as the INFOTERRA Thesaurus of Environmental Terms, this product has evolved into an important reference tool for both users and providers of environmental information. As testimony to the product's widespread appeal, the thesaurus has been renamed EnVoc - Multilingual Thesaurus of Environmental Terms, reflecting its established niche as a leading environmental vocabulary with an international client base.
For more information on EnVoc or other INFOTERRA products and services, please contact: UNEP Thesaurus Team, Division of Environmental Information and Assessment, United Nations Environment Programme,
PO Box 30552, Nairobi, Kenya.
Fax: (+254 2) 624269;
e-mail: infotinf@unep.org;
http://www.unep.org
GLOBAL BIOENERGY POTENTIAL CALCULATED BY A MODEL CONSIDERING OVERALL BIOMASS FLOW AND LAND USE COMPETITION
The global bioenergy potential for the future is estimated using a multiregional global land use and energy model (GLUE-11). The model consists of two sectors (a food and a forest sector) and describes land use competition among various uses for biomass applications such as paper, timber, food, feed and energy. The model covers a wide range of biomass flow including food chains from feed to meat, paper recycling and discharge of biomass residues. The model calculates the bioenergy potential from 1961 to 1990 based on past records and from 1990 to 2100 based on future biomass supply and demand scenarios.
Through a set of simulations, the following results were obtained. i) There will be a potential of energy crop production from surplus arable land in North America, Western Europe, Oceania, Latin America and the former USSR and Eastern Europe. However, the potential of energy will be strongly affected by food demand parameters in the future, such as animal food demand per caput. ii) Ultimate energy potential of biomass residues will increase globally from 81 EJ to 270 EJ per annum in 2100 and will be linked to food demand. In North America, the centrally planned Asian countries, Latin America and South Asia, which will be the major consumers or exporters of biomass, wood harvesting residues, sawmill residues, wood scrap, cereal harvesting residues and animal dung will be the biomass residues with considerable energy potential. (Contributed by: Mr Hiromi Yamamoto. Source: Bioenergy in global energy systems in the future - considering land use competitions and energy resource
constraints. Proceedings of the International Association for Energy Economics [IAEE] 24th Annual International Conference, 1998.)
For more information, please contact: Mr Hiromi Yamamoto, Socioeconomic Research Center, Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry,
1-6-1 Otemachi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 100-8216, Japan.
Fax: (+81 3) 3287 2805;
e-mail: yamamoth@criepi.denken.or.jp
A WOOD FUEL LOBBY IN EUROPE?
Unlike conventional energy sources, wood fuel is not commercialized by large multinational or national companies. A multiplicity of institutions, professionals and voluntary participants are involved. This leads to the emergence of an entrepreneurial, or branch, culture with individuals identifying with projects and building up project experience.
Thanks to the European Union, innovative technologies are being developed and theme networks are being set up. As well as sharing experiences, their aim is to agree best practice methods and to have credible technical and economic references on hand. Their credibility depends on the models developed being applied effectively at the national and regional levels, instead of existing only as limited and local successes.
In several countries, professional technical centres have created special departments which support manufacturers in the design of their products. Other countries or regions have set up agencies or networks offering advice centres for professionals in order to promote improvements among decision-makers and the public. (Source: Wood Fuel Newsletter, No. 2.)
With the support of the European Commission (Directorate General for Energy DG XVII), Wood Fuel Newsletter is published by Biomasse Normandie, in partnership with Adema (France) and in collaboration with ZREU (Germany), ECD (Denmark) and the Styrian Chamber of Agriculture and Forestry (Austria).
For more information, please contact: Biomasse Normandie, 42 avenue du Six Juin, F 14300 Caen, France.
Fax: (+33 2) 31522491;
e-mail: biomnor@acl.com
REGIONAL WOOD ENERGY DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAMME IN ASIA
The Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia (RWEDP) is a long-term project implemented by FAO's Forestry Department and funded by the Government of the Netherlands. The project started in 1984 and is now in its third phase, 1994-1999. The current phase links 16 countries which are major wood fuel producers and consumers: Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam. The share of wood energy in national energy consumption ranges from 20 to 80 percent. In absolute quantities the consumption of wood fuels is still increasing, and this is expected to remain so for several decades to come. The main uses are in the domestic, commercial and industrial sectors. The types of application can be traditional or modern, or any intermediary one.
Although wood fuels are often considered "non-commercial", they are widely traded. This is particularly true in urban areas, where wood fuels are most relevant, and where markets for fuelwood and charcoal are thriving. Many people, in both urban and rural areas, earn their main income from the wood fuel business. This can involve growing, harvesting, processing, trading, transporting or retailing. Despite years of misconceptions, most of the wood fuel is managed sustainably. It has been found that wood energy use is not a general or the main cause of deforestation in Asia.
Three specialist areas are being addressed by RWEDP, i.e. wood energy resource development, wood energy conservation and wood energy data and planning. Further specific aspects regard gender issues which play an important role in wood energy supply, trade and utilization. Common problems in wood energy are with regard to lack of adequate data, institutional weaknesses and limited skills. As a result, national policies with regard to wood energy are generally not yet well articulated, and RWEDP aims to assist in this.
RWEDP publishes a Newsletter, Wood Energy News, which is distributed to about 3 200 institutional subscribers. Furthermore, RWEDP publishes field documents and reports on various aspects of wood energy. [Ed. note: Part 1 of a list of RWEDP publications can be found under Publications.] A home page is being established on the Internet (Internet address: www.rwedp.org). (Contributed by: Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, RWEDP.)
For more information, please contact: Mr W. Hulscher, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: (+66 2) 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@field.fao.org
BIOMASS ENERGY NEWSLETTER
Biomass Users' Network (BUN)-INDIA is actively engaged in publishing newsletters to create a forum for the exchange of views in the field of biomass energy and has already published four newsletters so far. To make this forum more effective, we need articles from those who are actually engaged in research, technology development or any other issue related to this field. We welcome contributions from such people and sincerely hope to get a good response to our appeal. (Contributed by: V. Gayathri, BUN-INDIA, e-mail: gayathri@cgpl.iisc.ernet.in)
GREEN CRITERIA
A local group in Hong Kong is compiling a "user-friendly" buyer's guide/catalogue for purchasing managers (from a variety of industrial and service sectors) to incorporate green criteria into their purchasing decisions. The guide will provide a comprehensive, structured means of selecting items based on the environmental and technical performance data. There will be no charge for the guide. (Source: Bio Bulletin, July 1997.)
RECOGNIZING THE SOCIAL VALUE
OF WOMEN'S LABOUR
Women are the major users and managers of natural resources such as forests, water and land. They are the first to realize the environmental problems and most directly affected by a degradation in natural resources. But they are rarely recognized as agents in many development projects and extension activities in forestry or agriculture. Although they are de facto resource managers their voice is rarely heard in decision-making bodies. Women cannot benefit from the development process equally with men if they are not direct participants. Therefore, participatory methods should be used to integrate women's desires and knowledge into the planning process. To achieve sustainability in development, there is need of a culture of participation which embodies a partnership with the state, international organizations, national NGOs, universities and the local people themselves. Such a culture sets the ground for organizing grassroots activities. (Extracted from: It is our turn to
talk, by Zeliha Unaldt. A case study on Women in Forestry presented at the Eleventh World Forestry Congress.)
"WOMEN FEED THE WORLD"
1998 WORLD FOOD DAY/TELEFOOD
THEME
Women play a decisive role in household and national food security. When given the opportunities and resources, women have proved to be active partners in development: efficient, dynamic and open to innovations. When confronted with crises, they have been able to come up with coping survival strategies or to adjust technologies to the ever changing environment. They represent a formidable potential that could help meet the challenges of food security in the twenty-first century.
In order to promote the understanding of women's crucial contribution to world agriculture and food security, I have chosen "Women feed the world" as the theme for World Food Day 1998.
(Extracted from: From the Director-General. FAO Contact, February 1998.)
AND HAVE YOU HEARD ABOUT ...
ENERGIA News - the newsletter of the Network for Women and Sustainable Energy?
ENERGIA is an international network on women and sustainable energy, founded in 1995 by a group of women involved in gender and energy work in developing countries. ENERGIA's objective is to "engender" energy and empower women, through the promotion of information exchange, training, research, advocacy and action aimed at strengthening the role of women in sustainable energy development. ENERGIA's approach (since it is a loose network rather than a formal institution) is to seek to identify needed activities and actions through its membership, and then to encourage, and if possible to assist, members and their institutions to undertake decentralized initiatives. ENERGIA News is the principle vehicle for this approach.
The newsletter is produced jointly by Energy, Environment and Development (EED, Wipperfürth, Germany), the Technology and Development Group (TDG, Enschede, the Netherlands) and TOOLConsult (Amsterdam, the Netherlands), the coordinator.
For more information, please contact: ENERGIA News Secretariat, c/o TOOLConsult, Sarphatistraat 650,
1018 AV Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Tel.: (+31 20) 4246609;
fax: (+31 20) 4211202;
e-mail: toolconsult@tool.nl
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>4</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo FOCUS ON... MEXICO
TCP/MEX/4553 (DENDROENERGÍA PARA
EL DESARROLLO RURAL)
La leña en México constituye, como en muchos otros países del mundo, el principal combustible utilizado en el medio rural que es además frecuentemente usado en las áreas periféricas de las principales ciudades del país. Como a menudo sucede mundialmente, la utilización de la biomasa forestal para fines energéticos se realiza al margen del control y la gestión de las agencias técnicas especializadas.
La Secretaría del Medio Ambiente, Recursos Naturales y Pesca (SEMARNAP), a través de la Dirección General Forestal (DGF) solicitó la asistencia técnica de la FAO para mejorar la infraestructura, analizar la problemática dendroenergética y llevar a cabo acciones para garantizar el uso sostenible de los biocombustibles; capacitar recursos humanos; y transferir los esquemas metodológicos requeridos para el desarrollo de sistemas dendroenergéticos sostenibles. Dicha asistencia se materializó a través el proyecto TCP/MEX/4553, Dendroenergía para el desarrollo rural. El proyecto, de una duración de 24 meses, dio inició a sus actividades el 29 de enero de 1996 con la llegada al país de un consultor internacional contratado especialmente.
Se seleccionaron tres microrregiones específicas localizadas en los estados de Michoacán, Oaxaca y Guerrero como áreas demostrativas para la realización de los estudios relativos al consumo, mercadeo y producción de leña y otros combustibles derivados de la madera y crear las capacidades locales necesarias para expandir dichos esquemas a otras microrregiones dentro y fuera de los estados considerados.
Asimismo, se realizaron diversos estudios técnicos, cuyos resultados se describen en diversos documentos que ponen de relieve la importancia de la leña para la satisfacción de las necesidades energéticas de las comunidades rurales, especialmente indígenas, de las zonas de montaña de México y el papel que juega en las actividades económicas de dichas comunidades en cuanto a generación de empleo, de ingreso y en la sustitución de combustibles fósiles con el consiguiente impacto en la redistribución de ingreso a nivel local. Dichos estudios han permitido señalar interesantes aspectos hasta ahora poco reconocidos por los especialistas del sector, que tienen importantes repercusiones en el mundo forestal y energético.
En la reunión participaron unos 130 especialistas de diversas instituciones públicas, privadas y ONG interesadas en el tema a nivel nacional y estatal. Cabe señalar entre los participantes la presencia de diversos delegados y representantes estatales de la SEMARNAP, personalidades del mundo académico e investigadores.
RESÚMENES DE LOS RESULTADOS OBTENIDOS EN LOS PRINCIPALES DOCUMENTOS TÉCNICOS
Evaluación de la situación del uso de madera para energía en México
A partir de los datos obtenidos en los levantamientos de campo del proyecto, de un amplio conjunto adicional de documentos técnicos del proyecto y publicaciones preexistentes, se preparó un documento de situación cuyos resultados principales, a nivel nacional, indican que:
* el uso de madera para energía (leña y carbón vegetal) es muy importante en México: se estima que se utilizan en total unos 38 Mm^3/año (24,9 Mm^3/año en el sector doméstico de autoconsumo, 6 Mm^3/año en el sector doméstico comercial, 6 Mm^3/ año en el sector de las pequeñas
* industrias, y 0,7 Mm^3/año para producir carbón vegetal. En comparación, el uso de madera rolliza para industrias mecánicas y celulósicas no supera los 8 Mm^3/año, y la utilización de madera para postes se estima en 2,8 Mm^3/año;
* la leña aporta el 40 por ciento de la energía consumida por el sector residencial y probablemente más del 10 por ciento del total de energía primaria utilizada en el país, pero representa menos del 3 por ciento del total de emisiones de carbono de México;
* la magnitud del mercado de leña es igualmente importante: los 12 Mm^3 de leña comercializados anualmente tienen un valor de 300 millones de dólares EE.UU.;
* los precios de la leña son comparables a los de la madera en trozas para uso industrial, y justifican un aprovechamiento forestal ordenado;
* la actividad leñera comercial genera mucho empleo rural: unos 60 millones de jornales por año, o el equivalente de 240 000 empleos permanentes;
* la leña satisface las necesidades de energía para cocinar y calentar agua, y calefaccionar los hogares de 21 millones de pobladores rurales y por lo menos 4,5 millones de habitantes urbanos, que representan el 32 por ciento de los mexicanos.
Patrones de consumo de leña en tres microrregiones de México
Este informe sintetiza las conclusiones del estudio «Dendroenergía para el desarrollo rural» realizado entre abril de 1996 y mayo de 1997 en tres microrregiones de México: Lago de Pátzcuaro, en el estado de Michoacán, Los Altos Mixtepec, en el estado de Oaxaca y Tlapa de Comonfort, en el estado de Guerrero.
Metodología. Para realizar el estudio se partió de un enfoque sistémico, utilizando una metodología que combinó el levantamiento de 715 cuestionarios, 105 mediciones directas de los consumos de leña, alrededor de 1 000 mediciones para determinaciones de contenidos de humedad y visitas de reconocimiento a las zonas de producción de leña en un total de 13 localidades. El método de trabajo con las comunidades fue participativo.
Se estudiaron tres sectores: los usuarios domésticos, las pequeñas industrias y los productores de leña (leñadores e intermediarios). Los usuarios domésticos se dividieron a su vez en tres estratos de consumo de acuerdo con el tipo de combustible utilizado para cocinar: a) sólo leña; b) leña y gas; y c) sólo gas L.P. Las pequeñas industrias incluyeron: tabiqueras, panaderías, talleres alfareros y tortilleras.
Sector doméstico. La leña es el combustible doméstico más importante entre los habitantes del medio rural microrregional. Su difusión es también muy amplia incluso en la ciudad de Tlapa, con casi 25 000 habitantes. El uso de leña está asociado a factores económicos pero tiene también un fuerte arraigo cultural, siendo el combustible por excelencia para la preparación de platos tradicionales como tortillas, nixtamal y otros que se consumen en las frecuentes festividades de las comunidades. Se obtuvieron consumos per cápita promedios, incluyendo usuarios exclusivos de leña y de leña y gas de 1,7 kg/día en Guerrero, 2,0 kg/día en Michoacán y 2,6 kg/día en Oaxaca.
Existe un uso creciente del gas L.P., sin embargo esto no se traduce en la sustitución de la leña sino en el uso combinado de ambos combustibles. El uso combinado de leña y gas implica ahorros promedios de leña de alrededor del 15 por ciento.
Las familias que recolectan leña utilizan de 3 a 4 jornales mensuales para abastecerse de combustible y las que la compran gastan entre 45 y 177 pesos, dependiendo de la región. Los usuarios de leña y gas gastan en promedio lo mismo o hasta 60 por ciento más que los usuarios exclusivos de leña.
Pequeña industria. Las pequeñas industrias tienen una gran importancia social y económica en dos de las microrregiones, particularmente en Michoacán: generan 6 800 empleos y un valor económico de 74 millones de pesos al año.
Los precios de la leña para las pequeñas industrias, que alcanzan entre 50 y 100 pesos/m3 para desechos de pino y entre 120 y 250 pesos/m3 para madera de encino, justifican un aprovechamiento comercial de bajo manejo silvícola. Como existe una especialización de la demanda de leña por tipo de industria, los impactos ambientales pueden ser altos o bajos según la especie y el tipo de aprovechamiento.
Productores de leña. Los leñadores operan exclusivamente como extractores de leña. No existen esquemas de manejo propiamente dichos del recurso, ni una ordenación territorial respecto a formas o intensidades de corta. El impacto ambiental de la actividad es alto en las localidades que se dedican al corte de leña para venta. En general hay pocos intermediarios y la demanda atomizada dificulta la distribución del producto y la integración de cadenas de comercialización. El sector genera alrededor de 1 700 empleos y su valor económico es de 6,1 millones de pesos anuales.
Conclusiones y recomendaciones generales. En todas las localidades estudiadas, la leña constituye el principal uso de los recursos forestales locales. Se obtuvieron consumos promedios de 5,8 m3/año para la demanda familiar de leña (con variaciones de 5,2 a 7,4 m3/año, según la microrregión), 142 m3/año para tabiqueras, 37 m3/año para panaderías, 30 m3/año para tortilleras y 13 m3/año para alfarerías. Los consumos totales microrregionales superaron los 126 000 m3/año en Michoacán (con una población de 112 000 habitantes), 17 000 m3/año en Oaxaca (con 21 000 habitantes) y 25 000 m3/año en Guerrero (con 27 000 habitantes), con diferentes pesos de las pequeñas industrias en la demanda total de leña según la microrregión.
De continuar las actuales tendencias, las perspectivas de uso de leña a nivel microrregional apuntan a un consumo sostenido y a una intensificación de los impactos ambientales en áreas específicas debido a que existe un amplio porcentaje de familias que utilizan leña para cocinar; a que la mayor penetración de gas L.P. no se traducirá en ahorros importantes de leña en el sector doméstico; a que un sector todavía importante de pobladores y la mayor parte de las pequeñas industrias no tienen las condiciones económicas para acceder al gas de manera regular; y a que los recursos forestales de la región continúan reduciéndose, a causa de la demanda clandestina de madera y procesos de cambio de uso del suelo.
Sugerencias de acciones de seguimiento. En los lugares donde existe una demanda comercial de leña, es necesario:
* organizar centros de abastecimiento comunitarios o por grupo de comunidades;
* poner en contacto a las empresas forestales comunales que tengan permisos de aprovechamiento forestal con organizaciones de usuarios a fin de realizar ventas directas y en volumen, a menores precios;
* organizar y regularizar a los leñadores para que realicen una verdadera producción de leña, mediante planes de manejo silvícola o plantaciones leñeras. Para este fin normalmente serán necesarios estudios específicos de ordenamiento y manejo forestal.
En las zonas de escasez de leña donde predomina el autoabastecimiento, debe actuarse también de forma integral atacando simultáneamente la oferta y la demanda de combustible. En estos casos se justifican acciones como:
* programas de ordenamiento forestal comunitario, a fin de que las propias localidades regulen sus zonas de aprovechamiento leñero;
* sistemas agroforestales, plantaciones de traspatio y manejo de la vegetación leñosa;
* programas de uso eficiente de leña mediante la difusión de estufas mejoradas (reducción de las emisiones de humo, posibilidad de tener la cocina más limpia).
A nivel de la demanda, dado el carácter comercial de la leña y sus altos precios, se han implantado programas de difusión de tecnologías de uso eficiente tanto en el sector doméstico como en el de las pequeñas industrias.
Dada la diversidad de situaciones descritas, la relación beneficio/costo de las acciones posibles es muy variable, por ejemplo, en función de la existencia o no de recursos forestales manejables para leña a nivel local, el radio económico del abastecimiento y el carácter comercial o no del uso de la leña. Asimismo, como la escala del problema es fundamentalmente local, las intervenciones futuras deben planearse e implementarse a ese mismo nivel para lograr la máxima economía e impacto.
Compendio metodológico y de resultados
Este documento describe con detalle la metodología y presenta todos los cuadros de salida del estudio sobre consumos y flujos de leña llevado a cabo en tres microrregiones de México en el contexto del proyecto FAO/MEX/TCP/4553(A), Dendroenergía para el desarrollo rural. El documento incluye también los cuestionarios utilizados para el levantamiento de información y una guía del programa utilizado en el procesamiento de la información.
Determinación de municipios críticos por consumo de leña
Este informe presenta un método para priorizar las regiones (municipios) críticos por consumo de leña en México. El método sugerido consiste en construir un índice de consumo de leña, que combina variables sociodemográficas, técnicas y ambientales, para cada uno de los municipios del país. Mediante un análisis estadístico y un sistema de información geográfica se obtiene una clasificación de municipios en cinco categorías de criticidad según su consumo de leña.
Este análisis permitió seleccionar de un total de 2 392 municipios del país, 146 municipios muy críticos por consumo de leña, 437 municipios críticos y 302 municipios medianamente críticos. Se definen como municipios críticos por consumo de leña aquellos que combinan: a) un alto consumo y densidad de consumo de leña (o un alto número de usuarios y una elevada densidad de usuarios de leña); b) crecimiento de usuarios de leña; c) alta adaptabilidad al consumo por motivos económicos (bajos ingresos) y culturales (prácticas de cocción arraigadas que requieren el uso de leña); y d) recursos forestales poco productivos.
El método sugerido resulta una buena herramienta auxiliar de planeación pues permite reducir sustancialmente la escala de intervención sobre la problemática dendroenergética, a fin de concentrar esfuerzos en las regiones más críticas.
Otros documentos técnicos preparados por el proyecto
Como parte de este proyecto se produjeron diversos documentos técnicos que describen con mucho detalle los resultados del estudio y la situación específica de los consumos y flujos de leña en cada localidad y microrregión de estudio. Estos documentos son:
* La dendroenergía en México (contexto nacional, documento de situación).
* Patrones de consumo de leña en tres microrregiones de México: síntesis de resultados.
* Situación dendroenergética estatal para Michoacán, Guerrero y Oaxaca (un documento por estado).
* Consumos y flujos de leña en las microrregiones: Lago de Pátzcuaro, Michoacán, Los Altos Mixtepec, Oaxaca y Tlapa de Comonfort, Guerrero (un documento por microrregión).
* Uso de leña comunitario (uno por localidad de estudio).
* Determinación de municipios críticos por consumo de leña en México.
Para mayor información sobre las publicaciones mencionadas, dirigirse a:
Dirección General Forestal, SEMARNAP, México, D.F. y a las oficinas de la representación de la FAO en México, haciendo referencia al proyecto Dendroenergía para el desarrollo rural.
Las publicaciones pueden solicitarse a:
Omar R. Masera, Instituto de Ecología de la UNAM, Campus Morelia, Centro Comercial El Parián, Local 17, A.P. 152, Pátzcuaro, Mich.
Tel./fax: (+52 434) 23216;
correo electrónico: omasera@miranda.ecologia.unam.mx
Jaime Navia, Grupo Interdisciplinario de Tecnología Rural Apropiada, A.C., Apto. postal 158, Pátzcuaro, Mich.
Tel./fax: (+52 434) 23216;
correo electrónico: jnavia@upnet.com.mx
Teresita Arias Chalico, PAIR/UNAM.
Correo electrónico: tach@hp.fciencias.unam.mx
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>5</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo COUNTRY COMPASS
BOLIVIA
Producir con ganancia en las actuales condiciones requiere inversiones en información, investigación y tecnología. Sin embargo, muchas pequeñas industrias, como las industrias para la producción de yeso, cal y ladrillo, no están en condiciones de financiar estas tareas. Las actividades de Energética (energía para el desarrollo), en cooperación con la Asociación Provincial de Productores de Estuco y Cal de Cochabamba (APYC), con el apoyo del fondo FONAMA (cuenta Iniciativa para las Américas) buscan desarrollar y proponer tecnologías que permitan obtener mayores ganancias al productor y al mismo tiempo evitar las emisiones de contaminantes. Bajo la premisa de incentivar el uso de tecnologías económicamente accesibles y ambientalmente viables, se han elaborado varias propuestas entre las que sobresale el diseño mejorado de hornos, que ofrece ventajas económicas y ambientales a bajo precio.
Es evidente que los hornos actuales de producción de cal, yeso y ladrillo son el mejor ejemplo de derroche de material, de energía y de producto: son ineficientes en todos estos aspectos. Por lo tanto, es necesario utilizar hornos eficientes que consuman menos combustible y permitan obtener los productos requeridos por el mercado. Con estas acciones se pretende cubrir las demandas apremiantes de las microempresas, además de fortalecer y asegurar su sostenibilidad. En el marco de este proyecto se ha preparado una carpeta, «Industria, energía y ambiente», que presenta las características básicas de hornos típicos para producción de yeso (25 m^3 de capacidad), resultados de su evaluación de pérdidas energéticas y recomendaciones para su adecuada concepción y operación, garantizando la calidad del producto final. (Fuente: IEA, 3, nov. de 1997.)
Para más información, dirigirse a: Energética, Casilla 4964,
C/La Paz E 0626, Bolivia.
Fax: (+591 2) 53825;
correo electrónico: energica@proper.bo
The Ministry of Mines and Energy of the Federal Government of Brazil has launched a new programme to promote small-scale bioenergy development in rural areas (PROMASE). The PROMASE programme will offer financial assistance for projects in the range of 75 to 200 kW that use vegetable oils, forest and agricultural residues and fuelwood and charcoal. The National BioEnergy Industries Association (NBIA) has offered to assist the ministry in identifying appropriate technology, and to serve as a conduit to United States' system suppliers. (Source: Bio Bulletin, August 1997.)
BURKINA FASO
One of the voluntary papers prepared for Topic 16 of the World Forestry Congress was "Gestion rationnelle des ressources forestières et approvisionnement des villes en bois de feu - expérience du Burkina Faso", prepared by A. Thiam. [An extract of this paper can be found under Special Features.]
CHINA
Restructuring forestry energy institutions
On 7 March 1998, the Ninth China National People's Congress approved the Institution Reform Plan of the State Council. According to the plan, the 43 commissions and ministries will be restructured to 29 commissions and ministries. The Ministry of Forestry is one of the bodies to be axed in the plan and will become the State Forestry Bureau under the direct jurisdiction of the State Council. The plan is now being implemented, although its impact on China's national forestry energy development is not yet clear.
Under the old system the main institutions related to forestry energy policy formulation at the central level were the State Planning Commission (SPC), the State Economic and Trade Commission (SETC), the State Science and Technology Commission (SSTC), the Ministry of Finance (MOFin), the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), the Ministry of Forestry (MOF), the Ministry of Water Resources (MOWC), the State Land Administration, the State Bureau of Survey and Mapping, and others. SPC was the institution for medium- and long-term strategy formulation at the national level. SETC was the institution for short-term strategy and industrial policy formulation at the national level, especially for state-owned enterprises. SSTC was the institution for national science and technology strategy formulation. MOA was the institution for agriculture and rural development strategy formulation. MOF was the institution for national forestry strategy formulation. MOWC was the institution for national
strategy formulation for water conservation and small hydropower development.
Under the new system the main institutions related to forestry energy policy formulation at the central level will be the State Development Planning Commission (SSPC), the State Economic and Trade Commission (SETC), the Ministry of Science and Technology (MST), the Ministry of Finance (MOFin), the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), the Ministry of Water Resources (MOWC), the Ministry of Land and Natural Resources (MLNR), which is formed from the former Ministry of Geology and Mineral Resources, the State Land Administration, the State Oceanography Bureau, the State Bureau of Survey and Mapping, the State Forestry Bureau (SNF), and others. (Contributed by: Su Mingshan, e-mail: sumsh@d901.inet.tsinghua.edu.cn)
COSTA RICA
Costa Rica has taken the lead in devising a way carbon captured in tropical forests can be sold in the form of certifiable tradable offsets (CTOs or "carbon bonds"). In what is described as a "win-win" situation, industries manage to reduce the cost of meeting emission targets by "financing" forest conservation and reforestation projects in developing countries that help mitigate the pollution they produce.
the way of carbon trading in future climate-change talks, he added: "There is a potential gain for those who dare jump into the market now, since they can get a head-start over the competition, and it will be increasingly harder for the others to catch up." (Source: The Tico Times, San José, Costa Rica, 30 January 1998.)
The Government of Costa Rica has achieved, through the Costa Rican Office of Joint Implementation, the first sale on a world scale of 200 000 tonnes of carbon dioxide to the Norwegian Government, representing an income of US$2 million, to be invested in protection and renewal of natural resources programmes. (Source: Un caso de éxito en el uso de incentivos forestales y pago de servicios ambientales en Costa Rica, MINAE/FONAFIFO/ACCVC/FUNDECOR.)
El Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento Forestal (FONAFIFO) es una institución creada por la Ley forestal 7575, publicada el 16 de abril de 1996, y cuyo objetivo es financiar mediante créditos u otros mecanismos de fomento el manejo del bosque, intervenido o no, los procesos de reforestación, recuperación de áreas denudadas, los cambios tecnológicos en aprovechamiento e industrialización de los recursos forestales.
FONAFIFO cuenta con personería jurídica instrumental, además capta recursos para financiar el pago de los servicios ambientales que brindan los bosques, las plantaciones forestales y otras actividades necesarias para fortalecer el desarrollo del sector de los recursos naturales.
La Ley forestal provee una importante fuente de ingresos para el fondo proveniente de un impuesto que pagan todos los ciudadanos al comprar combustibles derivados del petróleo. FONAFIFO invierte estos recursos en programas forestales tendientes a disminuir o mitigar los gases de efecto invernadero. (Fuente: Un caso de éxito en el uso de incentivos forestales y pago de servicios ambientales en Costa Rica, MINAE/FONAFIFO/ACCVC/FUNDECOR.)
Para más información, dirigirse a: FONAFIFO, Apdo. 594-2120, San José, Costa Rica.
Fax: (+506) 257 9695;
correo electrónico: fonafifo@sol.racsa.co.cr
MALAYSIA
Charcoal briquettes for export
The technology of briquetting is relatively new in Malaysia. The first briquetting plant in the country was fully operational in 1985 and was sited in Klang, about 30 km from Kuala Lumpur. Subsequently, five other companies were set up to manufacture charcoal briquettes for export.
Generally, three types of briquette are produced in Malaysia: i) rice husk briquettes; ii) wood charcoal briquettes with a binder; and iii) wood charcoal briquettes without a binder.
However, the use of briquettes in Malaysia is very low; in addition, although charcoal briquettes are of superior quality, they are not widely used. In rural areas, charcoal briquettes cannot compete with the availability of cheap fuels such as wood residues, charcoal, kerosene and diesel. As an illustration, the market value for charcoal is about $M 0.30/kg, while the cheapest charcoal briquettes available cost $M 1.20/kg. In urban areas, the low usage of charcoal briquettes is mainly due to a lack of market promotion rather than pricing. A random survey of 50 restaurants in the capital city of Kuala Lumpur indicated that they had no knowledge of charcoal briquettes for barbecuing. However, they would be willing to pay a higher premium for a better, cleaner and more convenient product.
Almost 100 percent of the briquettes produced are for export to the Republic of Korea, Japan and Taiwan Province of China. As a result, 90 percent of the briquettes are charcoal since they are preferred over wood briquettes in terms of cost savings in transportation and storage. The rapid development in the wood briquetting industry in the country over the past few years has indicated that there might be a reasonable economic return for the production and sale of carbonized briquettes.
The financial analysis of the briquetting industry in Malaysia indicated that the industry is very attractive to new investors. However, the healthy development of the industry will be dependent on the following factors.
* The analysis is based on very high committed sales in the export market. The financial analysis assumes that the company will have a steady demand for its total briquette production. Overproduction or competition, however, will cause its market share to drop and will result in a sharp decrease in the financial viability of the industry.
* The most sensitive costs for briquette production in Malaysia are those based on energy prices, availability of labour and a steady supply of raw material. Any adverse change or variation of these factors will invariably affect the viability of the industry.
(Extracted from: The development of the wood and charcoal briquettes industry in Malaysia, by Dr Hoi Why Kong.)
For more information, please contact: Dr Hoi Why Kong, Forest Research Institute Malaysia (FRIM), Kepong, 52109 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Fax: (+60 3) 6367753.
MALI
La filière charbonnière
Le bassin charbonnier de Bamako, défini géographiquement dans le cadre de la mise en &#156;uvre de la Stratégie énergie domestique (SED), comporte: 106 villages, 27 arrondissements et
13 cercles répartis sur quatre régions administratives: Koulikoro, Ségou, Sikasso et Kayes.
La première enquête-diagnostic de compréhension de la problématique charbonnière sur le terrain au niveau des régions de Koulikoro, Ségou et Sikasso a permis d'obtenir une situation d'ensemble de la filière. Cette situation se traduit par une pression anarchique sur les ressources, une production artisanale du charbon, une mauvaise organisation de la commercialisation et un manque de formation des producteurs ruraux.
Les solutions aux problèmes ainsi évoqués ne sont-elles pas d'ordre organisationnel, technique et pédagogique? En tout cas, la SED envisage la fermeture des zones de production déficitaires en ressources, l'organisation en association des producteurs ruraux, la formation à l'organisation de la commercialisation, la diffusion des réchauds à pétrole et des fourneaux améliorés à charbon de bois et l'appui à la mise sur les marchés urbains des briquettes de charbon issues de résidus agro-industriels. (Source: Le bulletin d'information sur l'énergie domestique au Mali, no 3.)
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Stratégie énergie domestique, DNHE-Square Patrice Lumumba, B.P. 66, Bamako, Mali.
Télécopie: (+223) 23 4830.
THE NETHERLANDS
Through the Netherlands Agency for Energy and the Environment (Novem), the Netherlands Government pursues an active policy on energy conservation and environmental protection. To achieve its goals, Novem is playing an important role in the areas of technological innovation and energy conservation, managing many programmes aimed at environmental protection and improving energy efficiency. In doing so it acts on behalf of several Netherlands Government departments, as well as international organizations such as the International Energy Agency and the European Union, and supports the development and application of new technologies, techniques and instruments.
Novem has the financial resources to undertake projects, and the knowledge and expertise required to support them, and brings together government policy and market developments to bridge the gap between theoretical knowledge and its practical application.
The Novem Energy Guide 1998 presents general information on a range of issues related to energy consumption, energy production and environmental impact. The graphs, figures, charts and diagrams provide information about current trends and forecasts of the energy situation in the Netherlands, the European Union and other regions.
For more information, please contact: Mr Theo van Rossum, International Director, NOVEM, Swentiboldstraat 21, Postbus 17, 6130 AA Sittard,
the Netherlands.
Fax: (+31 464) 528 260;
http://www.novem.org
The Energy from Waste and Biomass (EWAB) Programme, which is managed by Novem, was established to promote the use of waste materials and biomass as energy sources for power generation which should reduce the use of fossil fuels and help to create a sustainable energy supply. Recent publications of EWAB are: Overview of current projects and reports published within the Energy from Waste and Biomass Programme. Status 1 January 1997 and Energy production from waste and biomass.
For more information on the EWAB Programme, please contact: Mr G.J.J. Smakman, Novem, Catherijnesingel 59, PO Box 8242, 3503 RE Utrecht,
the Netherlands.
Fax: (+31 30) 2316491;
e-mail: nlnovgsm@ibmmail.com;
http://www.novem.nl
NEW ZEALAND
Australasia's first wood-pellet fuel plant has been opened in Methven, New Zealand, by the Prime Minister and Rakaia MP Jenny Shipley. Pellet Heating New Zealand Ltd's $750 000 [$NZ 1 = US$0.58] plant was ready for the coming heating season, general manager Peter Mony said. The pellets are made from dried and compressed untreated wood waste, such as sawdust or shavings. The finished product resembles chicken feed. The clean-burning pellets have been designed for the company's pellet burners, imported from Canada. The fires have received Canterbury Regional Council clean air approval. Both pellets and burners will carry the Ecoheat trademark.
Mr Mony said the pellet burners were extremely efficient, cost-effective and clean. "Using the wood pellets Ecoheat fires are up to 96 percent heat-energy efficient - converting mass to heat energy - compared with 50 to 55 percent for a wood burner and 15 to 20 percent for an open fire." He also said that emissions over 24 hours could be as low as one-fifth of those from a traditional log burner. Waste from nearby sawmills will be used in the production of the pellets at Methven. At almost $3 000, the installation costs of the burners were higher than some other options. The pellets would sell for about $5.40 for a 20-kg bag, which should provide up to 40 hours of heating. (Source: Internet.)
SÉNÉGAL
Extrait d'une interview de M. Alioune Fall, Directeur de l'énergie,
Ministère de l'énergie, des mines et de l'industrie
Pourquoi le monde rural reste-t-il fermé à la butanisation?
Malgré de fortes subventions, le gaz butane et les équipements restent très onéreux, alors que le bois est une denrée quasiment gratuite. Autre raison, le prix n'est pas uniforme sur l'ensemble du territoire: plus on s'éloigne de Dakar, plus le prix est élevé, compte tenu du coût du transport. La péréquation serait une solution. Mais elle n'emporte pas l'adhésion de toutes les parties concernées. Précision importante: il ne s'agit pas à moyen terme de remplacer complètement les combustibles ligneux par le butane ou le kérosène. La biomasse est une ressource nationale dont nous devons tirer parti, tout en protégeant l'écosystème.
En 1987, vous avez décidé de libéraliser progressivement le transport des produits pétroliers, afin d'améliorer la sécurité et l'efficacité de la distribution. Est-ce effectif aujourd'hui?
Pas encore. Nous nous sommes heurtés à de fortes réticences de la part du syndicat des transporteurs. A notre actif cependant, un aménagement du système d'affectation des agréments pour la distribution des produits pétroliers: de nouveaux opérateurs peuvent investir dans ce créneau, sans être bloqués par les anciens. Mais nous devons aller plus loin pour supprimer le monopole de fait et gagner réellement en efficacité.
(Source: Message de la Direction de l'énergie, Ministère de l'énergie, des mines et de l'industrie.)
Pour plus de détails, veuillez contacter: Direction de l'énergie, Ministère de l'énergie, des mines et de l'industrie, B.P. 4037, Dakar, Sénégal.
Télécopie: (+221) 32 2400;
mél.: memisen@sonatel.senet.net
TURKEY
Accurate statistics about the supply of and demand for fuelwood are hard to come by, partly because substantial amounts of fuelwood are obtained informally, but also because fuelwood use varies greatly around the country owing to widely differing climatic conditions. In addition, there have been changes in the units of measurement of fuelwood, which have varied for steres and volumetric measures to weight measures, with varying conversion methods.
In 1987, an estimated 12.5 million steres of fuelwood were produced by the state, while recorded production from both public and private sectors was estimated at about 14.2 million steres with an additional 14.2 million steres from undeclared production. In other words, approximately half of the total demand for fuelwood is met by informal cutting in state forests and other sources of fuelwood in agricultural areas.
Figures for fuelwood consumption are also hard to establish. One estimate gives around 7 m^3 (or 4 tonnes, or 9 steres) as the annual energy requirements - in terms of cooking and heating - of an "average" rural household. The Ministry of Forestry supplies large quantities of fuelwood at highly concessional prices to forest villagers under the provisions of Articles 31, 32 and 34 of Law No. 6831. These programmes represent a considerable loss to government revenue, but are maintained as a social service for remote and low-income villages.
FUELWOOD CONSUMPTION
Total consumption 
9 796 000 m^3
Consumption/1 000 capita 
172 m^3
Percentage of total energy 
Estimated consumption (2010)
14 118 000 m^3
In spite of concessionary arrangements, it is obvious that many villagers have difficulty in obtaining sufficient fuelwood and have to resort to informal collection and the use of various agricultural wastes as fuel. A few households use coal for heating and bottled gas for cooking, but there is a recognized need for more efficient stoves, better insulation, solar panels and more communal laundries, etc. On the other hand, better management of oak coppices, for example, could increase the yield of fuelwood.
Recent work in some forest villages has demonstrated that at least 50 percent of the fuelwood consumed for the washing of clothes can be saved by more efficient heating and washing facilities, and by the use of solar-heated water. Similarly, the productivity of energy forests can be increased from virtually zero to at least 4 m^3 of fuelwood/ha/year using simple silvicultural methods, if forest villagers are encouraged and assisted appropriately. (Source: Forests and forestry in Turkey, by Maharaj K. Muthoo.)
For more information and for copies of the publication, please contact: Mr M.K. Muthoo, FAO Representative, Atatürk Bulvari 197, 06680 Ankara, Turkey.
Fax: (+90 312) 4274852;
e-mail: FAO-TUR@field.fao.org
UGANDA
Agricultural expansion and an ever increasing demand for timber, biomass energy and poles have put undue pressure on our environment. Wood fuel scarcities, especially in high- density population areas, are being felt seriously. The combined effect on the resource base is not good news for Uganda. Until recently, there have been no empirical data on our vegetation and land use for rational plans for sustainable use of the environment. Fortunately for Uganda, this information gap has been closed by the National Biomass Study.
The National Biomass Study project, which has been in operation since 1989, has been assessing and mapping Uganda's woody biomass resources. The main goal of the project is to promote economic, environmentally sound and sustainable management and development of natural resources in Uganda, while simultaneously providing the knowledge, information and data sets necessary to increase the resource base. The project is intended to provide knowledge, information, data sets, analyses and scientific and political scenarios to all relevant users within and outside Uganda, and in particular to the Forest Department and other actors in the forestry sector. (Source: Farmer's Digest, No. 2.)
UNITED STATES
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has issued new standards for ozone and particulate matters. To address regional sources of pollution, EPA, in cooperation with 37 states, is developing an emissions trading plan for electric power utilities; the plan seeks to place the onus for emissions reduction on major polluters so that small businesses will not be overly burdened with high attainment costs. Areas that achieve early reduction will receive credit towards future emissions. While the new standards are set to take effect in 2004 for ozone and 2005 for particulate matter, EPA will not begin to enforce compliance until 2007 and 2008, respectively, in order to give polluters ample time to comply with the new regulations. (Source: Bio Bulletin, August 1997.)
Green-e - the Renewable Electricity Branding Program - is the country's first voluntary certification programme for renewable energy-based electricity products. The Green-e brand is designed to help consumers easily identify certified products having at least 50 percent renewable energy content. (Source: Bio Bulletin, October 1997.)
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>6</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo EVENTS OF INTEREST
REUNION REGIONAL SOBRE BIOMASA PARA LA PRODUCCIÓN DE ENERGÍA Y ALIMENTOS
La Habana, Cuba
3-6 de noviembre de 1997
Conscientes de la responsabilidad que compete a los países para poner en práctica nuevos enfoques sobre el tema de la producción de energía a partir de biomasa y la seguidad alimentaria, se organizó en La Habana, Cuba, del 3 al 6 de noviembre de 1997, la Reunión regional sobre biomasa para la producción de energía y alimentos, en el marco del Plan de Acción aprobado en la Cumbre Mundial sobre la Alimentación, que se celebró en la Sede de la FAO, en Roma, Italia, en noviembre de 1996.
La reunión fue organizada conjuntamente por la Oficina Regional de la FAO para América Latina y el Caribe y por la Secretaría Permanente del Grupo Latinoamericano y del Caribe sobre Energización para un Desarrollo Rural Sostenible (GLAERS), en el marco de las actividades de la Red latinoamericana de cooperación técnica en dendroenergía, en cooperación con el Ministerio de Agricultura y la Agencia de Ciencia y Tecnología de Cuba, y en colaboración con la Dirección de Productos Forestales y el Servicio del Medio Ambiente y los Recursos Naturales de la FAO. Se contó además con la valiosa cooperación del Proyecto FAO/Países Bajos, Apoyo a los programas forestales nacionales de América Latina y el Caribe.
El objetivo general de la reunión fue ofrecer la oportunidad, en el contexto de la región, de discutir los problemas y las potencialidades técnicas, económicas y sociales de la producción de energía y alimentos a partir de biomasa resultante de actividades agrícolas, forestales y pecuarias e intercambiar informaciones, datos y experiencias relativas a los últimos desarrollos del tema en la región.
Durante la reunión se realizó un análisis sobre consideraciones políticas, legales, institucionales, económicas, tecnológicas, sociales y ambientales para la producción de energía y alimentos a partir de la biomasa. Se constató que la producción conjunta de energía y alimentos responde a la necesidad de incrementar los ingresos económicos en las regiones rurales como base para su desarrollo económico sostenible, teniendo en cuenta el aumento de los precios de los combustibles y la caída del de los alimentos. Se explicó que la diversidad de indicadores que se utilizan en cada país y en las organizaciones internacionales dificulta la evaluación comparativa del uso de la biomasa para la producción de energía; y que, por consiguiente, es necesario unificar dichos indicadores.
Se apreciaron los variados efectos que sobre el uso energético de la biomasa ha producido la implementación de nuevos marcos reguladores de la actividad energética en los países de la región. Se observó la sustitución de la biomasa utilizada como combustible en pequeñas y medianas industrias por el gas natural, y el establecimiento de medidas de estímulo para el uso de la biomasa como energía, que terminan favoreciendo las energías convencionales. Sobre las regulaciones, que favorecen el uso de las energías renovables, se reconoció que mientras en algunos países éstas se anulan, en otros se establecen por primera vez en el marco de concepciones de un desarrollo sostenible.
De especial interés fueron las discusiones sobre el uso de subsidios e incentivos para favorecer la introducción de tecnologías para el aprovechamiento de las fuentes renovables de energía, en particular de la biomasa. Predominó el criterio de que estos instrumentos deben ser utilizados para lograr no sólo la impementación de estas tecnologías sino para fortalecer el desarrollo económico y social de cada territorio, por lo que deben de aplicarse con flexibilidad y dinamismo.
Se analizaron las soluciones tecnológicas destinadas a la producción de energía a partir de la biomasa, estableciéndose la existencia de equipos y tecnologías comercialmente competitivas para su uso como combustible en hornos y calderas, así como para la producción de biogás. Se consideró necesario mantenerse informado sobre los trabajos de desarrollo tecnológico que se ejecutan con el propósito de continuar perfeccionando estas tecnologías. (Fuente: Torsten Frisk, Oficial forestal superior, Oficina Regional de la FAO para América Latina y el Caribe [RLC].)
Para más información, dirigirse a:
T. Frisk, RLC, Casilla 10095, Santiago, Chile.
Fax: (+56 2) 337 2101/2/3;
correo electrónico: Torsten.Frisk@field.fao.org
Agencia de Ciencia y Tecnología, Cuba.
Correo electrónico: driacc@ceniai.cu
Expert Workshop on Biomass Energy: Data, Analysis and Trends
23-24 March 1998
Paris, France
Contact: Ms Sylvie Lambert D'Apote, International Energy Agency,
9 rue de la Fédération, 75739 Paris CEDEX 15, France.
Fax: (+33 1) 40576651;
e-mail: lambert@iea.org;
http://www.iea.org
1998 Porim International Biofuel and Lubricant Conference
4-5 May 1998
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Contact: Director-General, PORIM,
PO Box 10620, 50720 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Fax: (+60 3) 8259446;
e-mail: sueking@porim.gov.my
Biomass for Energy and Industry
(10th European Conference and Technology Exhibition)
8-11 June 1998
Würzburg, Germany
Contact: Dr Heinz Kopetz, WIP, Sylvensteinstrasse 2, D-81369 Munich, Germany.
Fax: (+49 89) 7201291.
17th Congress of the World Energy Council (WEC) 1998
13-17 September 1998
Houston, Texas, USA
Contact:
E-mail: wec98@aol.com
or
Villaron@wec.co.uk;
http://www.wec98congress.org
BioEnergy '98 Conference
(Expanding Bioenergy Partnerships)
4-8 October 1998
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
Contact: Mr Fred Kuzel.
Tel: (+1 312) 407 0177;
e-mail: fkuzel@cglg.org;
http://www.cglg.org/bioenergy98
Forests and Forestry Research for the Third Millennium
11-14 October 1998
Zvolen, Slovak Republic
Contact: Forest Research Institute, Ing. Miroslav Gecovic, Csc, T.G. Masaryka 22, 960 92 Zwolen, Slovak Republic.
Fax: (+421 855) 321883;
e-mail: vedkonf10@fris.sk;
http://www.fris.sk
International Conference on Tropical Forests and Climate Change
19-22 October 1998
Manila, the Philippines
Contact: Secretariat, International Conference on Tropical Forests and Climate Change, Environmental Forestry Program, UPLB College of Forestry, 4031 College, Laguna, the Philippines.
Fax: (+63 49) 536 2341
or (+63 49) 536 3206;
e-mail: rdl@mudspring.uplb.edu.ph
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>7</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo PUBLICATIONS
FAO's Wood Energy Group has issued the first two studies under its "Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow" (WETT) initiative:
The role of wood energy in Europe and OECD, 1997 (E), (Working Paper FOPW/97/1);
The role of wood energy in Asia, 1997 (E), (Working Paper FOPW/97/2).
For copies of these publications, please contact: Ms Tina Etherington at the address on the first page.
Financing renewable energy projects: a guide for development workers has been developed in cooperation with the Stockholm Environment Institute (Sweden) and is published by IT Publications (London).
Copies of the book can be purchased from: IT Power, The Warren, Bramshill Road, Eversley, Hampshire, RG27 0PR, UK.
Fax: (+44 118) 973 0820;
e-mail: itpnews@itpower.co.uk
PUBLICATIONS PREPARED BY THE REGIONAL WOOD ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (RWEDP), PROJECT GCP/RAS/154/NET
PART 1 - WOOD ENERGY DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING
* Woodfuel flows, rapid rural appraisal in four Asian countries (FD 26), 1991
* Wood energy sectoral analysis, masterplan for forestry development in Bhutan (FD 32), 1991
* Biomass and energy planning - information, management and support, Workshop Report (FD 31), 1992
* Tropical Forestry Action Programme Viet Nam, fuelwood and energy sectoral review (FD 33), 1992
* Wood energy development: planning, policies and strategies (FD 37), 1993
* Marketing of wood fuels in Peshawar City, a case study - Pakistan (FD 38), 1993
* Woodfuel flows in the dry zone of Myanmar, a case study (FD 39), 1993
* Summary report of a National Training Course on Woodfuel Production and Marketing in Forest, Agriculture and Tree Production Systems, Hanoi, Viet Nam, 17-20 April 1996 (RM 27), 1996
* Review of wood energy data in RWEDP member countries (FD 47), 1997
* Data collection and analysis for area-based energy planning, a case study in Phrao District, northern Thailand (FD 48), 1997
* The wood fuel scenario and policy issues in India (FD 49), 1997
* Report on wood fuel flows: an overview of four studies (RM 30), 1997
For copies of any of these publications, please contact:
Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser, GCP/RAS/154/NET, c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion,
Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: (+66 2) 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@field.fao.org
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>8</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo WEB SITES
The FAO Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/apfsos/apfsoshm.htm
The scope of the study is to look at the main external and sectoral developments in policies, programmes and institutions that will affect the forestry sector and to assess the likely direction of the sector's evolution to the year 2010. The study involves the assessment of current status, trends and the main forces which are shaping those trends and then builds on this to explore future prospects.
Wood heat stoves
http://www.woodheat.com/
Why heat with wood? (cast-iron stoves)
http://www.hearth.com/jotul/why.html
IEA Bioenergy Agreement
http://www.fri.cri.nz/ieabioenergy/home.htm
Energy Plugs
http://members.aol.com/chaugen976/myplugs.htm
One-page descriptions of EIA reports and publications.
Grupo Latinoamericano sobre Energización para un Desarrollo Rural Sostenible (GLAERS)
http://www.ute.com.uy
Noticias sobre eventos a nivel regional que traten los temas de nuestra especialidad.
BIOENERGY E-MAIL LISTS
There are five lists at CREST.
* Bioenergy (bioenergy@crest.org). Moderator: Tom Miles (tmiles@teleport.com).
* Gasification (gasification@crest.org). Moderators: Thomas Reed (REEDTB@compuserve.com); Estoban Chornet (Chornete@tcplink.nrel.gov).
* Anaerobic digestion (digestion@crest.org). Moderators: Phil Lusk (plusk@usa.pipeline.com); Pat Wheeler (patrick.wheeler@aeat.co.uk);Richard Nelson (rnelson@oz.oznet.ksu.edu); Dave Stephenson (cdstephenson@tva.gov).
* Stoves (stoves@crest.org). Moderator: Ronal Larson (larcon@csn.net).
* Bioconversion (bioconversion@crest.org). Moderator: Tom Jeffries (twjeffri@facstaff.wisc.edu).
The lists are moderated and managed by volunteers. Current subscribers are engaged in the research and commercial production of biomass crops and fuels; the conversion of biomass power in commercial operating plants; the construction and testing of commercial-scale pilot facilities for combustion, gasification and anaerobic digestion; testing and analysis of environmental impacts for bioenergy; and the promotion and planning of future bioenergy resources.
To subscribe to the Bioenergy lists from any Internet e-mail address, please send an e-mail to majordomo@crest.org with the message:
SUBSCRIBE [list name] YOUR OWN E-MAIL ADDRESS.
For more information, please contact: Mr Thomas R. Miles Jr, Consultant,
1470 SW Woodward Way, Portland, Oregon 97225, USA.
Fax: (+1 503) 605 0208;
e-mail: tmiles@teleport.com;
http://www.teleport.com/~tmiles/
NETWORKS
Informal circular letter from the Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF)
E-mail: michaelsen@un.org
Bioenergy Network
Red Latinoamericana Electrónica en Bioenergía. Un servicio de: PROLENA/Nicaragua y SDN/Nicaragua.
http://www.sdnnic.org.ni;
correo electrónico:
rmiranda@sdnnic.org.ni, o
bioenergia@sdnnic.org.ni
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>9</section>
#ToC Next Previous
Logo POINTS OF VIEW
RESEARCH ON WOOD ENERGY AND
FAO'S ACADEMIC PROGRAMME
NEED ENERGY? - PLUG A TREE
Do you think this is a good slogan to promote forest energy? Write and let us know!
From fuelwood utilization in household stoves to burning lignocelulosic black liquor in pulp industry cogeneration systems, there are many kinds of wood fuels and many situations and technologies for using forest energy. Possibly the same diversity exists in ways to develop studies on wood energy systems and carry out applied research in this appealing field. However, some opportunities are not well known, as in the case of FAO's Academic Programme with which I have been involved for some months while working with the Wood Energy Group in the Forestry Department. I thought it would be interesting to introduce it and present my personal view about this activity.
The Academic Programme is a component of FAO's Partnership Programme, created recently to encourage an active cooperation with academic and research institutions worldwide and provide their personnel with an opportunity to work alongside FAO staff in activities of common interest. Many advantages are likely to result for both the visiting scientists and their mother institution, and FAO. This programme offers a good chance for a professional to be involved in international cooperation and to develop a close relationship with a broad group of questions and issues in his or her own field of study and work. Those interested can get more details through the FAO Web site (http://www.fao.org/geninfo/partner/default.htm).
My case is certainly a useful example to show the benefits of the Academic Programme. Since 1979 I have been working in a Brazilian engineering college where I develop lecturing, research and tutoring activities, basically in applied thermodynamics and bioenergy utilization issues. For instance, we have studied wood fuel utilization and cogeneration in the paper industry and sawmills and have developed methodologies to evaluate boilers and furnaces and made several technical-economic feasibility analyses of technologies for electric power production from biomass. I also have some consulting activities in these fields since I am the Coordinator of the Latin American Network on Dendroenergy (which is sponsored by FAO), but my focus has mainly been on Brazilian projects and activities. Last year, I took a sabbatical from my college and, through an agreement between my institution and FAO, was allowed to work in FAO as a Visiting Scientist in the Forestry Department's Wood
Energy Group, where I am working with M.A. Trossero on the Wood Energy Information System (WEIS) and other related issues.
This programme has considerably expanded my view of wood energy features and potential throughout the world. In this sense, this is one of the most interesting jobs I have ever done. The personnel here are friendly and, for someone really interested in research, there is good support. FAO's staff have introduced me to more global issues and a set of problems that I have never considered before: definitions of wood fuels, harmonization of conversion factors, methodologies for data collection, analysis and presentation, wood energy database organization, etc. Nowadays, I not only have some answers to old questions, but I also have other new and stimulating interrogations. And in science and technology it is perhaps more productive to have a suitable doubt than a simple belief. (Luiz Augusto Horta Nogueira, Escola Federal de Engenharia de Itajubá)
MAD COWS AND CRAZY BULLS
A recent story in the magazine World Coal (July 1997, p. 33) notes that after trials at two coal-fired power plants, the United Kingdom Environment Agency has given its permission to co-fire about 350 000 tonnes of biomass with coal. The biomass wastes have about the same calorific value as coal, are being given away free of charge (about US$1 million worth) and seven companies have applied to take them away from the Ministry of Agriculture.
I wondered if there is some opportunity here for some entrepreneur to set up a carbon offset transaction. One can persuasively argue that, in addition to avoiding carbon emissions from coal combustion, certain methane emissions are also avoided. That is because the biomass wastes are cow carcasses - meat, bone meal, fat, etc. This might be a rare, one-time opportunity - the cows were infected with BSE, and burning them at a temperature of 1 450°C seems to be the only way to destroy the infectious proteins in the wastes. (N.D., USA [name and address supplied])
[Top of page][Contents]
<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.2</title>
#ToC Previous
Logo READERS' CORNER
This page is for our readers to air their views and make their comments. We encourage participation! So, please write to us with your ideas/views/comments and suggestions for items that you feel should be covered in future issues, at the address given on the first page.
Como ustedes saben, desde hace unos meses, nuestra revista Desarrollo agroforestal y comunidad campesina ha dejado de ser gratuita. Permanentemente recibimos gestos de aliento de mucha gente, pero también muchas cartas de organizaciones de base, de docentes rurales, etc. que quisieran seguir recibiéndola pero no pueden pagarla.
Hoy tenemos ya 260 suscriptores que pagan, pero necesitamos llegar a 750 en los próximos doce meses. Queremos pedirles vuestro apoyo, para ayudarnos a conseguir nuevos suscriptores. Varias son las formas en que nos pueden ayudar:
* difundiendo la existencia de la revista entre amigos y colegas;
* promoviendo una compra colectiva en su institución;
* si tienen algún boletín o revista, poniendo un aviso (tenemos un disquete con un archivo preparado a tal efecto);
* apadrinando una o más suscripciones para bibliotecas, colegios u organizaciones campesinas de su zona.
Esperando contar con su apoyo, los saluda cordialmente. (Chris van Dam, Proyecto desarrollo agroforestal en comunidades rurales del NOA, Casilla de Correo 559, 4400 Salta, Argentina)
Congratulations on bringing out the inaugural issue of Forest Energy Forum and thank you for sending me a copy. Bringing out a separate issue on forest energy recognizes the present and future importance of this sector for its potential in meeting the growing demand of energy and feedstocks in the form of derived solid, liquid and gaseous products. The information provided in the December issue is extremely useful and we hope to receive the newsletter regularly. (Prof. P.D. Grover, New Delhi, India)
The IPCC/OECD/IEA Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme is based in Paris and has been developing the Greenhouse Gas Inventories Guidelines since 1992. We are now in our second revision and some of the default methodologies recommend the use of FAO data for calculating national greenhouse gas emissions estimates (N[2]O from agriculture and CO[2] from land-use change and forestry).
It would be useful to maintain close ties for the current year in which our work plan will be addressing the issues of inventory quality (including uncertainties and data verification), as well as the issue of sources and sinks in the land-use change and forestry sector. I would welcome any information you may consider useful on the methods used for collecting and reporting FAO information.
We will be holding an Expert Group meeting in Senegal from 5 to 7 May 1998 on the issues of harvested wood products and emissions estimates from land-use change and forestry. If you or any of your colleagues would consider it useful to contribute to or attend that meeting, please feel free to contact me or Bo Lim (head of the programme).
I thank you for your interest in our programme and look forward to our fruitful collaboration. (Pierre Boileau, IPCC/OECD/IEA Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme, OECD Environment Directorate, 2 rue Andre Pascal, Paris CEDEX 16, 75775 France. Fax: [+33 1] 45 24 78 76; e-mail: Pierre.Boileau@oecd.org or Bo.Lim@oecd.org; http://www.iea.org/ipcc/general/invs1.htm)
En relación con la red de dendroenergía le informo que aunque no pudimos estar en la reunión regional de Cuba he logrado entusiasmar a la empresa en apoyar a la ONG Proleña con el fin de desarrollar un programa independiente, para financiar a pequeños y medianos productores a fin de incrementar la oferta de eucalipto. El proyecto Maribios podría apoyar esta idea. (Lic. Pedro Silva de la Maza, Jefe del Proyecto Forestal, Nicaragua Sugar Estates Ltd, Nicaragua)
I think the new publication gives an interesting overview of various relevant subjects and news items which will serve many foresters within and outside FAO. It will definitely help them to become more aware of the many different applications and great potentials of energy from forest biomass. I would like to congratulate you and your colleagues for this initiative! (Wim Hulscher, Bangkok, Thailand)
[Top of page][Contents]
<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.2</title>
<section>1</section>
#ToC Next
Logo INFORMATION
FOREST ENERGY FORUM
No. 2
June 1998
has been compiled by Miguel A. Trossero and Tina Etherington, Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW) of the FAO Forest Products Division.
If you have any material that could be included in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum for the benefit of other readers, kindly send it before 15 September 1998 to:
Forest Energy Forum - FOPW
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy.
E-mail: Forest-Energy-Forum@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/forestry/energy/feforum.htm
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Editing, design, graphics and desktop publishing/Rédaction, mise en page, graphiques et édition électronique/Redacción, compaginación, elaboración gráfica y composición electrónica:
Publishing Management Group, FAO Information Division/Groupe des publications,
Division de l'information de la FAO/Grupo de Gestión de las Publicaciones,
Dirección de Información de la FAO
IN OUR NEXT ISSUE:
* UWET in depth
* World Energy Council
* FO Task Force on Dendroenergy and CO[2 ]Substitution and Sequestration
* New publications from FAO's Wood Energy Group
[Top of page][Contents]
<section>2</section>
Logo FORESTS BRANCH OFF...
Not available in this issue
[Contents]
