<title>Mobilizing Science for Global Food Security. Fourth External Review of CIMMYT (Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research - CGIAR - SDR/TAC:IAR/97/9)</title>
<section>1</section>
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)
TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Donald Winkelmann, Chairman
17 April 1998
Dear Mr. Serageldin,
It is our pleasure to submit to you the report of the Fourth External Programme and Management Review of CIMMYT which was conducted recently by a Panel chaired by Dr. Graham Jenkins of the UK. The Review report and the CIMMYT response to it were considered by TAC at its 74th meeting held in Hyderabad in March 1998. The Panel Chair was present at the meeting, and CIMMYT was represented by the Board Chair and the Director General.
In addition to the Panel's report, there are two attachments to this letter. The first contains the TAC commentary, which summarises the Committee's reactions to the Panel's report and to the response of CIMMYT's Board and management; the second is CIMMYT's response to the review report.
We are pleased with the Panel's favourable Review of the Centre. The EPMR concludes that CIMMYT conducts high quality science, has an impressive record of achievements, and is well governed and managed. TAC supports the Centre's current emphasis on multi-commodity projects. It believes that CIMMYT's emphasis on biotechnology, economics and NRM research can be further exploited to generate increased synergy among its maize and wheat research projects; and that the Centre could further improve its internal priority-setting processes.
We are particularly pleased with the leadership role CIMMYT is playing in the management of intellectual property rights, given the importance of this topic for the System as a whole.
Mr. Ismail Serageldin
CGIAR Chair
World Bank
1818H Street, N.W.
Washington, DC, 20433
USA
355 E. Palace Avenue, Santa Fe, NM 87501  (1-505) 988-1284  FAX: (1-505) 988-1285
 tacwink@newmexico.com
We also note the comments made by CIMMYT on the implications of the CGIAR's new financing arrangements for Centre management and governance, and agree with these in general.
CIMMYT continues to be a high-return investment. We highly recommend that the CGIAR maintain its strong support of this flagship Centre.
Yours sincerely,
Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary, CGIAR
Donald L. Winkelmann
TAC Chair
<section>2</section>
TAC COMMENTARY ON THE FOURTH EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW OF CIMMYT
Overall Statement
TAC is grateful to the Chairman, Dr. Graham Jenkins, and Members of the CIMMYT Fourth External Programme and Management Review Panel for a comprehensive and constructive report. The Panel chose the 1993 IER as the starting point for this Review, considering that the last EPMR was conducted in 1988. The Committee notes with satisfaction the Panel's extremely favourable view of the Centre, that it conducts high quality science, has an impressive record of achievements, and is well governed and managed. TAC also notes the projections of high demand for maize and wheat in developing countries and the implications this has for the expansion of CIMMYT's work.
The Committee considers the organization of the Review to have been exemplary, and is satisfied that the Centre was given the opportunity to check factual aspects before the report was finalised. The report must be read in full because references to the same theme are in some cases found in different chapters and the many useful suggestions are not highlighted or grouped together in the text. In the course of planning future reviews, TAC will take into account the Panel's opinion on the use of consultants, and on the earlier interim and centre-commissioned external reviews.
TAC notes that the Panel made 20 recommendations, 17 of which have been endorsed by CIMMYT and action already taken in many cases. The three others were endorsed with qualification. TAC, in general, endorses the Panel's recommendations and offers the following additional commentary which was prepared with inputs from the CGIAR Secretariat.
Priority setting and Resource Allocation
The Review has suggested that priority setting processes be improved at CIMMYT, with better information provided to the Board and a more active role of the Economics Programme in this area. TAC encourages the Centre to clarify its priority setting procedure and looks forward to seeing the more explicit links between priorities and resource allocation, which CIMMYT is proposing to make.
Research Programme
 TAC strongly supports the Centre's transition from a programme- to a project-based approach to management, which was also encouraged by the Panel. It concurs with the Panel on the need to finalise the project write-ups and include precise and realistic milestones. The Committee particularly looks forward to seeing the synergies resulting through the projects from closer collaboration within CIMMYT in areas noted by the Panel including biotechnology, breeding, economics and natural resource management research.
 The Committee concurs with the Panel's recommendations that a global monitoring Programme for rusts be established by CIMMYT and that breeding strategies are developed to incorporate durable resistance traits. TAC notes that the Centre has made significant progress along these lines and that it is firmly committed to this goal which is essential to the sustainability of wheat.
 TAC is impressed by the leadership of CIMMYT in its move to incorporate biotechnological tools such as molecular markers, developed by the Applied Biotechnology Centre in its maize and wheat breeding programmes. TAC notes that such work on wheat lags that on maize and encourages CIMMYT to press further the integration of biotechnology in the Wheat Programme also.
Partnership with NARS
The Committee notes the Panel's observation that CIMMYT serves many audiences (e.g. NARS, host country, the scientific community, financial partners and the CGIAR System). It is recognized that CIMMYT has successfully involved NARS in the development and implementation of its research, training and networking programmes. TAC shares the Panel's concern that some weaker NARS will deserve special attention and support. The Committee is impressed by the role of CIMMYT's outreach staff, in the four regional locations, as excellent conduits between the regions and headquarters. TAC encourages CIMMYT to consider stronger NARS as full partners in the implementation of its activities, particularly in areas which NARS have a comparative advantage.
Training
TAC observed CIMMYT's initiative to expand its investment in training for 1998 and beyond. This would allow NARS scientists working on wheat and maize to gain cutting-edge knowledge in their specific disciplines and research interests. TAC urges CIMMYT to give special attention to specialist training to meet the growing needs of NARS in areas such as biotechnology, genetics, economic analysis of research, impact assessment methodologies, GIS and modelling for natural resource management.
Management
The Panel gave relatively little attention to the dramatic implications of domestic inflation and the rising value of the Mexican peso for the Centre's operation which, together with a simultaneous reduction in CGIAR funds, necessitated substantial downscaling and led to declines in staff morale in the recent past.
TAC notes with satisfaction the Panel's very favourable opinion of CIMMYT's management. The Committee fully agrees on the importance of optimising financial and information management and encourages CIMMYT to continue its efforts in these areas. TAC is particularly pleased that, in the Panel's view, CIMMYT shows strong leadership in the area of management of intellectual property rights, because of the current importance of the subject to the System as a whole.
Governance
In its response to the recommendations of the EPMR, CIMMYT has made observations regarding the implications of new finance arrangements in the CGIAR for the management and governance of the Centre. TAC has considered these observations with great interest and agrees with them in general. Active involvement of the Board in formulation of strategy and priorities is essential to provide the framework within which management would have greater operational flexibility. Board performance should be considered in the light of these funding realities. TAC commends CIMMYT's Board of Trustees for already responding positively to the Panel's recommendations on its operation.
Monitoring Progress
TAC concurs with the Panel that it is too early to assess the effectiveness of the new project-based approach to research management and endorses the Panel's recommendation that a CCER be conducted by mid 2000 to assess progress in its implementation. The Committee expects to be kept informed of the outcome of this review.
System Issues
The Committee considers that one of the important contributions of this Review, and CIMMYT's response, was to draw the attention of the CGIAR to the urgent need for Centres and members to ensure full cost recovery, especially in view of the rapid proportional increase in restricted funding. TAC concurs fully and notes that the CGIAR's existing general policies call for full cost recovery. The CGIAR Guidelines for preparing allocation proposals require centres to fully allocate all costs to project budgets.
INTERNATIONAL MAIZE AND WHEAT IMPROVEMENT CENTER CENTRO INTERNACIONAL DE MEJORAMIENTO DE MAIZ Y TRIGO
Sustainable Maize and Wheat Systems for the Poor
Professor T. G. Reeves
Director General
12 February, 1998
Ref.: TGR-L042.98
Dr. D.L. Winkelmann
Chairman
TAC
Rome, Italy
fax: (39-6) 522 53298
Dr. Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary
CGIAR
Washington, DC
Fax: IVDN 6908110
Dear Dr. Winkelmann and Dr. von der Osten,
Enclosed herewith is CIMMYT's response to the Center's 4^th External Program and Management Review. Overall, we found the Review report to be extraordinarily positive, and highly supportive of the continuing importance and impact of CIMMYT's work for the resource-poor. You will see that we agree with the vast majority of the recommendations made.
The review process was carried out in a highly professional manner and we wish to record our sincere thanks and congratulations to Dr. Graham Jenkins and his team. We found their approach to be extremely thorough, often 'hard hitting' but also fair and open. Both CIMMYT staff and management appreciated the inputs and interactions of the review team.
We are already in the process of addressing the Review's recommendations and implementing them accordingly, although it is fair to say that for some we were already in the process of change.
Thank you to both of you and Secretariat staff for your contributions to this favourable review of CIMMYT. We particularly thank Dr. Guido Gryseels for his superb organization and devotion to duty.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
Professor T.G. Reeves
Director General
Walter P. Falcon
Chairman, Board of Trustees
cc: Dr. Graham Jenkins, Chair, EPMR Panel, fax (44-1223) 87 15 39
TGR/plm
Lisboa 27, Apdo. Postal 6-641
06600 Mexico, D.F., MEXICO (Mexico City office)
Fax: (52)(5) 726-7585
Email: TReeves@CIMMYT.MX
Internet: http://www.cimmyt.mx
Telephones
@ Mexico, D.F.: (52)(5) 726-9091
@ Texcoco: (52)(595) 5 4400
<section>3</section>
CIMMYT's Response to the Fourth External Programme and Management Review
A. Response to Recommendations
B. Other Comments by the Chairman, on behalf of the Board of Trustees
A. Response to Recommendations
1. The Panel recommends that the Wheat Programme initiate an integrated global programme to monitor the racial composition of the populations of stem, leaf, and stripe rust in the major epidemiological regions of the developing world, and help develop complementary research capacity in key NARS.
ENDORSED:
The Wheat Programme proposes a strategy to launch an integrated global epidemiology based on nine regions, each with a coordination centre and laboratory base. Pathogenicity surveys through race analysis and adult plant reactions would then be used for monitoring through a system of trap nurseries. NARS, in many cases, have trained pathologists and CIMMYT will seek to enhance this capacity.
2. The panel recommends that the Wheat Programme move to develop breeding strategies that guarantee CIMMYT germplasm carries effective combinations of genes to all three rust diseases.
ENDORSED:
Significant progress has been made; for example, it is widely recognized that CIMMYT's breeding programme already combines the effective minor genes for stem rust and leaf rust derived from McFadden's Hope and Brazilian's Frontana. In the past twenty years, no major epidemic of the stem rust or leaf rust has been reported. Our genetic analyses indicate that we have incorporated six genes (including Sr2) to stem rust and at least ten minor genes to leaf rust. CIMMYT is now developing conventional pathological markers and molecular markers to identify top crosses with yellow rust durability.
3. The panel recommends that the Wheat Programme develop full costing of the output of its present wheat, triticale, and barley breeding programmes and examine potential cost benefits of the incorporation of double haploid and marker assisted selection technologies in these breeding programmes.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT believes that the approach described in this recommendation is part of effective research management. We also note recommendations 7 and 9 in which it is implicit that biotechnology and genetic engineering will be incorporated into mainstream maize and wheat breeding efforts. Recent studies at CIMMYT have shown encouraging results for the double haploid system, and we believe that it may be efficient for characters such as quality and disease resistance.
4. The panel recommends that the Wheat Programme make a concerted effort to seek additional funding for triticale and barley research without which the future viability of these programmes is at risk. In the case of barley this needs to be done in close collaboration with ICARDA. If this is not possible, or not successful, then serious consideration will need to be give to the discontinuation of the breeding of these crops.
ENDORSED WITH QUALIFICATION:
CIMMYT agrees that extra funds are needed for the barley and triticale programmes particularly in the area of adaptive research however we also consider that the current effort is viable.
5. The panel recommends that the Maize Programme place greater emphasis on the development of new heterotic populations that incorporate both improved yield potential and increased stress tolerance and make these populations available to NARS and the private sector.
ENDORSED WITH QUALIFICATION:
CIMMYT agrees that the development of populations in heterotic pairs increases the possibility of obtaining lines from each population that are heterotic to each other however notes that this is not guaranteed. We have accumulated substantial evidence that a high and acceptable level of heterosis can be obtained between lines from the same population. Nonetheless, we plan to augment heterosis by pairing populations and using reciprocal recurrent selection to improve the probability of heterotic combinations between lines derived from that pair.
6. The panel recommends that the Maize Programme increase the flow of information and germplasm between maize researchers in Regional projects and at Headquarters by convening an annual meeting that includes maize scientists involved in germplasm improvement.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT's new project structure ensures that there are better working links between regional-based and Mexico-based maize researchers. For example leadership of Global Project 4, concerned with increasing maize productivity and sustainability in stressed environments resides in Zimbabwe, with a large number of headquarters staff included in the project team.
In addition, we plan to conduct an annual meeting of all CIMMYT researchers at headquarters - the first of these meetings is scheduled for November 1998. We also anticipate that a program wide database of genotype-specific data will be established, allowing more timely and efficient exchanges of information between locations.
7. The panel recommends that the Maize Program fully incorporate marker-assisted breeding approaches into the mainstream maize breeding effort, which will require clarification of the roles and responsibilities of the Maize Programme and the Applied Biotechnology Centre.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT's maize programme is committed to using the new plant breeding tools provided by biotechnology using two guiding principles:
a) CIMMYT will test new techniques in a practical maize breeding program as they become available; we need to be in the position of providing responsible advice on their use to NARS.
b) the choice of crop improvement techniques will always take into account the cost effectiveness of a technique.
One of CIMMYT's new MTP projects, Frontier Project 6, will undertake an analysis of the cost effectiveness of marker assisted breeding and genetic engineering vs. conventional approaches.
8. The panel recommends that the Maize Program thoroughly investigate the reason for lack of adoption of improved maize OPVs and hybrids on more than 40% of the maize area in developing countries.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT accepts the challenge to identify factors affecting the degree of adoption of improved maize although the substantiation of this recommendation is not clear to us. We expect to develop further and teach participatory maize breeding methodologies to meet specific community needs in areas where there has been a major investment in maize breeding yet adoption rates are much lower than expected.
A study of factors affecting adoption rates is timely and it is anticipated that such a study may result in region specific breeding strategies and products and in a better definition of the comparative advantage of the Maize Programme vis-a-vis the private sector.
9. The panel recommends that the Applied Biotechnology Centre, in collaboration with the Wheat and Maize programmes, develop clear joint research plans with agreed priorities and focus for wheat and maize biotechnology and genetic engineering. Particular emphasis should be given to how these technologies will be incorporated into the CIMMYT wheat and maize breeding activities.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees with the recommended joint priority setting process. See also our comments on recommendations 3 and 7.
10. The panel recommends that the Natural Resources Group make conservation tillage and related soil and crop management practices the primary research focus of the NRG, with the goal of quantifying the effects of conservation tillage on water and nutrient use efficiency, soil quality, and productivity of maize and wheat based systems.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT endorses this focus and notes that the conservation tillage and residue management themes are already central to its work in Natural Resources. They are the key elements of Frontier Project 7 which is concerned with resource degradation issues in maize and wheat systems.
11. The panel recommends that the Natural Resources Group establish a critical mass of scientific expertise in Frontier Project 7 to improve research efficiency and the complementation of strategic and applied research on conservation tillage systems.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees to strengthen the input of Maize and Wheat Programmes in Frontier Project 7. In addition, CIMMYT proposes to continue with the innovative use of consultants, associates and collaborative projects in pursuing priority themes within this project.
12. The panel recommends that the Economics Program determine, in discussions with the RCC, the balance of its research activities in institution-wide activities, support to other programmes, support to NARS, and its own frontier research.
ENDORSED PARTIALLY:
CIMMYT agrees that there should be a balance of activities under these headings however we also maintain that, under the new MTP project structure, the role of the Economics program and the input it makes is appropriate and balanced and has been determined following extensive consultation with partners, including NARS.
13. The panel recommends that the Economics Programme strengthen its presence in the Asian region through a greater use of affiliate economists working in close collaboration with NARS and ARIs.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees and we are taking steps to increase our presence in the region through special project funding. We have developed proposals for a strengthened presence in the Asian region following a similar recommendation made during the Centre Commissioned External Review of the CIMMYT Economics Program, conducted in June 1997.
14. The panel recommends that the Economics Program, in view of the increasing importance of macroeconomic policies as they affect maize and wheat, gradually place more emphasis on this aspect of research focusing on a few selected countries.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees and has commenced the development of proposals to examine macro policy issues in key maize and wheat countries including those in the Asian region.
15. The panel recommends that CIMMYT management establish a regular annual review of issues of common interest between INIFAP and CIMMYT, with each organization represented by a small group of senior administrative and research officers.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees and conducted a series of meetings during December 1997 and plans to follow up on key issues on a regular basis.
16. The panel recommends that CIMMYT management prepare all future budget proposals on the basis of full project costing, showing both income and expenditure for all project outputs.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT's Board and Management agree with the need for full-project costing within CIMMYT and, indeed, within all other units of the CGIAR. Some of what needs to be done on full-costing can be done within CIMMYT itself; however, to be truly effective, such efforts will also need to be supported-intellectually and financially-by donors to the various projects.
In CIMMYT's view, a commitment to full-cost accounting is far from trivial. Such a commitment embraces six distinct components, not all of which are under CIMMYT's direct control. It will be necessary: 1) for CIMMYT's auditors to work with CIMMYT management (as they are now doing) to verify the scope and quantitative estimates of costs components in the indirect cost rate(s); 2) for CIMMYT to plan for flexibility in project preparation to accommodate various donor rules for including legitimate costs in proposals. Some donors, for example, will not permit a line entitled 'indirect costs' as a specified percentage, but will allow a line or lines showing direct charges for elements (such as space charges) that might typically be included in indirect charges; 3) for the Board policy (which CIMMYT now has) to embrace full cost recovery as the goal of the Center (yet knowing that in some instances that such recovery will not be forthcoming), thereby shifting the burden of
proof and argument to those projects that do not cover full costs; 4) for the Board and Senior Management to use indirect cost recovery as one component in judging performance of managers; 5) for all Centers in the CG System to move toward recovery of full-costs to prevent 'cost cutting' on indirect costs from becoming a destructive element of competition among Centers; and 6) for donors to face up to the legitimate nature of indirect costs in their funding of projects and understand that it is basically self-destructive for a Center to use unrestricted funds to cover the indirect costs of special projects. CIMMYT also notes that non-payment of indirect costs on projects leads to tensions and suggestions of 'free-riding' within the donor community itself.
CIMMYT's Board and Management believe that implementation of the principle of full-costs pricing, especially for special projects, is critical for the entire CG System and hope that a discussion of this principle will be an element of the System Review now in progress.
17. The panel recommends that CIMMYT management take all the necessary steps and obtain the necessary expert input to develop and implement an integrated strategy for information technology and the operation of CIMMYT's management information systems.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT agrees and notes that it's Board of Trustees has approved a major review and consultancy of CIMMYT's information technology requirements. A consultants report is expected by late-1998.
18. The panel recommends that CIMMYT management implement a policy of full charging for all samples processed by the various laboratory services and evaluate the relative cost effectiveness and analytical quality of outsourcing the supply of the different types of laboratory analysis.
ENDORSED:
CIMMYT management has commissioned a review of the soil and plant analytical facility and a Users Group has been established to help set policy that will include consideration of charge back systems and provision for equipment upgrading.
19. The panel recommends that the CIMMYT Board ensure that adequate information on the budget and important policy decisions is provided to all Board members irrespective of the specific committee on which they serve; and that the flow of information from committees and Board be improved.
ENDORSED:
The CIMMYT Board concurs completely with this recommendation. Henceforth, all Board members will receive materials for each of the Board Committees, whether or not they are members of a particular committee. Procedural changes were made in 1997 to ensure that all Board members are sent quarterly financial statements and audit reports. The financial reports themselves have been amplified and redesigned, and arrangements have also been made for a specific Trustee on each committee to take lead responsibility for assessing CIMMYT's financial health (currently A. Gregson for the Audit Committee, J. Holmberg for the Program Committee, and W. Falcon for the Executive and Finance Committee)
20. The panel recommends that the CIMMYT Board commission an external review (CCER) to be conducted by mid-2000 to assess progress in implementing the project based approach to research management as outlined in the MTP. This review should include the assessment of progress towards the attainment of development of management systems to support these projects, integration of financial and human resource databases, the implementation of a strategy on information technology, and the operation of CIMMYT's management information systems.
ENDORSED:
The CIMMYT Board concurs with this recommendation and commits itself to an externally commissioned review (CCER) to assess implementation of the project-management approach outlined in the MTP. The Board understands that the 1997 EPMR occurred at a time of transition for the organizational structure within CIMMYT and believes that a serious review of the new approach is appropriate in two years. The current thinking of Board and Management is to name external reviewers in the autumn of 1999 (perhaps during Center's Week) and to compete the review before September 2000.
B. Other Comments by the Chairman, on behalf of the Board of Trustees
1. On page 92 of the draft report the EPMR Panel suggests that Trustees not be included in CCERs if those reviews are to have validity for later EPMR evaluations. CIMMYT's Board understands the importance of arm-length evaluations, but also recognized the need for increasing Trustee involvement in certain substantive areas of a Center and for using certain specific talents that a particular Trustee may possess. CIMMYT believes that CCERs serve many purposes and that the right Trustee on the right issues in the right review need not compromise the validity of CCERs for almost any purpose. In short, CIMMYT would have preferred a less categorical statement in the EPMR report on the role of Trustees in reviews.
2. In a separate consultancy, John Griffith provided the EPMR Panel a report on CIMMYT Board issues. In addition, he interacted informally on several occasions with Trustees and Management on a series of financial issues. CIMMYT found virtually all of his suggestions to be helpful, and wishes to record its appreciation for his assistance in these comments.
3. On page 69 of the draft report, the EPMR Panel indicates that 'progress needs to be made in clarifying the connection and relationship between mission and strategy and decisions being taken by the Board, especially related to the budget...'. At one level of generality, this observation is appropriate for all Boards of all organizations at all times. Even more than that, however, the CIMMYT Board accepts this comment as being specifically appropriate and useful. The Board has already made some changes in this regard, such as having a 'lead' Trustee on each of the Board committees with particular responsibilities for assuring appropriate program/funding linkages. More can and will be done in this general area in the future.
That said, CIMMYT's Board feels uneasy about prevailing views within parts of the current CGIAR system as regards funding and governance. The CGIAR financial system of the late 1990s is very different than the one that prevailed fifteen years ago. In the 1980s, there could be (and was) much more centralization of fund raising and fund allocation. Centers could 'book' budgets on January 1^st; most of these funds were certain and unrestricted; January budgets tended to be relevant for most, if not all of the year; and a Board meeting twice each year could monitor expenditures against budgets rather easily.
By the early 1990s. however, the situation had become quite different. Fund-raising had become much more decentralized and market-driven; funding became, at the same time, more uncertain and more restricted; budgets made in good faith on January 1^st often had shelf-lives of only a month or two because expected income and concomitant expenditures both changed; and monitoring became a weekly or monthly task, with many options, and not a semi-annual look at variances from the January 1^st budget. Research managers dealing with market-driven systems in many parts of the world have grown to understand these points well; however, they appear to have been less easily grasped by individuals who have worked only in bureaucracies and whose experience and focus historically have been only on the expenditure side.
CIMMYT's Board raises this point, not because the Board's financial oversight has been perfect, but rather because the Board believes that parts of the CGIAR system are still 'living in the financial world that prevailed in the 1980s. In the old system, expenditures could be 'controlled' by TAC, Center Boards and/or Management with great precision. In the new system, Management must have more flexibility to operate on both income and expense sides of the ledger and to move unrestricted funds so as to maximize the total research output of the Center. This conclusion, in turn, has important implications for governance issues, including how a Center Board should approach its fiduciary responsibility.
The CIMMYT Board's view is that Trustees, with the assistance of TAC and other System-level Committees, should define carefully the boundaries of what research it regards as legitimate. The Board should also make clear to Management what it expects at year's end with respect to reserves, or reserve draw-downs, i.e., a 'bottom' line, which may or not be zero (meaning the differences between income and expenditures) for a given year. Within these boundary and bottom-line parameters, however. The CIMMYT Board feeds that Management must have considerable financial discretion. Moreover, it is unlikely that a Board can become sufficiently well informed to monitor decisions on a monthly basis, without at the same time intruding into questions that rightfully belong to Management. For example, it may be impossible to specify with precision the amount of expenditures for a given commodity or area of inquiry, if the financial 'market' for research in a particular area says otherwise.
Clearly the Board needs to monitor research objectives and to press Management towards preferred outcomes. But when the income situation for a Center may be very unclear as late as September, new budget and budget-control processes are required. These circumstances emphasize the need for astute financial capability in the Center's Director-General, for in some fundamental sense, a Board can only monitor the 'bottom' line and the Director General's performance in meeting financial objectives.
The link between finance and governance, and the implications of those links for the financial role of Boards is, in CIMMYT's view, only partially covered in the EPMR draft report. The Board feels this is an issue worthy of discussion within TAC and the CGIAR more generally and hopes that it will also be a topic addressed by the System Review Panel.
<section>4</section>
REPORT OF THE FOURTH EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW OF THE CENTRO INTERNACIONAL DE MEJORAMIENTO DE MAIZ Y TRIGO (CIMMYT)
THE CONSULTATIVE GROUP ON INTERNATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND CGIAR SECRETARIAT
SDR/TAC: IAR/97/9
Review Panel:
Mr. Graham Jenkins (Chairman)
Dr. Antonio Bahia Filho
Dr. Kenneth Cassman
Mr. Barrie Keenan
Dr. Don Marshall
Dr. V. S. Vyas
Mr. John Griffith (Consultant)
Dr. Ralph Quatrano (Consultant)
Dr. Paramjit Sachdeva (CGIAR Secretariat)
Dr. Guido Gryseels (Panel Secretary, TAC Secretariat)
TAC SECRETARIAT
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
November 1997
El Batan, Mexico - 27 November 1997
Dr. Donald Winkelmann
Chair, Technical Advisory Committee/CGIAR
355 East Palace Avenue
Santa Fe, NM 87501
USA
Mr. Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
The World Bank
1818H Street, NW
Washington, DC, 20433, USA
Dear Don and Alexander,
It is my pleasure to transmit to you the report of the Panel that conducted the Fourth External Programme and Management Review (EPMR) of CIMMYT. This review was the Centre's first major EPMR since 1988, although a shorter Interim External Review (IER) was conducted during 1993 to allow the period between two regular external reviews to be extended from five to about seven years. Judged by this timetable, CIMMYT was therefore well overdue for a full scale external review.
The timing of the Panel's visit was nevertheless not ideal since CIMMYT is undergoing fundamental changes in the way it operates, under a Director General who has been in office for only two years. The Centre is being transformed from one of commodity-driven programmes into one of multidisciplinary projects which involve major changes in research management that will eventually result in a significant cultural change. However, the formulation of projects, as reflected in the MTP 1998-2000, was at the formative stage of development at the time of the EPMR.
The Panel chose the 1993 IER as the starting point for this review. Its overall impressions are extremely favourable. The Panel is pleased to report that CIMMYT, after a difficult period aggravated by a funding crisis during 1993 and 1994, is undergoing an impressive renewal under widely respected and vigorous leadership. The Centre conducts high quality science, has an impressive record of achievements and impact and is well managed. The Panel has concluded that CIMMYT's contributions to the mission and goal of the CGIAR are truly outstanding. The Centre has expanded its strategic partnerships, enhanced its external relations and improved its funding. The Panel is concerned, however, about the rapidly increasing part of CIMMYT's funding that is restricted. This has significant implications for ensuring a transparent link between the Centre's priorities and the subsequent allocation of resources to projects. Full project costing would help to resolve this problem but many
donors are reluctant to pay adequate overhead charges.
In the process of change, CIMMYT is taking steps to position itself strategically to meet the challenges associated with an evolving internal and external environment. The Panel believes that, in general, the steps taken are appropriate.
Overall, the Panel is pleased with the quality and relevance of the research programmes and with the project portfolio proposed in the MTP 98-2000. The Panel has critically reviewed each of these programmes and also the research support, and has made a number of recommendations to help construct an appropriate chart for the future. The Panel acknowledges the steps taken by the new Director General to improve areas of management where change was long overdue, particularly in human resources and financial management. Further improvements are needed, however, particularly in the context of the introduction of project based management. Greater efforts will also be needed to develop and implement a strategy on information technology and to introduce more appropriate management information systems.
The Panel also wants to give credit to the previous administration for their ability to weather the financial storms of the early 1990s with the scientific core of CIMMYT left substantially intact.
As CIMMYT is going through a period of transition, and as the new project based approach to research management will start only in 1998, the Panel has recommended that CIMMYT's Board of Trustees commission an external review to be conducted before mid 2000 to consider progress in implementing this approach.
I would like to express my thanks to the members of the Review Panel for their hard work and very professional approach to the job. We had indispensable assistance from the secretariats of both the CGIAR and TAC. I would like to put on record our appreciation for the excellent collaboration we have had from the Board Chair, the Director General, Management, and staff of CIMMYT throughout the course of this review.
In closing, I would like to thank you for providing me with the opportunity to chair this review. It has been a taxing but enjoyable experience, the fruits of which I hope will ultimately benefit CIMMYT and the CGIAR System.
Yours sincerely,
Graham Jenkins Panel Chair, EPMR
<section>5</section>
Summary and Recommendations
Introduction
Strategic Planning and Priority Setting
The Research Programmes
Impact
CIMMYT Management
CIMMYT Board
Relations with NARS
Conclusion
Recommendations
Introduction
This report covers the first major external programme and management review (EPMR) of CIMMYT since 1988. Since that date, external reviews have been limited to a small-scale Interim Review (IER) in 1993, which the Panel chose as the starting point for this review, and a series of Centre-Commissioned External Reviews (CCERs). Judged by the usual timetable for centre reviews, CIMMYT was therefore overdue for a full-scale external review.
Notwithstanding this situation, the timing of the Panel's visit was not ideal since CIMMYT is currently undergoing fundamental changes in the way it operates, under a Director General who has been in office for only two years. The assessment of the Panel has therefore been conditioned by the requirement to review a system in the process of evolution. It has been assisted in this by the Medium-Term Plan (MTP) for the years 1998-2000 which CIMMYT has produced and which currently serves as the Centre's statement of strategy.
Compared with 1988, the duration of the exercise and the extent of travel allotted to the review was much reduced. It was not possible for the Panel to see every aspect of CIMMYT's work at first hand. However, Panel members visited CIMMYT's outreach activities in sub-Saharan Africa, in Asia and in Latin America before returning to Mexico for the main phase of the process. Opportunities therefore arose to consult not only with CIMMYT staff but also with key NARS representatives in the regions and in the Host Country. Some members of the Panel took the opportunity to have discussions with key donors and other participants during International Centres Week in Washington.
"The Panel's overall view of CIMMYT is extremely favourable. The Centre conducts high-quality science and has an impressive record of achievements as well as impact on the daily livelihood of hundreds of millions of rural and urban poor. CIMMYT is well managed, has strong leadership, and is a flagship centre of the CGIAR System". (Chapter 6)
Strategic Planning and Priority Setting
The Panel believes that CIMMYT's mission statement is still valid, despite changes taking place in the external and internal environment of the Centre. CIMMYT's priority-setting process resulted in the MTP proposals that wheat should receive slightly more investment than maize and that Asia should receive rather more than Africa. For reasons discussed in the next paragraph, this allocation has not been achieved. Overall the Panel concluded that CIMMYT's priorities and strategies are consistent with the goals set by the CGIAR.
The Panel was, however, less convinced that the links between priorities and resource allocation in the MTP and from the MTP to the 1998 budget are sufficiently transparent and it urges CIMMYT to design a more rational procedure for allocating resources to the newly defined projects. The Panel recognizes that the increasing proportion of restricted funding (now more than half of the total) makes this task more difficult. The impressive consultative process conducted with partners and stakeholders in the formulation of the MTP is strongly commended by the Panel.
CIMMYT has given some consideration to alternative sources of supply for its products and claims that it confines its activities to those in which it has a comparative advantage. In general, the Panel supports this claim and observes that the Centre's principal products, enhanced germplasm of wheat and maize, continue to exert a huge influence in most developing and some developed countries throughout the world. However, the Panel believes that there are further opportunities for collaboration with ARIs, NARS, and the private sector and encourages CIMMYT to expand its efforts in this direction.
CIMMYT is conscientiously adopting a project-based approach to research as reflected in the MTP 1998-2000. However, the formulation of the projects was at a formative stage of development at the time of the EPMR. While the Panel believes that CIMMYT is on the correct course in this process, it considers that it had insufficient data to make a proper judgement as to how effective the change to the new project mode of operation will be when implemented in 1998. Accordingly, it has recommended that a Board-commissioned external review be conducted by mid 2000 specifically to assess the new system.
The Panel was impressed by the collaboration between CIMMYT outreach staff and the NARS in the four regions which they had the opportunity to visit. In particular, the Panel commends CIMMYT on the impressive catalytic effect which the Centre has had on the operational efficiency of the networks in which it is involved.
The Research Programmes
The research work has been reviewed by the Panel under the traditional programme structure which was operative for the period of the review. The programmes comprise: Wheat, Maize, Economics, Natural Resources, and the Applied Biotechnology Centre. CIMMYT has improved the organization and enlarged the scope of its work on Genetic Resources, and the Panel has suggested further opportunities for strengthening this important area of research.
The Wheat Programme has an unrivalled record in the contribution it has made, and continues to make to the germplasm which constitutes the world's wheat crop. The Panel endorses the many tributes which this programme has received for its work. Success on such a large scale, however, brings in its train vulnerability to new forms of pests and diseases. The Panel believes that CIMMYT should do more to anticipate this eventuality and has recommended that CIMMYT take the necessary action. The Panel has also recommended that the Wheat Programme should review many of its long-established operational procedures in the light of new technologies now becoming available and re-evaluate their cost-effectiveness. Finally, the Panel has expressed concern over the continuing viability of minor programmes in triticale and in barley (the latter jointly with ICARDA) and recommended that additional funding be sought to avoid eventual closure of the programmes.
The Panel has identified many substantial contributions which the Maize Programme has made to increasing the production and productivity of the crop in developing countries. It is concerned, however, that approximately 40% of the maize area in developing countries is still planted with unimproved material. It has recommended that the reasons for this be thoroughly investigated and has also made several other recommendations designed to assist the Maize Programme to re-position itself to face major challenges in improving maize yields and yield stability in marginal environments.
The Applied Biotechnology Centre was established as an independent programme following a recommendation of the 1993 IER. It has developed rapidly in size and scope and is one of the leading programmes of its kind in the CGIAR System, and is amongst world leaders in work on apomixis in maize. The Panel believes that CIMMYT will need to monitor the future balance between work on transgenics and that on molecular markers to assist the plant breeders. For the present, the Panel is satisfied that this balance is acceptable. A recommendation has been made to enhance existing collaboration between the ABC and the commodity programmes and to promote the uptake by them of new technology.
The Natural Resources Group is small in number and of recent origin. Inevitably, questions arise as to whether it has critical mass. The recommendations of the Panel with respect to this Group are designed to encourage interaction within and outside CIMMYT with scientists of related disciplines, working on the unifying research theme of conservation tillage and related soil and crop management practices.
The Economics Programme is now re-positioning itself following a period of two years without a Director. It has done and continues to do some excellent work. The Panel has made recommendations to the effect that the programme should review the balance of its activities, strengthen its presence in Asia, and move gradually in the direction of placing more emphasis on the effect of macroeconomic policies, as they affect wheat and maize in a few selected countries.
Impact
CIMMYT has made a tremendous impact on the production of wheat and maize throughout the developing world. More than 70% of the wheat area in developing countries, excluding China, is planted with CIMMYT-derived material, covering more than 50 million ha. Of the area planted to improved maize varieties in developing countries, 55% or more than 14 million ha of non-temperate maize is now sown to CIMMYT-related cultivars. In China, CIMMYT-related wheat varieties are grown on 10 million ha and CIMMYT-related maize varieties on 1 million ha. CIMMYT-related wheat and maize varieties are worth over US$ 3 billion in extra grain production each year in the developing world.
The role of CIMMYT in training research workers has been equally important and more than 5,000 alumni of the Centre are distributed around the world to strengthen national capacities in maize and wheat research.
Although the primary impact of CIMMYT's activities has been through the uptake of its germplasm, this research activity has been strongly underpinned by the Economics Programme and more recently by the Applied Biotechnology Centre and the Natural Resources Group.
The Panel commends CIMMYT on the quality of the impact studies it conducted.
CIMMYT Management
Management has not been CIMMYT's strongest suit in the past, partly because it was considered, rightly, that the scientific programmes should receive priority of attention from the senior administration. It is to the credit of the previous administration that the financial storms of the early 1990s were weathered with the scientific core of CIMMYT left substantially intact.
The Panel believes that, under the present leadership, CIMMYT has done well in addressing a range of management and organizational issues that emerged as funding trends changed. It also believes that the external environment will continue to be challenging in the period to the next review and has made several recommendations designed to initiate further improvements in managerial efficiency. Particular emphasis has been placed on a move to the preparation of all future budget proposals on the basis of full project costing.
CIMMYT Board
The Board of Trustees is a group of highly qualified individuals who are eager to carry out their responsibilities with interest and dedication. It enjoys experienced and competent leadership. The Panel commends the Board on its intention to improve the gender balance in its composition and to gain specific competencies such as legal expertise in the area of Intellectual Property Rights. Proposals are made in the report for improvements in the quality of information, particularly financial information provided for the Board and for improving the transparency of the linkage between CIMMYT's mission and strategy and the budget decisions taken by the Board.
Relations with NARS
All the evidence accumulated by the Panel confirmed that CIMMYT is universally held in high esteem by the NARS with which it interacts. In the regions, its impact through networks has been substantial and the benefits derived have been out of all proportion to the costs. CIMMYT continues to devote a substantial part of its effort to training and is now adapting its programme to more the specialized needs of the NARS. During the period, CIMMYT has collaborated with the NARS in developing a number of training initiatives in the various countries. This is mutually beneficial. Relations with the host country are generally good but the Panel has made one recommendation which it considers should enhance the harmony of this interaction.
Conclusion
The Panel is pleased to report that CIMMYT, after a difficult period, is undergoing an impressive renewal under widely respected and vigorous leadership. The need for CIMMYT's work is as strong as ever and the Centre is fully worthy of the improving donor support which it is receiving.
Recommendations
The EPMR Panel recommends that:
The Wheat Programme:
1. Initiate an integrated global programme to monitor the racial composition of the populations of stem, leaf, and stripe rust in the major epidemiological regions of the developing world, and help develop complementary research capacity in key NARS.
2. Move to develop breeding strategies that guarantee CIMMYT germplasm carries effective combinations of genes to all three rust diseases.
3. Develop full costing of the outputs of its present wheat, triticale, and barley breeding programmes and examine potential cost benefits of the incorporation of double haploid and marker assisted selection technologies in these breeding programmes.
4. Make a concerted effort to seek additional funding for triticale and barley research without which the future viability of these programmes is at risk. In the case of barley, this needs to be done in close collaboration with ICARDA. If this is not possible, or not successful, then serious consideration will need to be given to the discontinuation of the breeding of these crops.
The Maize Programme:
5. Place greater emphasis on the development of new heterotic populations that incorporate both improved yield potential and increased stress tolerance, and make these populations available to NARS and the private sector.
6. Increase the flow of information and germplasm between maize researchers in Regional Projects and at Headquarters by convening an annual meeting that includes maize scientists involved in germplasm improvement.
7. Fully incorporate marker-assisted breeding approaches into the mainstream maize breeding effort, which will require clarification of the roles and responsibilities of the Maize Programme and the Applied Biotechnology Centre.
8. Thoroughly investigate the reasons for lack of adoption of improved maize OPVs and hybrids on more than 40% of the maize area in developing countries.
The Applied Biotechnology Centre:
9. In collaboration with the Wheat and Maize Programmes develop clear joint research plans with agreed priorities and focus for wheat and maize biotechnology and genetic engineering. Particular emphasis should be given to how these technologies will be incorporated into the CIMMYT wheat and maize breeding activities.
Natural Resources Group:
10. Make conservation tillage and related soil and crop management practices the primary research focus of the NRG, with the goal of quantifying the effects of conservation tillage on water and nutrient use efficiency, soil quality, and productivity of maize-and wheat-based systems.
11. Establish a critical mass of scientific expertise in Frontier Project 7 to improve research efficiency and the complementation of strategic and applied research on conservation tillage systems.
The Economics Programme:
12. Determine, in discussions with RCC, the balance of its research activities in institution-wide activities, support to other programmes, support to NARS, and its own frontier research.
13. Strengthen its presence in the Asian region through a greater use of affiliate economists working in close collaboration with NARS and ARIs.
14. In view of the increasing importance of macroeconomic policies as they affect maize and wheat, gradually place more emphasis on this aspect of research focusing on a few selected countries.
CIMMYT Management:
15. CIMMYT establish a regular annual review of issues of common interest between INIFAP and CIMMYT, with each organization represented by a small group of senior administrative and research officers.
16. Prepare all future budget proposals on the basis of full project costing, showing both income and all expenditures for all project outputs.
17. Take all the necessary steps and obtain the necessary expert input to develop and implement an integrated strategy for information technology and the operation of CIMMYT's management information systems.
18. Implement a policy of full charging for all samples processed by the various laboratory services and evaluate the relative cost effectiveness and analytical quality of outsourcing the supply of the different types of laboratory analyses.
CIMMYT Board:
19. Ensure that adequate information on the budget and important policy decisions is provided to all Board members irrespective of the specific committee on which they serve; and that the flow of information from committees to the Board, and from management to the committees and Board be improved.
20. Commission an external review (CCER) to be conducted by mid 2000 to assess progress in implementing the project-based approach to research management as outlined in the MTP. This review should include the assessment of progress towards the attainment of development of management systems to support these projects, integration of the financial and human resource databases, the implementation of a strategy on information technology, and the operation of CIMMYT's management information systems.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 1 - Background
1.1 Origin, Mission and Mandate
1.2 Maize an Wheat in the Developing World Economy
1.3 Changes in CIMMYT's External Environment
1.4 CIMMYT Today
1.5 Strategic Planning, Priority Setting, and the 1998-2000 Medium-Term Plan
1.6 CIMMYT's Impact
1.7 Conduct of the Review
1.1 Origin, Mission and Mandate
CIMMYT was established in 1966 with a mandate to promote and carry out, nationally and internationally, programmes to improve in all its aspects maize and wheat production... through research, the distribution of germplasm, training, scientific and technical meetings, and information. Its mission was to increase the quantity and quality of maize and wheat produced in the developing countries of the world.
Although the Centre's mandate has remained the same over the years, it has been subject to different interpretations. During the 1980s, the Centre began to view its mission as one of improving productivity of agricultural resources rather than increasing the production of maize and wheat per se. Emphasis was also starting to be given to the importance of increasing agricultural productivity for poverty alleviation, protecting natural resources, and collaboration with national research systems.
CIMMYT's current mission statement is to help alleviate poverty by increasing the profitability, productivity and sustainability of maize and wheat farming systems.
The Centre underwent its third External Programme and Management Review (EPMR) in 1988 which made a number of recommendations on programmes, governance, and management. Rather than having another full-scale external programme and management review in 1993, which would have followed the normal five-year cycle, TAC and the CGIAR Secretariat initiated an experiment (which has not been repeated since) and commissioned an Interim External Review (IER), of a more limited scope than a regular EPMR, so as to allow the period between two regular external reviews to be extended from five to about seven or eight years. The purpose of the 1993 IER was to look at major changes in strategic direction that had taken place at the Centre since the 1988 external review, to highlight the main achievements, impact and challenges facing CIMMYT, and recommend issues that required a more comprehensive examination by the Centre and the next regular external review. The Panel was not expected to
carry out a thorough assessment of CIMMYT but to make an independent general appraisal of the Centre by identifying and focusing on significant trends and critical issues. All in all, this interim review found that the recommendations of the 1988 EPMR had been implemented with very minor exceptions and concluded that the Centre was "well governed and managed overall". The IER was conducted in a ten-day period and made only two major recommendations, namely, that CIMMYT should give greater emphasis to natural resources research (NRR) and create a NRR unit, and that the Centre should consider according programme status to the applied molecular biology unit. Both of these recommendations have been implemented.
1.2 Maize an Wheat in the Developing World Economy^1
[^1 Compiled from CIMMYT's 1998-2000+ Medium-Term Plan and from TAC's Report on CGIAR Priorities and Strategies for Resource Allocation During 1998-2000.]
Maize and wheat together amount for more than half of the cereals consumed in the developing world. Among the food crops, after rice, wheat and maize are the most important commodities both in terms of calorie consumption and value of production. They are significant staples in the diets of billions of poor in the developing world and variations in productivity can profoundly influence their well-being. Developing countries now account for more than 44% of total world production of both cereals, compared to around 30% in the early sixties. This has been due to the tremendous growth in productivity. Between 1961 and 1995 maize production in the developing world has grown at an annual rate of 3.6% and wheat production at 4.5%. At the same time, imports by developing countries have increased rapidly because of expanding consumption due to rapid population growth, per capita income growth and a decline in real prices. Today wheat and maize account for two-thirds of all
developing country food imports.
Over the next 30 years, it is expected that overall wheat and maize demand will continue to grow at an annual rate of 2.2%. In the case of wheat, it is expected that the increased demand will be the result of substitution of coarse grain cereals as incomes rise and populations become increasingly urban based. While the per capita demand for maize in human diets is expected to decline in all regions except sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), the demand for feed maize is expected to rise substantially as a result of the rapid increase in demand for livestock products. Projections estimate that by 2020, 67% of world wheat consumption and 55% of world maize consumption will occur in developing countries.
1.3 Changes in CIMMYT's External Environment
In recent years, CIMMYT has faced a rapidly changing external environment necessitating the Centre either to reposition itself strategically or to adapt the ways in which it was conducting its work. Some of the important changes can be highlighted as follows.
 Renewal Process of the CGIAR: After its 1992-93 financial crisis, the CGIAR embarked on a renewal process in 1994, leading to the Lucerne Declaration in February 1995, in which greater commitment was made to developing partnerships with the south, to poverty alleviation as the driving motivation behind all of the CGIAR's work, to the need for greater emphasis on natural resources management and conservation efforts, and to new approaches to governance and management. New financing arrangements came into play which encouraged entrepreneurship in centre fund raising but which also led to a greater share of funding being provided as restricted funding rather than as unrestricted core. The CGIAR also embarked on the introduction of project-based research management to enhance accountability, promote multidisciplinarity, strengthen impact assessment and an output orientation of research, and to facilitate priority setting. Moreover, the CGIAR decided to expand its work into
central Asia and eastern Europe. All of these developments had major consequences for CIMMYT's work and the way it conducted its business.
 Developments in Science: New scientific developments have provided new opportunities for approaches to research that increase chances of success and reduce the time required to obtain results. Many of these opportunities arise from the progress in the applications of biotechnology, primarily molecular genetics and genetic engineering, to the major problems faced in maize and-wheat production. Other important scientific developments are in the areas of information technology in general and geographic information systems in particular, and participatory research approaches.
 Alternative Sources of Supply: Alternative suppliers of research on maize and wheat include other international agricultural research centres, advanced research institutes, national agricultural research systems (NARS), the private sector, and NGOs. CIMMYT shares the mandate for wheat in the West Asia-North Africa (WANA) region, and for barley in Latin America, with ICARDA, and the mandate for maize in West Africa with IITA. A substantial amount of wheat and maize research is conducted in developed countries but mostly in temperate conditions rather than the tropical or sub-tropical environments of the developing world. Some NARS have considerably strengthened their capacity to develop cultivars. Some of the larger countries particularly, such as India, Brazil, and China, where both maize and wheat are dominant food staple crops, have rapidly increased their capacity both in strategic and applied research. Of major importance to CIMMYT is the fast development in private
sector involvement, particularly in the hybrid maize seed industry. This highlights the increasing importance of giving attention to issues related to intellectual property rights (IPR) and, where appropriate, partnerships with the private sector. NGOs have also expanded their involvement with the global agricultural system. One important positive development is also the emergence and growth of regional NARS organizations and the development of regional fora. This will encourage and facilitate more effective partnerships.
 Intensification of Wheat and Maize Cropping Systems: In response to rapid and continuing increases in demand for maize and wheat in developing countries, and the import status of many of these countries, both maize and wheat cropping systems have been intensified. To sustain yield gains, this intensification process includes the use of increasing amounts of fertilizers, pest management strategies, and sometimes changing from mono- to double- and triple-cropping on the same piece of land each year. Because the arable land available for cereal production in developing countries is not expected to increase and cereal demand continues to grow, continued intensification of maize and wheat cropping systems is anticipated. A key challenge will be to sustain yield increases while preserving natural resources and environmental quality. It will therefore be necessary to place greater emphasis on strategic research to increase the efficiency of applied nutrients and reduce
dependence on chemical control of pests through ecological approaches to disease, insect, and weed management to ensure food security and environmental protection.
 Availability of Resources: Many countries of the north have reduced their investment in development assistance and funding for agricultural research is increasingly scarce. In recent years, the proportion of total CGIAR funding that is restricted has increased rapidly. In view of the limited resources available, despite the enormous research challenge CIMMYT is facing, there is an ever-increasing need to develop strategic alliances and research partnerships.
1.4 CIMMYT Today
Since the 1988 EPMR, CIMMYT has undergone substantial changes in its internal environment. The Centre went through a period of deep financial difficulty between 1989 and 1993, necessitating a down-scaling of its operation and a repositioning of its work. During that time, its expenditures for the agreed research agenda decreased steadily from US$ 27.9 million to US$ 23.1 million. The number of both locally and internationally recruited staff was reduced by a third. In particular, its involvement with adaptive agronomic research, training, and outreach was cut substantially. The underlying principle was to leave the germplasm enhancement programmes essentially intact since these were identified as CIMMYT's traditional strengths.
A new Director General, Tim Reeves, took office at the end of 1995 and has made major efforts to develop a more participatory approach to management as well as to instilling a new culture in the organization. Major efforts were made to improve funding and to improve relations with national programmes. He has also promoted the transition from a programme-based to a project-based research organization which is output oriented, more multidisciplinary, and is taking major steps to address long-standing management problems in the areas of finance, human resources, and information technology.
In 1997, CIMMYT has a budget of US$ 32.4 million and is staffed by 83 internationally recruited core-funded staff, of whom seven are seconded from other organizations, and by 18 post-doctoral fellows and associate scientists. The Centre also has a total of 708 locally recruited staff. CIMMYT has research programmes on wheat, maize, economics, natural resources and applied biotechnology. Of the US$ 24 million assigned to these research programmes, 38% is assigned to the Maize Programme, 39% to the Wheat Programme, 9% to Economics, 5% to Natural Resources, and 9% to Biotechnology. These are complemented by a programme on external relations which includes communications, information, publications, and fund raising. CIMMYT is governed by an international Board of Trustees and has international organization status. CIMMYT's Headquarters are in Mexico but the Centre has scientific and outreach staff based in 15 developing countries. Regular collaboration takes place with more than
100 NARS. CIMMYT participates in nine Systemwide and ecoregional initiatives and programmes, with a particularly large involvement in the Rice/Wheat Programme, Latin American Ecoregional Programme, the Systemwide Programme on Genetic Resources, and the Systemwide Programme on Participatory Research and Gender Analysis.
During 1997, CIMMYT allocated 35% of its resources to activities associated with Increasing Productivity, 19% to Protecting the Environment, 12% to Saving Biodiversity, 4% to Improving Policies, 22% to Strengthening National Programmes, and 7% to Systemwide Programmes. On a regional basis, 32% of resources are allocated to SSA, 10% to WANA, 32% to Asia, and 26% to LAC.
1.5 Strategic Planning, Priority Setting, and the 1998-2000 Medium-Term Plan
CIMMYT's activities are guided by its strategic plan, which was published in 1989 and has been updated by a series of "evergreen reports" in which the key issues concerning CIMMYT's programmes and operating environment were assessed and amended as necessary. This approach to setting priorities complemented the 1989 strategic plan and has provided guidance to the Centre in assessing the appropriate balance of resource allocation between wheat and maize, among regions, and between breeding and crop management. CIMMYT's priority-setting process considers the importance of maize versus wheat for producers and consumers, the size of mega-environments,^1 alternative sources of supply, likelihood of success, poverty, and the relative strength of NARS. For the 1998-2000 medium-term planning process, gender was added as a further criterion, as well as the expected impact of CIMMYT's work on poor urban and rural women, particularly in SSA and southern Asia.
[^1 Mega-environments are broad areas, defined by similar biotic and abiotic stresses, cropping system requirements, consumer preferences, and, for convenience, by a volume of production of the relevant crop sufficient to justify the attention of an international breeding programme.]
During 1997, CIMMYT developed a new medium-term plan (MTP) which now also serves as its current views on strategic planning and priority setting. It is based on activities organized through 21 projects: eight with a global theme, five with a regional focus, seven frontier projects, plus a special focus project geared to the problems of the newly independent states. Compared to the previous MTP, greater emphasis is given to the activities related to saving biodiversity, protection of the environment, and increasing productivity. Fewer resources will be allocated to activities specifically associated with strengthening NARS. Funding for research on improving policies and the Systemwide programmes will remain constant. By the year 2000, it is estimated that 40% of CIMMYT's resources will be allocated to SSA, 30% to Asia, 20% to Latin America, and 10% to WANA. On the basis of priority setting, CIMMYT's investment should be slightly higher in wheat than in maize. Increased donor
interest in maize compared to wheat, however, provides more restricted funding for maize, resulting in a higher investment by the Centre in maize than the relative priorities of maize and wheat would indicate.
The 1998-2000 MTP now serves as the basis for further internal planning to operationalize project-based management and to implement the 21 projects. This planning process will be discussed elsewhere in this report.
1.6 CIMMYT's Impact^2
[^2 Based on "A Sampling of CIMMYT's Impacts", CIMMYT, 1997.]
CIMMYT's impact has been tremendous. More than 70% of the wheat area in the developing world, excluding China, is now planted with CIMMYT-related wheat varieties covering more than 50 million ha. Over 80% of the wheat varieties released by national programmes are derived from CIMMYT germplasm. The varietal impact of CIMMYT-related bread wheat alone accounts for an extra 11 million t of grain each year, worth over US$ 2 billion (in 1990 dollars) to developing country wheat farmers.
About 55% of the area planted with improved maize varieties, or more than 14 million ha of non-temperate maize, is now sown to CIMMYT-related cultivars. Nearly 80% of the maize varieties being released by public sector national programmes were related to CIMMYT materials and these CIMMYT-related cultivars are worth US$ 1 billion per year in extra grain.
In China, CIMMYT-related wheat varieties are grown on 10 million ha, and CIMMYT-related maize varieties on 1 million ha, leading to an approximate additional value to this country alone of US$ 500 million. CIMMYT's maize and wheat varieties account for over US$ 3 billion (in 1990 dollars) in extra grain production each year around the developing world. More than 5000 researchers from around the world are alumni of CIMMYT's training programmes thereby substantially strengthening national capacities in maize and wheat research. Finally, CIMMYT's activities also have a major impact on the conservation of genetic diversity and of natural resources.
1.7 Conduct of the Review
The review started with the Panel Chair, accompanied by the Consultant on Board matters, attending CIMMYT's Board meeting in Mexico in April 1997. The whole Panel then attended the initial phase of the review (23-27 June 1997), for which CIMMYT provided in-depth briefings on its programmes and management. The Panel's Consultant on biotechnology also attended part of this phase. At this stage, the Panel decided that its review would cover the period starting from the IER of 1993. Members of the Panel subsequently visited the Centre's operations in southern Africa (Zimbabwe and Swaziland), southern Asia (India and Nepal), Guatemala, and Bangkok, thereby broadly interacting with national programmes of those regions as well as with CIMMYT's outreach staff. The Panel Chair and one member attended ICW97 and took the opportunity to obtain the views of a number of CIMMYT donors, the Chair of the NGO Committee, and a number of representatives of national research systems of the
different regional fora. They also attended the meeting of the Board of Trustees which was held in Washington, D.C., on 1-2 November 1997.
The Panel conducted a survey of staff perceptions through a questionnaire, in addition to conducting a large number of interviews with staff. The main phase of the review took place from 12-28 November 1997, during which the Panel interacted with staff and management and prepared the following report. The Panel Chair also met with the representative of the Host Country and the Head of the Mexican NARS. Panel members also visited CIMMYT's research stations at El Batan, Ciudad Obregon, and Tlaltizapan. Prior to presenting the final report on 28 November to the Chair and Members of the Executive Committee of the Board of Trustees, the Director General, senior management, and staff, early drafts of the report had been shared with the Director General for any comments, in particular on errors of fact.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 2 - Commodity Programmes
2.1 Wheat Programme
2.2 Maize Programme
2.1 Wheat Programme
2.1.1 Introduction
2.1.2. Evolution
2.1.3. Achievements and Impacts
2.1.4 CCERs and other External Reviews
2.1.5 Emerging Challenges and Future Strategies
2.1.1 Introduction
CIMMYT serves as a world centre for the improvement of bread wheat, durum wheat and triticale, and, jointly with ICARDA, for barley in Latin America. It also acts as a repository for a significant proportion of the world's publicly available genetic resources of bread wheat and triticale. The programme has 31 international scientists; 19 are located in Mexico. Programme expenditure in 1997 was US$ 8.585 million.
A large proportion of the Wheat Programme staff and budget (currently about 50%) is devoted to the development of improved germplasm. Much of the rest (currently a further 26%) is devoted to disciplines directly supporting crop improvement, notably plant protection, cereal chemistry, crop physiology, biometry, and genetic resources. Most breeding resources are invested in spring bread wheat with much of the rest going to winter bread wheat and durum. Very limited resources are currently devoted to triticale (<6%) and barley (<5%). Only five out of 31 international scientist positions in the programme focus on production systems research and management.
This section of the report briefly reviews the Wheat Programme: its evolution, achievements and impacts; emerging issues; and future directions.
Background and Target Areas
Wheat and rice are the world's most important food crops. Global production of wheat is now approaching 600 million t, with international trade approximately 100 million t annually. Up until recently, both global production and international trade in wheat have broadly kept pace with growth in the human population. However, in recent years there has been a slowdown in the growth of global wheat production relative to the growth in human population. As a consequence, global reserves of wheat have fallen to disturbingly low levels.
Given the critical role of wheat as a food crop, because of its wide adaptability and flexibility in end uses, it is important that the balance between global production growth and human population growth be restored. World wheat demand is conservatively estimated to increase by 40% by 2020. This will have to come predominantly from productivity increases rather than area expansion with some notable exceptions such as the Cerrados of Brazil.
Wheat is grown in a very diverse range of environments. CIMMYT recognizes 12 global mega-environments (MEs), nine of which, ranging in area from 3 million to 36 million ha, are of importance in the developing world. CIMMYT uses the concept of the MEs to develop targeted germplasm to specific environments and particular biotic and abiotic problems.
2.1.2. Evolution
CIMMYT has been involved in bread and durum wheat breeding since its establishment in 1966. The early breeding efforts focused on the introgression of dwarfing and photoperiod insensitive genes into high yielding, disease resistant (particularly stem, leaf, and yellow rust) backgrounds. Significant emphasis was given to breeding for irrigated sub-tropical environments (effectively ME1), which were the initial sites for the Green Revolution. The focus has gradually broadened to include all nine (9) MEs of importance in developing countries, although some of the larger ones, notably ME1 and ME2 for spring wheat, ME7 and ME8 for facultative wheat and ME10 and ME11 for winter wheats, receive greater attention.
When first established, the CIMMYT wheat breeding programme incorporated a number of innovative features, including:
i) rapid generation turnover and two (2) cycles of selection/year using shuttle breeding between Toluca and the Obregon field stations;
ii) effective exploitation of a very wide range of germplasm such as spring x winter wheats;
iii) a heavy emphasis on multidisciplinary teamwork involving breeders, pathologists, cereal chemists, biometricians, physiologists, and agronomists;
iv) free sharing and exchange of germplasm and information. In particular, the international nursery system provided an excellent mechanism for interaction with NARS collaborators and outreach staff and permitted the rapid identification of outstanding lines both from CIMMYT and NARS and their early recycling with the crossing programme; and
v) substantial (unrestricted) budget support which permitted large numbers of crosses, segregating populations, screening tests, yield assessments, and the advantages of scale. This has allowed expansion of the programme from about 500 crosses in the 1970s to more than 5,000 now.
Based on these innovations, the CIMMYT Programme has been highly successful. The Wheat Programme has provided a continuous stream of outstanding germplasm to NARS which has dramatically changed wheat production in the developing world. In the light of this success, the broad goals and much of the methodology of the CIMMYT Wheat Breeding Programme have been maintained relatively unchanged over the years. This is not to say that significant modifications and improvements have not been made. For example, the breeding methodology changed in 1985 from a pure pedigree system to a pedigree bulk system. Further, the breeding objectives were expanded to cover a wider range of traits of interest to NARS including:
 durable resistance to leaf and stripe rust;
 resistance to head scab;
 greater adaptation to marginal environments; and
 acid soil tolerance.
However, the broad thrust of the programme has remained unchanged for the past three decades.
After 1989, CIMMYT, in common with many other centres in the CGIAR System, suffered notable funding cuts. These funding cuts reached their peak about 1994 and caused a serious re-evaluation of the programme's priorities. Since then CIMMYT's funding has improved, principally due to an increase in restricted funding, which now accounts for about 50% of CIMMYT's budget. However, the staffing levels in the Wheat Programme have continued to decline from 42 in 1994 (34 senior staff, five associate scientists and three post-doctoral fellows) to 37 in 1997 (31 senior staff, four associate scientists and two post-doctoral fellows).
With respect to barley, CIMMYT has been involved in breeding since 1973. As in wheat, the initial emphasis was on the development of agronomically superior cultivars with high yield potential and multiple disease resistance. In 1984, a joint programme agreement was negotiated with ICARDA. Over time the focus of the programme has broadened to include all production regions of Latin America and all end uses, although the primary focus remains on food and feed rather than on malt. The CIMMYT Wheat Programme funds the operating costs of the joint ICARDA/CIMMYT Latin America Region Barley Breeding project. The operational support for the programme has remained at the same level since 1984; however, visiting scientist and post-doctoral support for the programme has been withdrawn due to downsizing in the Wheat Programme.
From 1998, CIMMYT will adopt a new set of 21 integrated multidisciplinary projects aimed at improving the integration and efficiency of CIMMYT's activities. Wheat Programme staff are involved in 16 of these new projects (six global, four regional, five frontier, one special focus) and the Wheat Programme carries prime responsibility for the management of six projects.
2.1.3. Achievements and Impacts
(a) Global Impact on Sustainable Wheat Production
The CIMMYT Wheat Programme has had a very significant global impact on sustainable wheat production. Detailed quantitative assessments indicate:
i) By the early 1990s, over 80% of the wheat varieties being released by CIMMYT's national programme partners were derived at least in part from CIMMYT germplasm. This level of output has continued through the 1990s. In the last few years, for example, more than 160 bread wheat, durum wheat, triticale, and barley varieties related to CIMMYT Wheat Programme germplasm have been released by more than 30 countries.
ii) In the early 1990s, over 45 million ha in developing countries were planted to CIMMYT-related wheat varieties each year, accounting for about 70% of total wheat production. The most recent estimates indicate that the area planted to CIMMYT-based bread wheats has risen to 55 million ha, accounting for nearly 80% of total production.
iii) In 1990, a conservative estimate by the Centre of the extra grain produced per hectare due to the use of improved CIMMYT-related varieties (on average taken to be 200 kg/ha/crop) was 9 million t on an annual basis in developing countries, worth over US$ 1.5 billion. The most recent estimates suggest current gains stand at an extra 11 million t of grain worth over US$ 2.0 billion annually (in 1990 dollars).
In addition, the strong resistance of CIMMYT cultivars to a number of previously serious diseases and pests, particularly stem and leaf rust, means that additional developing country farmers have gained considerable indirect benefits through:
i) the need to use significantly lower inputs of costly and sometimes dangerous agrochemicals to control diseases; and
ii) the capacity to shift resources previously committed to pesticides to other inputs (fertilizer, water) and to alternate practices that improve the sustainability of their farming systems.
Other notable achievements include:
 the identification of exciting new sources of resistance to a wide range of pests and diseases of bread wheat, durum wheat, triticale, and barley, including yellow rust, Karnal bunt, fusarium head scab, Russian wheat aphid and Septoria tritici blotch;
 the development and release of the International Wheat Information System (IWIS), which is available on CD-Rom. IWIS is a user-focused data management system that integrates many kinds of passport and performance information pertaining to nearly 1.5 million genotypes of bread wheat durum wheat and triticale. To date more than 500 IWIS compact disks have been distributed to about 50 countries, giving NARS scientists direct access to all CIMMYT pedigrees and related data for the first time;
 the development of permanent bed, conservation tillage wheat farming practices (FIRBS- Furrow Irrigation and Raised Bed Systems) which allows substantial reduction in costs (estimated to be 30%) in wheat production without significantly decreasing productivity/ha. FIRBS achieves this cost reduction because inputs (water and N) are substantially reduced and weeds are mechanically controlled reducing herbicide use. This system is being widely adopted in the Yaqui Valley in Mexico and is being adapted for use in the Punjab in India. FIRBS has the potential for adoption over much of the Ml mega-environment, a wheat production area of 36 million ha; and
 continuous active participation in training. Over the past four years, the Wheat Programme has hosted 60 trainees in Mexico for its improvement and industrial quality courses. A further 59 national programme scientists participated in the programme's wheat agronomy course, which was devolved to Pergamino, Argentina, in the early 1990s. In addition, since 1993 the programme has engaged in short-term collaboration research efforts with nearly 250 visiting scientists from national programmes.
(b) Scientific Contributions
The Wheat Programme has a diverse and talented staff with expertise in genetics, plant breeding, genetic resources conservation, plant pathology, agronomy, and crop and plant physiology. The quality of science produced by the group is good as evidenced by the number of publications in refereed international journals. This has increased substantially in recent years in response to the greater emphasis by CIMMYT on upstream research as recommended by the 1988 EPMR.
One area of particular note has been the identification and documentation by the Crop Protection and Epidemiology Group of sources of adult plant resistances to leaf and stripe rust and their genetic analysis. This is long-needed original work with profound implications for the development of durable resistance to these diseases in both bread and durum wheats. It has also opened up significant new opportunities for basic research into the mechanisms underlying adult plant resistances to rust in wheat. A second is the use of wild relatives to expand the range of genetic diversity in the Wheat Breeding Programme via wide crossing. This is a long-standing project and CIMMYT's efforts in the area have been at the forefront of the field for well over a decade.
While there are many other examples, these serve to emphasize the quality of scientific outputs from the CIMMYT Wheat Programme.
2.1.4 CCERs and other External Reviews
The Panel had for its consideration the reports of two external reviews of sub-programmes of the Wheat Programme conducted since the 1993 IER. The first was a review of the Wheat Crop Protection Sub-programme conducted in September 1993. The CCER made 20 recommendations in areas as diverse as staff evaluation, training, interactions with other programmes and sub-programmes, refereed publications, and research priorities. Two, however, stand out. The first related to the need for resistance diversification and gene deployment to reduce the risk of major disease epidemics, and the second to CIMMYT's lack of capacity to undertake adequate yellow or stripe rust virulence analyses. Both issues are relevant today and the need for action more pressing.
The second CCER reviewed the Wheat Germplasm Improvement Sub-programme in March 1994. This review made 15 recommendations, again covering a diverse range of subjects, including programme structure and management, training, crop priorities, interaction with NARS, hybrid wheat, and industrial quality. CIMMYT has effectively dealt with many of the issues identified by the CCER. However, several, including yellow or stripe rust resistance, industrial quality, interaction with NARS, and collaboration with the Applied Biotechnology Centre, remain current and are revisited below.
Overall, the CCER reports were helpful in evaluating the progress of CIMMYT in responding to externally identified issues. However, the strict terms of reference (ToR) in relation to the subject matter of the reviews often limited they utility. Indeed, the CCER on the Wheat Germplasm Improvement Sub-programme noted that the Panel was charged with the review of the Wheat Genetic Improvement Sub-programme. We understand that the present programme structure dictated the bounds of this review, but we also believe that genetic improvement in wheat cannot be divorced from crop protection, or agronomy/physiology, or genetic resources. We recommend, therefore, that future internally managed external reviews of the Wheat Programme be charged with reviewing all aspects of the Programme.
The point to be made is that if the CCERs have a very narrow focus, then many of the broader and generally more significant issues facing CIMMYT are outside the ToR of the reviews.
2.1.5 Emerging Challenges and Future Strategies
Overall, the Wheat Programme has been an outstanding success for CIMMYT over many years. The continued output of high-yielding germplasm could not be achieved without the dedicated application of good science in an output-orientated programme.
Nevertheless, despite the outstanding achievements and readily demonstrable impacts of the CIMMYT Wheat Programme, based as it has been on the paradigm established by Dr. N.E. Borlaug, it is clear it will face significant challenges in the immediate future. These challenges will arise from a variety of internal and external factors. Among the most important of these are CIMMYT's success; the accelerating push towards sustainable, pesticide-free agricultural production systems; the rapid advances in new biotechnologies and molecular genetics; the continuing evolution in CGIAR away from core funding towards specific project grants; and the rising expectations and needs of the NARS. These challenges are likely, between now and the next EPMR, to lead to radical changes in the germplasm enhancement and improvement programmes of all crops in the CIMMYT Wheat Programme. Some of the more important challenges are considered in detail below.
CIMMYT's Success
The widespread success of CIMMYT germplasm, and the fact that it, or its derivatives, now occupy about 55 million ha and account for about 80% of developing country production, means that CIMMYT has a special responsibility to ensure its varieties have effective resistance to the major pathogens (stem, leaf, and stripe or yellow rust in particular) that are capable of causing severe global pandemics. This implies that each cultivar carry "durable" resistance that is unlikely to "break down" through the evolution of new disease strains. It also implies that farmers have access to different varieties carrying different resistances so if one does "break down" then the damage is limited and resistant alternatives are on hand to ensure sustainable production.
Initially CIMMYT's approach to the development of rust resistant germplasm was to start with a very diverse gene pool, select under severe disease pressure, and test advanced lines in multiple disease hotspots globally. It was postulated that by adopting this strategy, most lines would carry multiple genes for resistance and would be unlikely to "break down" under disease pressure. Further, the different advanced lines would carry different gene combinations providing the needed diversity in production fields. This methodology worked for stem rust, for which the combination of Sr2, the adult plant resistance gene from Hope, with two or more other Sr genes has proved effective for over 30 years. However, for leaf and yellow rust, reality often fell short of expectation. It was found that despite the high levels of genetic diversity going into CIMMYT breeding programmes, the output was often relatively uniform and many lines carried the same major gene, albeit effective
worldwide, for disease resistance. In the case of leaf rust, to overcome this problem, CIMMYT in the early 1980s adopted a more sophisticated breeding strategy based on the use of the adult plant resistance gene Lr34 from Frontana in combination with other minor genes. This strategy is now used routinely in the CIMMYT Programme and in other wheat breeding programmes worldwide.
CIMMYT is now in the process of putting a similar strategy in place for yellow or stripe rust based on apparently durable adult plant resistance source Yr18, first identified in the cultivar Anza. This change in direction was prompted by occurrence of severe epidemics of yellow rust on some widespread cultivars of CIMMYT origin,-first in Morocco-and then in Nepal, Pakistan, and Iran. Surveys indicate that about 25% of advanced CIMMYT germplasm which was previously protected by the major gene Yr9, is susceptible to the new race, and a further 20% are only moderately resistant.
The point is that inputting high levels of genetic diversity into a crossing programme does not guarantee a high level of genetic diversity in the final advanced lines. The recent yellow rust epidemics on CIMMYT-derived varieties once again highlight this fact. The Panel endorses the current efforts of CIMMYT to address the issue of durable resistance to stripe rust through the use of combinations of minor/adult genes for resistance. However, it suggests that if CIMMYT is to meet the threat of genetic vulnerability posed by sowing its germplasm derivatives on 50+ million ha it must:
i) continue to monitor on a regular basis the virulence patterns of all three rusts (stem, leaf, and stripe rust) in the major epidemiological regions of the developing world. CIMMYT needs this information not only to assess current threats but the likely consequences of major mutational or sexual events;
ii) develop sophisticated breeding strategies that allow CIMMYT to produce effective combinations of resistance genes that provide durable protection against all existing races of the rust pathogens; and
iii) ensure, wherever possible, that NARS and their client farmers have at all times access to cultivars with different combinations of effective genes so that in the event of the development of virulent new pathogen races farmers are not faced with continuing devastating yield losses.
The Panel recognizes the difficulties in achieving (i) due to the reduction in activities in two critical rust pathology laboratories in Advanced Research Institutes (ARIs) in recent years and the difficulties in moving rust samples across national borders due to quarantine laws. However, this information is of critical importance to CIMMYT's Wheat Programme and its developing country NARS partners. The Panel, therefore, suggests that CIMMYT should, as a priority, develop this monitoring capacity using the best available science in cooperation with its NARS partners.
The Panel therefore recommends that CIMMYT:
i) initiate an integrated global programme to monitor the racial composition of the populations of stem, leaf, and stripe rust in the major epidemiological regions of the developing world, and help develop complementary research capacity in key NARS;
ii) move to develop breeding strategies that guarantee CIMMYT germplasm carries effective combinations of genes to all three rust diseases.
The Cost of Durable Resistance
The Panel recognizes the desirability, indeed the necessity, of CIMMYT embracing a strategy of developing germplasm with durable resistance to all three rusts based on effective combinations of minor resistance genes. However, it also recognizes that this strategy has a cost in terms of gains made in other traits, especially yield. This cost, which is not only real but substantial, arises from the rapidly decreasing probability of obtaining desirable combinations of genes as the number of traits (and genes) under selection increases. For example, if two parents carry different favourable or unfavourable alleles at 10 different loci (say 3 for yield, 3 for quality, and 4 for agronomic traits such as height, day length response, etc.), the probability that an F2 individual from a cross between these parents carries at least one copy of each favourable allele at all loci is (1/2)^10 or 1/1024. If the number of loci under consideration is increased to 20 (by adding, for example,
3,3, and 4 genes for stem, leaf, and stripe rust resistance, respectively) the probability an F2 individual carries at least one copy of each favourable allele is (1/2)^20 or about one in a million.
The need for CIMMYT breeders to retain in their advanced lines combinations of effective genes for resistance will lead them to adopt more conservative breeding strategies than they have used previously. Indeed, the Panel understands that CIMMYT breeders are increasingly using limited backcrossing (with one or two backcrosses) in their programme. This approach to variety development is favoured in developed countries such as Australia, Canada, or the USA where pressure for the retention of desirable gene combinations arises not only for disease resistance, but also for end-use quality. However, as practised in those countries (where three or four or occasionally more backcrosses are used) this has proved to be a very conservative breeding strategy; the rate of increase in yield potential in these programmes has generally been much lower than that achieved by CIMMYT in the past. Indeed, in many cases the gains in yield potential that have been made have been due in a major
part to the use of CIMMYT germplasm.
In light of the likely cost of breeding for durable disease resistance in terms of yield gains, and the importance of high-yielding germplasm to NARS, the Panel suggests that CIMMYT will need to put greater resources into increasing yield per se across the whole Wheat Programme. The Panel notes that CIMMYT has already made significant moves in this area with its hybrid wheat initiative and the brainstorming workshop "Increasing Yield Potential in Wheat: Breaking the Barriers". It also notes that one of its new 21 projects (Frontier Project #1) is specifically targeted at significantly improving grain yield of wheat per se above current levels. The Panel commends the Centre for this initiative.
Rapid Advances in Biotechnology
In theory, one means of reducing the impact of the need to develop durably resistant germplasm on the rate of improvement of other traits is by the incorporation of new biotechnologies into the breeding programme. Progress in wheat biotechnology and molecular genetics lags behind that in maize and barley both generally and at CIMMYT. Nevertheless, exciting progress has been made in dihaploid (DH) production protocols, the development of molecular markers [Simple Sequence Repeats (SSR) or microsatellites and Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphisms (AFLPs)], and transformation protocols in wheat and barley over the last three years. Incorporation of these techniques in the yearly breeding cycle now warrants serious consideration.
It should be noted at this point that CIMMYT has a major programme in applied biotechnology of wheat and maize. This programme and its interactions with the Wheat Programme are considered elsewhere in this report (Section 3.3). Here, the focus is on the implications of the routine use of DH technologies and molecular marker assisted selection (MAS) on the organization of the breeding projects in the Wheat Programme.
A combination of DH production and MAS, based on markers for each target disease resistance gene segregating in a population, potentially offer very substantial gains in time and efficiency in a limited backcross programme. Generally a minimum of two to three generations can be saved using DH technology while MAS can be used to ensure that only those genotypes carrying the target genes for disease resistance are tested in the field. Both DH technologies and MAS currently have technical limitations that reduce their cost competitiveness and limit their applicability to a relatively small number of selected crosses. However, these technologies are now being used by commercial companies for both wheat and barley improvement in Europe. Major advances in technology are expected to make them more competitive and widely applicable in the next two to three years.
The Panel acknowledges that the CIMMYT Wheat Programme have both DH and MAS technologies under active consideration or trial. However, planning for their possible routine use in the breeding programme still appears to be in its infancy. Yet the figures available to the Panel suggest that expenditure on wheat biotechnology (both core unrestricted and special funds) will be at least 25% of the total Wheat Programme budget by 1999 and is likely to rise rapidly in the future. Consequently there is a need for the Wheat Programme to develop detailed operational plans for the progressive changes that advances in technology will undoubtedly bring. Rational discussions on the adoption of these technologies can only be made on the basis of a detailed cost analysis of present procedures versus the new technologies. The Panel therefore recommends:
that the CIMMYT Wheat Programme develop full costing of the outputs of its present wheat, triticale, and barley breeding programmes and examine potential cost benefits of the incorporation of double haploid and marker assisted selection technologies in these breeding programmes.
Better Industrial Quality
Until recently, industrial quality (IQ) was not considered to be a high priority breeding goal at CIMMYT relative to grain yield and disease resistance. However, as the economies of developing countries improve and as trade barriers are lowered, there is a growing and widespread demand for better quality wheats among CIMMYT's partner NARS. For example, in Mexico, the price of locally produced wheats based on CIMMYT germplasm is already less than their international competitors and industry is avoiding the purchase of these wheats based on quality. This means that IQ must be given a higher priority in the future than it has in the past if CIMMYT is to maintain the same impact amongst developing country farmers.
CIMMYT has already considerably revamped its approach to IQ in its bread wheat breeding programme and this is expected to impact favourably on the overall quality of advanced CIMMYT bread wheat germplasm relatively quickly. The Panel commends CIMMYT on these changes in response to NARS needs. It notes, however, that selection for higher quality is likely to further restrict the gains that can be made in other areas, such as yield, since it involves several complex traits including flour yield and dough strength, and extensibility, and tolerance to overmixing, in addition to durable disease resistance.
Rising Expectations of NARS
If CIMMYT can routinely supply outstanding germplasm to NARS with durable resistance to stem leaf and stripe rust, then other biotic and abiotic factors will become the major constraints to yield in all environments. What may have been second-rank priorities will quickly become more important and move up the NARS priority list. These new priorities will vary amongst and within regions and will include pests and diseases such as head scab, Septoria tritici blotch, tan spot, barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV), Karnal bunt, common root rot, crown rot, take-all and cereal cyst nematode as well as biotic stresses such as heat, waterlogging, acid soils, boron toxicity and zinc deficiency. The NARS will undoubtedly be seeking CIMMYT's assistance in meeting their germplasm needs in terms of these new priorities. However, CIMMYT is unlikely to be able to meet from its own resources the demands placed on it with respect to these regional priorities, given the efforts it will have to
commit to breeding for its global priorities such as durable rust resistance.
CIMMYT therefore faces a crucial dilemma. It can restrict its attention to a small number of the more important regional priorities and it can develop new ways of working with NARS to meet all of their high priority needs. The CCER of the Wheat Germplasm Improvement Sub-programme, conducted from 20-25 March, 1994, proposed an innovative solution to this dilemma. They recommended that CIMMYT and the NARS subscribe to a vision that they might jointly redesign their wheat breeding programmes with the goal that the CIMMYT programme and the NARS programmes will function as a single interconnected collaborative Wheat Breeding Programme for the Developing World. The programme should provide maximum independence and service to individual NARS, but it also should enable all members to help each other with services they can best provide. This programme would not be a CIMMYT programme; CIMMYT would be one part of the programme. CIMMYT's particular role would be to keep the flow of
improved germplasm moving at optimum speed and effectiveness; secondarily it would develop a significant proportion of finished lines, targeted for areas with most need of them. The programme might be organized as an interlinked series of Regional Programmes, with CIMMYT acting as the linker between Regional Programmes.
This proposed Wheat Breeding Programme for the Developing World is visionary and can never be realized in full because of differing national goals and international rivalries. But we believe that to have this vision and to work towards it with hopeful resolution is better than to do nothing. We believe that this vision is the logical next step of CIMMYT's efforts to help the poor and disadvantaged people of the developing world; and that significant steps in that direction can be taken in the near future.
The Panel recognizes that CIMMYT has developed very significant joint breeding activities with key NARS partners in addition to its long-standing joint activities with Mexico - for example, with Brazil in developing acid soil tolerant germplasm and with China in scab resistance breeding. However, it has not fully embraced the concept proposed by the CCER as a means of meeting the diverse priorities of its NARS partners. The Panel recognizes that many NARS lack the facilities and staff to participate fully in joint breeding activities. But equally there is a growing list that can now, or will be able to do so in the future. The Panel strongly suggests that CIMMYT now fully embrace the above concept and move towards its implementation as speedily as possible.
Reduction in Unrestricted Core Funding - Differential Impact on Triticale and Barley Research
The last five years have seen a sharp change in the balance of funding available to CIMMYT between unrestricted core, restricted core and special project funding. Unrestricted core now represents only about 50% of CIMMYT's total budget. This change has had a significant effect on all CIMMYT programmes. However, it has had much more severe consequences for triticale and barley, because the research programmes of both crops are small and largely funded from unrestricted core. The Wheat Programme has been less effective in attracting restricted core and special projects funding than other CIMMYT programmes and this is especially true for the triticale and barley components.
Further reductions in unrestricted core funding which seem likely if not inevitable will put severe funding pressure on triticale and barley research. Both are now funded near their minimum acceptable levels and further funding cuts would threaten the viability of these programmes.
The Panel notes, for example, that there is no interaction between the Applied Biotechnology Centre and the Wheat Programme with respect to these crops. This is despite the fact that research on barley biotechnology and molecular genetics is more advanced globally than it is for wheat, and further, that the barley breeder has established a cooperative venture with Oregon State University for using molecular markers to map a number of disease resistance genes.
The Panel therefore recommends:
that the Wheat Programme make a concerted effort to seek additional funding for triticale and barley research without which the future viability of these programmes is at risk. In the case of barley, this needs to be done in close collaboration with ICARDA. If this is not possible, or not successful, then serious consideration will need to be given to the discontinuation of the breeding of these crops.
2.2 Maize Programme
2.2.1. Introduction
2.2.2 Evolution
2.2.3 Achievements and Impacts
2.2.4 CCERs
2.2.5 Emerging Challenges and Future Strategies
2.2.6 Conclusions
2.2.1. Introduction
The CIMMYT Maize Programme's mission is to help the poor in developing countries by increasing the productivity of resources committed to maize, while protecting natural resources.
Over the next 30 years, maize demand will grow at an annual rate of 2.2%. To meet this demand, yield increases will then need to be above 1.2% per year, because cultivated area is projected to increase by less than 1% per year. By 2020, developing countries will produce half of the total world supply of wheat and maize and consume 55% of this total, while importing 61 million t of maize annually.
In this scenario, maize is a strategic crop because it represents a major source of energy, protein and forage in all continents of the world. In the developing world, and particularly for stress environments, maize research has been addressing demands for higher grain yields while minimizing requirements for inputs. This strategy requires germplasm that is adapted to less favoured environments (marginal areas). Furthermore, the tropical regions of the world face increasing environmental pressures, decreased availability of labour, and a tendency to market domination by multinational companies in the areas of maize breeding, biotechnology, seed production, and trade in grain.
2.2.2 Evolution
Although the structure of the Maize Programme has changed since 1988, the general objectives of the Programme remain the same. They are to preserve, improve, and disseminate genetic resources; develop environmentally compatible crop management practices; and to provide research methodologies and information through training and consulting.
The Programme adopted the mega-environment concept, of which the most important for CIMMYT's mandate are environments in tropical regions (lowland 54 million ha; mid-altitude 8 million ha; highland 6 million ha) and in sub-tropical regions (8 million ha).
In the light of the current world situation, CIMMYT's Maize Programme has identified the following themes/areas, in which the Centre can be considered to have a comparative advantage over other public and private organizations.
 Conserved but available genetic variation - CIMMYT's ex-situ germplasm collection.
 Globally or regionally evaluated public research goods - lines, topcrosses, germplasm complexes, and germplasm selection methods - especially those appropriate to the lowland tropics.
 Open-pollinated varieties with high, stable yield and broad adaptation.
 Publicly available elite inbred lines with high and known general combining ability (GCA).
 Sources of tolerance to specific abiotic and biotic stresses - lines, synthetics, varieties, and populations.
 Molecular genetic information: linkage maps and probes.
 Publicly accessible regional research networks.
 Hands-on training that provides skills in practical breeding and on-farm crop management research obtained by working closely with internationally known maize researchers.
 Strategic crop research information on maize-based systems in the tropics.
 Research consultation at no cost to national researchers.
 An institution that serves as an "honest broker" for intellectual property lines, gene constructs (e.g., Bt), biosafety information - on behalf of national programme scientists with little purchasing power and leverage. CIMMYT may also be the only ultimate source of transgenics for traits which have little commercial value in the north.
CIMMYT's current MTP (pp. 16-17) distinguishes four generic types of activities: 1) strategic research, 2) applied or adaptive research, 3) technology delivery, and 4) human capital development. Specific outputs from these activities in CIMMYT's Maize Programme are:
 Germplasm with efficient input use, input-responsiveness, stress tolerance, and broad adaptation, suited to the needs of maize production mega-environments in the lowlands, mid-altitude/sub-tropical, and highland zones. In the majority of cases, these will be inbred lines of good general combining ability, possessing the capacity to produce high-yielding, stress tolerant, and stable hybrids and synthetics.
 Source germplasm (lines, synthetics, populations) with tolerance to specific stresses (e.g., soil acidity, drought, low N, borers, and specific diseases).
 Conserved, accessible genetic variation. This is usually in the form of ex-situ preservation in the Genetic Resources Centre, but in future may also be in-situ preserved genetic stocks that evolve with the cropping systems and climate.
 Efficient selection methodologies: CIMMYT has the opportunity and the responsibility for developing effective and efficient methods for germplasm improvement by national programmes.
 Environmentally compatible, maize-based management practices that complement the properties of input-efficient and input-responsive germplasm without threatening the quality and quantity of natural soil and water resources.
 Trained national researchers with practical hands-on research skills and a field orientation.
 Information imparted through direct consultation with NARS, published documents, public databases (e.g., on the Internet, audiovisuals, etc).
The Maize Programme research team is highly qualified and conducts research of excellent quality and relevance within its targeted area. Following the financial cuts of the early 1990s, however, there are now only 23 internationally recruited staff (IRS) in the Maize Programme, which represents 74% of the IRS in 1991. At present, 57% (13 IRS) of the senior staff are located in outreach (Guatemala, Colombia, Ethiopia, Zimbabwe, Kenya, and Thailand) and 43% (10 IRS) are based at Headquarters. In addition to the 23 IRS, the programme also has 12 researchers who are post-doctoral or visiting scientists.
The MTP continues to use the mega-environment concept for germplasm and outputs, but puts more emphasis on a more integrated and multidisciplinary approach between and within research programmes, and with CIMMYT's partners. This transition is embodied in the new project management structure of the 1998-2000+ MTP. The Maize Programme is involved in 15 projects (five global, four regional, and six frontier) and has the responsibility for coordinating seven projects.
The MTP also represents a shift in emphasis to redirect more effort to less favourable environments to meet the challenges of poverty reduction, preservation of biodiversity, and natural resources. For the Maize Programme, this shift takes the form of increased research directed to abiotic stress tolerance, the use of marker-assisted selection to accelerate this breeding effort, greater investment in regional projects in SSA, and stronger linkages with the Natural Resources Group (NRG) and the Economics Programme.
In global projects, the main products are enhanced germplasm; regional projects focus on the interactions between germplasm, management, natural resource conservation, and socioeconomic issues; frontier projects enhance the application of advanced scientific methodologies that will facilitate research in the global projects. This set of projects offer, if well managed, an excellent opportunity for interaction with diversified partners such as ARIs, NARS, NGOs, and the private sector.
2.2.3 Achievements and Impacts
CIMMYT's Maize Programme has made substantial contributions to increasing maize productivity and production in developing countries.
i) One estimate made in 1994 suggests that 445 of the 842 public maize varieties released in developing countries during 1966-1990 contained some CIMMYT germplasm. CIMMYT-based open pollinated varieties (OPVs) and hybrids were grown on nearly 13.5 million ha, with seed for 12.1 million ha provided by the public sector and for 1.4 million ha by the private sector. The relative importance of public and private institutions in the provision of seed has been changing lately, with the private sector assuming greater importance.
ii) The latest available information reveals that the Programme has developed and released 366 inbred lines for use by public and private institutions. Nearly 80% of the improved maize varieties currently released by the public sector in developing countries contain CIMMYT germplasm and such cultivars are grown on about 21 million ha, contributing approximately one billion dollars annually to their economies. Efforts are underway to update the Programme's impact and the contribution of CIMMYT's germplasm in currently grown improved cultivars and it is expected to be greater than that last estimated for 1994. CIMMYT's Maize Programme has the world's largest research network for maize: research is conducted in collaboration with over 80 countries and about 500 maize germplasm evaluation trials are distributed to NARS each year.
iii) The involvement of both the public and private sector in maize seed production makes impact assessment difficult because the private sector has been reluctant to provide information on the use of CIMMYT materials for reasons of confidentiality. Companies who receive CIMMYT lines are not obligated to recognize this contribution or provide information about their utilization in commercial products, although this situation is improving. The same occurs with OPVs, although in this case it is easier to gather information. Despite these difficulties, the EPMR believes that the available information suggests that CIMMYT's germplasm has made significant contributions to the improved OPVs and hybrids used on 58% of the maize area in developing countries.
iv) Significant progress has been made in developing selection techniques for tolerance to drought and low N availability. Tolerant, elite, open-pollinated populations and synthetic varieties have been improved and released. In particular, the crop physiology research that has led to the development of selection methods for identification of maize genotypes tolerant of drought and low N is well published and of high scientific quality and relevance. The EPMR Panel commends this research. Recently, one project has been established in sub-Saharan and another in East Africa to use these new selection procedures to identify adapted maize OPVs and hybrids with tolerance to drought and low N.
v) Another significant finding is that stress-tolerant materials are also capable of maintaining their yield advantage in favourable environments, which indicates broad adaptation. For the acid soils of Colombia, CIMMYT researchers have also produced new maize germplasm that tolerates high soil A1 levels. This achievement came from a cooperative research network with NARS in which selection methods were developed and germplasm was generated and evaluated. The result was the release of variety CIMCALI 91SA3 (Sikuani V-110 in Colombia), and the expected release of hybrids with high yielding potential.
vi) Molecular tools are in the early stage of utilization in the Maize Breeding Programme. The exploratory use of these tools has occurred in collaboration with the ABC. Molecular markers for anthesis-silking interval (which is associated with tolerance to drought and low N), resistance to streak virus, borers, ear rot, and tolerance to soil acidity have been, or are in the process of being, identified. CIMMYT is in the process of testing Bt maize in greenhouse and field trials. Bt toxin production has been evaluated under abiotic stress conditions to verify the effectiveness of transgenic expression under conditions that will occur in farmers' fields. Transgenic lines have been used for Bt gene transfer to 10 tropical inbred maize lines through backcrossing.
vii) The regional programme based in Zimbabwe has developed materials with resistance to streak virus and other foliar diseases and tolerance to borers and weevils. In Asia, progress has been made in the simultaneous improvement of yield and resistance to downy mildew. In East and West Africa, maize researchers have developed lines and hybrids that yield more than non-tolerant germplasm in both the presence and absence of Striga.
viii) In the hillside maize systems of Central America, a CIMMYT network conducted adaptive research on conservation tillage, mulching, and green manuring that documents the benefits of these technologies and uses on-farm trials to test them in farmers' fields. These practices have the potential to improve soil quality and productivity in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, and Costa Rica.
ix) The Maize Programme has an impressive record in training scientists from developing countries. Since 1966, approximately 3,800 scientists have received training at CIMMYT's Headquarters in breeding, agronomy, pathology, entomology, seed issues, quality protein maize (QPM), and other areas. Approximately 3,500 scientists have also been trained through in-country and regional training courses. CIMMYT now collaborates with NARS in Brazil, Kenya, and Thailand to provide agronomy training courses in those countries. These training courses have reached an additional 300 NARS scientists. Over 1,000 senior scientists from NARS have visited CIMMYT Headquarters or its regional programmes to acquaint themselves with modern research methodologies and germplasm. The programme has been associated with undergraduate and graduate thesis projects of nearly 210 NARS scientists from 49 countries.
x) The Maize Programme has recently organized a series of conferences on several important topics: Insect Resistant Maize: Recent Advances and Utilization, attended by 40 developing countries scientists, November 1994; Developing Drought and Low N-Tolerant Maize, attended by 70 national programme representatives, March 1996; the Genetics and Exploitation of Heterosis in Crops, attended by 500 scientists, August 1997.
2.2.4 CCERs
Four centre-commissioned reviews have been conducted of subprogrammes or breeding methods in the Maize Programme over the past five years. These included reviews of (1) maize international testing and population improvement, 1992, (2) subtropical mid-altitude and highland maize subprogramme, 1993, (3) lowland tropical maize subprogramme, 1994, and (4) breeding strategies and methodologies of CIMMYT's Maize Programme, 1995. All of these reviews focused on the quality, efficiency, and improvement of CIMMYT's maize breeding research.
The first CCER related to the need for clustering populations by heterotic groups, to accommodate hybrids in international trials, to identify "key site" locations, and to improve coordination between Headquarters and regional programmes. An integrated system for managing trial data was also proposed. The second CCER made recommendations on testing environments for population improvement and line extraction, special populations (drought tolerance and insect resistance) and evaluated the stage of development of collaborative projects. The third CCER reviewed the lowland tropical maize subprogramme and discussed the role of NARS and the private sector in this mega-environment, germplasm development efforts (population improvement and hybrid development), and the need to incorporate multiple stress tolerance and improved grain quality in appropriate germplasm. The review team emphasized the need to evaluate the utility of marker-assisted selection as a breeding tool for complex
traits.
The fourth CCER reviewed breeding strategies and methodologies. It generally endorsed the strategies of the Programme, made suggestions to enhance the work, and recommended that population improvement should not be de-emphasized despite increased focus on hybrid breeding.
The EPMR Panel found these peer reviews useful, but notes that they did not address broader cross-cutting strategic issues or subjects other than breeding.
2.2.5 Emerging Challenges and Future Strategies
The Maize Programme will face major challenges in the future related to improving maize yields and yield stability in marginal environments, the need to protect soil resources and environmental quality, and increasing use of hybrids and improved OPVs. Another major issue concerns the lack of adoption of improved maize varieties on 42% of the maize production area in developing countries. These areas are typically regions of rural poverty and marginal soils. The Panel considers the transfer of improved maize germplasm into these areas to be one of CIMMYT's major challenges.
Strategic Issues in Future Planning
The Maize Programme has invested heavily in developing regional projects that foster collaboration with NARS in germplasm development. The EPMR commends this commitment to outreach and believes that these regional projects are making important contributions. However, the capacity of the Maize Programme to develop improved OPVs and hybrids for use by NARS, private companies, and farmers can be increased in the following ways:
i) The programme should re-examine the rationale for resource allocation to OPV and hybrid development and improvement efforts. It needs to develop more appropriate populations (many current ones are nearly 40 years old and have contributed little), using old and new elite germplasm from CIMMYT and NARS and to improve them using methods that enhance their performance per se and in hybrid combinations. The programme should integrate its yield improvement and stress tolerance breeding efforts to develop cultivars that provide high and stable yields. The efficiency of this effort will be greater if germplasm is tested in the most appropriate environments. Identification of appropriate environments can be facilitated by collaboration with the NRG and use of existing information, experience, and GIS databases.
The EPMR Panel recommends that the CIMMYT Maize Programme:
place greater emphasis on the development of new heterotic populations that incorporate both improved yield potential and increased stress tolerance, and make these populations available to NARS and the private sector.
ii) There are other key issues concerning the lack of adoption of hybrids and improved varieties in some regions. (1) Why has the use of hybrid maize varieties been slow to replace OPVs in many parts of Africa despite the significant potential yield advantage of the available hybrids? (2) Why have QPM varieties had little or no impact despite documented advantages with regard to children's nutrition and livestock production efficiency (see Economics Programme and Programme Linkages sections)? The Panel is not convinced that these questions have been adequately addressed and believes that a more thorough analysis is required to ensure appropriate strategic planning.
iii) Linkages are not obvious for germplasm enhancement activities among outreach sites and between outreach sites and Headquarters. These efforts need to be integrated where appropriate, ensuring a reciprocal flow of germplasm and information. CIMMYT's regional programmes need to develop closer links with relatively stronger NARS in their regions to increase efficiency and productivity. Such NARS can provide a larger pool of human resources, research infrastructure, experience, and germplasm to complement CIMMYT's resources at little additional cost.
The EPMR Panel recommends that the CIMMYT Maize Programme:
increase the flow of information and germplasm between maize researchers in Regional Projects and at Headquarters by convening an annual meeting that includes maize scientists involved in germplasm improvement.
iv) Significant progress toward development of materials with resistance to most of the tropical and subtropical diseases has been made in the programme. However, some diseases are spreading (e.g., downy mildew has moved from Asia to Africa and Latin America and stunt has moved from its traditional habitat in Central America to most countries in Latin America). Other diseases are already quite widespread (e.g., ear rots, stalk rots, turcicum, rusts), and some are becoming important (e.g. Phaeosphaeria in Brazil). The programme should take a closer look at integrating disease resistance efforts between outreach sites and between outreach and Headquarters to avoid duplication and to increase efficiency.
v) While significant progress has been made toward enhancing resistance to, and tolerance of, some Latin American insects, greater efforts are needed on others, such as army worms, ear worms, and weevils. Less work on insect resistance/tolerance has been conducted in Africa and Asia, and increased effort is needed here as well. The programme should establish strategic linkages with appropriate institutions in Latin America, Asia, and Africa to achieve this goal.
vi) Several molecular markers for important maize traits are now available for use in the Maize Breeding Programme. Most promising are markers for anthesis-silking interval (drought and low-N tolerance) and resistance to borers. Both traits are under complex genetic control and are, therefore, difficult to select by conventional breeding methods. The use of molecular markers would accelerate selection procedures. Although these molecular markers are now available, marker-assisted breeding methods are not yet utilized in the main line breeding programme.
The EPMR Panel recommends that the CIMMYT Maize Programme:
fully incorporate marker-assisted breeding approaches into the mainstream maize breeding effort, which will require clarification of the roles and responsibilities of the Maize Programme and the Applied Biotechnology Centre.
vii) More agronomic research is needed to support germplasm improvement efforts on OPVs and hybrids. In most cases, adoption and full exploitation of the genetic potential of these materials cannot be expressed without improved management. Continued efforts are encouraged on soil fertility and nutrient management, crop rotation, intercropping, and improved fallow systems that enhance productivity and sustainability for resource-poor farmers. For high-potential areas, old management technologies and modern cultivars provide little benefit. CIMMYT should assist NARS to develop agronomic practices that match the enhanced high yield potential of hybrids and OPVs in these more favourable environments. Use of conservation tillage is expected to increase as is presently occurring in Brazil. The EPMR Panel believes that CIMMYT can play a leadership role in facilitating the development and adoption of appropriate conservation tillage systems for maize production in other
developing countries. Much of this agronomic research must be conducted in the regional projects. The EPMR Panel encourages CIMMYT to continue its investment in upgrading the agronomic research capacity of its outreach programmes and in collaborating with NARS at these sites.
viii) CIMMYT must continue its emphasis on training. Training in modern research methods, biotechnology, and specific issues in breeding, entomology, pathology, and physiology are especially needed to enhance NARS capacity to conduct high quality research. CIMMYT must also maintain its commitment and support to, and involvement in, the recently developed training activities in partnership with NARS to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of those efforts. In-country and regional training courses can be organized in collaboration with relatively stronger NARS in the regions to enhance relevance of the courses, to reduce expenses, and to maximize spill-over effects.
Public and Private Sector Relationship
Public sector research and extension in developing countries is often poorly funded and, in many NARS, financial support for these programmes is declining. Traditionally the NARS have been CIMMYT's most important partners. Static or declining strength of NARS directly affects CIMMYT's ability to serve the poor. This situation strongly suggests that regional networking is the best way to ensure a critical mass of national programme staff and expertise, a shared well-focused research programme, adequate research planning, and long-term funding (see Section 3.6, Regional Programmes). If NARS are not able to release new cultivars that reach the farmers, they have little probability of impact, with consequent poor acceptability by society. Cultivar development is, therefore, not enough to justify these programmes if the materials generated do not reach the farming community, the companies, and the market in general.
Traditionally, CIMMYT has been associated with NARS in cultivar development, training, and consulting. However, to help ensure continuity of these programmes, it is necessary to develop new strategies to channel their products to the farmers. In many cases, NARS do not presently have the resources to properly develop and support the strengthening of seed production and distribution efforts of NGOs and regional seed companies. CIMMYT should devote greater attention to developing linkages between NARS and local, regional, and national seed companies. One way to achieve this is by developing a training course on seed marketing and production that would be a joint collaboration between NARS, commercial seed companies, and CIMMYT. This course would help build the capabilities of the private companies and NARS to produce high-quality seeds (with quality control assistance) at competitive prices, in order to satisfy local market requirements. It is important to point out that this
strategy should not only be initiated with single-cross hybrids. Because of their characteristics, in terms of facility of production, seed costs, and other factors, three-way and double-cross hybrids are likely to be more appropriate to initiate such a process. Balanced emphasis should be given to both small and large companies within a country, and CIMMYT must also maintain an open-door policy toward multinational seed companies as well.
In some countries, CIMMYT has forged successful alliances with NARS and private seed companies and these alliances have increased the utilization of improved maize germplasm by farmers. The EPMR Panel believes that CIMMYT can play a catalytic role in stimulating the development of similar alliances in other countries and, where feasible, foster the development of additional private seed companies.
Inbred lines developed by CIMMYT, crossed to testers from national programmes and private companies, could generate materials which could be useful to help establish a good system of interaction for the production of improved commercial cultivars. In this case, international cooperative trials could include new combinations of specific interest to the regions involved in the collaboration. This would provide national and multinational seed companies with an opportunity to incorporate more CIMMYT lines into their programmes. CIMMYT, in turn, would benefit from the credit given to this participation, thus helping to correct the present situation in which it is difficult to measure CIMMYT's contributions through private programmes.
Improved Germplasm for Less Favourable Environments
CIMMYT has made significant progress in gaining increased understanding of physiological traits associated with abiotic stress tolerance and using this knowledge to develop improved breeding strategies. In particular, progress on tolerance to drought, low-N, and soil acidity has been notable. If adoption by resource-poor farmers, farming marginal soils, is to succeed at the physiological and breeding level, the Panel sees three major challenges:
i) Although 58% of maize area in developing countries is planted to improved varieties, 42% is not and there has been little progress in increasing the adoption rate. The reasons for lack of adoption are fundamental to CIMMYT's strategy and yet the EPMR Panel could find little documentation concerning this issue. There is an urgent need to understand why over 40% of the area sown to maize is occupied by unimproved varieties (compared to less than 20% for wheat). Is lack of adoption the result of preference (e.g., unacceptable quality or other traits), access to seed, or poor performance of the available improved varieties under on-farm conditions?
Therefore, the EPMR Panel recommends that CIMMYT:
thoroughly investigate the reasons for lack of adoption of improved maize OPVs and hybrids on more than 40% of the maize area in developing countries.
The Panel understands that this effort will require direct input from the Maize Programme scientists in collaboration with the Economics Programme and the NARS.
ii) Germplasm alone is not sufficient to achieve a sustainable positive impact on productivity in marginal maize-growing environments where drought, low soil fertility, and soil acidity are major constraints. In addition, agronomic practices are required that amplify the benefits of the stress-tolerance advantage and that conserve soil resources. Because most cropping systems in stress environments with poor soil fertility are at steady-state with regard to input and output of nutrients, maintaining the yield advantage and greater nutrient removal in harvested grain of stress-tolerant germplasm will require additional input of nutrients. Otherwise soil fertility will be depleted. Therefore, nutrient use efficiency of these materials, as well as the nutrient management practices to sustain soil fertility, are key issues. The EPMR Panel believes that stronger efforts on agronomic and natural resource issues related to use of stress-tolerant germplasm are required in the
Global and Regional Projects related to stress tolerant maize.
iii) Although there is a growing tendency for the utilization of hybrids (in 1992, 44% of the 83.6 million ha in the tropical and sub-tropical regions were grown with hybrids compared with 38% in 1985), in some regions it is still incipient or remains static, which indicates considerable room for the utilization of improved OPVs (in 1992, 14% of the area in LDCs utilized improved OPVs). In several of these regions there are local private companies that produce OPVs at prices that are acceptable to farmers. Many of these companies provide, in addition to seeds, assistance and information that helps farmers to improve their production efficiency.
Another important aspect of OPVs is that their use is usually a necessary step to help farmers understand the importance of using improved seeds of good quality and to open the door on the use of improved agronomic practices. After a first contact with improved OPVs, the farmer is usually better able to decide about the necessity for adopting hybrids.
Besides commercial production, the seed of OPVs can also be locally produced by farmer communities, as extensively demonstrated in Brazil. These experiences show that the improved seed is a "technological vehicle" that stimulates the adoption of better crop management practices, product conservation, and specialty maize utilization (e.g., QPM).
2.2.6 Conclusions
The overall assessment of the Maize Programme is very favourable. The programme has had a significant impact on the availability of improved hybrids and OPVs in developing countries. Scientific quality and productivity has also been excellent. In particular, the research on the physiological determinants of stress and selection methods for identifying stress-tolerant maize germplasm has provided new opportunities for improving maize performance in marginal environments. The EPMR Panel commends these achievements.
<section>8</section>
Chapter 3 - Crosscutting Programmes
3.1 Natural Resources Group
3.2 Economics
3.3 Applied Biotechnology Centre
3.4 Genetic Resources
3.5 Programme Linkages
3.6 Regional Programmes and Networks
3.1 Natural Resources Group
3.1.1 Background
3.1.2 Achievements, Impact, and Quality of Science
3.1.3 Future Challenges and Opportunities
3.1.4. Conclusions
3.1.1 Background
The 1993 Interim External Programme Review recommended formation of a natural resources research unit at CIMMYT. This proposal was justified by concerns about: (i) the strong association between rural poverty and impoverished soils; (ii) evidence of soil degradation in several major maize- and wheat-based production systems; and (iii) the dependence of future increases in productivity on the preservation and improvement of soil quality. Since the 1993 review, there has been increased documentation of soil degradation linked to management practices employed in maize and wheat systems. CIMMYT's regional projects have contributed to increased awareness of these problems, particularly in the rice-wheat systems of Asia and in maize-based systems of sub-Saharan Africa, and Central South America.
In 1994, CIMMYT established a Natural Resource Group (NRG), which was elevated to "research programme" status in 1996. The goals and objectives of the NRG were incorporated into the 1998-2000+ MTP. The EPMR Panel commends CIMMYT's establishment of a natural resources research group, and concurs with its mandate to address the challenge of sustaining productivity gains while preserving or improving natural resources and environmental quality in maize- and wheat-based cropping systems.
Senior scientific staff assigned to the NRG include three IRS positions at Headquarters (an economist, a crop physiologist, and a soil scientist), a fourth IRS with a 100% time commitment to the NRG (agronomy soils) in Nepal, and a fifth IRS in Honduras (agronomy-soils) with a 20% time commitment to the NRG. Another five IRS have "associate" status in the NRG although their "home base" is in another programme and they report to their home base programme director. These associate IRS work more than half time on natural resource issues, but only two have active collaborations with NRG staff within CIMMYT projects. The active NRG associates include an agronomist in the Maize Programme who is posted in Southern Africa, and another agronomist in the Wheat Programme posted in Bolivia. A third IRS in the Economics Programme is a recent hire and is expected to be an active NRG associate. Two other associate IRS, a soil scientist-agronomist in Bangladesh and an economist in Costa
Rica, have yet to establish active collaborations with NRG Programme activities.
Because of the relatively small number of IRS formally assigned to the NRG, the programme relies heavily on visiting scientists, collaboration with ARIs, and consultants to help implement its research. At present, the NRG has two visiting scientists who are seconded to CIMMYT from ARIs in Europe and has formed strategic alliances with ARIs in Europe, Australia, and the USA to develop collaborative projects and backstop several strategic research initiatives. In addition, the NRG currently employs several consultants who work at CIMMYT Headquarters on short-term projects.
3.1.2 Achievements, Impact, and Quality of Science
Outputs from CIMMYT's programmes have had a positive impact on conservation of natural resources despite the lack of a formal natural resource research programme before September 1996. Much of this impact is the result of indirect effects of germplasm improvement. Increased genetic resistance of wheat and maize germplasm to diseases has contributed to reduced need for agrochemicals that are potentially damaging to the environment. Greater yield and yield stability of wheat and maize germplasm in combination with appropriate production practices have spared millions of hectares of non-agricultural land from cultivation, land that is either marginal or presently in forests, grasslands, and wetlands. Although these contributions result from indirect effects, they are no less important and are recognized by the Panel. The scientific quality of CIMMYT's plant genetics, breeding, agronomy, physiology, and plant pathology research responsible for these land-sparing technologies are
discussed in the Wheat and Maize Programme sections of this report.
CIMMYT's applied research on natural resource management includes a portfolio of ventures on conservation tillage, soil fertility, green manure cover crops and improved fallow systems, and crop rotation. About two-thirds of this total effort, including both CIMMYT's own research and its collaboration with NARS in regional projects, has focused on the development of conservation tillage, residue management, and related husbandry practices that reduce soil degradation and increase productivity. Resource-conserving minimum tillage, residue management, and sowing methods have been identified for hillside maize in Central America, Bolivia, highland maize in East Africa, irrigated wheat in Mexico, and for rice-wheat systems of South Asia. In several regional projects, the suitability of these conservation practices is currently being tested in on-farm research and research networks in collaboration with NARS. In fact, conservation tillage, residue management, and related agronomic
practices provide a unifying theme for much of CIMMYT's natural resource and sustainability research on wheat- and maize-based cropping systems. Moreover, conservation tillage systems can provide an entry point for addressing a range of other related natural resource constraints such as soil fertility and quality, water and nutrient use efficiency, and greater cropping system diversity.
CIMMYT's agronomic research on conservation tillage systems has largely addressed issues concerning the short-term influence of component technologies on yield and input use efficiency. This work has documented consistent benefits of these management practices in maize and wheat cropping systems in a wide range of agroecological zones and ecoregions. The causes and effects that link system performance to soil properties and crop response have received less attention, as have the longer-term issues of soil quality and yield stability. At several of the regional projects and in the Rice-Wheat Systemwide Programme, however, longer-term research experiments and farm monitoring studies have been established and initial results are expected in the next few years. The addition to the NRG of newly hired IRS with crop physiology and soil science expertise has strengthened capabilities in these strategic research areas. The Panel commends CIMMYT for making this critical investment.
In the 1980s and early 1990s, CIMMYT economists and agronomists were leaders in developing a conceptual framework for conducting farming systems research and in the development of NARS capacity to conduct this type of research. Outputs have been of high quality: natural resource constraints to sustained productivity in maize and wheat systems were identified using diagnostic survey methods, and the conditions that favour farmer adoption or rejection of technologies that preserve or enhance natural resources were documented. In recent years, CIMMYT has greatly reduced its efforts in farming systems research although the NRG plans to continue work on farmer participatory research approaches.
3.1.3 Future Challenges and Opportunities
The establishment of the NRG, recent changes in IRS staffing, and CIMMYT's new project structure demonstrate an increased commitment to interdisciplinary research on natural resource protection and the long-term sustainability of maize- and wheat-based cropping systems. Two of the three HQ-based IRS in the NRG were hired within the past two years and one Associate Scientist within the past six months. They bring needed expertise in crop physiology, soil science, simulation modeling, GIS, and human ecology. In addition, there is a good mix of expertise in agronomy, soil science, and economics among the NRG IRS staff stationed in regional projects and the NRG Programme Associates, although only three of the five associate IRS are presently active in research collaboration with the NRG.
Despite this increase in resources allocated to the NRG, it should be noted that the NRG is the smallest of the five CIMMYT research programmes, with 5-6% of the projected operating research budget in the 1998-2000+ MTP. Additional operating funds are allocated to NRG Associate IRS for research on natural resource issues, and these funds are included in the budgets of other programmes. Given the relatively small size, success of NRG programmes will depend on tightly focused objectives and outputs, strategic research capabilities in the regional projects, and strong linkages with, and increased commitment of, scientific resources from the Wheat, Maize, and Economics Programmes.
Focus and Outputs of the NRG
Although NRG staff contribute to a wide range of MTP Projects, the Frontier Project 7, Learning to More Effectively Confront Problems of Resource Degradation in Maize and Wheat Systems, is the only project under direct supervision of the NRG. This project embodies many of the goals and objectives of the NRG Programme. Research outputs from this project described in the 1998-2000+ MTP are:
 a framework for research on natural resource management, acceptable to a wide range of stakeholders, and featuring improved research methods;
 dissemination of productivity-enhancing, resource-conserving sustainable maize and wheat systems; and
 documentation of regional consequences of resource degradation and the effect of technical change on resource quality and system productivity.
These are broad over-arching goals and there is a need to rapidly develop a more specific research agenda. The draft project document provided to the EPMR Panel indicates little additional focus. A more detailed work plan and timeframe for accomplishing meaningful research outputs is urgently needed.
The following considerations could help determine what this focus should be within the unifying theme provided by conservation tillage, residue management, and related agronomic practices, which presently represent a major emphasis of CIMMYT's work on natural resource conservation and productivity enhancement.
 Conservation tillage systems (i.e. various combinations of no-till, minimum till, ridge-till, fixed beds, residue cover, and stubble mulch) can increase soil water retention, reduce erosion, maintain soil organic matter, increase yields and yield stability. These benefits appear to have broad applicability as indicated by results from applied research conducted by CIMMYT and NARS collaborators in Mexico and at regional project sites - in both maize and wheat systems, under irrigated and rainfed conditions, and in a large number of agroecological zones and ecoregions. Such wide applicability is consistent with experiences in the USA and Brazil, where conservation tillage practices have been widely adopted, and where direct benefits to both productivity and natural resource conservation have been thoroughly documented.
 Most maize and wheat production in developing countries occurs in systems without conservation tillage practices, which indicates a tremendous potential impact area.
 The combination of simulation modeling of crop growth and soil processes coupled with GIS databases represents a strategic research thrust that can improve the efficiency and extrapolation of applied field research currently in progress. Adoption of conservation tillage and improved residue management will alter nutrient cycling rates and processes, water relations, weed species, and disease and insect pressure. The magnitude of these changes and their interactions in tropical and subtropical environments, however, will be fundamentally different from those found in temperate regions. Strategic research is required to better understand these processes. This knowledge will facilitate applied and adaptive research by identifying key parameters to measure and appropriate environments for conducting on-farm research, and opportunities for modifying other management practices to fully exploit the benefits of conservation tillage systems.
 As CIMMYT moves to project-based management, a focus on conservation tillage provides an opportunity for the NRG to play a catalytic role in strengthening linkages among the Maize, Wheat, and Economics Programmes. There will be a need for maize and wheat germplasm adapted to the changes in soil and pest pressures that result from adoption of conservation tillage systems, improved nutrient and water management practices, and impact assessment of conservation tillage technologies. The conservation tillage focus of the NRG and its strength in strategic research on this topic also provides opportunities for collaboration with NARS and other CGIAR Centres (e.g. CIAT, ICRISAT, ICARDA) that conduct conservation tillage research on other cropping systems.
Based on the above considerations the EPMR Panel recommends that:
conservation tillage and related soil and crop management practices should be the primary research focus of the NRG, with the goal of quantifying the effects of conservation tillage on water and nutrient use efficiency, soil quality, and productivity of maize- and wheat-based systems.
Balance of Short- and Medium-Term Research
The Panel encourages the NRG to carefully consider the balance between short- (one to two years) and medium-term (three to five years) objectives in formulating their research agenda. It should be possible to identify several useful outputs that can be accomplished in the short term. One example is the use of results from field research at regional project sites, simulation modeling, and GIS databases to produce surface maps of maize and wheat production areas that indicate regions where conservation tillage would have the greatest benefits. This information would help regional projects and networks direct on-farm research to areas of greatest potential impact. Another short-term output would be surface maps showing areas where certain diseases would be expected to become more severe because of changes in tillage and residue management. This work would utilize knowledge of pathogen epidemiology and climate to identify potential hotspots where disease-resistant germplasm
might be needed.
The NRG has made a project commitment to refine maize and wheat mega-environments using a GIS approach. The objective is to utilize soil and climate databases for more accurately delineating MEs in relation to crop-specific performance indices. This short-term project will provide a framework to identify sub-zones within MEs that are more discriminate with regard to climate, soil properties, and stresses that influence GxExM interactions. These refinements will aid breeding efforts and help predict where new technologies developed by CIMMYT programmes, including the NRG, would be most beneficial. The EPMR Panel views this effort as a building block to a more focused programme on natural resource issues related to conservation tillage.
Longer-term objectives should centre on gaining new understanding of the processes that control the effects of conservation tillage practices on crop response, nutrient and water use efficiency, yield, and yield stability. The goal of this research is to develop the capability to better predict the longer-term impact of these management practices on soil quality and cropping system performance in diverse environments. This effort will require data from field research conducted at CIMMYT research stations in Mexico and at regional project sites. The need for direct collaboration with agronomists, soil scientists, and breeders who work at these locations will help strengthen the overall research capacity at these outreach sites and provide a broader synthesis and extrapolation of the research findings.
On-farm participatory research will be needed to identify the conditions that favour adoption of conservation tillage and related practices, and to tap farmer knowledge about modifications and innovations concerning these practices. Conservation tillage practices interact with livestock enterprises, mechanization, nutrient management, and cropping patterns. Hence the development of appropriate technologies and adoption by farmers depends on site-specific knowledge of these interactions. The NRG presently has expertise in farmer participatory research and plans collaborative efforts with regional projects and NARS. The Panel believes that the goal of this effort should be to develop NARS capacity to conduct on-farm participatory research while avoiding a large investment in the development of methodologies. The new training course under development (see below) appears to be an appropriate strategy for developing this NARS capacity.
Service and Training
The relatively small size of the NRG will require strategic decisions about the balance among research, service, and training activities. Already, the NRG has provided surface climate maps and GIS software to a CIMMYT scientist in Southern Africa to facilitate her research on selection methods for drought and low-N tolerance in tropical maize germplasm. Although selection criteria were identified in research conducted in Mexico, the Mexican germplasm is not suitable for Southern Africa, where drought and poor soil fertility are major constraints to maize productivity. This service permitted a more rapid initiation of this research project by helping to identify appropriate experimental sites for selection nurseries.
While such services are extremely useful, the Panel anticipates that the potential demand for such services by other programmes and regional projects could easily exceed staff resources in the NRG. Providing GIS training of CIMMYT staff from other programmes is one option. Contracting out such GIS training of CIMMYT personnel to other CGIAR Centres, ARIs, or consultants should be considered to minimize the time commitment of NRG staff. Obtaining good quality data on climate and soils is also required. The NRG will need strong support from CIMMYT's regional project, research field stations, and the Soil and Plant Analysis Laboratory to insure the acquisition and quality of these data.
Presently, the NRG plans to play a leadership role in developing a course entitled The Principles and Practices of Sustainable Maize and Wheat Cropping Systems, which is the central activity of Global Project 8. This course will emphasize farmer participatory research methods. An initial project proposal has been developed and a donor has been identified. The course will require a substantial effort, although the proposal appears to have sufficient resources to hire adequate training and support positions. This training activity is a worthwhile effort, but care must be taken to ensure that it does not distract from accomplishing the NRG research objectives.
Critical Mass and Collaboration with Other Programmes
Ensuring a critical mass for the new NRG Programme and coordinated research efforts on natural resource management constraints are key issues for the success of CIMMYT's investment in protecting the environment while sustaining productivity gains of maize- and wheat systems. The NRG Programme represents only 5-6% of CIMMYT's operating research budget and has only 4.2 full time equivalent IRS. These resources are not sufficient to establish an effective NRG Programme. Although five IRS have NRG Associate status, only two are actively involved in collaboration with the NRG, and a third Associate IRS, hired within the past six months, is expected to develop an active collaboration with the NRG. Clearly there is an opportunity to develop more active collaboration between the NRG and the other two Associate IRS, and the Panel strongly encourages this action. In fact, we expect that the Associate category will disappear as CIMMYT continues to move towards full implementation of
its project management approach.
There is also a need to allocate more time to coordinated efforts on natural resource management research that includes both applied and strategic components. Under the present projects in the MTP 1998-2000+, and excluding contributions from projects with purely a genetics or economics approach, 44% of CIMMYT's research on protecting the environment occurs in the Global Projects (GP) on increasing the productivity and sustainability of maize and wheat systems in stressed environments (GP 4 and 5), 51% in the regional projects in SSA, Latin America, Asia, and WANA (RP 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5), and 4% on frontier project F7, which is the single project under the NRG.
The Panel recommends that:
CIMMYT establish a critical mass of scientific expertise in Frontier Project 7 to improve research efficiency and the complementation of strategic and applied research on conservation tillage systems.
One option to accomplish this recommendation would be to transfer IRS time and supporting research budgets into Frontier Project 7 from global and regional projects that presently have conservation tillage research efforts. While this action may not require a change in short-term plans of the affected IRS, it would improve the synergism between strategic and applied research on this topic and increase overall research efficiency.
3.1.4. Conclusions
The EPMR strongly supports the establishment of the NRG and sees tremendous opportunities for the NRG to serve a catalytic role in strengthening internal linkages among CIMMYT's research programmes and regional projects, and external linkages among NARS and other international agricultural research centres (IARCs). Given the small size of the NRG, however, success will depend on a tightly focused research agenda, strategic alliances with ARIs, and a proper balance between research, service, and training commitments. The Panel recommends that the NRG have a primary focus on conservation tillage and associated soil and crop management practices that enhance productivity and protect natural resources in maize- and wheat-based cropping systems. The Panel further recommends reallocation of some IRS time and associated budgets to a coordinated effort on strategic and applied research on conservation tillage systems within the FP 7 project to provide a critical mass to this effort.
3.2 Economics
3.2.1 Staffing and Budget
3.2.2 Review of Programme Activities
3.2.3 CCERs
3.2.4 Future Challenges
3.2.5 Assessment and Conclusion
CIMMYT's Economics Programme (EP) provides valuable services to its internal partners and undertakes disciplinary research that is highly regarded by external collaborators. This assessment is based on the excellent documentation provided by the programme, discussions with its staff as well as staff of other programmes, internal reviews undertaken by the EP, and the report of the Centre-Commissioned External Review (CCER) undertaken in June 1997.
3.2.1 Staffing and Budget
Currently, the EP has nine internationally recruited staff (IRS) members, one Rockefeller fellow, three associated scientists, six national staff, and a number of research associates and assistants. All IRS members except one are economists, many with undergraduate or supplementary training in other social sciences; and about half began their post-doctoral careers in CIMMYT. They are a highly productive group, as evidenced by the number of high-quality publications. Most have also worked in CIMMYT's outreach programmes and/or with the regional programmes. The group, therefore, is attuned to field-level conditions in developing countries.
Of the 13 senior staff (IRS, Associate Scientists, and Post-Doctorals), eight are based at El Batan, and five at various field locations. This contrasts with the situation about 10 years ago, when 11 of the 15 senior staff were based in outreach programmes, and devoted much of their time to research on, and training for, national agricultural research systems. Irrespective of the location of the staff, the proper balance between support to regional activities and Headquarters-oriented work needs to be monitored constantly.
The staff of the EP, as of many other CIMMYT programmes, is concerned about being overloaded, partly due to what they perceive as an increase in administrative, coordinating, and reporting activities, many of which are unavoidable. What this strongly suggests is a need for better priority setting and time management, both by the staff and their managers. In this context, the Panel notes that a majority of the EP staff are engaged in more than three projects; and the Programme Director is involved in six projects. Some rationalization of workloads is clearly possible and desirable, especially in view of CIMMYT's emerging priorities.
The Panel also notes that some of the current pressure of work is to be expected in a group that has set high expectations of itself and wishes to maintain its excellent professional reputation, especially since the position of Programme Director was not filled for nearly two years following the funding crisis in 1994. The current Director was appointed in 1996, has made a good start in leading the programme, using a collegial approach in planning and execution of programme activities.
In terms of its financial resources, the 1997 budget of the EP is US$ 2.2 million, up from US$ 1.13 million in 1993. During 1998, this budget is likely to increase to US$ 3.0 million. Two noteworthy features in this regard are a more or less constant share of the Centre's unrestricted funding (ranging from 3-5%) and a corresponding increase in self-generated resources, mainly through special project funding. The share of the latter sources of funding has gone up from 20% of the EP's budget in the early 1990s to about 60% in 1997, and is expected to increase further to 72% in 1998.
3.2.2 Review of Programme Activities
In general, CIMMYT's Economics Programme seeks to improve the economic benefits resulting from the scientific work of the Centre, and also addresses external constraints to the adoption of improved technologies and efficient utilization of agricultural resources in different crops and regions. The first group of considerations has led to substantial work on priority setting, while the second has led to impact assessment activities. Two other considerations have been taken into account while designing the work programme, i.e., ex ante evaluation of technologies with high potential, and second, the role of the private sector in the extension and use of new technologies.
In the early 1990s, these considerations resulted in a research portfolio that - besides continuing the long-standing work on demand and supply projections for wheat and maize - comprised mainly impact assessment; resource allocation and priority setting; ex ante technology assessment; and policy studies, especially in regard to the seed industry. Following funding cutbacks, the on-farm research (OFR) work was considerably reduced, as the methodologies were standardized and several NARS were considered competent to work on these aspects. (Some OFR work was continued by economists at outreach locations in Africa and Central America.) The research on natural resources was hived off as a separate unit, as the concern for sustainability became widespread after increasing evidence of resource degradation (see the section on NRG). The EP continues to be involved in research on social and economic aspects of NRG work.
Service to CIMMYT Management. The EP strives to serve several internal and external partners - mainly CIMMYT management, the commodity programmes, and NARS. From all indications, the EP has served CIMMYT's management well: it assists the Director General in reporting on the Centre's achievements and impact, and in taking a lead role in such CGIAR-wide discussions as IPR.
Through impact assessment studies, the EP has helped highlight the impressive global spread of CIMMYT's wheat and maize varieties. The programme is currently contributing to new Systemwide initiatives, including the one on participatory research and gender analysis. In all these areas, the Programme's contributions are well appreciated, and rightly so. The EP also has overall responsibility for producing CIMMYT's Wheat and Maize Facts and Trends series, which is an extremely useful contribution. There is, however, a need to incorporate more analytical content in this publication.
Support to Commodity Programmes. The Economics Programme has had a long history of supporting the commodity programmes in the areas of technology design and impact assessment. It needs to take a more proactive role in priority setting in the commodity programmes, which are looking for more detailed guidelines, as well as a clearer basis for assigning relative weights to different research objectives, such as breeding maize for food or feed. The issue of popularizing hybrid versus open-pollinated maize, say, in Africa, also needs specific answers. The Panel considers that the findings of the impact studies should also feed back into the appropriate programmes, and result in suitable changes, in the design of commodity research projects. For example, the Panel is convinced that the EP's findings on the socioeconomic reasons for the non-adoption of improved varieties of maize in over 40% of the target area should directly contribute to the collaborative work between the two
programmes on this important issue. (See also Section 2.2.4.)
Another example of the desirability of greater inter-programme collaboration is the frontier project FP6, Priority Setting and Technological Forecasting for Increased Research Efficiency, which is proposed to be carried out almost exclusively by economists from the EP. It is clear to the Panel that greater concerted efforts by staff of the EP as well as other programmes are needed to further integrate the commodity programmes into this type of research project.
In this context, the Panel is aware that there are other important initiatives in which the EP is collaborating with CIMMYT's commodity programmes in a meaningful way. The project on Economics of Genetic Diversity is one such example. This study examines the relationship between biodiversity and productivity; and the relevant scientific staff of CIMMYT are involved in the design and implementation of the study. Other similar examples, such as the economics of biotechnology, can also be cited; so it seems to the Panel that it is mainly in the priority-setting area that increased collaboration between staff of the EP and other programmes would be mutually beneficial. In this respect, collaboration with IPGRI and IFPRI would also be helpful.
Strengthening NARS Capacity. EP staff in the outreach programmes perform a variety of very valuable functions. For instance, they organize training programmes, mainly in the form of short-term workshops. The themes selected for such workshops in recent years include natural resource policy, economic analysis, and seed production and supply policy. Currently, training programmes on these topics are organized in Africa and Central America, and the staff are involved in collaborative training programmes with the commodity programmes and NARS. It is expected that staff of the EP will also make significant contributions to the proposed training course on sustainable systems. However, no such training programme is presently conducted in Asia.
The EP's current research support to NARS is planned under a global project, Building Partnership through Human Resource Development, and two regional projects, Improving Food Security in Sub-Saharan Africa and Enhancing Maize and Wheat Production Systems. These projects are at present at a preparatory stage. However, from the documentation and presentations given to the Panel, it appears that three ongoing projects, two in Eastern Africa and one in Latin America, provide good backstopping to national research systems as well as to the regional programmes of CIMMYT. They also provide good examples of inter-centre collaboration. However, the EP's contribution to these projects gives an impression of multiple and fragmented activities. A clearer strategy for enhancing human resource capacity in NARS through the EP's efforts in research, networking and training, is suggested.
The Panel is also concerned that there is hardly any EP project located in Asia, the largest wheat- and maize-producing region of the world. There is a proposal to have "affiliate economists" in the region; but it is not clear what these affiliates are expected to do, in which activities they would be involved, and what their responsibility and accountability would be. In any case "affiliate economists" are no substitute for CIMMYT's core staff, more so when there are few ongoing EP activities in research, training, and networking in the region. This gap in the EP's work programme in Asia needs to be closed urgently.
3.2.3 CCERs
Over the last few years, CIMMYT has commissioned two external reviews (in 1994 and 1997) to assess the Economics Programme. Each review was led by Jock Anderson, who was assisted by two other eminent economists, of whom one was a member (or Chair) of the Board serving as a resource person. The Panel has commented on the participation of Board members in CCERs in Section 6.6.
The reviews made favourable comments on the EP and also provided some useful ideas for its future direction. The review team was explicitly asked to comment on the quality of work, as well as on quality control mechanisms, support furnished to the main users within and outside the Centre, and the relationship between the present activities and the objectives defined for the programme. The reviews made constructive suggestions and influenced the functioning of the programme. The 1994 review, for example, encouraged the Centre to advance its work on private sector activities in maize research, commended CIMMYT's research on priority setting, and advised a greater focus on impact assessment research. The 1997 review advised the EP to give more attention to the macro policy issues in key wheat and maize countries. It also suggested that consumption and poverty-related issues deserved greater attention. The reviews were of assistance in providing guidance to the programme for its
agenda setting. The EPMR Panel benefited from the CCER reports in the process of formulation of its own views on the programme.
3.2.4 Future Challenges
The main themes of the EP identified in the MTP are, in the Panel's view, relevant and appropriate. However, because of significant changes taking place in CIMMYT's external and internal environment, a gradual shift in emphasis and orientation of the EP's work would be called for in the coming years, as programme staff have already recognized. Some key features of such external and internal changes and their implications for each of the EP's main research areas are highlighted below.
Impact Assessment. In the years following the food crisis of the mid 1960s, the major goal of agricultural research in and for developing countries was to increase food production, mainly by land-saving, productivity-enhancing technologies. CIMMYT played an important part in enabling a number of developing countries to achieve this goal. The need for increasing food production is, and will continue to be, an important objective. However, there are other objectives which now need to be included as components of agricultural development. Chief among these are poverty alleviation, gender equity, and environmental sustainability. This multiplicity of goals makes impact assessment difficult, more so when some of these goals conflict with each other, at least in the short term. The EP, which has a major role in the impact assessment activities of the Centre, now needs to systematically explore and develop new methodologies and approaches that take account of multiple objectives.
Priority Setting. National economies, developed as well as developing, are getting more and more integrated. Institutional mechanisms such as WTO at the global level, and the regional economic groupings at the regional level, are leading towards the opening up of national economies and their agricultural sectors to international competition. Such moves have two important implications for the global agricultural agenda. First, these developments more sharply highlight the question of comparative advantages (or disadvantages) that a country faces in the production of certain commodities. Research priorities have to take into account, in a dynamic and fast-changing setting, the comparative advantage of growing a particular crop in a given region. Second, the opening up of the economies may lead to the "import" of price instability into a country. At the same time it also provides, via the trade routes, an opportunity to stabilize supplies and prices. Thus, a whole range of new
policy issues connected with "stability" acquire importance in research of the EP.
Links with the Private Sector. Together with the move towards global economic integration, there is also a pressure to liberalize economies, including their agricultural sector, by removing state interference in the production, pricing, and trade of commodities. A rapid shift to a market orientation is clearly discernible. Often, this is interpreted as withdrawal of the state from activities that can best be managed by the private sector. Agriculture is no exception to this general tendency. While research is still considered a "public good", justifying a major role for the state or state-supported institutions, a whole range of activities, from extension to input supplies and especially marketing, are now considered as the legitimate areas for private sector operations. The EP's study on maize seeds has explored this area; but privatization does not necessarily mean opening the market to large seed companies. The potentialities of the smaller, national companies and the
constraints that they are facing, should, in the Panel's view, be a legitimate topic for research. Such research would also need to link up with macro-policy aspects, such as prices and trade policies.
Ex Ante Technology Assessment. In recent years, new frontiers have opened up in two broad areas of science, which are of immediate relevance to the Economics Programme. First, the growing importance of biotechnology, and second, significant developments in the area of information technology. The implication of new thrusts in technologies for the Maize and Wheat Programmes are discussed elsewhere in this report. These developments also have important implications for the Economics Programme. Questions such as the ex ante evaluation of new technologies, priority setting in an unfamiliar environment, forecasting the adoption of largely untested technologies, etc., have thrown up difficult challenges to social scientists. A much closer interaction between the social scientists and biological scientists, as well as with the user systems, has become imperative. The rapid advances in information technology, on the other hand, provide a facilitating environment for dealing with the
conventional issues as well as new developments in the social sciences. Such developments require not only the acquisition of new skills, but also a change in the mind-set to comprehend and adapt to the emerging scenarios.
Projection of Demand and Supply for CIMMYT Commodities. With the increase in incomes and the decline in the population growth rate the world over, the rate of growth of demand for cereals, including wheat and maize, is decelerating. Still, there is hunger and poverty in large parts of the world; and the switch-over from coarse cereals (excluding maize), roots, and tubers to superior cereals, i.e., wheat and maize, is taking place in the initial stages of economic growth. Yet the demand for maize and wheat as food is not increasing as rapidly as in the past, while the demand for animal feed and for industrial uses of these cereals is progressively increasing. Even in their food intake, consumers are exercising more product differentiation. These developments have immediate implications for the projection of demand and supply. To be of practical use, CIMMYT's projections now have to be made in terms of specific products of research, rather than for wheat and maize as such.
Internal Developments. Besides these external factors, more recent developments in CIMMYT are also relevant for the design and implementation of the Economics Programme's activities. Of these, the most important internal development is the recent move towards a multidisciplinary project mode. The EP needs to continue to play an essential supportive role within the Centre; and the Panel believes it is essential that existing mechanisms, such as the Research Coordinating Committee (RCC), be fully utilized to assist the EP in defining this role, its commitments in terms of resources, and its accountability to other CIMMYT programmes, in a clearer manner. In other words, the Panel believes that the apparent lack of focus in some activities of the EP, as noted above, is mainly due to this lack of clarity on the expected contributions from it to the other programmes of the Centre. Once this role has been further clarified, it would be useful for the EP to revisit its own
priorities for the medium and long term.
3.2.5 Assessment and Conclusion
The Panel's overall assessment of CIMMYT's Economics Programme is that it is a dynamic group that has made useful contributions to the Centre. Over the years, its reputation has been built on such factors as an able and respected leadership, competent staff, high research productivity, assistance to NARS, and continued professional staff growth. The EP is also involved in scanning and responding to the external environment as it relates to the principal concerns of the Centre.
Judged by any objective criteria, the EP has played an effective role in supporting the work of the Centre. It has assisted the commodity programmes in aspects of priority setting, technology assessment, demand forecasting, impact assessment, and the routine tasks of data collection and analysis. It has also collaborated with the regional programmes by supporting research, training, and networking activities; and it has taken a pioneering role in exploring new areas of concern to the Centre and the CGIAR in general, e.g., work on impact assessment, ex ante technological assessment, gender issues, participatory research and IPR.
There are, however, a few areas where some further thinking is indicated. The external trends towards globalization and privatization, among others, and the shift to a multidisciplinary project mode within CIMMYT, have considerably changed the external and internal environment in which the Economics Programme has to operate. The Panel is of the view that in the future the EP would need to pay more attention to building stronger partnerships with staff of other programmes of the Centre, and to undertake a somewhat more focused work programme at Headquarters and in its outreach locations, as noted above.
The Panel, therefore, recommends that the EP:
1. Determine, in discussions with RCC, the balance of its research activities in institution-wide activities, support to other programmes, support to NARS, and its own frontier research.
2. Strengthen its presence in the Asian region through a greater use of affiliate economists working in close collaboration with NARS and ARIs.
3. In view of the increasing importance of macroeconomic policies as they affect maize and wheat, gradually place more emphasis on this aspect of research focusing on a few selected countries.
Some further specific suggestions for further enhancing the quality of this otherwise excellent Programme are as follows:
1. The Panel suggests that in line with the increasing complexity and diversity of its work programme, the EP should now gradually and cautiously move towards establishing itself as a Social Science Programme, rather than as an Economics Programme.
2. It would be useful for the EP to conduct a priority-setting exercise for its own work, with the help of CIMMYT's management and other programmes.
3.3 Applied Biotechnology Centre
3.3.1 Introduction
3.3.2 External Evaluations and Reviews
3.3.3 Achievements
3.3.4 Assessment and Emerging Challenges
3.3.1 Introduction
The Applied Biotechnology Laboratory was founded in 1990. It was elevated to full research programme status in late 1995 following a recommendation of the 1993 Interim External Review. It was renamed the Applied Biotechnology Centre (ABC) in late 1996 to better reflect, in the words of CIMMYT, its special importance within CIMMYT and its function as a global focal point for developing country maize and wheat biotechnology research. CIMMYT's biotechnology research effort across all programmes in 1997 was the third largest in the CGIAR, after ILRI and IRRI. It has the largest scale of activities in the areas of genetic transformation and marker assisted selection. The ABC currently has only six core-funded international staff, all located in Mexico. However, the ABC, which is growing very rapidly due to its capacity to attract special project funding, has a total staff complement of about 60, of which about half are scientists (including adjuncts, post-doctoral scientists,
professional fellows, and graduate students).
About 60% (currently 15 scientists) of the ABC's staff and budget is devoted to studies of molecular maps in maize and wheat and the use of molecular markers in maize and wheat improvement and genetic resources description and use.
A further approximately 18% (currently five scientists) is concerned with genetic engineering (gene transfer and expression) in these crops. The third group or approximately 22% (currently six scientists) is involved in apomixis research in maize. Apomixis, or asexual reproduction through seed, results in progeny genetically identical to the parent plant even in outcrossing species. Apomitic versions of hybrid varieties of maize and wheat would allow farmers to replant seed from their own harvests, rather than purchasing new seed each year. This technology would, often for the first time, make hybrid technology available to poor farmers who cannot afford to buy new seed each year.
3.3.2 External Evaluations and Reviews
Because of the short existence of the ABC, there have been no Centre-Commissioned External Reviews of its operations or performance. However, many of the projects have been reviewed individually. Several of the reports from these reviews were available to the Panel. Further, the Panel was aided in its assessment of this Programme by an independent expert, Dr. Ralph Quatrano, Department of Biology, NCSU, Chapel Hill, N.C., who acted as an external consultant. Dr. Quatrano undertook a three-day review of the ABC scientific programme during Phase I of the review and provided detailed input to the Panel.
3.3.3 Achievements
During its relatively short existence, given the difficulties in initiating from scratch a sophisticated programme of research in a developing country, the ABC has an impressive list of accomplishments. These include since 1993:
 Development of non-radioactive, safer, and more environmentally friendly molecular (DNA) marker technologies for use in maize and wheat genome analysis and manipulation. These technologies have been successfully used to map a number of important traits in maize (resistance to South-Western Corn Borer, Sugar Cane Stem Borer, Maize Streak Virus, Maize Mosaic Virus and anthesis silking interval - ASI - a major component of drought tolerance in maize) and wheat (components of durable leaf rust resistance).
 Completion of the transfer of genes for resistance to South Western Corn Borer into a susceptible tropical maize using, for the first time, molecular markers and the development of large scale molecular marker strategies for marker assisted selection (MAS) for ASI.
 The transformation of both maize and wheat using the biolistic-based methodology. This was followed by the successful completion of the first field trial of transgenic maize in Mexico. CIMMYT used the transgenic maize it developed as a model in working with the Host Country authorities to develop appropriate regulations and guidelines for the safe conduct of field trials of transgenic plants. The ABC has also converted existing CIMMYT greenhouses to meet Mexican requirements as a biocontainment facility for work with transgenic wheat and maize.
 The development by CIMMYT-based scientists from the French National Research Institute for Development Cooperation (ORSTOM), working with the ABC and Mexican researchers, of BC4 maize and Tripsacum derivatives that are apomitic, and the mapping of the genomic region in Tripsacum involved in the expression of apomixis.
 The negotiated acquisition of transgenic Bt maize from a private sector company, the first such collaboration for CIMMYT.
 Hosting of a "gene-flow" workshop at CIMMYT-Mexico to address the issue of field trials of transgenic maize in Mexico, a centre of origin for maize, and two training courses in the application of molecular genetics in plant improvement.
3.3.4 Assessment and Emerging Challenges
Overall this is a well-managed programme implemented by an enthusiastic and dedicated staff and based on good-quality science. However, the Panel noted the following areas of concern arising from the rapid growth of the group over a short period of time and the increasing demand for access to new molecular genetic technologies inside and outside CIMMYT.
Interaction with Maize and Wheat Programmes
The ABC has a range of successful interactions with the Maize Programme and, as seen above, can claim a number of notable successes (see also Section 2.2). However, the Panel has concerns at the level of integration of biotechnology in CIMMYT's maize improvement activities. The majority of breeders in the Maize Programme have training only in conventional breeding. There is an urgent need to correct this deficiency and for the ABC and Maize Programme to expand their collaboration to facilitate the development of biotechnology assisted breeding. The Panel is pleased to note that the ABC has organized for December this year the first internal course (to last eight days) to be offered to 25 CIMMYT staff members to improve their knowledge and skills in biotechnology.
Integration of biotechnology into the Wheat Programme also needs, perhaps to an even greater degree, more focus and commitment, not only from the ABC, but also from the Wheat Programme (see Section 2.1). This is not to say there have not been significant successes in the interaction between the Wheat Programme and the ABC. The successful mapping of the genomic regions responsible for leaf rust resistance and the ongoing programmes seeking to map the aluminum tolerance genes from rye and applying marker assisted selection (MAS) for BYDV resistance are cases in point. However, the status, commitment and priority for a number of other wheat projects (e.g. resistance to Karnal bunt, drought tolerance, Russian wheat aphids and septoria resistance) appear to be poorly defined. In addition, some Wheat Programme staff appear to have developed relationships with ARIs in the area of molecular genetics outside the ABC/Wheat Programme interaction. While this is to be commended, it does
raise issues of the roles and responsibilities with respect to wheat breeding and biotechnology in CIMMYT.
The Panel therefore recommends that the ABC:
in collaboration with the Wheat and Maize Programmes develop clear joint research plans with agreed priorities and focus for wheat and maize biotechnology and genetic engineering. Particular emphasis should be given to how these technologies will be incorporated into the CIMMYT wheat and maize breeding activities.
The Panel notes that CIMMYT is a core partner in the Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) for Molecular Plant Breeding headquartered at The University of Adelaide in South Australia. The CRC will provide two postdoctoral persons to be based at CIMMYT to work on priority problems in wheat biotechnology. The Panel commends the ABC for this interaction, which will stimulate wheat biotechnology at CIMMYT. However, involvement of the ABC in the CRC should neither detract from, nor substitute for, the development of a close interaction between the Wheat Programme and the ABC at CIMMYT.
Apomixis Research
Work on the transfer, isolation, and cloning of the DNA segment controlling apomixis from Tripsacum to maize is already a major project in the ABC portfolio (approximately 22% of staff) and has the capacity to quickly grow further if current negotiations for additional funding with transnational hybrid maize companies are successful. This work is undertaken in close collaboration with ORSTOM of France, which has several scientists outposted to CIMMYT.
The apomixis project is an extremely important one, not only for CIMMYT but for world agriculture. Apomixis has the potential to provide a step-up in yield of 10-20% in all major food crops through its capacity to fix heterosis in self-reproducing lines. The Panel commends CIMMYT for this association with ORSTOM and its leadership role in maize apomixis. However, while success is still some way off, and by no means guaranteed, it is clear that this project is raising concerns in a number of areas. One of these is intellectual property rights (IPR), with both the Mexican Government and partner NARS in developing countries. Another is the potential impact of this technology on the hybrid maize seed industry regionally and globally. The Panel recognizes that CIMMYT is responding to these concerns by providing leadership in the CGIAR System with respect to developing policies on IPR issues and also by funding an economic assessment of the likely impact of apomixis on the hybrid
seed industry. The Panel urges CIMMYT to move ahead on these issues as quickly as possible.
In view of the potential importance of apomixis to the effective exploitation of heterosis by resource-poor farmers, and the outstanding progress made to date in the apomixis project, the Panel encourages CIMMYT to continue to mobilize all available resources to support the apomixis project to reach two goals: (i) a diploid maize plant that is apomictic and (ii) the isolation and cloning of a fragment of DNA that is required for apomixis.
Relative Emphasis of Genetic Engineering Versus Molecular Genetics
One of the key problems facing the ABC is the relative emphasis to be given in its programme to genetic engineering (generation and testing of genetically transformed plants) and molecular genetics (gene mapping and marker assisted characterization and selection). Currently, about 75% of the staff and resources devoted to these two areas goes to molecular genetics and 25% goes to genetic engineering. While marker-based technologies are of greater interest to the plant breeding programmes in the short term, genetic engineering offers significant benefits in the longer term. Once stable and heritable expression of useful DNA segments from other organisms has been obtained in elite lines of wheat and maize, this material can be incorporated readily and directly in the routine breeding programmes. In other words, technology transfer within CIMMYT and to the NARS with transformants may pose fewer problems than molecular markers In the light of this and the fact that the ABC
already has access to an exciting suite of gene constructs (e.g. Bt variants, ribosome inhibitor, glucanase and chitinase genes), the Panel suggests that genetic engineering should remain a priority area of research for the ABC, even though research on molecular markers may be of more immediate interest to many breeders. However, the Panel also wishes to stress that if CIMMYT is to be involved in genetic engineering research and the transfer of transformed plants to NARS, it must be done with a great deal of caution and education on the potential problems and difficulties the national programmes may face. This careful education process should be an integral part of the ABC's outreach activities.
Greenhouse and Field Facilities for Transgenics
The ABC has successfully converted existing greenhouse space to meet Mexican requirements for use as a biocontainment facility. However, as the number of projects involving genetically engineered wheat and maize plants grows, there will be a growing requirement for greenhouse and field space for transgenics. It is clear that the ABC team will soon be required to generate and test large numbers of transformed plants of wheat and maize. This will involve not only physical facilities but a large demand for specialized labour that will require careful coordination and planning. The Panel suggests that the ABC on the basis of a careful analysis of future requirements seek to ensure it has adequate greenhouse facilities to permit the smooth implementation of its funded programme.
Automation of Molecular Marker Analysis
The ABC team has adapted and refined non-radioactive techniques for all their marker detection research. For long-term use, safety, and ease of transfer to other groups in the developing world, this is a noteworthy and important accomplishment and perhaps a standard for other international centres to follow.
However, as the Maize and Wheat Programmes embrace these technologies for use in their breeding programmes, the demand in CIMMYT for rapid and efficient DNA extraction procedures, nucleic acid sequencing, probe development, and PCR analysis will grow rapidly. Parallel to this will be a growing requirement for data storage and manipulation. For example, CIMMYT generates over 5,000 spring wheat crosses each year and from these about 500 progeny/cross. If each F2 plant is analysed for 20 molecular markers, this will generate 50X10^6 data points/year. This is the sort of marker number and analysis capacity that will be required if marker assisted selection is to replace a substantial fraction of field screening for disease resistances and agronomic traits that are difficult to select.
Clearly the ABC must for the future consider the use of new techniques aimed at the automation of DNA analysis. As a first step towards this end, the ABC should be planning the integration of automatic DNA sequencing facilities and robotic pipetters in their programme in the short term. In the longer term, they need to maintain close contact with groups developing automated protocols for marker probing and scoring techniques. Since this is a rapidly developing field, the Panel suggests the ABC plan for 1998/99 a mini-symposium/workshop at CIMMYT, in which individuals from various companies and universities are invited to present a picture as to where this technology is, where it is going, and possible applications as they relate to CIMMYT.
3.4 Genetic Resources
3.4.1 Evolution
3.4.2 Achievements and Impacts
3.4.3 CCERs
3.4.4 Assessment and Future Challenges
3.4.1 Evolution
Genetic resources are the cornerstones of both the Wheat and Maize Programmes at CIMMYT. Since their inception in 1966, both programmes have independently funded a range of genetic resource activities.
The original holdings of maize germplasm at CIMMYT were samples of landraces collected from all accessible regions of Mexico by the Office of Special Studies and from other countries in the Americas by a variety of agencies. These were maintained by the Maize Programme at Chapingo as a working collection in support of its breeding activities. With the completion of the new facilities at El Batan in 1971, including suitable facilities for medium-term seed storage, an active genebank was established at CIMMYT Headquarters. The main focus of the genebank's activities was the servicing of breeding programmes not only at CIMMYT but worldwide. While further systematic collection was undertaken, especially after the establishment of IBPGR in 1974, during this period genetic resources conservation was regarded as a secondary priority compared to breeding for increased production.
In the early 1980s, with the growing awareness of, and publicity given to, the issues of genetic conservation and genetic vulnerability, CIMMYT came in for substantial public criticism with respect to the management of the genetic resources under its care. In the mid 1980s, partly in response to this criticism, CIMMYT upgraded its storage facilities and accepted responsibility for the maintenance of a base collection of landraces of maize native to the Western Hemisphere and, later, for germplasm of some of the wild relatives of maize. More recently, maize genebank staff have led the initiative to establish a global network for the conservation and distribution of maize genetic resources.
The history of the wheat germplasm collection at CIMMYT closely parallels that of maize. The original collections were made and maintained as a working collection to support the wheat breeding programme. The need for establishing a global collection at CIMMYT was not felt until the mid 1980s because among cultivated plants, wheat was probably the most widely collected and conserved crop. However, as a result of concerns about the continuing availability of wheat genetic resources to NARS, and criticism of CIMMYT's lack of leadership in this area, CIMMYT's 1988 strategic plan recognized the need for establishing a global germplasm collection. Consequently, in 1989, CIMMYT and ICARDA entered into an agreement whereby CIMMYT assumed responsibility for the maintenance of base collections of hexaploid wheats and triticale and ICARDA assumed responsibility for base collections of tetraploid and diploid wheats and wheat wild relatives. Each centre agreed to provide back-up service
to the other so that both collections were safeguarded in two locations. The wheat genebank also interacts with NARS by backing up national collections and responding to germplasm requests. In 1993, CIMMYT along with ICARDA and IPGRI established a Global Wheat Genetic Resources Network to facilitate and promote the greater utilization of wheat genetic resources through free exchange of information and germplasm.
In 1994, CIMMYT as an organization, along with the other CGIAR Centres, signed an agreement with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, bringing their collections under the auspices of FAO as part of the international network of ex situ collections. This agreement recognizes that CIMMYT holds and maintains its germplasm collections on behalf of the global community and is committed to the goal of fair and equitable access to germplasm. This agreement underpins CIMMYT's commitment to the Global Plan of Action for Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture sponsored by FAO and the Systemwide Genetic Resources Programme sponsored by the CGIAR.
From 1998, many of the genetic resource activities of the Wheat and Maize Programmes will be integrated under Global Project 1, Conservation and Management of Genetic Resources, to be coordinated by the Director General.
3.4.2 Achievements and Impacts
The Collections
Over their 30 year history, the CIMMYT Maize and Wheat Programmes have developed impressive collections of germplasm. In the case of wheat and triticale the number of accessions is about 120,000 and for maize, about 17,000 accessions.
The Genebank
The new Wellhausen-Anderson Plant Genetic Resources Centre was inaugurated in September 1996. This Centre, funded in part by the Japanese Government, has a storage capacity of 450,000 seed samples. It also has specially designed seed treatment and packaging installations to support CIMMYT's activities in germplasm collection, conservation, and distribution. Active collections are maintained at -3캜, ensuring seed viability for about 25+ years. The active collections are used to supply seed for CIMMYT's work and to meet the hundreds of requests yearly from researchers worldwide. Base collections are kept at -18캜, ensuring seed viability for 50+ years. The base collections are primarily for long-term conservation.
Information Systems
CIMMYT has developed for both the wheat and maize collections comprehensive databases designed to allow potential users to pinpoint accessions of interest. The Wheat Programme developed the International Wheat Information System (IWIS), which lists passport information, pedigrees, and evaluation data on a wide range of wheat germplasm. A complementary database developed collaboratively by CIMMYT and Australian scientists, and which comes on a diskette for personal computers, the Genetic Resources Information Package (GRIP), allows IWIS users to locate seed samples of wheat germplasm stocks around the world and provides an abbreviated version of the IWIS pedigrees. For maize, the genetic resources sub-programme produced an updated CD-ROM earlier this year containing passport data and preliminary characterization data obtained during the latest round of regeneration for about 17,000 accessions. Further evaluation data is being added as it is generated.
Regeneration
The Maize Programme can claim three significant achievements in terms of regeneration of maize genetic resources. The first is the development of suitable protocols for the regeneration of maize germplasm in collaboration with the Biometrics Unit. The second is the regeneration of samples from CIMMYT's own collection. The Centre has the capacity to regenerate about 350-400 accessions per year and about 1,650 accessions have been regenerated since 1993. The third is the regeneration of about 7,000 accessions held in regional NARS genebanks. This was done under the Phase I of Latin America Maize Regeneration Project (LAMP), started in 1992 with USAID-NSSL funding, and completed in 1996. Regenerated seed is retained in the originating national collection with back-up samples sent to CIMMYT and NSSL for long-term storage.
Wheat genebank scientists recently assembled and regenerated a comprehensive collection of triticale germplasm. Emphasis was placed on North America because three prominent US triticale breeders had retired and the germplasm they had developed and accumulated risked being lost. The project multiplied >3000 accessions and recorded descriptor and evaluation data. This was made available to the US National Programme, CIMMYT and any other interested party.
Collection and Acquisition
The prime targets for collection by the maize genebank are Latin American landraces, particularly those that are poorly represented in the collection or have been lost from NARS collections. One hundred and fifty two (152) new collections from Oaxaca, Mexico, were added to the collection in 1997.
For wheat, emphasis is given to collecting germplasm, in cooperation with ICARDA, and the respective NARS, in areas threatened by "genetic wipeout". Since 1994, particular emphasis has been given to the collection of Mexican landraces in collaboration with CONABIO, the Mexican National Commission for the Study and Use of Biodiversity.
3.4.3 CCERs
A CCER of the Wheat Genetic Resources Sub-programme was undertaken in September 1992. This covered not only genetic resources conservation, evaluation, and use but a range of other related activities included in the Sub-programme at that time, including wheat biotechnology and genetic engineering. With respect to the content of the present Chapter, the CCER made a number of recommendations. In summary, these were:
i) CIMMYT should develop modern new facilities;
ii) CIMMYT should strengthen and broaden its collaboration with other agencies on wheat genetic resources and utilization. It should also provide "black box" back up of NARS collections as needed, take leadership in creating a Wheat Genetic Resources Network, and serve as the global database centre for wheat genetic resources;
iii) all phases of the database management system should be completed and brought into use as quickly as possible; and
iv) the collection of landraces and old and new cultivars from around the world should be continued as aggressively as resources and personnel permitted.
CIMMYT has responded positively to each of these recommendations.
A CCER of the Maize Germplasm Bank (MGB) was carried out in February 1993. Briefly its recommendations were to:
i) consolidate maize (and wheat) genebanks in a modern new facility and preserve MGB's base and active collections under appropriate storage conditions;
ii) accelerate the regeneration and characterization of landrace collections not yet in CIMMYT's active and base collections; complete core subsets and assemble racial groupings for all races;
iii) emphasize continued collaborative research seeking greater stress tolerance in tropical maize germplasm; add germplasm enhancement (pre-breeding) activities to make landraces more useful to breeders (for both stress tolerance and yield improvement); and
iv) access appropriate improved germplasm in MGB to ensure preservations.
Again CIMMYT responded positively to these recommendations although progress on (ii) has been slower than would be desirable. Indeed, both CCERs were important in the further internationalization of CIMMYT's genetic resources activities.
3.4.4 Assessment and Future Challenges
The last decade has seen a major change in the philosophies and practice of genetic resources collection, conservation and use. CIMMYT has come to accept a leadership role in this area and has the policies, facilities, and support in place to facilitate that role. The Centre has come to realize that only CIMMYT has the mandate, motivation, and capacity to promote the development of effective global networks for maize and wheat genetic resources. The Panel warmly commends CIMMYT for this change.
Nevertheless, while much has been achieved, further change would be desirable on a number of fronts.
Coordination of Wheat and Maize Genetic Resources Activities
Up until the present time, the Wheat and Maize Programmes have maintained separate genetic resources/genebank activities. This had the obvious advantage that the genetic resources activities were tightly linked to the individual crop programmes and in particular to their germplasm improvement activities. However, this system also has a number of disadvantages. One has been the lack of coordination and, up until quite recently, substantial duplication of some activities of wheat and maize genebanks. A prime example is the development of parallel information storage and retrieval systems. A second has been the almost total focus on genetic resources evaluation and utilization by both programmes. Other genetic resources activities such as collection, conservation, and documentation of genetic resources, and the broad issues of genebank management, have been regarded as much lower priority.
The new project structure if proactively implemented should significantly improve coordination and cooperation between the maize and wheat genetic resources activities and allow CIMMYT to have a true institution-wide programme and policies in this important area. The Panel endorses this change. However, given that the Centre still does not have a single curator with overall responsibility for the continuing proper functioning of its new genebank, the Panel still has concerns about the commitment of CIMMYT to the development of the genetic resources group as a unified and cohesive scientific entity. The Panel commends the Director General for assuming the role of coordinator of Global Project 1 and the commitment this demonstrates to genetic resources and the development in CIMMYT of a cohesive, unified, and efficient genetic resources programme. However, the Panel questions whether Professor Reeves will be able to devote 15-20% of his time to the task of project coordinator,
a commitment he expects from the other project coordinators, and hence whether an alternative strategy may not have been preferable.
Regeneration of Maize Landraces
From 1992 to 1996, CIMMYT's Maize Genetic Resources Programme has focused strongly on the regeneration of maize landraces held in its own and NARS genebanks. Substantial progress has been made, but much remains to be done. The Panel understands that over 9,000 unique accessions, often of irreplaceable maize landraces, remain to be regenerated. It also understands up to 2000 of these are under significant threat of loss. The Panel is concerned at the lack of progress towards, and apparent low priority given to, the completion of the regeneration of all threatened maize accessions. Failure to act decisively on this issue, given the high priority assigned to genetic conservation in CIMMYT documentation, has the potential to damage the credibility of the whole of the genetic resources programme.
Research Priorities in Genetic Resources
Globally, the knowledge base and research effort on collections to support conservation, evaluation, and utilization is limited and inadequate. The project preschedule for Global Project 1, Conservation and Management of Genetic Resources, outlines for CIMMYT an exciting programme of research on many aspects of wheat and maize genetic resources, from conservation, including in situ conservation, through to use. The Panel commends CIMMYT on this proposed programme. Nevertheless, much more could be done, particularly in the areas of:
i) germplasm management and genebank management, including ecogeographic studies of biodiversity of largest crops and wild relatives (especially in wheat), collection and regeneration protocols (especially in maize) and the role of molecular markers in facilitating the conservation and use of maize and wheat genetic resources;
ii) in situ and ex situ conservation of the wild relatives of maize. Much more is being done globally with respect to the conservation and use of the wild relatives of wheat compared to maize. CIMMYT has both the opportunity and responsibility to redress this imbalance, particularly in light of the increasing threat of genetic wipeout of teosinte and Tripsacum genepools.
Consequently, the Panel is of a view that there are exciting opportunities for CIMMYT to further expand its genetic resources research, especially through collaborative projects with other CGIAR Centres and partner NARS, and suggests CIMMYT pursue these opportunities.
3.5 Programme Linkages
CIMMYT's organization was historically centered around the two commodity programmes for wheat and maize. Both programmes were essentially self-sufficient with regard to scientific expertise and disciplines as well as field and laboratory facilities. CIMMYT has now moved towards integrated projects (global, regional and frontier), most of which require multidisciplinary inputs from a number of programmes. The resulting project portfolio is quite different from the earlier commodity-driven programme structure, and has resulted in a qualitatively different approach and corresponding output expectations.
Regional projects, particularly, require the delivery of multiprogramme and multidisciplinary outputs targeted at specific agroecological area-based research needs. The outreach staff, though "housed" in particular programmes, nevertheless work closely with scientists from other CIMMYT programmes. Such projects would not work well in the absence of close linkages within CIMMYT. These linkages are being fostered through the RCC and team-based approach to project implementation. This approach is commended and needs to be encouraged further.
The Panel sees a number of opportunities where further strengthening of the linkages between programmes will enhance implementation of the integrated projects in the MTP. Several examples are given below.
Maize. Wheat and Biotechnology
The Maize Programme (MP) and the Applied Biotechnology Centre (ABC) have developed strong collaborative interactions both in terms of the development of molecular markers for disease resistance and agronomically important traits that are difficult to select for in the field, and genetic engineering protocols and their use in the production of transformants. These collaborative efforts have been successful in generating significant outputs (see Chapter 2 and earlier sections in this Chapter). Further, there appears to have been good collaborative effort in the development of protocols for the use of molecular markers in the maize breeding programmes. However, these have seen little application in the actual breeding programme to date. There seems little point in developing molecular markers for particular traits and developing experimental protocols for their use, if they are not then used, even in CIMMYT's own programmes. If CIMMYT has difficulty with respect to the transfer
of this technology to applied breeding, it is unlikely to be successful in its transfer to the NARS.
Two major factors inhibiting the uptake of molecular marker technologies by the Maize Programme appear to be:
i) the lack of appropriate and timely training of Maize Programme breeders in the necessary technologies. Further, it would appear that the Maize Programme is seeking to solve this problem by hiring new staff already possessing the necessary skills. This at best serves only as a partial solution to the technology transfer problem.
ii) a lack of clarity within CIMMYT on the role and responsibility of the ABC in servicing the breeding programmes. In particular, what level of service, if any, will the ABC provide for the breeding programmes?
The Wheat Programme (WP) and the ABC have also developed useful collaborative interactions. However, such interactions have been less numerous and less well developed than those between the MP and the ABC. This is partly due to a slower rate of progress in wheat biotechnology both globally and at CIMMYT. However, it also appears to be partly due to the fact that wheat biotechnology was not regarded as a priority area by the WP in the past.
As with the MP, planning for the effective incorporation of molecular marker technologies in wheat improvement at CIMMYT is in its infancy. This is despite the fact that molecular markers have been developed for traits of direct importance to CIMMYT breeders either by the ABC or ARIs (e.g., durable resistance to both leaf and stem rust) which could have immediate application in the wheat breeding programme. As with the MP, the problem with the transfer of this technology from the ABC to the WP appears to be due in part to lack of training of wheat staff in molecular marker techniques and a lack of clarity in the respective roles of the ABC and the WP in its implementation.
Genetic Resources Centre
The Maize and Wheat Programmes have to date operated largely independent genetic resource subprogrammes. While the MP and WP have shared joint facilities and some equipment since 1972, there was very little interaction between the two. Indeed, they often ran parallel systems in, for example, seed exchange and information technology. Although the completion of the new Wellhausen-Anderson Plant Genetic Resources Centre, shared by both the Maize and Wheat Programmes, has led to greater coordination than in the past, both groups have argued strongly for the status quo of independent funding and minimum integration. The implementation of the new project structure should lead to a closer integration and coordination of the activities of the maize and wheat genetic resources activities from 1998.
Because the maize and wheat genetic resources staff and activities were firmly embedded in their respective programmes, they have had only limited opportunity to independently develop linkages with the other three programmes, Natural Resources Group (NRG), Economics (EP), and the Applied Biotechnology Centre. Any linkages were of necessity developed through the respective programme leaders. Therefore, while some linkages have been developed between the Genetic Resources Centre (GRC) and the crosscutting programmes, for example between the MP and GRC on in situ conservation and participatory plant breeding in Oaxaca, these have been limited. The further development of these interactions is likely to be an area of great importance to CIMMYT in the future in building up its profile in genetic resources. Of particular importance will be the interaction between GRC and EP in prioritizing GRC activities, between NRG and GRC in further developing in situ conservation projects, and
between ABC and GRC in the use of molecular markers in characterizing germplasm.
Economics, Maize, and Wheat
The new project-based management structure provides increased opportunities for the Economics Programme (EP) to play an integrative role at CIMMYT, particularly in its research on impact assessment, feedback, and priority setting. The multidisciplinary character of the projects in the MTP will allow EP scientists to contribute to global, regional, and frontier projects. In addition to project objectives specified in the MTP, the Panel sees the need for collaborative efforts between the EP and other programmes on several key issues that appear to be critical for guiding CIMMYT's future research strategy. Topics that require EP input include:
i) The reasons for lack of adoption of improved maize varieties on over 40% of maize area in developing countries.
ii) Lack of uptake of hybrid maize varieties in many areas despite their apparent yield advantage, and the relative importance of smaller regional seed companies versus large multinationals in diffusion of hybrid maize in these areas.
iii) The effect of increasing demand for wheat varieties with improved end-use quality on the future impact of CIMMYT's wheat breeding programme.
In addition, there appears to be a need for greater inputs from commodity programmes to Frontier Project 6 on priority setting and technology forecasting. The present project is almost entirely staffed by economists. Given the importance of prioritization and forecasting on resource allocation, the Panel believes that this project needs greater direct participation by commodity scientists in the planning, implementation, and analysis of the research.
Natural Resources Group
The Natural Resources Group (NRG) can play a catalytic role in forging linkages across programmes and also contribute to increased research efficiency. A primary focus of the NRG on conservation tillage, residue management, and associated agronomic practices was recommended by the Panel for two reasons. First, this topic provides a unifying theme for much of the current agronomic research in the MP and WP. Second, the adoption of conservation tillage appears to have the potential for a large positive impact on productivity enhancement and natural resource conservation. The use of GIS and modeling can also aid the identification of appropriate environments for conducting selection nurseries in breeding programmes, on-farm research, and demonstrations. These same tools can facilitate the extrapolation of research results from one project to another, and between different regions and cropping systems. Because of the relatively small size of the NRG, success in playing this
catalytic role will depend upon commitment of scientific resources from the WP, MP, and EP to a genuine collaborative effort (see the NRG section in this Chapter).
Peer Review by Disciplines
Except for the EP and ABC, the other programmes are composed of IRS from a large number of disciplines. Consequently, while CIMMYT may have a critical mass of plant geneticists and breeders in the MP and WP, they do not have a critical mass of scientists for disciplines such as agronomy, crop physiology, soil science, plant pathology, and entomology in any programme. Therefore, the Panel suggests the formation of "peer review groups" for under-represented disciplines that would cut across programmes. Examples of potential peer groups are Agronomy-Soil Science, Crop Physiology, Entomology, and Plant Pathology.
The purpose of peer groups would be two-fold. First, peer group members would provide direct feedback about the scientific quality and productivity of each IRS in the group based on an annual report of accomplishments prepared by each member. Second, the process of peer evaluation would enhance and insure the flow of information about current research among scientists working in similar disciplines but separated by Programme and Project boundaries. In making this suggestion, it is our assumption that all IRS will be required to prepare an annual accomplishment report for their annual performance evaluation so that the peer group evaluations will not require additional reporting.
3.6 Regional Programmes and Networks
3.6.1 Regional Priorities
3.6.2 Programme Emphasis and Approach
3.6.3 Assessment
3.6.1 Regional Priorities
Over the period from 1993 to 1997, the number of staff posted in outreach increased from 28 to 36 and the proportion of outreach staff to total staff from 25% to 32%. Most of this increase has taken place in SSA and LAC. Nevertheless, Asia and LAC together still accounted for 52% of regional expenditure in 1997 compared with 62.6% in 1993, with SSA accounting for the remainder. Although there has been a slight overall decrease in SSA over the period reviewed, there has been a transfer of resources from WANA to Southern Africa (from 8% to 13.7% of total expenditure, which is itself projected to increase from US$ 2.4 million in 1993 to US$ 6.96 million in 1997). The proportion of the total budget allocated to the NARS in the region in 1997 was 15.2%, two-thirds of this being accounted for by the Maize Programme.
With effect from 1 January 1998, work in regional programmes is being reorganized into five regional projects which are described in the MTP. This document signals the intention of CIMMYT to make further adjustments to the relative expenditure within the regions so that work in SSA is projected to account for 40% of the budget by the year 2000 with a compensating relative decline mostly occurring in LAC and with Asia remaining fairly constant. Work on maize-based systems will dominate the increased effort in SSA. The Panel endorses this broad shift in regional strategy.
3.6.2 Programme Emphasis and Approach
A key role for CIMMYT in the programmes visited, in line with current CGIAR philosophy, is that of a facilitator and catalyst for regional networks.
CIMMYT is currently represented in 15 countries but, given the compression of the EPMR's duration and scope, it was possible to visit only the more significant outreach activities as identified in preliminary discussions with TAC and the Centre. Visits were, therefore, made to the regional programmes operating out of Zimbabwe (for SSA), Nepal (for South Asia) and Guatemala (for Central America). One Panel member who was in Thailand for separate reasons also visited the Maize Programme based in Bangkok. Issues arising from CIMMYT's involvement in the Rice-Wheat Consortium coordinated by ICRISAT are discussed elsewhere (see NRG).
In Africa, the Centre is involved in the Maize and Wheat Improvement Research Network (MWIRNET), funded by the EU and undertaken in collaboration with the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), and has a coordinating role in the Soil Fertility Network for Maize-based Cropping Systems in Malawi and Zimbabwe, which is supported by the Rockefeller Foundation, with funding going directly to the NARS. The staff member assigned to MWIRNET with responsibilities for wheat reports to the Wheat Programme Director in Mexico for administrative and disciplinary matters and to the Team Leader, CIMMYT-Zimbabwe, on a day-to-day basis for matters relating to MWIRNET. This situation will be perpetuated in the operation of Regional Project 1, due to come into operation on 1 January 1998.
Research activities of CIMMYT-Zimbabwe, as opposed to network facilitation, are largely concentrated on maize and these have been strengthened (since 1996) by the establishment of the Southern African Drought and Low Fertility Project (SADLF), funded by the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC). The Panel sub-group visiting Zimbabwe was able to attend a meeting of the steering committee of MWIRNET in Swaziland and to hold discussions with many of the participating NARS representatives.
The Panel was favourably impressed by the way in which CIMMYT is undertaking its role in the SSA programme, particularly with respect to MWIRNET in which its own maize work is integrated with the constituent NARS in full and equal partnership. CIMMYT's role in organizing meetings and workshops, assisting with publications, with training and in facilitating the exchange of germplasm is greatly appreciated within the region. Relations with the Host Country NARS appear to have improved with the stabilization of staffing at CIMMYT-Zimbabwe, under the present leadership. Earlier problems with the MWIRNET donor over centralized budgetary control have apparently been resolved. CIMMYT can take much credit from its representation in SSA.
In Asia, CIMMYT has long had a presence and the programme for South Asia operates out of Nepal where some long-serving outreach staff have recently changed. The reporting line for the agronomist has also changed to the Natural Resources Group from the Wheat Programme. For maize, there is a formally constituted network facilitated by CIMMYT's Asian Regional Maize Programme operating out of Bangkok. Work on wheat is more loosely coordinated and dependent on long-standing interaction between CIMMYT and the NARS within the region.
The Panel concluded that CIMMYT's role in technical support was greatly appreciated by the NARS in southern Asia, both with regard to the outstanding contribution of CIMMYT germplasm and to the development of appropriate production systems for wheat and maize. The relative importance attached locally to other activities reflected the state of development of the NARS concerned so that the Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR), for example, was more concerned with training than with institutional development, which was of relatively greater significance for the Nepal Council for Agricultural Research (NCAR). The recently funded ADB Asian Maize Biotech Network will further boost the existing move to more specialized training. Participation in regional networks has been seen as a highly cost-effective exercise for CIMMYT, the Asian maize network being a conspicuously successful example. The prevailing impression received is that CIMMYT operates as a true partner to the
NARS in the region.
CIMMYT, with IRRI, is a leader in the Rice-Wheat Consortium, which is facilitated by ICRISAT, and is represented on the RW Steering Committee. This activity is further discussed in Chapter 4.
In Central America, a further opportunity to assess a regional network in operation was provided by the visit of the Panel sub-group to Guatemala where the Regional Maize Programme (PRAM) is based. The PRAM is a mature collaborative network resulting from a long and continuous working relationship between NARS research workers in maize within the region and CIMMYT. The Panel was greatly impressed by the operation of the network and by the esteem in which CIMMYT is held by the NARS.
The success of the operation is attributable to a number of factors. The first is the planning process, which comprises a strategic plan and an annual plan from which annual work plans are derived, both of exceptional quality and produced by consensus of the members as to the relevance and quality of research proposals and agreed prioritization. Second, the reporting of results is efficient and timely and CIMMYT provides excellent support. Third, the network has the benefit of strong, long-term funding from the donor (SDC), and this is well managed by CIMMYT, with rapid and effective communication to facilitate interaction between the members of the network. Finally, progress is keenly monitored and continued support is dependent on the achievement of agreed targets. In all, the Panel concludes that the PRAM provides an excellent model for a research network and that CIMMYT is to be warmly congratulated on the success of its operation.
3.6.3 Assessment
Generalizing from CIMMYT's successful experience, the Panel would like to offer its views on factors contributing to the operational success of networks. These are adduced to be:
i) clarity of focus and the preservation of the identity and independence of the partners;
ii) voluntary participation, with shared leadership of the network and coordination of functions;
iii) good communication and cooperation at all levels in the partnership; and
iv) flexibility of operation and adequacy of long-term funding.
Thus, on the basis of its limited observations at first hand, the Panel has concluded that CIMMYT's regional programmes provide good value for money and that networks, if properly conducted, provide an excellent mechanism for CIMMYT (and other centres) to disseminate its products through the NARS and thereby facilitate the achievement of its mission. However, in order to fulfil its catalytic role the Centre must be adequately funded for coordination activities.
<section>9</section>
Chapter 4 - External Partnerships
4.1 Partnership with NARS
4.2 Training
4.3 Donor Relations
4.4 Host Country
4.5 Collaboration with Other CGIAR Centres
4.6 Private Sector
4.7 NGOs
4.8 Systemwide Programmes
4.1 Partnership with NARS
As a major international research centre, CIMMYT serves many publics: the NARS, Host Country, the scientific community, financial partners, and the CGIAR System. However, the most important partner in its major research activities are the NARS. The impact of CIMMYT's output, be it research or training or networking, in an important sense is determined by its relevance to the agricultural growth and environmental protection in developing countries, more particularly the disadvantaged groups. CIMMYT has accepted this responsibility and incorporated it explicitly in its mission statement.
CIMMYT has involved NARS in developing and implementing its programmes in a careful way. The Panel has commented on the existing as well as emerging relationships in previous sections. In the area of developing research ideas, involvement of NARS in CIMMYT's programme planning exercises, particularly in the development of the MTP, has been quite serious and fruitful. It goes to the credit of the Centre that the consultations with the NARS were not restricted to the formal meetings in its Headquarters. The senior staff of the Centre attended all five regional NARS fora as well as the Global NARS forum. We commend CIMMYT for its keenness to listen to, and consult with, the NARS.
The continuing dialogue with NARS is facilitated through CIMMYT's regional programmes and networking activities as well, as noted earlier. It is important in this context to emphasize the role of CIMMYT's outreach staff. It was heartening for the Panel to observe that in all the four regional locations visited, CIMMYT scientists were held in high esteem. They serve as the partners of the NARS and act as important conduits between the regions and Headquarters.
CIMMYT's role in regional networks has proved to be invaluable. It is acting as a catalytic agent in all such arrangements. The NARS in a region are sometimes constrained by the political relationship between their respective governments, but when it comes to the breeding or extension of CIMMYT materials such boundaries are not insurmountable. This speaks well of the confidence and good relations that CIMMYT scientists have created in the regions in which they are located.
The strengths of NARS, however, in terms of research capacity and resources, differ. It is important that CIMMYT recognizes such differences. The Centre will be well served if the stronger NARS are taken as full partners and some of the activities of the Centre where they have a comparative advantage, are devolved to them. At the same time, some "weaker" NARS will require special attention and support. There could be active involvement of CIMMYT staff in the institutional and human development tasks with these NARS. In other words, a more discriminatory, need-based strategy should be developed for building partnership.
4.2 Training
The training of wheat and maize scientists from developing countries has been one of CIMMYT's most important contributions. Over the years, the level of training activity, the location and content of courses being offered, and the manner in which partnerships with NARS is expressed, have changed. The cut backs experienced for two years in the early 1990s, which were partly due to funding constraints, and also because it was assumed that most NARS could finance their own training needs in production systems and agronomy -have been addressed. CIMMYT is again according high priority to training activities.
The major emphasis in the four years since the IER have been some 200 scientists attending group training courses and workshops at Headquarters and in the regions; the funding of some 400 visiting scientists who have benefited from the opportunity for gaining cutting-edge knowledge in their particular disciplines and research interests; and the operation of a small fellowship programme, funded by a few donors (notably, CIDA, Japan, and UNDP), for M.Sc. and Ph.D. students sponsored to several universities.
The training budget has gone up from US$ 1 million in 1995 to a projected US$ 2.5 million in 1997, and is expected to increase further to US$ 4.5 million in 1998 in the MTP document.
One of the commendable changes is that training in agronomy has been largely devolved to the NARS and regional and outreach programmes. CIMMYT has forged relationships with agricultural training institutions in NARS, for example in Kenya, Zimbabwe and Central America, and the Panel has observed how much of this training is also linked to the activities of the maize and wheat networks. A total of 350 scientists have benefited from CIMMYT's regional training courses in Kenya, Thailand and Argentina and key NARS scientists participate by presenting lectures at these courses. These initiatives have resulted in financial savings for CIMMYT, but certainly improve the ownership and relevance of the training provided, and increase the spill-over effects to other capacity-building activities of the NARS and regional organizations,
Specialist training has also been provided meeting the needs of people from advanced NARS in such areas as the use of biotechnology, genetics and GIS, economic analysis of research, impact assessment methodologies, and computer simulations for natural resource management. These programmes have been organized at El Batan through the interaction of the respective programme staff. The visiting scientists have appreciated these courses and preliminary plans are being developed for new courses utilizing inputs from multidisciplinary projects.
Two major new initiatives are being planned. The new project GP8 relates specifically to Building Partnerships through Human Resource Development. The project coordinator has been appointed, a coordinating committee has been formed with representatives from each of the programmes, and the Panel is informed they are about to develop the detailed project plan with the appropriate needs assessments and strategies.
A new course in sustainable cropping systems has been in the process of development for the past year and some US$ 75,000 has been spent consulting with partners in NARS and ARIs, and with staff, on the needs for and expectations of this new course.
One overall observation the Panel would make is that there is an ongoing need for consultations with NARS about the scope and content of training programmes. Such consultations are being held in some areas and regions and these have resulted in identifying new training programmes and the improvement of existing programmes. The Panel hopes that this process will be strengthened by the implementation of the new project GP8.
The Panel commends CIMMYT for according due importance to training, the commitment to the relevance of the training and for the efforts in continually evolving new approaches to maximize the Centre's contribution in this important area. The Panel also encourages CIMMYT to continue this process, utilizing results from evaluations of the various courses and measurement of their impact assessment.
4.3 Donor Relations
CIMMYT receives funding from about 40 "financial partners", with annual contributions ranging from less than US$ 100,000 to about US$ 5 million. Significantly improved relationships with each of these partners have been developed, carefully cultivated and maintained by the Director General himself and the staff of the External Relations Programme, established in 1996.
As a result of this systematic fund-raising effort, based largely on a strategy of tailoring special project proposals to the perceived interests of particular donors, this special project funding has increased from US$ 6 million of a total of US$ 26.4 million in 1995 to US$ 14.3 million of a total of US$ 30.4 million in 1997. Total income for 1998 is budgeted at US$ 35.5 million, of which US$ 16 million is expected from this source. While this increased reliance on restricted funds has its limitations (discussed elsewhere in this report), the steady increase in CIMMYT's aggregate budget during the past few years attests to the attractiveness of the Centre's revamped research programme, as well as to the success of its targeted fund-raising approach.
The credit for developing fundable project proposals has to be shared by those playing important roles in the process. Priorities are determined by programme scientists, through discussions with NARS partners and with input from staff of External Relations. Concept notes are prepared and discussed at the RCC prior to submission to possible donors. This process of involving all stakeholders generates increased donor confidence in CIMMYT's ability to deliver on its research proposals. The Executive Officer is now responsible for ensuring that the required contractual documents are completed, financial accountabilities established within CIMMYT, and that progress reports are submitted to various donors once the project activities get underway.
The Panel therefore wishes to commend the many CIMMYT staff involved.
4.4 Host Country
CIMMYT has enjoyed generally good relations with its Host Country Government, which were formalized in the Headquarters Agreement signed in May 1988. This has benefited the Centre in many ways, including the agreement by the Mexican Government to rebate value- added tax (IVA) payments from CIMMYT, estimated to be worth US$ 0.5 million to the Centre in 1997. The presence on the Board of Trustees of the Executive Director and the Director of Agricultural Research of INIFAP as ex-officio members, nominated by the Government, has greatly facilitated CIMMYT's cooperation with the Host Country.
At the research scientist level, there appear to be good and frequent contacts between INIFAP and CIMMYT in the form of workshops, technical meetings, and individual contacts. Discussions between the Panel and the host NARS revealed a few issues requiring attention, although some of these appeared to be due to misunderstandings caused partly by recent turnover of senior administrative staff in both organizations. The Panel hopes that most of these matters will be resolved by a meeting between the respective directors scheduled for early 1998.
In addition, the Panel believes that better interaction with the Host Country NARS would be facilitated by a more formalized arrangement for an annual review of matters of common interest, perhaps under the aegis of the RCC. Accordingly, the Panel recommends that:
CIMMYT establish a regular annual review of issues of common interest between INIFAP and CIMMYT, with each organization represented by a small group of senior administrative and research officers.
On a more positive note, the Panel is pleased to note the excellent support that CIMMYT has received from the Mexican authorities, which has greatly facilitated the day-to-day operations of CIMMYT and its staff in Mexico. It also wishes to note the excellent collaboration which has resulted in the formulation of biosafety regulations for glasshouse and field work with transgenic plants.
4.5 Collaboration with Other CGIAR Centres
CIMMYT has a wide range of collaborative working relations with many of the CGIAR Centres. The most prominent are: IITA, with whom it shares the mandate for maize in West Africa; ICARDA, with whom it shares the mandate for wheat in WANA and for barley in Latin America, as well as working closely in the coordination of its work in Central Asia; and IRRI and ICRISAT, with whom it has a joint collaborative research programme on Rice/Wheat Production Systems in the Indo-Gangetic Plains.
Working relations with centres with a shared mandate appear to be excellent, in contrast to the time of the last EPMR in 1988 when problems existed with both IITA and ICARDA. We understand that these conflicts have now been fully resolved and that relations with those centres are now strategic and productive. Collaboration with IRRI on the Rice/Wheat Programme is also excellent. More specific comments on this Systemwide Programme are made in Section 4.8.
CIMMYT also has close collaboration with CIAT on maize production systems in this Centre's hillsides programme for Central America and several Systemwide Programmes as discussed in Section 4.8, with ICRAF in its Highlands and Slash-and-Bum Systemwide Programmes, with CIP in the Mountain Agriculture Programme, with IPGRI on biodiversity issues and on Genetic Resources and the Systemwide Programme in this area, and with IFPRI in the work of the Economics Programme with respect to future projections and trends in wheat and maize.
All these relations with the other centres appear to be functional and no particular issues were brought to the attention of the Panel by the collaborating centres or by CIMMYT.
4.6 Private Sector
A survey conducted by the Private Sector Committee of the CGIAR in 1996 identified CIMMYT as one of four centres (the others being CIAT, ICRISAT, and IRRI) having the broadest involvement with private sector institutions. CIMMYT was also identified as one of five centres showing the largest increase in expenditure on biotechnology in the preceding two years. The areas of product transfer and research agreements were those identified by CIMMYT to be the most likely to increase in the near future.
CIMMYT interacts with the private sector at several levels, the interactions ranging from sponsorship of conferences to seed multiplication, to the presence of a Board member from the industry, to the negotiation of agreements with biotechnology companies. It was the last aspect with which the CGIAR survey was primarily concerned.
In biotechnology, CIMMYT has a research agreement with Novartis to provide Bt maize for research purposes and Pioneer and Novartis have provided some support for a training course on molecular markers. There are in existence a number of Material Transfer Agreements for research purposes. Also, as part of the ORSTOM-ABC-Maize Programme project on apomixis, negotiations are underway with Pioneer and Limagrain to decide the acceptability of exclusivity agreements in countries where the companies are active and which are also within CIMMYT's mandate.
Given the greater involvement of private companies in maize research and development, there are more opportunities for interaction with CIMMYT in the case of this commodity than with wheat. The manner in which this interaction may be extended is discussed in the review of the Maize Programme (Chapter 2). Several leading companies in the USA are involved in germplasm exchange and collaborative evaluation and they also provide some support for training. A Latin American Programme was funded by Pioneer to evaluate maize germplasm in genebanks in the region. Preliminary discussions are in progress on a tripartite agreement involving CIMMYT and Monsanto but with the Kenya Agricultural Research Institute (KARI) as the lead institute, for an evaluation of Striga control using herbicide resistant maize in Kenya. The Programme Committee of CIMMYT's BoT discussed this issue and agreed that for experimental purposes this was a justifiable use of herbicide, given the overwhelming
severity of the Striga problem in Africa.
There has been good interaction between the Maize Programme and the private sector in Thailand, with exchange of germplasm and support provided to the Regional Maize Programme and in TAMNET. In Brazil there exists a unique interaction between the NARS and the private sector, involving substantial royalty payments to the public sector. CIMMYT benefits from this in its interaction with CNPMS, facilitating a two-way flow of germplasm with private companies. The Panel supports CIMMYT's contention that Brazil provides an excellent model for the extension of interaction with the private sector (see Chapter 2). The regional programme for maize based in Zimbabwe is discussed in Section 3.6. CIMMYT's activities have greatly assisted the operation of the local seed company (National Tested Seeds), which is active in assisting NGOs and other organizations to supply seed of OPVs to war affected countries in the region.
The Wheat Programme has received financial support from the major Mexican flour milling company Bimbo for improving bread making quality, although the Panel understands that the transference of these funds currently awaits the resolution of discussions with INIFAP. For many years CIMMYT has received considerable support, both financial and in kind, from the farmers' association (Patronato) at the Obregon field station. There are exchanges of germplasm and visits with the private sector in Argentina and the UK. Discussions are also in progress with Monsanto for the exploration of the use of that company's gametocide in producing wheat hybrids.
There is limited interaction with some of CIMMYT's other programmes. For example, the private sector has been involved in discussions with the Economics Programme on Maize Impact Studies and the NRG has been involved in informal collaboration in Mexico and Brazil on zero-till machinery.
With respect to the commodity programmes, interaction between CIMMYT and the private sector in the past appears to have been conducted in a spasmodic, ad hoc manner. The Panel strongly supports the recent initiative of the CIMMYT Board to encourage a more systematic approach to discussions with the private sector. (See Chapter 2 and Section 3.2.) CIMMYT could also consider opening discussions with representative bodies of private plant breeders such as ASSINSEL or groups of smaller companies to discuss principles for a modus operandi across the whole range of issues affecting germplasm enhancement and release.
Inevitably, discussion of interactions with the private sector involve the related but not identical issue of IPR. CIMMYT's involvement in this area, in relation to CGIAR initiatives, is discussed in Section 5.7.
4.7 NGOs
CIMMYT works closely with NGOs in several of its projects covering both its commodities in each of the major developing country regions. In Mexico, CIMMYT has had continuing collaboration since 1992 with a Mexican NGO on hillside maize systems. There is further planned collaboration through the Hilton Foundation on maize system development and water resource development for maize systems in the area of Oaxaca. CIMMYT is also working with Sasakawa Global 2000 in four countries in Africa (Ethiopia, Mozambique, Benin, and Ghana) in technology transfer and QPM. In Central America, there is ongoing collaboration with the regional entity PASOLAC that brings together NGOs and provides the link between them and the regional maize research network. In Bolivia, CIMMYT collaborates with a farmer organization in the development of direct sowing conservation tillage practices for wheat systems. In Bangladesh, CIMMYT's whole family training project has a rich set of NGO linkages. In
Nepal, CIMMYT works with farmer groups in testing and adaptation of tillage methods for wheat. In Southern Africa, CIMMYT works with World Vision on multiplying and distributing maize seed and has plans to work with NGOs in Zimbabwe and Malawi on a risk management project.
Overall, the Panel commends CIMMYT for its close collaboration with NGOs. Representatives of the CGIAR NGO Committee reported to the Panel their broad satisfaction with CIMMYT's activities, although they would prefer the Centre to place more emphasis on cropping systems rather than on crops. They would also prefer CIMMYT to work more directly with small farmers and to further integrate natural resources management into the breeding approach.
4.8 Systemwide Programmes
CIMMYT participates in the Systemwide Programmes listed below with the Convening Centre given in parenthesis:
 the Rice-Wheat Consortium for the Indo-Gangetic Plains (ICRISAT);
 the African Highlands Initiative/Mountain Agriculture (ICRAF/CIP);
 the Latin American Ecoregional Programme (CIAT);
 the Systemwide Programme on Genetic Resources (IPGRI);
 the Systemwide Programme on Integrated Pest Management (IITA);
 the Ecoregional Programme for the Humid and Subhumid Tropics and Subtropics of Asia (IRRI);
 the Systemwide Programme on Participatory Research and Gender Analysis (CIAT); and
 the Soil, Water and Nutrient Management Programme (CIAT).
An assessment of these Systemwide Programmes was beyond the mandate of the Panel. However, the Panel did interact with CIMMYT staff and other stakeholders of the Rice/Wheat Consortium. The Panel senses that since the establishment of the formal CGIAR Rice/Wheat Ecoregional Programme, emphasis in the programme has been given to developing regional mechanisms for cooperation and the conduct of workshops at the expense of research on the ground. The Panel wishes to bring this perception to the attention of TAC as it will conduct an External Review of Systemwide Programmes during 1999.
<section>a</section>
Chapter 5 - Organization, Management And Structure
5.1 Overall Management Structure
5.2 Management of Research
5.3 Management of Support Services
5.4 Financial Management
5.5 Human Resources Management
5.6. Information Technology and Management Information Systems
5.7 Management of Intellectual Property and Intellectual Property Rights
5.1 Overall Management Structure
CIMMYT has done well in addressing a range of management and organizational issues that have emerged as funding trends have changed. The overall environment for operating a successful CGIAR Centre will continue to be challenging in the next 5-10 years.
Changes in styles and amounts of funding, the rate of change in information transfer opportunities, new and different relationships with partners, changing patterns of employment and increasing uncertainty will all contribute significantly to the new management challenges.
Board of Trustees
The Board of Trustees is a group of highly qualified individuals eager to carry out their responsibilities with interest and dedication. The Board enjoys experienced and competent leadership, and there is a good balance of both competencies and geographic representation. The Panel notes the intention of the Board to seek to improve the gender balance in its next round of appointees, as well as to gain specific competencies, such as legal expertise in intellectual property rights, which will be important in the coming term.
It is the view of the Panel, however, that there is insufficient information going to the Board identifying both the significant programme initiatives and different types of risk - and how these risks are being managed. Additionally, progress needs to be made on clarifying the connection and relationship between mission and strategy and decisions being taken by the Board, especially those decisions relating to the budget, as this is one of the most important policy decisions the Board takes annually. Information on these aspects needs to be available to all Board members, irrespective of the specific committee on which they serve. The flow of information from the committees to the full Board, and from management to the committees and Board, could be improved. Therefore, the Panel recommends that the Board:
Ensure that adequate information on the budget and important policy decisions is provided to all Board members irrespective of the specific committee on which they serve; and that the flow of information from committees to the Board, and from management to the committees and Board be improved.
The Board must be assured that all outputs are costed fully and completely, that the generation of outputs is resourced adequately, and that they are delivered on time. This approach is essential to manage the changes resulting from the continuing decline in unrestricted core funding.
Director General's Operations
The period under review covers the tenure of the preceding Director General up to 1995 and that of the present incumbent commencing in 1995.
The period from 1993 to 1995 was characterized by the maintenance of the strength of the primary programmes and mandates. Significant adjustments were made to accommodate substantial financial cuts in real funding and dollar related inflation in Mexico. These changes repositioned the Centre particularly through the initiation of work in biotechnology and natural resource management. The guiding principle in these undertakings was the preservation of CIMMYT's traditional strengths in germplasm enhancement. The former Director General and his colleagues are to be commended for these achievements. However, some of these changes were at the expense of activities deemed to be of secondary importance. In the management area, the failure to recognize the need for specific competencies was an unfortunate oversight.
The present Director General is to be commended for the strengthening and development of very effective relationships with the 'donors, and the priority he has accorded to interacting with NARS and attending meetings of the various regional fora. Within CIMMYT his initiatives in developing a new style of management through the strengthening of the Management Advisory Committee (MAC) and amending the role of the Research Coordinating Committee (RCC) have been beneficial and are appreciated. It is evident that a combination of circumstances, including financial gains from devaluation of the Mexican peso, completion of downsizing, procedures adopted for the development of the Medium Term Plan (MTP); and an emphasis on participative management and improved communications, has resulted in a significant improvement in morale of staff, and a number of initiatives which are modifying and improving the culture of the Centre. There is no doubt that the Director General is
demonstrating very good and effective leadership.
CIMMYT now enjoys a very high profile and reputation in the CGIAR and is taking a significant leadership role on a number of very important issues. These include the contribution of the Director General to the work of the Centre Directors' Committee and to the CGIAR System's discussions on Intellectual Property Rights and biotechnology issues. The Director of CIMMYT's Applied Biotechnology Centre (ABC) serves as the resource person on the TAC Panel on Biotechnology and the Director of External Relations serves as Chair of the CGIAR Public Awareness Association.
The Panel is pleased to note that, following considerable interaction with the external auditors, the Director General has clarified the role of the internal audit department and reestablished the Internal Audit Committee. The development, execution and evaluation of the longer-term internal audit work plan is something in which the Director General will undoubtedly take a close interest.
The challenges for the Director General in the immediate future will be the sponsorship of the evolution to full project management that is to be undertaken in the first year of the new MTP, the sponsorship of new initiatives in information management, and the maintenance of the current very high profile of the Centre.
CIMMYT Committees
CIMMYT is well served by the following committees:
 Management Advisory Committee
 Research Coordinating Committee
 Intellectual Property Rights Task Force
 Biosafety and Bioethics Committee
 Catalytic Change Committee
 Comite de Personal de Apoyo (comprising nationally recruited staff)
 International Staff Committee
 Fondo Hanson (Hanson Fund)
 Empleado del Mes (Employee of the month)
 Securidad e Higiene (Security and Sanitation)
Their terms of reference appear to be appropriate and the Panel understands that each committee is operating effectively. No significant areas of activity, with the possible exception of the coordination of training, appear to be overlooked. It appears that a number of people share the view that the Catalytic Change Committee has achieved its main purpose and should now be phased out. The Panel agrees that when a committee appears to have completed its key objectives it should be terminated rather than kept going simply for the sake of continuing to exist.
The activity and contribution of the Management Advisory Committee and the Research Coordinating Committee are discussed in the following section. The new initiatives through the Catalytic Change Committee and the role of the two staff committees have been particularly appreciated during the recent actions to discuss desirable changes, and to determine and implement improvements in job classification for both international and national staff.
The work of the Intellectual Property Rights Task Force is making a contribution both within CIMMYT and also to the wider discussions within the CGIAR System.
5.2 Management of Research
Since the last review, the roles and responsibilities of both the RCC and the MAC have been enhanced. All major science programmes are now represented on the RCC, which exercises a significant role in the coordination of research, oversight of donor relations, identification of new project proposals and negotiation of these with donors. During the past two years, the amount of restricted funding has increased from US$ 6 million of a total of US$ 26.4 million (22.7%) in 1995 to US$ 16 million of a total of US$ 30.4 million (52.6%) in 1997. Total income for 1998 is budgeted at US$ 35.5 million, of which US$ 16 million (45.1%) is expected from this source.
The effectiveness of the MAC has been heightened by direct representation of all the science programmes, and especially by persons with specialized financial management and human resources management skills. In view of the importance of the topic, the Panel wonders why the Committee does not have available to it specialist expertise in information management. The Panel notes that in 1998 it is proposed that IT be a standing item on the monthly MAC agenda.
The new modes of operation of the RCC and the MAC have created a number of positive benefits. These include greater transparency of decision making, improved two-way communication of issues, prompt communication of decisions to staff and a much more participative management style. The identification of the 21 new project coordinators was by peer assessment and nomination, followed by the confirmation by senior management via the RCC. None of those being offered this new role declined this leadership opportunity.
In combination with other groups within the CGIAR System, a number of training and Gender in the Workplace initiatives have been undertaken to assist to change the culture, develop management skills, empower Project Coordinators, develop teams, and equip people for more effective work paradigms.
A major initiative has been the development of a new management matrix that will come into operation with the commencement of the 21 new projects in 1998. The Panel has had the opportunity to view draft proposals for seven of the proposed 21 new projects. Based on these, and there being considerable variation in the preparation of the drafts, it is evident that the new way of working presents both significant new opportunities and challenges. Clearly it is too early to come to any firm conclusion on the long-term success of this new way of operation, but the Panel supports the move to project management.
What CIMMYT is endeavouring to do is an exciting development that has considerable potential benefit and the Centre is to be commended for the initiatives being taken to engage in multidisciplinary projects and, as part of these, for their interaction with partners.
The draft project proposals seen and evaluated by the Panel raise concerns about the means and consistency of costing the research outputs and, therefore, the assessments of impact and estimation of cost benefits. It is acknowledged that 1998 will be a transitional year, and also that the ongoing strength and benefit from some aspects of a programme focus cannot be ignored. While attention has been given to the development of the responsibilities and accountabilities of the project coordinators, these have yet to be tested in practice. The Panel expects that considerable attention is going to have to be given to the alignment of staff and procedures for ensuring the timely delivery of the contracted project outputs.
The role of project coordinators and their interaction with programme directors will need to be monitored and can be expected to change over time. A particular concern of the Panel is the apparent reluctance to change the method of budgeting as well as the proposed financial management accountabilities and reporting to recognize the significant changes that must be expected in operational management.
5.3 Management of Support Services
Communication. Public Awareness and Library
CIMMYT enjoys very good service from each of these functions. 'New initiatives in communications have been particularly evident in the discussions Panel members have had with a range of donors and with members of the regional networks in Africa and Guatemala. There is no doubt that the way in which technical material is made available and the format in which it is presented are greatly appreciated by a range of important audiences.
The Public Awareness function has been well utilized as CIMMYT has gone through a period of building new relationships with its partners. It has also contributed to raising CIMMYT's profile internationally. The Panel notes the efforts being made to improve the efficiency as well as the effectiveness of these activities.
The Library is very well resourced and efficiently managed. Staff at CIMMYT are well served by the manner in which the Library maintains reference material holdings and the provision of up-to-date information from periodicals and other databases. Significant initiatives have been taken, making efficient use of computerized systems, and staff are now benefiting from these changes.
CIMMYT's Laboratories
Due to the likely changes that implementation of the new project structure will bring the Panel has not taken the time to review the laboratory facilities and services in great detail. In making its brief assessment, the Panel has benefited from discussions with the staff of Applied Biotechnology Centre (ABC) and also from a paper on the management and resourcing of the Soil and Plant Analysis Laboratory that has been prepared for consideration by the MAC.
Applied Biotechnology Centre
In the time since the Interim External Review in 1993, Applied Biotechnology is the area of laboratory function that has increased the most, and it has been elevated to programme status. Details of the work conducted by this laboratory and its management are set out in Section 3.3.
Soil and Plant Analysis Laboratory
This laboratory is a centralized facility that provides analytical services for plant materials and soils. Since 1995 there has been a two-fold increase in the total number of individual analyses requested. So far this year (mid November 1997), the figure is some 48,100 and over 20,000 soil plant and water samples having been submitted for multiple analyses. Plant material represents about 75% of all samples submitted. The number of soil samples submitted for analysis has nearly doubled in the same two-year period.
Currently the laboratory is staffed by a manager, six full-time technical staff who do the analyses and three assistants who assist with preparation and cleaning. The manager reports to the Director of the ABC; this is being reviewed. It is proposed that the manager report to a specialist scientist on the staff of the Natural Resources Group (NRG). This seems logical to the Panel in view of the specialist advice that would be available and the need to support the NRG's expanded efforts in research on natural resource management. The proposed budget for 1998 is some US$ 220,000.
At the present time staff of the Wheat Programme are the principal users of this laboratory, with just over 90% of all samples submitted to date in 1997 coming from that programme. The number of analyses requested by the Wheat Programme constitutes 83% of the laboratory's total load. The agronomy section of the Wheat Programme submits 66% of all samples received from within CIMMYT, and the laboratory spends some 70% of its time undertaking total nitrogen (using the Kjeldahl wet digestion method followed by colorimetric analysis) and micro-elemental analyses of plant and soil samples. The method for performing K, Ca, Mg, Na, Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu, Al and P analyses of plant and soil samples is inductively coupled plasma for atomic emission spectrometry. Analyses are currently done at no charge for all but special projects.
The major problems are that the turn-round time for processing samples can be as long as six months, which is entirely due to the fact that the laboratory is expected to operate with antiquated equipment. This imposes constraints on the introduction of new methods and techniques. Staff are considered to be well trained and highly efficient, and the laboratory is well managed and working to the maximum possible capacity of its present equipment. Consideration will need to be given to introducing new techniques, updating the analytical equipment and significantly improving computerization. The laboratory currently has only one computer: a 3 86 model.
The Panel believes that the current practice of not charging core-restricted programmes for the provision of services must be reviewed and would urge that all programmes or projects submitting the samples bear the full cost of all analyses.
Seed Health Laboratory
The primary purpose of this laboratory is to provide health assurance of all seed materials being prepared for export. The laboratory manager reports to the Director General and no difficulties were reported to the Panel.
Wheat Quality Laboratory
This laboratory, which is located at El Batan, runs a comprehensive set of quality data assessments on the parents and advanced products of the wheat breeding programme, and is managed by staff in that programme. The operations of the laboratory have undergone substantial changes as a result of implementing the outcomes of the CCER conducted in 1994 (see further discussion in Section 2.1.5). No particular difficulties with the operation of this laboratory were reported to the Panel.
Plant Pathology Laboratory
Currently staffed by one person with particular expertise in wheat diseases and one person with comparable expertise in maize diseases, the laboratory provides services to the respective programmes and will, in 1998, service the projects. No particular difficulties with the operation of this laboratory were reported to the Panel.
Entomology Laboratory
This laboratory provides entomological services to both the Wheat and the Maize Programmes, and the staff are responsible to the Maize Programme. No particular difficulties with the operation of this laboratory were reported to the Panel.
Biometric Services
This small unit used to report to the DDG (Research) and now reports to the Director of the ABC. The unit is staffed by one full-time person and additional assistance is contracted in as required. No particular difficulties with the operation of this unit or the service provided were reported to the Panel.
Conclusions
The Panel suggests that in addition to the specific recommendation on full charging for all services, that the Centre may want to explore whether some of these services could in fact be provided in a more cost effective way if they were contracted out to other agencies in Mexico City. Therefore, the Panel recommends that CIMMYT:
Implement a policy of full charging for all samples processed by the various laboratory services and evaluate the relative cost effectiveness and analytical quality of outsourcing the supply of the different types of laboratory analyses.
It appears to the Panel that the provision of these services has not benefited from proactive management. The full costs of the services should be determined, the equipment in the Soil and Plant Analysis Laboratory updated, and the staff trained to use more effective analytical methods. More information will have to be obtained to determine if it is more cost effective to provide all the services from CIMMYT's resources, as is being done at present, after the proposed upgrading and re-equipping has been carried out.
Field Stations
Research at CIMMYT is greatly assisted by the impressive array of services provided by a network of field stations and the professionalism of those who staff them. There are five main field stations in Mexico (Headquarters at El Batan; Obregon and Toluca for wheat research; and Tlaltizipan and Poza Rica for maize research) and a number of facilities serving the outreach offices in various countries. The Panel had the opportunity to visit the stations in Obregon and Tlaltizipan in Mexico (used mainly for wheat and maize research, respectively), and the outreach offices in Guatemala, Nepal, Thailand and Zimbabwe (which serves the southern Africa region). Some 200 full-time regular CIMMYT staff are based at the five field locations in Mexico. The total operational budget for these stations is US$ 1.95 million per year.
The Panel commends the station superintendents and their staff for doing an excellent job, often under difficult conditions. The general impression is very positive about the competence and dedication of staff and their contribution to CIMMYT's research programmes. The field stations visited both in Mexico and elsewhere were well resourced and immaculately kept, the atmosphere was conducive to work, and relationships with Headquarters were generally good. Reporting procedures for these stations have changed. Formerly all CIMMYT field stations were under a central office at Headquarters. The various field stations are each headed by a superintendent and come under the research programme that utilizes them the most. This change is perceived by all concerned as being very positive, primarily because it enables direct contact between the scientists and the superintendent, all of whom report to the same programme director.
During its visits, the Panel examined several key aspects, including station administration and its links with programme and project management at El Batan, cost and financial accountability, human resources management, information management and wider environmental concerns.
The Panel was unable to ascertain what action was being taken to counter the reported declining water table problem, and the impact of urban encroachment being encountered at El Batan. It was also informed about the deterioration of soil quality at the Tlaltizipan site, which may threaten the utility of the site for the major breeding activities. It is a crucial location for the Maize Programme's research. The Panel notes the steps being taken to identify improved management practices to reverse the degradation processes; improved agronomy and soil science management appear to be needed.
Important issues related to management information and reporting systems, performance appraisal of field-based staff, and the costing of sub-project outputs discussed elsewhere in this report deserve further follow-up by CIMMYT management. The present system does not provide accurate output or activity costing information.
One of the stations visited by some Panel members has a line-item budget of US$ 450,000-500,000 per year that is not charged back to the projects/subprogrammes using the facilities. In addition, there is an annual expenditure of about US$ 500,000-600,000 on specific experiment-related costs that is recovered from the users. While the station maintains details of actual costs incurred for each item of expenditure in the reports that go to management, the total cost of the activities is not shown in a single report.
The accounting and financial information is available on a computer database. The Panel understands that the proposed project-management system has not yet had a significant impact on station operations. However, in the future it should be possible to utilize the costing data already available to undertake "standard" as well as "full-costing" of the new MTP project activities conducted at the station, as suggested elsewhere in this report.
The Panel notes that this detailed information is going to be necessary to determine whether the present total cost of some US$ 2.5 million annually is sustainable, or whether current methods of operation are the most cost-effective way of producing the project outputs.
With regard to staffing matters, the staff at the Tlaltizipan station (some 60 people) appreciate the significant improvements made in the HR system in recent years, especially its perceived fairness and transparency, and the introduction of well-documented personnel and benefits policies and manuals, the staff classification scheme, and the proposed 360 degrees evaluation scheme. However, at present the performance evaluation system leaves much to be desired, as few programme scientists routinely consult the station superintendent before evaluating "their" programme staff. The link between evaluation ratings and merit increases is not always apparent. The management-by-objectives (MBO) system is apparently applied somewhat loosely, based on general job descriptions and evaluation criteria, and the link between this and career development and training of technical staff at the station is not very strong. The Panel understands from discussions with staff at other locations
and Headquarters that this situation is not atypical, and therefore suggests that these matters merit increased attention by management.
Maintenance
CIMMYT retains staff to provide a variety of both repair and preventive maintenance functions. The quality and appearance of the buildings and grounds are very impressive. Carpenters, electricians, painters and plumbers are available to undertake the normal range of duties and if required for large building jobs, additional services are contracted in from the local community.
A well-equipped automotive workshop enables the provision of similar regular maintenance for motor vehicles and farm machinery. Attention has been given to the level of resourcing so that the most cost-effective services can be provided and if demand exceeds supply additional services are available locally.
5.4 Financial Management
This area has been one of the most challenging of all aspects of management. Difficulties with financial management were identified in both the Interim External Review (IER) in 1993 and particularly at the time of the Internally Commissioned Management Review in 1995. The Panel considers that until the latter part of 1995, insufficient action was taken to effectively address and correct the shortcomings that had been identified.
Since the IER in 1993, there have been two new accounting systems, two different external auditors, two different internal auditors, and three different financial managers.
The key weakness has been, until recently, CIMMYT's lack of recognition of the need for additional high calibre professional financial competence to contribute value and benefit to the overall efficiency and operations of the Centre. The external auditors' management letters note a number of issues that would not occur under normal operating policies and procedures, and that reasonable internal audit practices should have been able to identify and correct.
Recently, however, much has been done to improve the credibility of the financial systems at Headquarters, and CIMMYT has developed and implemented a software system for financial recording and reporting at its regional posts and research stations. The first reconciliation of the fixed asset inventory since 1992 has been completed and steps are being taken to modify procedures accordingly.
During 1998 additional staffing support will be needed as substantial new work must be undertaken to provide good project-based information to all levels of management, and to implement improvements to the chart of accounts, and related systems, as recommended by a recent consultancy.
The development and implementation of a transparent template based on project outputs for the preparation of 1999 budget proposals will be a very important step in managing the transition to the system required to achieve the MTP commitments. It is the view of the Panel that full project costing, showing both income and all expenditures, will be one of the most important ways that CIMMYT (and other CGIAR Centres) can manage the implications of the continuing decline in unrestricted core funding. The Panel believes that the present categorization of funding (unrestricted core, restricted core, special project and self-generated income) is one aspect that places a high administrative cost on centres and complicates financial management. Therefore the Panel recommends that CIMMYT:
Prepare all future budget proposals on the basis of full project costing, showing both income and all expenditures for all project outputs.
There is still considerable scope for improving the integration of "end of month" financial data transferred from regional posts to Headquarters, with the costs debited by staff at Headquarters to those regional specific activities.
The tendency for some managers to keep separate sets of financial records should be discouraged. CIMMYT will operate much better when a single database and the relevant sets of figures are, without exception, used by all managers.
Urgent consideration should be given to linking the accounting and the human resources databases.
5.5 Human Resources Management
Both the IER of 1993 and the ICMR of 1995 suggested actions that CIMMYT should take to improve various aspects of its Human Resources Management (HRM). These have been done. The Centre now recognizes and appreciates the benefit of leadership from a qualified and skilled professional practitioner.
Significant progress has been made with job classification studies and the review of positions for both internationally and nationally recruited staff. These initiatives have reduced anomalies and seek to ensure that CIMMYT's terms and conditions are fair and realistically competitive with comparable enterprises. Progress is being made, within this context, on mechanisms for performance appraisal, again for both internationally and nationally recruited staff, and pilot teams have been identified to test new styles of multi-source performance appraisal.
The availability of professional HRM advice to the MAC is having an impact in assisting programme directors to develop the necessary understanding and philosophy of people management that are needed to ensure CIMMYT remains efficient and effective in a changing world.
There are opportunities for improved administrative efficiencies through closer interaction of systems between Human Resources and Financial Management, and the move to project-based management will further highlight the need for these improved systems.
CIMMYT has engaged in a number of programmes being offered as part of the CGIAR Gender Programme which have assisted its endeavours to improve both the overall strategic performance of the organization as well as creating better work environments for women and men. Progress has also been made in increasing the number of women employed in various roles in CIMMYT and in ensuring that advertisements reach a wide pool of suitably qualified persons. CIMMYT provides facilities on campus for a school and a women's centre. The development of a childcare centre has been approved. Some initiatives have been taken in the area of spouse support and employment and further attention is being given to this topic.
Long-term initiatives have been commenced to change the work culture of the organization and ensure that CIMMYT staff and research partners, when planning collaborative work, seriously consider gender issues. Actions have been undertaken to identify potential leaders, provide training in both leadership and team building, and look for particular ways to express and encourage participatory management. The Panel will be interested to see which indicators are developed to monitor the results of these initiatives.
The work that CIMMYT has done in the areas of job classification and the terms and conditions of employment is particularly important for both national and international staff. The Panel encourages CIMMYT to continue to look at a range of examples so as to ensure that what is being done is most appropriate for the future employment environment. Because of changing circumstances the future will require a number of changes compared with what organizations have regarded in the past as best practice.
A particular challenge is that scientific research is strategic and long term. However, the whole funding environment has changed and the focus is on shorter term funding than was the case in the past. This will mean a variety of employment relationships, some of which will be quite different from the very long-term tenure that many enjoyed in the past. The job classification and reward systems initiated thus far may have to be amended to take this into account.
CIMMYT is going to have to ensure that what it expects of its staff enables them to remain competitive in bids of employment with other institutions at the end of their employment on a particular contract with CIMMYT. In this regard the Panel looks forward to the outcomes of the new approach to performance appraisal.
Attention will also need to be given to the feeling of "overload" being experienced by many staff and to providing effective cover for key persons, when taking parental leave, study leave, and when travelling. Another challenge, in a time of considerable change and development, especially to the new project management, is for CIMMYT to develop more realistic job loads for staff so that they do not take on too many new initiatives at once - realizing the amount of time and energy that it takes to change "long established cultural values".
5.6. Information Technology and Management Information Systems
5.6.1 Information Technology and Information Management
5.6.2 Management Information Systems
5.6.1 Information Technology and Information Management
In any scientific organization information is probably the most precious resource. This includes the ideas members of staff have, and how those ideas are developed, tested and subsequently shared. The skills in managing information are therefore very important. The resources and opportunities for managing information have developed enormously since the mid 1980s with the availability of computers and related systems.
CIMMYT has an enviable record for the information resources that it has generated over the years and the way in which that information has been shared. This has been through personal contacts at visits, seminars, lectures, field days and demonstrations; papers, books and other printed resources; films, tapes, CD-ROMs and, now, the Internet and information on the web page.
CIMMYT is contributing significantly to the current debate on the appropriate understanding, within the CGIAR System, of intellectual property rights, and how intellectual property of the various types should be managed.
Having such a wealth of information poses a challenge as to how it is most effectively managed. As noted in Section 5.3 CIMMYT has a very good record of creating and maintaining library resources and in public awareness and communication. There has been a good history of software development for specialist applications and a number of significant scientist-led initiatives, of which an example is given below.
Agricultural researchers face increasing challenges for the efficient management of research results. Biotechnology promises to generate vast sets of data on genetic variation, but breeders will need these data to be directly linked to crossing plans and field evaluations. Concomitantly, increasing costs of field and laboratory research mean that experimental data - both old and new and from diverse sources - must be exploited to achieve greater cost-effectiveness, and that such data must be managed as valuable corporate resources. Although most centres and some NARS have explored use of research databases, there are few examples of fully integrated crop information systems that meet data management and storage standards of other industries.
The International Crop Information System (ICIS) represents an active "grass roots" response to these concerns. Building on CIMMYT's International Wheat Information system (IWIS) (see also Section 2.1.3), versions of ICIS are being implemented through collaborative research at CIAT, CIMMYT, CIP, ICRISAT, IITA, IRRI and partner national institutions.
Consultations started in 1994. A data model was developed in 1996 for managing pedigrees of crops from diverse breeding systems. In 1997, the model for managing evaluation data was developed by CIMMYT, ICRAF and IRRI. The aim is to allow the linking of evaluation data from international trials, specialist nurseries, molecular biology and, essentially, any other source used by the centres or the NARS. The design of ICIS is sufficiently generic and robust to accommodate a broad range of users and the Open Database Connectivity protocol (ODBC) ensures that ICIS is "platform independent" and can be installed on any major relational database system. This also allows for distributing a full copy of ICIS to NARS or other groups at low cost. Use of a standard interface across centres not only ensures development of more versatile and robust software but will allow major savings in software development, training and system maintenance.
The ICIS initiative is congruent with the strategy of the Singer Genetic Resources Project (SGRP) and has been endorsed by the Inter-Centre Working Group on Genetic Resources. Nonetheless, the initiative lacks formal status within the CGIAR System. To guarantee continued efficient development, the initiative needs stable resourcing and a formal management structure.
5.6.2 Management Information Systems
Outside of what has been done in information management, the Panel considers that some of the technical aspects of developing and maintaining management information systems have not received the overall attention they warrant. CIMMYT has until quite recently failed to provide and resource the necessary professional competencies in this important area. The short- and long-term cost to the Centre is largely unrealized.
The fact that some 450 computers at El Batan operate on nine different operating systems and that there are four different types of network configurations means that developing and implementing efficient upgrade strategies is very difficult and much more expensive than need be.
CIMMYT is to be congratulated on the fact that all its software is licensed, but more effective backup policies and practices for managing all scientific and general administrative information must be developed and implemented as a matter of urgency.
The Panel is encouraged by the proposal that CIMMYT will, in 1998, undertake an exercise to develop a strategy for information technology and information management.
The Panel thinks that this is extremely important and hopes that the Director General personally sponsor the initiative to develop the terms of reference for a consultancy to develop a draft strategy. The Panel expects that the consultancy will be asked to provide recommendations as to the whole range of managerial and technical competencies that CIMMYT needs in order to make the necessary progress in this important area. Therefore, the Panel recommends that CIMMYT:
Take all the necessary steps and obtain the necessary expert input to develop and implement an integrated strategy for information technology and the operation of CIMMYT's management information systems.
5.7 Management of Intellectual Property and Intellectual Property Rights
This topic (IPR) is potentially one of the most important issues to be addressed within the CGIAR in the foreseeable future. Some reference has been made to it in Section 5.2 of this report, and it is also being addressed at the broader CGIAR System level.
The CGIAR has set up, under the auspices of TAC, two specialist panels, one of which will deal with Biotechnology and the other with Proprietary Science and Technology. This is commendable, as the two topics are separate but integrally related. Both panels should report to TAC and the CGIAR by mid 1998. The EPMR Panel understands that the special panel dealing with property rights will use five of CIMMYT's case studies as base materials to progress in its own work and to formulate recommendations on how the issues involved could be resolved and a course for the future might be charted.
It is acknowledged that there are two initiatives that have to proceed simultaneously. Individual centres have to develop their own clear policies for the management of IPR and the situation needs to be avoided whereby individual centres have widely divergent policies.
CIMMYT has a policy on Intellectual Property (IP), approved by the Board of Trustees in June 1995. The first section of this sets out policy related to genetic resources held in trust, the products of research, and information products and computer software. A second section deals with the distribution and use of germplasm from the Maize Programme, including germplasm distributed in collaborative trials, announced inbred lines and source populations, breeding nursery germplasm, germplasm bank accessions and non-CIMMYT germplasm. A third section contains the Material Transfer Agreement and a separate Germplasm Acquisition Agreement follows as the fourth section. The fifth section deals with the distribution and use of germplasm from the Wheat Programme, including CIMMYT segregating populations, CIMMYT-derived lines, non-CIMMYT introductions, and germplasm bank materials. Finally there is the CIMMYT policy for classifying accessions held "in trust".
The Panel commends CIMMYT for the development of this policy statement and also for the establishment in June 1997 of an IPR Task Force, which has two broad tasks:
1. To advise the Director General and the Research Coordinating Committee and to recommend best practice on current and planned IP protection that CIMMYT is, or should be, involved with; and
2. To advise on any reporting required by CIMMYT, in relation to CIMMYT's IP policy and the development of specific partnerships with the private sector.
This is a rapidly developing field and the CGIAR System is fortunate to be able to benefit from the carefully thought through positions and initiatives that CIMMYT has prepared and taken. The Panel is confident that CIMMYT staff will continue to make a significant contribution in this field.
<section>b</section>
Chapter 6 - Overall Assessment
6.1 Overview
6.2 Strategic Planning, Priority Setting and Medium-Term Planning
6.3 Impact
6.4 Quality of Science
6.5 Effectiveness and Efficiency Management
6.6 CCERs - An Evaluation
6.1 Overview
The Panel's overall view of CIMMYT is extremely favourable. The Centre conducts high-quality science and has an impressive record of achievements as well as impact on the daily livelihood of hundreds of millions of rural and urban poor. CIMMYT is well managed, has strong leadership, and is a flagship centre of the CGIAR System. The Panel firmly believes that CIMMYT merits continued strong support from the donor community. CIMMYT is providing much-needed services and products for which it has a definite comparative advantage and for which there are no alternative suppliers. There is no perceived diminution in the uptake of CIMMYT's enhanced germplasm by NARS throughout the world. There are also substantial spillovers to other organizations in countries that are financial partners of the CGIAR.
The Centre is not resting on its laurels, but is taking appropriate steps to position itself strategically to meet the challenges of a changing internal and external environment. The Centre is being transformed from one of commodity-driven programmes into one of multidisciplinary projects, sometimes involving more than one commodity, that include global, regional and frontier thrusts. This requires a transition from programme- to project-based management and a major change in the way research is conducted, managed and implemented. To this end, CIMMYT is also undergoing a profound cultural change, has expanded its strategic partnerships and enhanced its external relationships. In addition, CIMMYT's funding has improved dramatically during the last two years, and the Centre remains at the forefront of advanced science.
To implement this process of change effectively, CIMMYT must continue to meet major challenges in both science and management. The Panel believes that the Centre is plotting the appropriate course to address these challenges. CIMMYT has taken effective steps to introduce project-based management and to strengthen its human resources and financial management, which were areas where improvement was long overdue. The Centre is also in the process of improving its management of information systems. In the areas of research and research support, the Panel has made several critical observations as well as recommendations and suggestions on each of the programmes, and their inter-linkages, to assist in plotting future directions. The Panel chose not to repeat these observations and recommendations here for reasons of brevity, but refers the reader to the Summary and List of Recommendations, and to Chapters 2 and 3 of this report.
6.2 Strategic Planning, Priority Setting and Medium-Term Planning
Formally, CIMMYT's 1988 Strategic Plan is still valid but was regularly complemented by evergreen reports until 1993. Currently the 1998-2000 Medium-Term Plan serves as the Centre's basic document outlining its future strategic directions.
The Panel believes that CIMMYT's current mission statement to help alleviate poverty by increasing the profitability, productivity and sustainability of maize and wheat farming systems is still valid and consistent with changes in the internal and external environments.
CIMMYT's overall approach to setting priorities is presented in Section 1.5 of this report. This approach, together with TAC's report on CGIAR priorities and strategies, guided the overall resource allocation process for the MTP 1998-2000. In general, CIMMYT's priority-setting criteria can be categorized by three basic indicators: efficiency, equity and security. Based on those criteria, it was suggested that wheat should receive slightly greater investment than maize and that Asia should receive slightly greater investment than Africa. Overall, the Panel considers that CIMMYT's priorities and strategies are consistent with the CGIAR goals of poverty alleviation and protection of the environment, leading in turn to sustainable food security, and that they are highly relevant to both the rural and urban poor, particularly rural women.
It should be noted, however, that while CIMMYT's criteria were all extensively considered, this was so only in a subjective sense for the MTP 1998-2000. Although CIMMYT's priorities and strategies appear to be consistent with CGIAR goals, the links between priorities and resource allocation in CIMMYT's MTP, and from the MTP priorities to the 1998 budget, are not transparent. This lack of clarity results from the fact that CIMMYT does not use a formal priority-setting model and because a large part of the Centre's funding is of a restrictive nature. While the Panel understands CIMMYT's pragmatic approach to setting priorities and translating them into resource allocations, it also urges the Centre to proceed with its intention to design a more rational procedure for allocating resources to projects.
CIMMYT is to be commended for the impressive consultative process conducted with partners and stakeholders in the development of the MTP 1998-2000. CIMMYT's management made substantial efforts to develop more effective partnerships with NARS, NGOs, ARIs and the private sector, and to involve them more closely in the Centre's planning processes. CIMMYT has also given some consideration to issues related to alternative sources of supply, and claims (it) consciously seeks to avoid activities in which it does not have a clear comparative advantage (MTP 1998-2000). The Panel notes CIMMYT's progress to date, and encourages the Centre to continue its efforts in this direction.
On the implementation of the new project-based approach to research, the Panel was assured by management that the process for putting the proposed projects into operation is in place, using training of project staff, team building, and development of appropriate management structures. Unfortunately the Panel was able to see draft write-ups only of seven out of 21 CIMMYT projects because the necessary consultations among staff and partners had not been completed to permit finalization of the remaining write-ups. (The MTP contains project summaries only.) Within these limitations, the Panel is satisfied with the proposed project portfolio and endorses the shift towards a more multidisciplinary approach. It considers the proposed projects to be highly relevant to CIMMYT's mandate, priorities and comparative advantage. The EPMR considers that since the projects will be implemented as from 1998, it would be undesirable to make premature judgements on the effectiveness of this new
approach to research management. The Panel, therefore, recommends that CIMMYT's Board of Trustees:
Commission an external review (CCER) to be conducted by mid 2000 to assess progress in implementing the project-based approach to research management as outlined in the MTP. This review should include the assessment of progress towards the attainment of development of management systems to support these projects, integration of the financial and human resource databases, the implementation of a strategy on information technology, and the operation of CIMMYT's management information systems.
The Panel had the opportunity to observe at first hand the successful involvement of CIMMYT in three regional networks in Africa, Asia and Latin America (see Section 3.6). This involvement reflects a commitment by CIMMYT to true partnerships with the NARS in the regions concerned. The Centre has evidently made a substantial impact with modest inputs. The Panel commends CIMMYT for its catalytic role in these networks and considers them to be a good model for further development.
6.3 Impact
As discussed in Chapters 1, 2 and 3, CIMMYT has made a tremendous impact on the production of wheat and maize throughout the developing world, and hence on the incomes and welfare of vast numbers of both urban and rural poor, and indirect but positive impacts on the conservation of natural resources. CIMMYT's contributions to the mission and goals of the CGIAR are truly outstanding. In particular, the impact of CIMMYT's contributions to germplasm enhancement continue to be worldwide, and research on natural resources management and economics support the efforts on germplasm. CIMMYT is to be commended on the quality of the impact studies it has conducted.
Nevertheless, the Panel questions why approximately 40% of the maize area in developing countries is still sown with unimproved varieties, nor does it have evidence that CIMMYT has seriously addressed the problem. To this end, it has suggested that the Economics Programme, in close collaboration with the Maize Programme, carefully study the reasons for the limited progress in these areas.
In addition to direct impact on the intended beneficiaries of the CGIAR, CIMMYT has also made significant contributions to science with a large number of good publications, to the preservation of biodiversity, and to improving the conservation and management of natural resources.
6.4 Quality of Science
The quality of the applied sciences at CIMMYT, as used in the breeding programmes and by the outreach staff, when measured by output and impact, is clearly excellent. The quality of the strategic sciences at CIMMYT, including research in a wide range of disciplines that underpin the applied programmes, is more difficult to assess objectively.
One measure of the quality of CIMMYT's strategic science is the number of articles and book chapters in international refereed publications. Over the last five years, this has varied from 62 to 173, with an average of about 100/year or about 1.3 per IRS. The number of journal articles and book chapters amounted to 74 in 1992, 110 in 1993, 87 in 1994, 173 in 1995, and 62 in 1996. The output of papers has varied markedly within and between programmes. Those in the applied programmes and outreach understandably tend to publish less that those doing strategic research. Amongst the latter, the rate of publication in refereed journals averages over two per year, and for a number of individual staff members-over four per year, which is excellent.
This analysis suggests that if CIMMYT wishes to increase its output in terms of its contribution to the refereed scientific literature, then it is most likely to be able to do so by improving the opportunities for its staff in the applied programmes and outreach to publish more. This would also have the additional benefit of improving the promotional opportunities and career prospects of those staff.
The Panel is concerned with the steep decline in the number of journal articles and book chapters published by CIMMYT staff in 1996. The Panel assumes this is due to the distractions of continuing budget adjustments and the time needed for inputs by staff into the project planning process. It is clear, however, that the RCC needs to keep a watching brief in this area to ensure that the Centre maintains an acceptable level of output of scientific publications. The intention to publish needs to be included in individual work plans and progress should be monitored annually.
Another measure of the quality of science at CIMMYT is leadership in specific research areas. Each of the programmes can claim to be among the leaders in their respective areas of research. For example: the Centre's work on stress physiology and development of selection methods for stress-tolerant germplasm in maize; durable resistance to leaf rust, and wide crossing and transfer of novel genes from wide relatives in wheat; apomixis in maize; and technology adoption and impact assessment studies.
Both the publication records of individual scientists and their recognition internationally as leaders in specific research areas suggest that much of the strategic science at CIMMYT is of high quality, and this holds across all programmes.
6.5 Effectiveness and Efficiency Management
The Panel has been impressed by CIMMYT's progress in its organization and management since the particularly difficult period of the early 1990s. The Board of Trustees has competent leadership experience and is composed of highly qualified, dedicated individuals. The Panel believes, however, that the flow of information to the Board could be improved, and that there is a need to enhance the relationships between the mission and strategy of the Centre and the decisions taken by the Board, particularly with respect to budgets.
The Director General is to be commended for initiating a change in culture and for developing a new style of participatory management. Consequently, staff morale has significantly improved and much progress has been made in the development of strategic partnerships and in improving CIMMYT's relations with the donor community. There is no doubt in the minds of the Panel members that the Director General is demonstrating very good and effective leadership. He and the programme directors have high standing in the broader CGIAR community.
The Panel commends the Centre for introducing a multidisciplinary approach to project management, sometimes involving more than one commodity, and is convinced that the proposed new way of working presents significant new opportunities and challenges. The Panel's concerns about the implementation of this approach have already been noted in Section 6.2. The Panel is also concerned about the lack of progress in introducing fall project costing but appreciates that a change is necessary in donor mentality before farther significant headway can be made. While the Panel was pleased with the general quality of the available project write-ups, it noted some inconsistency. Further thought may have to be given to the formulation of effective milestones. Overall, the Panel is satisfied that the existing project write-ups provide a good model for others to follow.
CIMMYT has made significant improvements in its human resources management, particularly in job classification studies and in performance appraisal. The Centre should also be commended for its efforts in incorporating gender concerns and introducing new approaches to developing a more conducive and pleasant work environment, to participatory management, and to the encouragement of team building.
The area of financial management has been one of the most difficult challenges in CIMMYT's administration, and difficulties identified at the time of the IER in 1993 and of the ICER of 1995 have still not been fully overcome. The Panel considers that until the end of 1995, insufficient action was taken to address the shortcomings effectively. The Panel is pleased to note that, since then, much has been done to improve the credibility of CIMMYT's financial systems, but further improvements are necessary in the accounting systems and in the development of project-based information systems. Moreover, there is also still considerable room for improvement in the integration of Headquarters and regional financial systems and for the introduction of fall project costing. The Panel also considers that urgent consideration should be given to linking the accounting and human resources databases.
On information management, CIMMYT has an enviable record for the information resources it has generated over the years and the way that information has been shared. There is an urgent need, however, now being addressed by CIMMYT, to develop strategies and procedures for the management of these information sources and the related computer systems. In particular, CIMMYT will need to make a major effort to improve its management information systems.
Overall, the Panel believes that the quality of organization and management at CIMMYT is good, although there are significant areas where progress can be made. As noted in Section 6.2, the Panel has recommended that an external review be conducted by mid 2000 to assess progress in implementing the project-based approach to management.
6.6 CCERs - An Evaluation
The CCERs are an important management tool for ensuring that the Centre's Board and Management periodically obtain external assessments of ongoing work of the Centre. Often these reports highlight issues and opportunities for substantially strengthening or re-directing programme activities and initiatives in the management area. In some cases, the centres have also commissioned strategic reviews of particular aspects of work; but as in the case of CIMMYT, this is somewhat rare. The Panel's comments on specific CCERs undertaken in the past few years are included in the sections of the report dealing with those particular issues.
Another major aspect required to be covered by the Panel is the role and-value of CCERs in the EPMR process. The Centre has commissioned 11 CCERs since 1993 (inclusive), the year of the IER. These were distributed amongst programmes as follows:
Number
Years
Maize Programme (MP)
Wheat Programme (WP)
Economics Programme (EP)
Applied Biotechnology Centre (ABC)
Natural Resources Group (NRG)
Management
Clearly the distribution of the CCERs amongst programmes is very uneven. The lack of CCERs for the ABC and NRG is understandable given they are "new" in the sense that they were accorded programme status only in 1995 and 1996, respectively. The uneven distribution among the "older" programmes, especially the larger ones, WP, MP and Management, is more difficult to explain.
The scope of the CCERs has varied markedly. Only those of the EP and of Management dealt with the programme-specific area as a whole. Those in the MP and WP were narrower in their focus, and in all cases dealt with subprogrammes, or in one case in the MP, an individual project.
The quality of the reports also varied substantially. Some were relatively superficial, and some were more analytical. Some review teams interpreted their terms of reference narrowly, thereby adding to the problem of limited scope, while others were more ambitious and expansive. The size of the review panels varied from three to five members (in the cases where this is documented in the reports) and usually included a member of the BoT as a " resource person". This meant that in the case of the reviews of the EP, for example, there were only two independent reviewers on the panel.
In all CCERs, the review panel had formal meetings and/or information exchange sessions with concerned staff. However, where lists of documents are included in the reports, it is clear that the documentation often falls short of what would be required for an EPMR.
For the great majority of the cases, the Centre has responded in writing to the recommendations of the reports and in many cases has implemented those recommendations. The reports sometimes provided a useful input to the EPMR because, for some aspects of the programmes, they gave a view on whether specific issues were long standing and on whether specific recommendations had been made in relation to them in previous reviews.
However, it should be pointed out that their use for the EPMR Panel was limited. First, the topics covered by the reviews were limited and apparently arbitrary. Topic selection appears to have been driven by the needs of the management for outside opinions on perceived problem areas, rather than by a perceived need for a systematic review of whole programmes. The restricted time allowance for some reviews and the small number of independent panel members also limited their value. In the Panel's view, the CCERs do not substitute for the provision of full documentation to the EPMRs, although they may still be useful as peer review documents for particular areas of work. Further, their narrow focus reduces their value in examining issues of balance between and within programmes. Finally, the Panel is unable to agree with some of the conclusions of the 1995 CCER of Management, Organization and Structure, in particular with the statement that CIMMYT was an exemplary Centre from
the point of view of management.
The Panel suggests that if CCERs are to be seen as an aid to the EPMR process, they should:
i) consider only whole programmes or two or more related programmes;
ii) not be obsolete;
iii) not involve Trustees but be composed of independent members;
iv) ensure that the documentation provided to the CCERs, with updates if necessary, are provided to EPMR Panel members during the initial phase;
v) be penetrating and comprehensive.
In short, while often helpful to the Centre, to critically aid an EPMR, the CCER process needs to be more systematic, relevant and directed than the process implemented by CIMMYT.
<section>c</section>
Chapter 7 - Future challenges
Over the course of its history, CIMMYT can look back at outstanding achievements and tremendous impact, and since the period of the last EPMR the Centre has continued this successful record. Nevertheless, this is no time for complacency. Over the next 30 years, the population of developing countries will continue to grow at a rate of 1.6% per year and the expected income growth will further increase the demand for maize and wheat. Overall, the demand for wheat and maize is expected to grow at an annual rate of 2.2% over the next 30 years. By the year 2020, 67% of the world's wheat consumption and 55% of the world's maize consumption will occur in developing countries. Projections indicate that they will need to import about 122 million metric tonnes of wheat and 41 million metric tonnes of maize annually. Moreover, nearly all the necessary increases in maize and wheat production in the developing world will have to emanate from increased yields since, with the exception of
very few countries, the opportunities to increase the area under cultivation are limited. Agricultural research must continue to play a critical role in developing new technology to further increase the productivity of maize and wheat cropping. CIMMYT will have to maintain its pivotal part in this process.
CIMMYT is to be congratulated on the significant shift it has made from the strongly entrenched organization of its work by programmes towards a matrix management of multidisciplinary projects. Its dominant challenge for the future is in deciding how to proceed beyond the interim stage of development that the present formative structure of projects represents. The Panel was unable to assess CIMMYT's vision of the end-point of this process because it has not yet been articulated. The challenge identified will require further major adjustments in CIMMYT's culture and ethos, and in the way that CIMMYT projects its image to the outside world. These adjustments will require further evolution of CIMMYT's management of people, finance and information.
A major external factor affecting this consideration is the fundamental change in the nature of donor funding within the CGIAR System. There appears to be an inescapable trend towards a reduction in the relative proportion of unrestricted core funds (which have traditionally provided CIMMYT and other IARCs with flexibility in the management of their budget) and a corresponding increase in restricted and special project funding. Considerable skill will be required to sustain financial security without distorting the mission and the work programmes designed to achieve it. In the Panel's opinion, a move towards full project costing of all projects is overdue.
The image which CIMMYT has traditionally presented to the outside world and especially to its major stakeholders, the NARS, is that of a centre based on the improvement, in the broad sense, of two important commodities, wheat and maize. The challenge for CIMMYT is to reassure its partners that the internal changes in its management culture should in no way detract from its capability to deliver the same impact as in the past. CIMMYT's partners will continue to need recognizable points of contact at the Centre.
It may be anticipated that CIMMYT will move further upstream in the nature of the scientific research that it conducts and in providing more specialized training. CIMMYT will therefore need to consider how to do this without jeopardizing the situation of the "weaker" NARS. CIMMYT will need to decide how to assist the flow of technology from the stronger to the weaker NARS through networking or other means.
CIMMYT has already moved substantially into research in biotechnology and will increasingly, in seeking to exploit the fruits of this research, find itself confronted by problems of IPR, confidentiality and exclusivity, formerly considered anathema in the CGIAR System. The clock will not be turned back and CIMMYT will need to press on with vigour to formulate its own policy to deal with this situation while at the same time conforming to broad CGIAR guidelines. CIMMYT will also need to review how the adoption of new technology would internally affect the conduct of its traditional operations in the commodity programmes, in terms of efficiency and cost-effectiveness.
Finally, CIMMYT will need to devise a means of fostering its emerging programmes, such as NRG, within relatively flat budget projections for the foreseeable future. Above all, CIMMYT faces the challenge of maintaining the vigour, quality and relevance of its research in a changing world. The Panel believes that CIMMYT will rise to this challenge.
<section>d</section>
Acknowledgements
The Panel sincerely thanks the Board, Management and staff of CIMMYT for their excellent support during all stages of the Review. The Panel is particularly grateful for the constructive attitude, the warm hospitality and the help given whenever requested.
The arrangements for the Panel's visits to the Headquarters and to the outreach programmes in Zimbabwe and Swaziland, Nepal and India, Thailand, and Guatemala were simply excellent. The Panel is very thankful for the support and hospitality generously given by CIMMYT staff, Government officials and NARS collaborators.
The Panel would also like to acknowledge with thanks the efforts made by CIMMYT staff in responding to the Panel's questionnaire. The responses received were very useful in helping the Panel to better understand perceptions of professional and support staff at both Headquarters and in the outreach locations.
Patricia Lopez, Executive Assistant to the Director General served as focal point to the Review team, and to the TAC Secretariat in the logistical and organizational aspects of this Review. She was a pleasure to deal with and ensured that every assistance was given to the Panel so that our work could always be conducted efficiently. Claudio Cafati, Deputy Director General for Administration and Finance, Linda Ainsworth, Head of Visitors and Conference Services, Peter Ninnes, Executive Officer, Edith Hesse, Manager Information Technology, and each of the members of the MAC and RCC were also very helpful during various phases of the Review. Kelly Cassaday, Head of Publications and Alma McNab, Science Writer/Editor, assisted the Panel in the final polishing of the report and arranged for it to be printed. Guillermo Ibarra and staff of Computer Services helped the Panel in overcoming occasional computer problems. Finally, the staff of the Guesthouse did everything possible to
make our stay as comfort and pleasant as possible. To all, the Panel is very grateful.
The Panel greatly appreciated the hospitality of Tim, Pat and Jane Reeves who organized a magnificent Noche Mexicana, and of Claudio and Patricia Cafati who organized a splendid lunch. Several CIMMT staff also invited Panel Members to their homes and this was always a pleasant experience.
Thanks are also due to Irmi Braun-Castaldi of the TAC Secretariat for assistance to the Panel with respect to travel and administrative aspects of the Review.
Finally, the Panel would like to say a special word of thanks to Jane Garrioch of the TAC Secretariat without whose good humour, very hard work well beyond the call of duty, and skill in word processing, the report would never have appeared on time. She was thereby ably and pleasantly assisted by Pilar Junco. Their efficiency and patience, particularly during moments of stress, and their charm were greatly appreciated by the Panel.
<section>e</section>
Annex 1: Panel Composition and Biographic Information
PANEL COMPOSITION
Panel Chair:
Graham Jenkins
16 High Street
Hauxton
Cambridge CB2 5HW
United Kingdom
Tel: (44-1223) 871539
Fax: (44-1223) 871539
Members:
Antonio Bahia Filho
Director General
EMBRAPA/CNPMS
Caixa Postal 151
35701-970 Sete lagoas, MG
Brazil
Tel: (55-31) 7735644
Fax: (55-31) 7791088
Eml: bahia@cnpms.embrapa.br
Kenneth Cassman
Professor and Head Department of Agronomy
University of Nebraska
279 Plant Science Building
P.O. Box 830915
Lincoln, NE 68583-0915 USA
Tel: (1-402) 4721555
Fax: (1-402) 4727904
Eml: AGR0001@UNLVM.UNL.EDU
Barrie Keenan
Principal
Keenan Consulting
146a Karori Road
Wellington 6005
New Zealand
Tel: (64-4) 4767677
Fax: (64-4) 4766630
Eml: BarrieKeenan@compuserve.com
b.keenan@cgnet.com
Don Marshall
Professor of Plant Breeding
Director of the Plant Breeding Institute
Faculty of Agriculture, Bldg. A05
The University of Sydney
New South Wales 2006
Australia
Tel: (61-2) 93514332
Fax: (61-2) 93513292
Eml: MarshallD@Agric.usyd.edu.au
V.S. Vyas 396
Vasundhara Extension
Near Gopalpura Bye-pass
Tonk Road
Jaipur 302 018
India
Tel: (91-141) 515348
Fax: (91-141) 519938
Eml: visquar@jpl.vsnl.net.in
TAC Secretariat:
Panel Secretary:
Guido Gryseels
Deputy Executive Secretary, TAC
SDRC - D442
FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome,
Italy
Tel: (39-6) 57055442
Fax: (39-6) 57053298
Eml: Guido.Gryseels@fao.org
CGIAR Secretariat:
Paramjit Sachdeva
Senior Management Specialist
CGIAR Secretariat
World Bank 1818H Street, NW
Washington DC 20433
USA
Tel: (1-202) 4738941
Fax: (1-202) 4738110
Eml: PSACHDEVA@worldbank.org
Consultants:
John Griffith (Board)
9210 Friars Road
Bethesda
MD 20817-2321
USA
Tel: (1-301) 8975046 (Home)
(1-410) 3828655 (Cellphone)
Fax: (1-301) 5309347
Eml: 102625.1076@compuserve.com
Ralph Quatrano (Biotechnology)
Professor and Chair
Department of Biology
University of North Carolina
Coker Hall, South Road
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280
USA
Tel: (1-919) 962-2098
Fax: (1-919) 962-6840/962-3690
Eml: rsq@unc.edu
BIOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
Graham Jenkins (UK) graduated in Agricultural Botany at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, and undertook post-graduate training at Cambridge and Trinidad, (West Indies). From 1955-59, he worked as a rice breeder in Nigeria, returning to work briefly in the Biochemistry Department at Rothamsted Experimental Station in England before taking up an appointment as a cereal breeder at the then Plant Breeding Institute (PBI) at Cambridge. From 1979-83, he served as a Scientific Adviser with responsibilities for plant breeding and genetics at the Agricultural and Food Research Council in London, returning then to PBI Cambridge as Head of the Cereals Department and subsequently also as Deputy Director. He was Acting Director of the PBI at the time of its privatization in October 1987 and was appointed a director with responsibilities for plant breeding and research on the board of the new company, Plant Breeding International Ltd, a subsidiary of Unilever PLC. With regard
to experience in the CGIAR System, Graham Jenkins has participated in EPMRs - and other types of review - of ICARDA, IITA, ICRISAT, IPGRI and CIMMYT. The current EPMR represents his fourth visit to CIMMYT over a period of 25 years. He retired from PBI Cambridge Ltd in 1993 and has undertaken a number of consultancies, mostly within the CGIAR System, since that time.
Antonio Bahia Filho (Brazil) presently serves as Director General of the National Maize and Sorghum Research Center of EMBRAPA in Sete Lagoas, Brazil. He previously held this post from 1985-1990, and has been Research Director and Soil Scientist at this Institution. He obtained his B.Sc., M. Sc., and Ph. D. in Agronomy from the Federal University of Vicosa. Antonio. Bahia Filho is a soil scientist with research interests in maize tolerance to soil stress conditions including acidity and phosphorus deficiency. He has also worked on the physico-chemistry of phosphorus availability in tropical soils. In addition to his duties as Director General, Dr. Bahia Filho was leader of a national committee that developed and implemented a franchising system with private seed companies to deliver maize hybrids generated by EMBRAPA's plant breeding research. This consortium of seed companies (UNIMILHO) provides 16% of the seed sold in Brazil, and royalties paid from seed sales provide
funds to support federal agricultural research programmes. Antonio Bahia Filho was a consultant for a World Bank mission to Angola, and has served as a Technical Adviser to the CIMMYT South America Maize Regional Programme since 1990.
Kenneth Cassman (USA) is currently Head of the Department of Agronomy at the University of Nebraska. Previous positions include Head of the Agronomy, Plant Physiology, and Agroecology Division at the International Rice Research Institute (1991-1995), Assistant and Associate Professor in the Department of Agronomy and Range Science at the University of California, Davis (1984-1990), Grain Legume Agronomist on the Egyptian Major Crop Improvement Project (1982-1984), and Project Leader of the Jari Rice Project Research Group in Para, Brasil (1980-1982). He received a B.Sc. in Biology from the University of California, San Diego (1975), and a Ph.D. in Agronomy and Soil Science from the University of Hawaii (1979). Kenneth Cassman's research interests include soil fertility and plant nutrition, nutrient cycling and soil organic matter, root ecophysiology, and the sustainability of intensive cropping systems. He is a Fellow of the American Society of Agronomy and the Soil Science
Society of America, and he serves as a Board member of the Nebraska Crop Improvement Association.
Barrie Keenan (New Zealand) is Principal of Keenan Consulting, a firm specializing in human resources management and the development of management information systems to achieve best business performance. Prior to founding this business he was involved for 22 years in various agricultural research management roles with the Agricultural Research Division of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and then with the MAF Technology business group. Since 1992 he has consulted with a number of the Crown Research Institutes and the agricultural extension company formed after the restructuring of the New Zealand science agencies, on a World Bank project in Turkey, and with CIAT. He has also visited other CGIAR Centres in Africa looking at issues relating to the communication of management information between headquarters and regional staff.
Don Marshall (Australia) is an population geneticist. He is currently Professor of Plant Breeding, and Director of the Plant Breeding Institute at the University of Sydney. He was previously Professor of Agronomy and Head of the Department of Plant Sciences at the University of Adelaide. He served on the board of IPGRI and is currently a member of the Board of ICRISAT. He previously participated in the CCER of the Wheat Germplasm Improvement Subprogramme at CIMMYT. He is a member of the Board of Suprime Seeds and Hybrid Wheat Australia and a Program Leader in the Cooperative Research Centre for Quality Wheat Products and Processes. He is a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering.
Vijay S. Vyas (India) has a Ph.D. in Economics. Currently he is Emeritus Professor at the Institute of Development Studies, Jaipur, from where he retired as Director in 1996. He has taught in the Bombay University, Sarden Patel University and the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad (IIMA). Vijay Vyas has served as a member of the Agricultural Prices Commission of the Government of India, Director of IIMA and Senior Advisor in the Agricultural and Rural Development Department of the World Bank. He was Team Leader of the Second Asian Agricultural Survey, Chairman of the External Management Review of Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) and Chairman of the External Programme and Management Review of International Irrigation Management Institute (IMMI). He served as member of the Board of Trustees of the International Food Policy Research Institute and the Vice Chairman of the Board of Trustees of CIAT, and a member of the Governing Board of the Institute of Development
Studies of Sussex University. He is a member of the National Commission on Integrated Water Planning, and a member of the Scientific Advisory Committee of the Cabinet in India. He has written extensively on key issues of Agricultural Policy and Rural Development, and has been honoured by the academic community in India and abroad for his contribution to the profession. Vijay Vyas is the President elected of the Asian Association of Agricultural Economists.
<section>f</section>
Annex 2: ToR of External Reviews
BACKGROUND
TERMS OF REFERENCE
TOPICS TO BE COVERED
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEWS OF CGIAR CENTRES
BACKGROUND
Context
The Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) is an informal association of over 50 members that supports a network of 16 international research centres in agriculture, forestry and fisheries. The CGIAR aims, through its support to the Centres, to contribute to promoting sustainable agriculture for food security in developing countries. Because the Centres constitute the core of the CGIAR, the effectiveness of each Centre is crucial to the continued success of the CGIAR (as a System).
Each Centre is an autonomous institution operating within the mandate assigned to it by the CGIAR, and is governed by a legally constituted Board that has full fiduciary responsibility for managing the Centre. To ensure accountability in an essentially decentralized system, each Centre is expected to be responsive to the CGIAR, which provides financial support for its work.
The CGIAR has established a tradition of External Programme and Management Reviews (EPMRs) to provide a mechanism of transparency and accountability to the Members and other stakeholders of the CGIAR System. EPMRs are the joint responsibility of TAC and the CGIAR Secretariat, and are conducted for each Centre approximately every five years. As each Centre is autonomous, EPMRs provide a measure of central oversight and serve as an essential component of the CGIAR's accountability system.
Integrated System of Reviews of Each Centre
Besides the EPMRs, Centre Commissioned External Reviews (CCERs) are undertaken at each Centre. These CCERs are commissioned by the Centre Boards to periodically assess the quality and effectiveness of particular aspects of a Centre's work. The terms of reference (ToRs) for each CCER are determined by the Centre, based on broad principles endorsed by the CGIAR at ICW95 (ref. document entitled Improving the Quality and Consistency of CGIAR's External Centre Reviews, dated October 24,1995).
EPMRs complement the CCERs by providing a CGIAR-commissioned and comprehensive external assessment of the Centre's program and management, especially its future directions and the quality and relevance of its research. The ToRs for the EPMRs (which update the "standard ToRs" endorsed by the CGIAR at MTM95) are provided below. Guidelines for undertaking the reviews are issued separately.
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Objectives and Scope
EPMRs seek to inform CGIAR members that their investment is sound, or recommend measures to make it so. Members of the CGIAR and other stakeholders can be informed whether the Centre is doing its work effectively and efficiently. EPMRs are both retrospective and prospective; and help ensure the Centres' excellence, relevance and continued viability, and the CGIAR System's coherence. Each review is expected to be strategic in orientation and as comprehensive as the situation warrants.
The broad objectives of EPMRs are to: a) provide CGIAR members with an independent and rigorous assessment of the institutional health and contribution of a Centre they are supporting; and b) to provide the Centre and its collaborators with assessment information that complements or validates their own evaluation efforts, including the CCERs.
The EPMR panel is specifically charged to assess the following:
a) The Centre's mission, strategy and priorities in the context of the CGIAR's priorities' and strategies;
b) The quality and relevance of the science undertaken, including the effectiveness and potential impact of the Centre's completed and ongoing research;
c) The effectiveness and efficiency of management, including the mechanisms and processes for ensuring quality; and
d) The accomplishments and impact of the Centre's research and related activities. The topics expected to be covered by the EPMRs are listed below.
TOPICS TO BE COVERED
A. Mission, Strategy and Priorities
 The continuing appropriateness of the Centre's mission in light of important changes in the Centre and its external environment since the previous external review.
 The policies, strategies, and priorities of the Centre, their coherence with the CGIAR's goals (of poverty alleviation, natural resources management, and sustainable food security), and relevance to beneficiaries, especially rural women.
 The appropriateness of the roles of relevant partners in the formulation and implementation of the Centre's strategy and priorities, considering alternative sources of supply and the benefits of partnerships with others.
B. Quality and Relevance
 The quality and relevance of the science practised at the Centre.
 The effectiveness of the Centre's processes for planning, priority setting, quality management (e.g., CCERs, peer reviews and other quality and relevance assurance mechanisms), and impact assessment.
C. Effectiveness and Efficiency of Management
 The performance of the Centre's Board in governing the Centre, the effectiveness of leadership throughout the Centre, and the suitability of the organization's culture to its mission.
 The adequacy of the Centre's organizational structure and the mechanisms in place to manage, coordinate and ensure the excellence of the research programs and related activities.
 The adequacy of resources (financial, human, physical and information) available and the effectiveness and efficiency of their management.
 The effectiveness of the Centre's relationships with relevant research partners and other stakeholders of the CGIAR System.
D. Accomplishments and Impact
 Recent achievements of the Centre in research and other areas.
 The effectiveness of the Centre's programs in terms of their impact and contribution to the achievement of the mission and goals of the CGIAR.
<section>g</section>
Annex 3: Acronyms
ABC
Applied Biotechnology Centre
AFLP
Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphisms
ARI
Advanced Research Institute
ASI
Anthesis Silking Interval
BoT
Board of Trustees
BYDV
Barley Yellow Dwarf Virus
CATIE
Centro Agronomico Tropical de Investigacin y Enseanza (Costa Rica)
CCER
Centre-Commissioned External Review
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CIAT
Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical
CIDA
Canadian International Development Agency
CIMMYT
Centro Internacional de Mejoramiento de Maiz y Trigo
CIRAD
Centre de Cooperation International en Recherche Agronomique pour le Dveloppement
CMR
Crop Management Research
CNPMS
Centro Nacional de Pesquisa de Milho e Sorgo
CRC
Cooperative Research Centre
DH
Dihaploid
EP
Economics Programme
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
FIRBS
Furrow Irrigation and Raised Bed Systems
FP
Frontier Project
GCA
General Combining Ability
GIS
Geographical Information Services
GP
Global Project
GPA
Global Plan of Action
GRIP
Genetic Resources Information Package
ha
hectare
HRM
Human Resources Management
IARC
International Agricultural Research Centre
ICARDA
International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas
ICER
Internally Commissioned External Review
ICIS
International Crop Information System
ICRAF
International Centre for Research in Agroforestry
ICRISAT
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
IER
Interim External Review
IFPRI
International Food Policy Research Institute
IIMI
International Irrigation Management Institute
IITA
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture
ILRI
International Livestock Research Institute
INIFAP
National Institute of Forestry, Agriculture and Livestock (Mexico)
IPM
Integrated Pest Management
IPR
Intellectual Property Rights
IQ
Industrial Quality
IRRI
International Rice Research Institute
IRS
Internationally Recruited Staff
IWIS
International Wheat Information System
LAMP
Latin America Maize Regeneration Project
MAC
Management Advisory Committee
MAS
Marker Assisted Selection
ME
Mega-environment
MGB
Maize Germplasm Bank
MTP
Medium-Term Plan
MWIRNET
Maize and Wheat Improvement Research Network
NARS
National Agricultural Research System
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
NRG
Natural Resources Group
NRM
Natural Resources Management
NRR
Natural Resources Research
ODBC
Open Database Connectivity
OFR
On-Farm Research
OPV
Open Pollinated Varieties
ORSTOM
French National Research Institute for Development Cooperation
PRAM
Regional Maize Programme
QPM
Quality Protein Maize
RCC
Research Coordinating Committee
SACCAR
Southern African Centre for Cooperation in Agricultural Research
SADC
South African Development Community
SSA
sub-Saharan Africa
SSR
Simple Sequence Repeats
SSY
Senior Staff Years
TAC
Technical Advisory Committee
TAMNET
Tropical Asian Maize Network
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WANA
West Asia and North Africa
WP
Wheat Programme
