<title>Mobilizing Science for Global Food Security. Third External Review of IFPRI (Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research - CGIAR - SDR/TAC:IAR/98/2)</title>
<section>1</section>
CONSULTATIVE GROUP ON INTERNATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND CGIAR SECRETARIAT
SDR/TAC IAR/98/2
Report of the Third External Programme and Management Review
of the
International Food Policy Research Institute
(IFPRI)
TAC Secretariat
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
April 1998
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)
TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Donald Winkelmann, Chairman
10 April 1998
Dear Mr. Serageldin,
We are indeed pleased to submit to you the report of the Third External Programme and Management Review of IFPRI, which was conducted recently by a Panel chaired by Dr. Samuel Paul of the Public Affairs Centre in Bangalore, India. The Review report and IFPRI's response were considered by TAC at its 74th meeting at Hyderabad in March 1998. The Panel Chair was present at the meeting, and IFPRI was represented by its Director General.
Besides the Panel's report, there are two attachments to this letter: the TAC commentary, which summarises the Committee's reactions to the Panel's report and to the response of IFPRI's Board and management; and IFPRI's response to the Panel's report.
TAC is pleased that EPMR Panel considers the overall quality of work, outputs and performance of IFPRI during the review period to be impressive. Since the last EPMR, IFPRI's senior management has done an outstanding job of restoring organisational cohesion, morale and stability. The Review Panel found IFPRI's research programmes to be of high quality and relevance, and notes the Institute's solid reputation among its peers and collaborators. IFPRI intends to re-examine its priorities later this year; and TAC has made a number of suggestions regarding possible future directions of IFPRI's work, including attention to institutional economics. It also concurs with the Panel that the Institute needs to develop a better strategy for its Outreach Programme and to integrate it effectively with research.
Mr. Ismail Serageldin
CGIAR Chair
World Bank
1818H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
USA
355 E. Palace Avenue, Santa Fe, NM 87501
FAX: (1-505) 988-1285
tacwink@newmexico.com
Overall, we endorse the Panel's view about the sound leadership of IFPRI and the effectiveness of its governance and management. IFPRI is in excellent shape, and folly deserves continued strong support from the CGIAR community.
Yours sincerely,
Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary, CGIAR
Donald L. Winkelmann
TAC Chair
<section>2</section>
TAC COMMENTARY ON THE THIRD EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW OF IFPRI
TAC is grateful to the Chair, Dr. Samuel Paul, and Members of the Panel that conducted the third EPMR of IFPRI, for an excellent report which contains a powerful analysis of IFPRI's programmes and management. The Committee is pleased about the very positive findings of the Review Panel and that the overall quality, outputs and performance of IFPRI during the period under review have been found to be impressive. Leadership of the Institute has done an outstanding job of restoring organizational cohesion, morale and stability after a period of internal turmoil and uncertainty at the time of the last EPMR.
The Committee notes that not all of the important considerations made in the analysis are fully reflected in the conclusions of the Panel and therefore encourages readers and IFPRI to consider the report in its entirety. TAC is pleased that the Panel conducted its Review against a background of the 1996 Strategic Study on Policy and Management Research in the CGIAR. TAC endorses the recommendations made by the External Review Panel and notes that the Institute also is in full agreement with all of them.
The Committee offers the following commentary, prepared with inputs from the CGIAR Secretariat, to supplement the Panel's report.
Strategy and Priorities
TAC is pleased with the Panel's findings that IFPRI's current mission and priorities are on the whole consistent with CGIAR goals and priorities, and that the research issues on its agenda and its major research outputs are pertinent to poverty alleviation, food security and environmental sustainability in the developing countries. The Committee agrees with the Panel that the priority-setting process used for the 1998-2000 MTP is appropriate and pragmatic but that IFPRI should more fully exploit the means available to gain greater input in its priorities setting from developing country policymakers. TAC notes that IFPRI intends to interact during 1998 with stakeholders to identify major emerging policy issues as an input for a new round of priority-setting. The results of this exercise will be reflected in IFPRI's subsequent medium-term plan. TAC expects IFPRI to give careful consideration both to the findings of the Panel and the Committee's commentary.
Programmes
TAC is pleased about the Panel's findings of the high quality and relevance of IFPRI's research programmes and the solid reputation IFPRI holds among its peers and collaborators.
In response to reading the Panel's report, TAC raises the following two general issues:
1. IFPRI bases much of its current work on multicountry analysis. Following this approach is clearly one of IFPRI's comparative advantages and it has proven highly beneficial. However, TAC wonders whether this approach needs to be so systematically pursued as it can lead to the over-dimensioning of projects and over-burdening of the scientists involved for sometimes only marginal additional information provided by increasing the number of countries and delays in completing the research. For each particular project, IFPRI may want to carefully consider whether reducing the number of countries, eventually down to one, would allow making projects leaner and quicker, without necessarily compromising the international public goods character of the results obtained. It may also enhance the relevance of results for the particular country chosen and their use in policymaking.
2. IFPRI should consider mechanisms to enable it to become more actively involved in emerging policy debates given the long lag that currently exists between initiation of research and availability of results in its traditional research activities. On the basis of its research experience, the Institute should explore mechanisms to make its expertise available to illuminate options in major debates on important current policy issues, perhaps by organizing special task forces as one element of its Outreach Programme.
As it engages in a new round of priority-setting, IFPRI may want to carefully consider the following suggestions for research. TAC does recognize that IFPRI already has more than a full agenda and that its staff justifiably claim to suffer from over-commitment and "time famine". Any addition to its research programme may, therefore, have to be accompanied by a corresponding reduction elsewhere.
1. Research on agrarian institutions for the rural poor. The trend in reducing the role of the state, following structural adjustment and redefinition of the role of the public sector in transition economies, has left large institutional gaps in important areas such as credit, insurance, marketing, technical assistance, and contracts with agro-industries that seriously constrain the competitiveness of many smallholders. Research should be directed at identifying best institutional responses for specific settings to fill these gaps. For this purpose, the Institute may benefit from a greater emphasis on applications of the New Institutional Economics as was already recommended by the Stripe Review Panel.
2. Research on new approaches to rural development. While IFPRI gives substantial emphasis to food nutrition and consumption issues at the household level, perhaps insufficient attention has been given to the implications of alternative income generation activities for poverty alleviation strategies. In particular, a major effort is required to systematically investigate the link between sources of growth and poverty reduction and their implications for the design of effective approaches to rural development consistent with the emerging roles of the globalized market, new forms of governance, organizations in civil society, and institutional circumstances.
3. Research on intellectual property rights (IPR). Given recent major changes on the privatization of research results in biology, IFPRI could play a more important role in research on IPR so as to enable the international agricultural research community to develop more informed options for policymaking on this subject.
4. Research on low-income transitional economies. The transformation from socialist to market economies has led to considerable problems associated with food security in transition countries. IFPRI should consider a more in-depth involvement with policy research and advice on low-income transitional economies about how to institute a functioning market economy which allows for improvements in the welfare of the poor.
Outreach
TAC agrees with the Panel that IFPRI needs to develop a better strategy for its Outreach Programme. It recalls that similar observations were made in the 1990 Review and in the 1992 Mid-Term Review. TAC considers that the IFPRI Outreach Programme still lacks an integrating philosophy and concurs with the Panel that the outreach function has to be well integrated with research with mutual reinforcements. Outreach should be the partial responsibility of every scientist, with senior scientists assuming a relatively larger role. The Committee also wonders about the extent to which outreach could perhaps be better facilitated if research were more country rather than only multicountry focused.
Quality of Science
TAC is impressed with the high quality of science at IFPRI and the high regard peers generally have for the Institute's work. The Committee is also very pleased that the Panel benefited from an Internally Commissioned External Review (ICER) of IFPRI's research methodology. TAC notes, however, that the Panel identified some degree of variation in the performance of IFPRI's different divisions. This is no doubt inevitable, but IFPRI should make an attempt to learn positive lessons through systematic analysis of why some divisions are more successful than others.
The Committee endorses the Panel's recommendation that there is a need for IFPRI to amplify its skill mix by recruitment of persons with both research and policy experience. TAC is also concerned about the large predominance of economists among the Institute's staff. The Committee appreciates IFPRI's efforts to make up for this imbalance in skill mix through partnerships but encourages IFPRI to improve its internal skill mix, while maximizing complementarities and overlaps between disciplines.
Governance and Management
TAC endorses the Panel's view about the strong leadership of IFPRI and acknowledges the Director General's contributions to reshaping the Institute. The Committee is also pleased that governance in IFPRI is efficient and that the Board has responded positively to the Panel's recommendations and suggestions. TAC notes the Panel's suggestion that the Board increase the number of its meetings but suggests that the Institute carefully weigh the benefits and costs of following this suggestion.
<section>3</section>
IFPRI - INTERNATIONAL FOOD POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE
March 6, 1998
Dr. Donald L. Winkelmann
Chairman
Technical Advisory Committee
355 East Palace Avenue
Santa Fe, NM 87501
USA
Dr. Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary, CGIAR
701 18^th Street, NW
Room J-4073
Washington, D.C.
USA
Dear Dr. Winkelmann and Dr. von der Osten:
On behalf of the IFPRI Board of Trustees and Management, we are pleased to submit our response to the Third External Program and Management Review of the International Food Policy Research Institute.
IFPRI's Board of Trustees and Management want to express their gratitude to the EPMR panel for its professionalism and for its extremely positive and constructive report. Our thanks also go to you, the Secretariat staff, particularly Selcuk Ozgediz, and Guido Gryseels, for your assistance in ensuring the success of IFPRI's Third EPMR.
Our response is attached.
With kind regards,
Per Pinstrup-Andersen
Director General
Martin Piñeiro
Chairman, Board of Trustees
1200 Seventeenth Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20036-3006 USA.
Tel: 202-862-5600
E-mail: ifpri@icgnet.com
Web: www.cgiar.org/ifpri
<section>4</section>
IFPRI'S BOARD AND MANAGEMENT JOINT RESPONSE TO THE REPORT OF THE THIRD EXTERNAL PROGRAM AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW
(March 1998)
Overall, we found the report to be an accurate reflection of the Institute's work and contribution during the five-year period under consideration and we are pleased by the panel's positive assessment of IFPRI. We are delighted by the panel's recognition of the high quality of IFPRI's work, staff, and published output. The report's acknowledgment of IFPRI's significant contribution in heightening worldwide awareness of food policy and environmental issues through its research and outreach activities, including the 2020 Vision initiative, is also appreciated. We are also gratified to see the panel's recognition of IFPRI's thorough internal review and quality control systems, processes that we feel have enriched IFPRI's research and outreach work during the past five years.
We agree with the panel's suggestion that to improve the utilization of our research results, IFPRI should enhance its collaborative efforts with developing country partners. The Institute works collaboratively with over 120 organizations. Our priority is to improve the effectiveness of these collaborations. The 2020 Vision networks that we are facilitating in East and West Africa, for example, were established so that countries can learn from IFPRI and each other for the purpose of improving the knowledge base for policymaking in the regions. IFPRI, too, will benefit from the improved linkages with developing country researchers and from the feedback we receive about emerging issues for which more research is needed. We are launching a major review of emerging food policy issues and needs for future food policy research in 1998. Stakeholders from developing countries will play a major role in this review.
IFPRI concurs with the EPMR report's suggestion that the Institute's role in identifying inter-sectoral research priorities should be strengthened. IFPRI needs to be at the forefront of emerging issues in order to set priorities for the Institute and to meet the future information needs of our developing country partners, donors, and others.
To ensure the relevance of our work, almost all of IFPRI's research and outreach work is carried out in close collaboration with policymakers in developing countries. However, the Board and Management endorse the panel's suggestion that IFPRI make a more concerted effort to strengthen policy experience on our staff and further diversify disciplinary input into our research. IFPRI plans to consider strengthening staff diversity through innovative exchange programs that will enhance the intellectual debate at the Institute and bring in more policy-making experience.
Conforming with the Panel's suggestion, the Board of Trustees will assess whether it should hold more frequent meetings, whether the Executive and Finance Committee should rethink the agenda of its meetings, and the role it should play in ensuring and monitoring the relevance and impact of the Institute's work. The Board will also consider whether it should undertake self-assessment.
We are in agreement with the Panel's suggestion that IFPRI improve the integration of its research and outreach activities. We are in the process of reassessing the Institute's outreach activities and the most appropriate role of the Outreach Division. In order to meet our goal of improving food security and nutrition, reducing poverty, and contributing to the sustainable use of natural resources we recognize that our outreach activities must become more proactive, as suggested in the internally-commissioned external review.
The number of IFPRI's outposted staff has increased significantly during the last several years. Thus, we agree with the Panel that we should develop more standardized procedures for outposted staff to facilitate their continued high quality field work.
We share the panel's belief that the Agricultural Research Indicators Project, co-convened by IFPRI and ISNAR, should be more centrally funded by the CGIAR as it is producing information that will be useful across the CGIAR system.
Our response to the four recommendations follows.
Recommendation 1
With respect to IFPRI's research work, the Panel Recommends that:
(a) notwithstanding the present difficulties in obtaining funding for work on water resources, IFPRI should redouble its efforts in raising such funds since it is an area identified as a priority by the CGIAR (Section 2.1); and,
(b) in designing its research every division within IFPRI should bear in mind that developing countries now have increasingly open economies, and that the planned research should take into full account the country's interactions with the rest of the world. (Section 2.3)
ENDORSED: We are in agreement with the EPMR panel regarding the importance of policy work on water resources for IFPRI and the CGIAR, and we are already putting a significant amount of unrestricted funding into our water project, relative to other projects. IFPRI will make every effort to attain additional restricted funding to at least double the Institute's activities in this critical area. IFPRI places high priority on research to assist governments and international institutions in the development of appropriate policies and institutions for water management, including appropriate mechanisms for water allocation among competing demands, within and among countries. Such work links closely with IFPRI's research priority on watershed management policies and institutions. Research by IFPRI and others clearly demonstrates the increasingly critical role of water in assuring food security and sustainable use of natural resources for the future. Appropriate water management is
critical to the success of improved agricultural technology, and therefore to the achievement of the goals of the CGIAR. Collaboration with IIMI and interaction with policy research on related topics within IFPRI provides an ideal environment for IFPRI to undertake additional research on water management policies and institutions.
IFPRI also agrees with the second part of the recommendation by the EPMR panel. As globalization, international trade liberalization and integration, and the opening up of individual low-income economies proceed, IFPRI's research must increasingly incorporate and take into account the study countries' interactions with the rest of the world.
Recommendation 2
In redesigning its outreach activities, IFPRI should ensure that:
a) the respective roles of the research divisions and the outreach division in outreach activities are clarified and that the outreach function is well integrated with research;
b) there is mutual reinforcement of research and outreach, with research driving outreach on the dissemination of research findings and outreach influencing research on the identification of research problems;
c) if a country programme format is used, it recognizes the need for integration of research and outreach, provides an efficient mechanism for management, and is reasonably consistent across countries in which IFPRI operates (Section 2.5)
ENDORSED: IFPRI agrees with this recommendation. At the time of the visit by the EPMR panel, IFPRI was in the process of reassessing the Institute's outreach activities and the appropriate role for the Outreach Division. In response to recommendations by the Internally-Commissioned External Review, IFPRI's outreach activities will become more proactive in an attempt to further enhance the impact of IFPRI's research on the ultimate goals of improving food security and nutrition, reducing poverty, and contributing to sustainable use of natural resources. While most of IFPRI's outreach activities have been and will continue to be undertaken within the research divisions as integral parts of research projects, we visualize that the Outreach Division will play the dual role of supporting such outreach activities while undertaking other outreach activities that are more appropriately done outside the research divisions, such as capacity strengthening and information dissemination
that cut across divisions. In order to assure a high level of impact of IFPRI's research, we must assure effective two-way communication between the intended clients of IFPRI's research and IFPRI. Both the outreach and the research divisions participate actively in assuring such two-way communication. During the last five years, IFPRI has sought new ways of improving the effectiveness of IFPRI's research output through a variety of means such as short policy briefs, reports written in less-technical language, and through the 2020 Vision initiative activities. IFPRI will continue to seek further gains in this area in order to enhance impact. We also agree with the EPMR panel that the current review of the Country Programs Office must be brought to a logical conclusion in a way that produces more effective mechanisms for integrating IFPRI collaborative research at the country level to assure enhanced interaction with intended clients and enhanced impact in study countries.
Recommendation 3
With respect to impact assessment. IFPRI should:
a) continue to assess the impact of its activities mainly in terms of the outputs for which it can be held accountable (intermediate impacts of its publications and capacity strengthening efforts, for example);
b) continue its activities related to developing improved understanding of, and means for assessing, impacts of policy and social science research; and develop further in-depth case studies of its impacts in partner countries, and also surveys of the use of its outputs in other, non-partner countries. (Section 3.3.5)
ENDORSED: We greatly appreciate the EPMR panel's recommendation that ongoing work to assess impact be continued along the lines currently pursued. We agree that impact assessment of IFPRI's research should focus on the Institute's output or intermediate variables. As recognized by the Panel, it is extremely difficult to establish reliable causal links between IFPRI's research and the ultimate impact variables, such as an individual's food security and nutritional levels. We also agree that ongoing activities aimed at the development of improved understanding of how the impact of policy and social science research can be improved should be continued, and we will continue in-depth case studies along the lines mentioned in the recommendation.
Recommendation 4
With respect to enhancing the relevance of its activities, IFPRI should:
a) further strengthen its mechanisms for priority setting by seeking new ways to identify and take account of developing country policy concerns;
b) diversify its skill mix by recruiting persons with both research and policy experience, -with greater flexibility in appointments, if necessary; and,
c) the IFPRI Board should play a more active role in ensuring and monitoring the relevance and impact of the Institute's work. (Section 5.2)
ENDORSED: As further outlined in IFPRI's current medium-term plan, IFPRI's research and outreach priorities are heavily influenced by developing-countries' needs for information that can be generated by policy research. However, we agree with the EPMR panel's recommendation to enhance the effectiveness by which developing-country concerns are translated into mechanisms for priority setting, and we will launch a major effort during 1998 to accomplish this for use in future medium-term plans.
While senior research staff members are hired primarily for their qualifications in the area of relevant food policy research, some of our senior researchers have significant policy experience. We agree with the EPMR panel recommendation that policy experience adds a very critical component to good policy research, and we will seek to enhance the policy experience of IFPRI's senior research staff by assuring that policy experience is specified as a desirable qualification of new hires. IFPRI will also explore innovative exchange programs to bring more policymaking experience into IFPRI's research and internal debate.
IFPRI also agrees that the Board must continue to play an active role in ensuring and monitoring the relevance and impact of the Institute's work. The Board sees this role as being an extremely important part of its overall mandate and, in response to the EPMR panel recommendation, the Board will review ways in which it can be even more effective in this role and will devote more time to fundamental issues of major importance to the long-term directions of the Institute. The Board has already begun the process of developing concrete responses to this recommendation and other observations in the report concerning the Board.
Washington D.C., USA - 27 February 1998
Dr. Donald L. Winkelmann
Chair, Technical Advisory Committee/CGIAR
355 East Palace Avenue
Santa Fe, NM 87501
USA.
Mr. Alexander von der Osten
Executive Secretary
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
The World Bank
1818H Street, NW
Washington D.C. 20433
USA.
Dear Don and Alexander,
I take pleasure in submitting to you the report of the Panel you commissioned to conduct the Third External Programme and Management Review of IFPRI. My colleagues on the Panel and I enjoyed this assignment, partly because we found in IFPRI a vibrant institute with strong achievements, and in part because this gave us an opportunity to debate several thorny questions that surround evaluation of policy research.
Our overall impression of IFPRI is very positive. IFPRI scores high in terms of all four major criteria we were asked to apply to our assessment: there is good evidence of impact from IFPRI's work; in the most part, the strategic thrusts of the Institute are clear and the work is highly relevant to the objectives of the CGIAR; the quality of the science practised is high and the internal mechanisms for quality control are effective; and the Institute is very well managed.
We have made four sets of recommendations to assist IFPRI's evolution. These concern integrating research and outreach activities, giving greater stress to two programmatic concerns (the context of open economies and research on water), strengthening impact assessment, and furthering infusion of developing country perspectives into IFPRI's work.
I would like to flag one special area for the attention of TAC and the CGIAR. At IFPRI we saw firsthand the effects of increased levels of targeted funding on the work of the individual scientists and the overall functioning of the Institute. To the extent that targeted funding coincides with the priorities of the Institute, this does not present a significant problem. But if it does not, a major shift towards more targeted funding (from the current 50-50 ratio of unrestricted vs. restricted) could limit the overall effectiveness of the Institute.
We had excellent co-operation from IFPRI. The documentation provided was excellent and the Board, management and staff were very open with the Panel on all issues. We also had strong professional support from both the TAC and the CGIAR Secretariats. This facilitated our task and increased the efficiency of our work as a panel.
I would also like to express my thanks to my fellow Panel members for their many insightful contributions and overall professional judgement.
Last, I thank you for providing me this opportunity to learn about a first-rate research institute and contribute to the thinking about its future. The CGIAR needs IFPRI and IFPRI deserves continued support from the CGIAR.
Yours sincerely,
Samuel Paul
Chair, IFPRI EPMR
<section>5</section>
REPORT OF THE THIRD EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL FOOD POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE (IFPRI)
Review Panel:
Dr. Samuel Paul (Chairman)
Mr. Gerald Bourrier
Dr. Jean-Marc Boussard
Dr Catherine Geissler
Dr. Hans Gregersen
Dr. Ammar Siamwalla
Ms. Maureen Robinson (Consultant)
Dr. Selcuk Ozgediz (CGIAR Secretariat)
Dr. Guido Gryseels (Panel Secretary, TAC Secretariat)
TAC SECRETARIAT
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
February 1998
<section>6</section>
Summary and Recommendations
This report summarizes the EPMR Panel's major findings and recommendations on IFPRI's overall performance during the review period 1992-97. It includes an assessment of the Centre's research and outreach activities, its governance and management, and a discussion of the cross cutting issues and themes that emerge therefrom. The Panel has offered a number of suggestions on the different aspects of the Centre's operations in the different chapters in addition to the major recommendations given below.
Recent Progress
This is the first comprehensive external review of IFPRI that has taken place since the second EPMR of 1990 which coincided with an extremely difficult period in the Centre's history. By 1992, IFPRI had turned around and many positive changes had taken place. The Panel is pleased to note that during 1992-97, the Centre had built further on this foundation and made steady and impressive progress in its research as well as overall governance and management. IFPRI is now a well-managed institute and continues to be a producer of high quality research output.
IFPRI has four research divisions and an outreach division. An assessment of the work of the research divisions shows that their outputs, both in terms of empirical findings and methodological contributions are relevant to developing countries, other partners and the research community at large. Some divisions have built up large collections of data sets that can be used for inter country and intertemporal comparisons. The volume of final research outputs has varied across divisions, but is significant and has been judged to be of high quality by the ICER as well as by other professional peers. There are priority areas such as water on which the Centre has not able to do significant research mainly due to lack of funding.
IFPRI's Vision 2020 and its outputs have not only given its work a high degree of visibility, but also contributed significantly to heightened awareness, worldwide, of global food policy and environmental issues. The dissemination of these outputs has resulted in several requests for IFPRI's advice and assistance from developing countries. The 2020 study has also helped integrate and highlight the different strands of research at IFPRI.
The outreach division is still in a state of flux, being relatively new in its present form. The expansion of the scope and thrust of outreach is moving in the right direction, but several gaps remain in terms of integrating research and outreach, ownership of the activities, and clarification of the organizational mechanisms for effective implementation.
Cross Cutting themes and Issues
The Panel is satisfied that the Centre's priority setting process and the research agenda it has adopted are on the whole appropriate and timely, given its own comparative advantage, the outputs available from other policy research bodies, and the uncertainty about donor resources IFPRI's resource allocation across major activities is generally in line with CG goals and priorities. The original rationale for establishing IFPRI as a policy research centre within the CG System continues to be valid today.
IFPRI's work is of good quality at all stages of its research process. The selection of research problems is in general carefully done and the quality standards applied are appropriate. The internal quality control system is efficient and working well. Its outputs such as policy briefs, project briefs and other information materials are widely disseminated and are of high quality. The staffs achievements in respect of peer reviewed publications is impressive, but their co-authors work and audiences are largely in the developed countries.
A quantitative assessment of the impacts of policy research on goals such as poverty alleviation is difficult in the present state of our knowledge. It is necessary therefore to depend on intermediate indicators of IFPRI's impact. The Centre's efforts to select and work on relevant policy issues of concern to developing countries, its wide dissemination of outputs, especially in a more accessible form to policy makers, its collaborative research partnerships in countries, and capacity building efforts all qualify as adequate intermediate indicators. The Centre is actively engaged in the task of policy research impact assessment.
IFPRI's management has effectively combined the use of incentives, peer pressure and negotiations to direct individual researchers away from the exclusive pursuit of academic excellence towards other institutional goals. But more work needs to be done to nudge them towards outreach and the production of joint research publications with developing country collaborators. The skill mix of the Centre needs to be balanced by inducting persons with significant policy experience in developing countries and from other relevant disciplines than economics.
IFPRI's linkages with other CG Centres are good. Its linkages with other advanced research institutions are also excellent. It has a good network of collaborating institutions in developing countries, but further strengthening of these links is in order. Steps are under way to move in this direction. The Centre is an active partner in seven Systemwide programmes.
Conclusions
In summary, the overall outputs and performance of IFPRI during the period under review have been impressive. It has achieved a good balance between quality and relevance of research, increased its impact through wide dissemination of its outputs and other outreach activities, and expanded its financial and human resources significantly. The gender balance at the senior research staff level has improved. The leadership of the Centre has done an outstanding job of restoring organizational cohesion, morale and stability after a period of internal turmoil and uncertainty. Its governance structure and processes are functioning effectively.
The Panel endorses the conclusion of the Stripe Study that policy research is important for the overall effectiveness of the CG System and that IFPRI should continue to play a lead role in this area. The Panel's major recommendations are summarized below.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1
With respect to IFPRI 's research work, the Panel recommends that:
a) notwithstanding the present difficulties in obtaining funding for work on water resources, IFPRI should redouble its efforts in raising such funds since it is an area identified as a priority by the CGIAR (Section 2.1); and,
b) in designing its research every division within IFPRI should bear in mind that developing countries now have increasingly open economies, and that the planned research should take into full account the country 's interactions with the rest of the world. (Section 2.3)
Recommendation 2
In redesigning its outreach activities, IFPRI should ensure that:
a) the respective roles of the research divisions and the outreach division in outreach activities are clarified and that the outreach function is well integrated with research;
b) there is mutual reinforcement of research and outreach, with research driving outreach on the dissemination of research findings and outreach influencing research on the identification of research problems;
c) if a country programme format is used, it recognizes the need for integration of research and outreach, provides an efficient mechanism for management, and is reasonably consistent across countries in which IFPRI operates (Section 2.5)
Recommendation 3
With respect to impact assessment, IFPRI should:
a) continue to assess the impact of its activities mainly in terms of the outputs for which it can be held accountable (intermediate impacts of its publications and capacity strengthening efforts, for example);
b) continue its activities related to developing improved understanding of, and means for assessing, impacts of policy and social science research; and
c) develop further in-depth case studies of its impacts in partner countries, and also surveys of the use of its outputs in other, non-partner countries, (Section 3.3.5)
Recommendation 4
With respect to enhancing the relevance of its activities, IFPRI should:
a) further strengthen its mechanisms for priority setting by seeking new ways to identify and take account of developing country policy concerns;
b) diversify its skill mix by recruiting persons with both research and policy experience, with greater flexibility in appointments, if necessary.
The Panel further recommends that:
the IFPRI Board should play a more active role in ensuring and monitoring the relevance and impact of the Institute's work. (Section 5.2)
<section>7</section>
Chapter 1 - Introduction and Evolution of IFPRI
1.1 Origin, Mission and Mandate
1.2 Policy Research and CGIAR Priorities and Strategies
1.3 Priorities and Strategies for IFPRI's Research
1.4 IFPRI Today
1.5 Conduct of the Review
1.1 Origin, Mission and Mandate
The International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) was established in 1975 in recognition of the need for an independent research institute that would deal with socioeconomic policies for agricultural development. IFPRI joined the CGIAR in 1980. The Institute's mission, as it was re-stated in 1996, is (a) to identify and analyse alternative national and international policies for meeting food needs on a sustainable basis, with particular regard for low-income countries and poor people, and for the sound management of the natural resource base that supports agriculture; (b) to make the results of its research available to all those in a position to apply them or use them; and (c) to help strengthen institutions conducting research on food policies and institutions in a position to apply such research results in developing countries. The interpretation of IFPRI's mandate and its research activities evolved over time, in response to changing needs within developing
countries and perceptions of their major policy issues.
IFPRI's first External Programme and Management Review took place during 1985; the second was during 1990. Programme and management reviews were then conducted separately. The second external review coincided with an extremely difficult period for IFPRI, during which the Board Chair and the Institute's Director General were abruptly replaced. Although the high regard in which the quality and the relevance of IFPRI's programme were held was not affected, the reviews called for many changes in the Institute's management to help put it on a more professional footing. To monitor the implementation of change, TAC and the CGIAR Secretariat commissioned an Interim External Review (IER), which took place during 1992. The IER found that IFPRI had overcome its major hurdles, achieved many positive changes, and was well on track. The IER provided an overview of IFPRI's response to the second EPMR, but also showed that a number of the 1990 recommendations had not yet been implemented.
An overview of these unimplemented recommendations and their current status are provided in Appendix I. The present report reflects the outcome of IFPRI's Third EPMR and covers the period since 1992, during which IFPRI has been led by its current Director General, Dr. Per Pinstrup-Andersen.
1.2 Policy Research and CGIAR Priorities and Strategies
A favourable policy environment is crucial to achieving alleviation of poverty, food security, and sustainable management of natural resources, and hence is essential for the attainment of the mission and goals of the CGIAR. Policy research is, therefore, a fundamental activity for the System.
During 1995 TAC commissioned an inter-centre Stripe study on the future of policy and management, as well as institution-strengthening research and service in the CGIAR. As part of this study, a panel, chaired by Alain de Janvry, conducted a review to provide a strategic analysis of policy and management research in the CGIAR^1 and its major future strategic directions. This study, and one on institutional strengthening were the basis on which TAC formulated its views on priorities and strategies in policy and management^2 During 1995 policy research accounted for approximately 8 percent of the budget and 9 percent of the scientific staff of the CGIAR. Both the Stripe Study Panel and TAC noted that the CGIAR's contribution to a world-wide effort on policy research was less than 2 percent, but that this investment is of critical importance for the operation of the System itself and for servicing the needs of its immediate national clients and partners; for maximizing the
benefits of technological innovations in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries to the welfare of humanity, and for providing solutions to some of the broader problems the System addresses, such as reducing rural poverty, improving human nutrition, and achieving sustainable development.
^1 TAC/CGIAR. 1996. Perspectives on Policy and Management Research in the CGIAR. SDR/TAC: IAR/95/26.1. TAC Secretariat, FAO, Rome.
^2 TAC/CGIAR. 1996. Priorities and Strategies for Policy, Public Management and Institution Strengthening Research and Service in the CGIAR. SDR/TAC: IAR/96/4.1. TAC Secretariat, FAO, Rome.
Most of the CGIAR Centres undertake policy research, but it is the main activity only at IFPRI. Policy research, as defined by TAC and the Stripe Study^3 is being undertaken in a majority of the CGIAR Centres, in varying degrees of importance. At CIFOR, ISNAR, IIMI and ILRI, it is an important and central component (6 to 15 percent of number of scientists in 1995); and at IRRI. CIMMYT. ICRISAT and IITA is a minor component (1.3 to 1.9 percent of number of scientists). This was a response to several specific questions voiced by CGIAR members and others concerning policy and public management research in the System. The most basic one was whether or not the System is doing the right kinds of policy, management and institution strengthening research and service work, and whether it is doing the right amount of such work. The overall conclusions of the Stripe Review Panel with regard to policy research in the CGIAR were that it:
· is running quite smoothly;
· is in most cases focused on the right issues;
· is of adequate quality;
· presently is funded at about the right level relative to the funding of the other activities in the System.
^3 TAC states that: "Policy research is distinguished here from the predominantly production economics research or socioeconomic analysis to evaluate technical options developed by centre researchers. It also is distinguished from the socioeconomic research carried out by centres in relation to assessments of farm organization, structure, and operation. While public policy research may use the same. microeconomics tools, and the results form socioeconomic work of centres, it is distinguished from the latter by being defined as research on the policy processes and the policy environments within which the results of technical research and socioeconomic and production economics research from the centres and national research systems are applied. Included under this heading is research that helps to define an appropriate agricultural and natural resources science policy for a country. Also included is research focused on public management as one of the tools or mechanisms for
implementation of policies." (See SDR/TAC:IAR/96/4.1).
TAC generally agreed with these conclusions, although it saw the potential for benefit from certain internal shifts.
A second concern is more directly related to this EPMR, namely, the reliance on IFPRI for participation in their policy research in proposals made by the other centres in the System. Thus, policy research appears in almost all the Medium-Term Plans of CGIAR Centres, with IFPRI linked to the various proposals. This widespread inclusion of IFPRI was associated with at least two potential issues. First, some of the research proposed by centres is in the form of socio-economic research IFPRI has little reason to be involved with, since it is not part of IFPRI's strategic plan and MTP. Second, even in the case of legitimate policy research that also fits within IFPRI's mandate and strategic plan, IFPRI does not have the capacity nor budget to be involved in every project that is proposed.
The Stripe Study discussed these issues and provided a number of recommendations, including several that were addressed directly to the present IFPRI EPMR Panel.
The subjects of these recommendations have been integrated further on into the Panel's assessments dealing with (a) IFPRI's program and present and future areas of emphasis, (b) IFPRI's linkages with ISNAR and other CGIAR Centres; (c) IFPRI's involvement in Systemwide Programmes (SWPs), including ecoregional initiatives; (d) IFPRI's allocation of resources to training and information programs; and (e) IFPRI's outreach and impacts.
In addition, the Stripe Study Panel had 13 recommendations directed specifically to IFPRI. The EPMR Panel is satisfied that IFPRI is addressing, or has addressed the recommendations related to: (a) making IFPRI's data more widely available for thesis research; (b) placing greater emphasis on outposting staff when appropriate (up from 7 to 14 senior staff since the Stripe Study); (c) making use of the internet for interactive activities on specific themes; (d) reviewing and assessing allocation of project funding in relation to programme effectiveness; (e) getting regional input in assessment of priorities for research; and (f) assessing the use of IFPRI's publications (see discussion Relevance and Impacts, Section 3.3).
The Panel addresses IFPRI's response to the other Stripe Study recommendations in its discussion under (a) outreach (information dissemination and courses and their evaluation) (Chapter 2.5); (b) international public goods nature of IFPRI's research (linking country specific to generic research themes) (Chapter 3.1); (c) linkages with other CGIAR Centres (Chapter 3.5). An overview of IFPRI's response to the recommendations of the Stripe Study is included as Appendix II.
1.3 Priorities and Strategies for IFPRI's Research
In developing its 1998-2000 Medium-Term Plan, IFPRI reassessed its mandate formulated in 1991 and included in IFPRI's Strategy for the 1990s. Although IFPRI still considers the 1991 strategy as relevant in providing an overall framework for the Institute's activities, in 1996 the Institute also developed a global vision, a mission, a business vision, and a research strategy. Accordingly, IFPRI aims "to organize and undertake research and outreach in a manner that will generate international public goods - knowledge relevant/or decision makers both inside and outside the countries where the research is undertaken and expected to result in large benefits to society, but unlikely to be undertaken by the private sector - while simultaneously seeking to contribute to a cohesive body of knowledge needed by decision makers in collaborating countries."
As discussed in the Stripe Review, IFPRI is one of many organizations involved in food policy research for developing countries. Many universities, government agencies, non-government organizations, and national and international research organizations are also involved in this type of work. Several multilateral organizations, such as FAO, IFAD, WFP, and the World Bank, play important roles in conducting policy studies on agriculture and poverty reduction and undertake some research.
IFPRI, therefore, attempts to ensure that its research activities are complementary to and do not replicate the efforts of others. To this end the Institute maintains collaborative relationships with over 125 other organizations, more than half of which are located in developing countries. The Institute intends to expand this number greatly during the MTP period. According to IFPRI, however, there are fewer organizations conducting food policy research today than there were five years ago.
Priority setting at IFPRI is not guided by a formal or quantitative priority-setting model. The Institute uses a conceptual, qualitative approach based on staff judgements. Broad thematic priorities are first set at the Institute level. Programme priorities are subsequently set at the divisional level.
To identify priority research areas, two major criteria are used:
1: Expected poverty reductions for current and future generations for each dollar spent by IFPRI, determined using the following variables:
· the number of poor, food-insecure, and malnourished people likely to be affected by policy changes;
· the extent to which new knowledge is required to guide decision making on policies that aim to alleviate poverty, food insecurity, and malnutrition while conserving natural resources;
· the likelihood that knowledge from policy research will influence future policy debates and decisions;
· the opportunities for capitalizing on past policy research; and
· the comparative advantage of belonging to the CGIAR, including opportunities for enhancing the overall impact of the work of the CGIAR and associated international research centres.
2: Expected impact on the food policy research capacity of developing countries.
Once the research areas are selected, IFPRI uses a further set of criteria to determine its geographic priorities and the choice of study countries. Examples are the need for broad country representation so that results can be generalized; availability and interest of national collaborators; potential benefits to the poor of the country; logistical and security conditions; opportunities for collaboration; and availability of resources.
The priorities set after evaluation using these criteria are subsequently discussed internally and in a series of research-planning meetings with outside experts and stakeholders.
1.4 IFPRI Today
During 1997 IFPRI had a budget of approximately US$ 18 million, and its staff totalled 138, including 57 internationally recruited staff and 81 locally hired supervisory and support staff. All of the Institute's work was incorporated into the agreed CGIAR research agenda.
In its proposed 1998-2000 Medium-Term Plan (MTP), IFPRI indicates that the focus of its research and outreach activities is to promote policies to improve food security and nutrition, reduce poverty, reduce the pressure on fragile natural resources, and thus advance sustainable development. Activities are divided among three programmes: multicountry, regional and synthesis studies. Programmes are to be implemented through IFPRI's four research divisions: the Environment and Production Technology Division, Food Consumption and Nutrition Division, Markets and Structural Studies Division, and Trade and Macroeconomic Division. The work of these research divisions is to be complemented by that of an Outreach Division. The Institute's work is implemented through a total of 21 projects. During the current MTP period, IFPRI expects to allocate 56 percent of its resources to policy analysis, 11 percent to economic and social analysis, 10 percent to sustainable production systems, 2
percent to saving biodiversity, 9 percent to training, 10 percent to documentation and information, and 2 percent to institution building networks. IFPRI's geographic allocation of resources is estimated to be 40 percent to sub-Saharan Africa, 35 percent to Asia, 15 percent to Latin America, and 10 percent to West Asia-North Africa (WANA). The Institute is also very active in Systemwide programmes. It is the convenor of the Property Rights and Collective Action Programme and is involved in six other Systemwide programmes and initiatives.
1.5 Conduct of the Review
The Review started when the Chair and the members of the Panel attended the initial phase from 6 to 10 October 1997 at IFPRI's Headquarters in Washington, D.C., during which the Institute provided briefings on its programmes and management. The Panel's consultant on Board matters, who had attended IFPRI's March 1997 Board meeting, also participated in these discussions. Information on panel composition is provided in Appendix III. Panel members conducted a number of interviews with IFPRI staff and were provided with comprehensive documentation. Members of the Panel subsequently attended the Internal Programme Review from 8 to 11 December 1997 as well the meeting of the Board's Executive Committee on 12 December. The Panel Chair conducted a series of interviews with IFPRI's stakeholders in the Washington area during the week of 15 December. Panel members visited the Institute's outreach operations in Southern Africa (Mozambique and Malawi), interacting with IFPRI's outreach
staff and with national institutes of the region. A number of IFPRI donors, policymakers in developing countries, collaborators, and other stakeholders were also interviewed. In addition to his visits to collaborators in the Washington area, the Panel Chair also visited FAO, IFAD, and IPGRI, all located in Rome, on 10 February 1998.
The main phase of the Review took place from 12 to 27 February 1998, during which the Panel interacted with staff and management, as well as with many of their collaborators, and prepared the following report. Prior to presenting the Panel's report on 27 February to the Board Chair, the Director General and Senior Management and staff, earlier drafts of the report were shared with the Institute for comments, in particular on factual matters.
<section>8</section>
Chapter 2 - IFPRI Research and Outreach Activities
2.1 Environment and Production Technology Division (EPTD)
2.2 Food Consumption and Nutrition Division (FCND)
2.3 Markets and Structural Studies Division (MSSD)
2.4 Trade and Macroeconomics Division (TMD)
2.5 Outreach Division (OD)
2.6 The 2020 Vision Initiative
IFPRI divides its research activity into three programme groups - multi-country programmes (MPs), global research programmes (GRPs), and synthesis activities (SYNs). The themes for the latter have been identified. These are Non-farm Rural Development (SYN1), on which work has already begun, and Strategies for Poverty Alleviation (SYN2).
The four research divisions are involved in eleven MPs and six GRPs with titles as indicated in Table 2.1. A short description of each is provided in Appendix IV. Table 2.1 also indicates the main divisional responsibilities for programmes (marked by an X) and other division participation (marked by a line) in each programme. All of the programmes except MP7 involve inputs from two or more divisions.
In addition to the GRPs under the responsibility of the research divisions, one is directly under the DG, 2020 Vision for Food, Agriculture and the Environment (GRP4); it involves all the other divisions and is a synthesizing activity that brings together work from all the research programmes with other key information from around the world, providing an overall vehicle through which the relevance and usefulness of IFPRI work can be tested with outside clients. Further discussion on 2020 is provided in Section 2.6.
IFPRI recently completed a thorough Internally Commissioned External Review (ICER) of its research methodology in all the MPs. IFPRI is to be commended on this activity and its choice of an outstanding Panel of nine independent experts. The EPMR Panel could not hope to equal this thorough, penetrating review of IFPRI research methodology.
The primary unanimous and positive findings and recommendations are that (a) IFPRI "has maintained or built commendable methodological strength in its traditional research areas, and is now adding to that strength by moving into new areas"; (b) the ICER Panel encourages IFPRI's movement "toward greater diversification of research methods and toward deeper integration of its research methods with more professionalized outreach methods"; and (c) the Panel recommends continued pursuit of the complementary goals of professionalization of communication methods and integration of outreach methods with research.
The following sections discuss each of the divisions' rationale, mix and balance of programmes and projects, and outputs; relevance to and coherence with IFPRI's overall mandate, mission, and focal areas; and their relation to the division's own subject matter. Cross-cutting issues related to such themes as priority setting, quality of research, relevance and impacts, and research environment (both internal and external), and the comparative advantage, efficiency, and the Institute's linkages are covered in Chapter 3.
Table 2.1: IFPRI's GRPs by Division
EPTD
FCND
MSSD
TMD
MPs
X
MP1 C Input Market Reform and Development
X
MP2 C Output Market Reform and Development
X
MP5 C Rural Financial Policies for Food Security of the Poor
X
MP7 C Marketing, Institutional, and Infrastructure Policies for Agricultural Commercialization, Diversification, and Export Promotion
X
MP8 C Arresting Deforestation and Resource Degradation in the Forest Margins of the Humid Tropics: Policy, Technology, and Institutional Options
X
MP10 C Water Resource Allocation: Productivity and Environmental Impacts
X
MP11 C Property Rights and Collective Action in Natural Resource Management
X
MP12 C Macroeconomic Policies, Rural Development, and the Environment
X
MP14 C Urban Challenges to Food and Nutrition Security
X
MP17 C Gender and Intrahousehold Aspects of Food Policy
X
MP18 C Targeted Interventions to Reduce and Prevent Poverty
X
GRPs
GRP1 C Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Policy (formerly MP4)
X
GRP2 C Global and Regional Trade (formerly MP13)
X
GRP3 C Priorities for Public Investment in Agriculture and Rural Areas, and Appropriate Institutional Arrangements
X
GRP4 C The 2020 Vision for Food, Agriculture, and the Environment 1
GRP5 C Sustainable Development of Less-Favoured Lands (formerly MP9)
X
GRP6 C Agricultural Strategies for Micronutrients (formerly MP19)
X
Legend:
X = primary responsibility
| = involvement by division
^1 This GRP is located and managed in the DG's office
2.1 Environment and Production Technology Division (EPTD)
2.1.1 Overall Direction of the Division, 1992-1997
2.1.2 Links to Current IFPRI Priorities and Strategy
2.1.3 Outputs
2.1.4 Relevance of the Division's Work
In 1990 the EPMR strongly recommended that IFPRI create a division that would primarily focus on natural resource management and environmental issues. The Division was created in 1992 and combined some of the earlier work and staff from the production division with a new staff and a mandate to focus on environmental issues related to agriculture.
EPTD was initially staffed with researchers from IFPRI's old production division. Several of the original staff did not have appropriate skills to contribute to the new mandate of the Division. Several staff members left and new staff were located through international searches. Also, the Division inherited several projects that had to be finished before it could undertake its new initiatives, including a large multi-year project on the sources of growth in Indian agriculture, which occupied about one third of the Division's staff and had yet to produce many of its deliverables. The transition from one focus to another inevitably created some morale problems and took about three years to complete. The Division is now appropriately staffed with high-quality and in most cases experienced senior researchers, who appear to be focusing on priority issues.
When the Division was first established, the EPTD, through a strategic planning process that involved many collaborators, determined that it should focus its research on policies to increase food production for poor people in an environmentally sustainable manner. Rather than focus on a broad research programme on the environment, the EPTD examined the interface between agriculture and natural resources with the overriding goal of sustainable poverty alleviation. The 1992 Interim Review noted that EPTD "has made excellent progress in defining its research agenda in the vast and complex field of environmental policy."
EPTD is the second largest division in IFPRI measured by number of staff and level of funding. Its 1996 operating budget was approximately US $ 2,74 million, and its staff was 32. The total budget for the Division is currently US$ 3.69 million (US$ 1.02 million of unrestricted funds and US$ 2.66 million of project funds). The EPTD derives its restricted funding from 24 donors through 35 projects.
2.1.1 Overall Direction of the Division, 1992-1997
Starting in 1991 the following factors contributed to the development of EPTD's research agenda: several international consultations; extensive discussions with other CGIAR Centres; discussions with established research groups working on environmental policies, such as IIED, WRI, ODI, NRI (UK), CIRAD, the World Bank, and FAO; and the views of relevant national and international stakeholders which were canvassed in preparation for IFPRI's MTP. EPTD's research agenda is to (a) provide primarily expertise related to social science policy research, working in partnership with other researchers (both inside and outside the CGIAR), to facilitate an increase in sustainable food production for poor people; (b) give highest priority to understanding incentive problems for natural resource management at the household and community levels, and (c) focus on the development of conceptual approaches and methodologies that have general application to (a) and (b).
Application of this agenda and consideration of all the inputs from outside partners and stakeholders led to the current focus on "integration of policy research on environmental problems and agricultural production and technology issues to provide guidance on how to move towards more highly sustainable agricultural intensification in developing countries." Those concerned felt this mission to be more in line with the CGIAR's mandate and IFPRI's role in the CG than the more direct focus on natural resources and environmental issues recommended by the 1992 Interim Review. The main reasons for the divergence from the 1992 recommendation were that IFPRI took into account that (a) the CGIAR System was starting a separate forestry initiative; (b) the System had other activity in the water resources, fisheries, and sustainable agriculture areas; and (c) a considerable number of other major non-CGIAR research efforts were addressing environmental and natural resources issues in
isolation from agriculture, whereas few were looking at the linkages between agriculture and environmental and natural resources issues (some exceptions were early work in watershed management). The EPMR Panel believes that IFPRI's rationale is sound and the focus is proper.
2.1.2 Links to Current IFPRI Priorities and Strategy
IFPRI has chosen five research focal areas in its current MTP. Two of these - promoting sustainable intensification of agricultural production among smallholders, and strengthening the effectiveness and efficiency of agricultural research and technology - provide the main focus for EPTD activity. Thus, the EPTD includes research work on Sustainable Development of Less-Favoured Lands (GRP5), Arresting Deforestation and Natural Resource Degradation (MP8), Water Resource Allocation in Relation to Agriculture (MP10), and Property Rights and Collective Action (MP11). Production focal areas in the Division include the Assessment of Agricultural Research, Investment and Policy Options, and Agricultural Genetic Resources Policies (GRP1). In addition, the Division has been designated to lead the development of a new synthesis activity, Non-farm Rural Development (SYN1). The five programmes are discussed in more detail in Appendix VI. EPTD also participates in a number of joint
activities and initiatives, as indicated in Table 2.1.
Strong collaborative links with national researchers and institutions in developing countries define the working style of EPTD. One of the best examples is the Arresting Deforestation (MP-8) set of activities in Brazil, where the partner institution EMBRAPA has indicated that the collaboration and the benefit are sufficiently strong to justify the contribution of funds for the research, as well as office space, vehicles, and administrative support at the Amazon field site.
2.1.3 Outputs
The EPTD has produced 15 books, 5 research reports, 191 journal articles, and 160 other published works, and a large body of grey literature during the review period. In addition, numerous publications are in the pipeline. Some of the key outputs include work on the following:
· Community survey methods for collecting participatory recall information as well as cross-sectional data for analysing the impact of property rights and other policy, institutional, and technological factors on natural resource management at the plot, household, and community levels, and for testing induced-innovation hypotheses.
· Bio-economic modelling methods for analysing the economic and environmental consequences of alternative development pathways at the community level.
· Methods for combining GIS data with economic models for ex post and ex ante evaluation of agricultural research.
· Models of river basin systems for analysing the efficiency and environmental consequences of alternative water management policies.
2.1.4 Relevance of the Division's Work
The Division's work covers the main issues related to its chosen focus natural resources and environmental issues in relation to sustainable agricultural development. The Panel concludes, on the basis of information available, discussions with stakeholders and with colleagues from other institutions, and its own experience, that the outputs from the EPTD, both methodological and empirical findings, are relevant to partners, clients, and the research community at large. For example, EPTD work on household analysis (e.g., from MP8 and old MP9) provides other researchers with a wealth of information on methodologies, avoiding problems in survey work, and the decision-making characteristics of and natural resources management processes associated with relatively poor rural households in tropical regions. This work resulted in a book, and numerous published articles in scholarly journals have clearly established EPTD researchers as being on the forefront of research related to
forest margins, fragile lands strategies, and land degradation issues.
The Stripe Study Panel on Policy Research (see Chapter 1) suggested specifically that the IFPRI EPMR review opportunities for further work on natural resources and environmental issues related to agriculture. These issues included understanding interactions among technologies and policies in areas where sustainability of production is at risk; emerging long-term transnational issues such as management of common water resources, management of common fisheries resources, biodiversity, and property rights in relation to global conventions; and intellectual property rights in relation to agriculture. The EPMR Panel concludes that EPTD is addressing the first area adequately (although research could be expanded if more resources were made available). Within the second area, common water management issues, IFPRI's involvement extends to water resources and common property resource management, both through MP10 and through the SWIs on water and property rights and collective
action.
The Panel suggests that more work in the water resource area is justified and should be undertaken by IFPRI. IFPRI has not focused resources on transnational issues related to common water management, nor has it done work related to common fisheries management, primarily for the reasons stated earlier. The Panel accepts IFPRI's decisions not to become actively involved in these areas, given the priorities it has set for use of its limited resources, the work underway at ICLARM, and the SWI on water led by IIMI. On the other hand, if new resources were to become available for work in the area of policies for transnational water management related to agricultural development and intensification, IFPRI would be well placed to participate in such work.
The Panel recommends that:
notwithstanding the present difficulties in obtaining funding for work on water resources, IFPRI should redouble its efforts in raising such funds since it is an area identified as a priority by the CGIAR.
With regard to the Stripe Study Panel's recommendation to consider work related to IPR and biodiversity, EPTD is the lead division in the joint activity with IPGRI. IFPRI's work on this subject has lagged because of lack of funding. However, EPTD is starting activity in this area in 1999 and intends to focus broadly on issues related to IPR policy through its GRP1. IFPRI should proceed with full awareness of IPGRI's activities and should also take into account the recommendations of the TAC Panel on Proprietary Science and Technology, which will be reporting to the CGIAR in May of 1998.
2.2 Food Consumption and Nutrition Division (FCND)
2.2.1 Introduction
2.2.2 Current Research
2.2.3 Relevance of Research Topics
2.2.4 Methodologies and Disciplines
2.2.5 Comparative Advantage of FCND
2.2.6 Concluding Comments
2.2.1 Introduction
The Food Consumption and Nutrition Division (FCND) is the largest division in IFPRI. Its mission is to generate and disseminate information that will be used by decision-makers to design and implement policies and programmes that help poor individuals obtain access to food and use that food for good nutrition. The focus of the Division is consumption as opposed to production, and the Division considers the individual as well as the household and the community. Nutritional status is considered as an ultimate indicator since food security is necessary but not sufficient for adequate nutritional status. This Division is therefore in the best position within IFPRI to determine the effects of food policies on the alleviation of hunger.
FCND has had a distinguished evolution, with no major changes of course. Its growth has been incremental as it has progressively built on previous work. The 1992 Interim External Review noted that the Division's performance was excellent at the time of the 1990 review and had remained so. Previous major areas of research included subsidies, commercialization, seasonality, nutrition and productivity, and dietary energy stress. The new research priorities defined at the time of the 1992 review included the performance of labour and credit markets; intrahousehold inequalities and the position of women; micronutrient deficiencies and their linkage to health; urban malnutrition and specific forms of intervention; approaches for monitoring food security and nutrition; and analysis of the design and implementation of projects such as food distribution, famine relief, and labour-intensive public work.
2.2.2 Current Research
The current emphasis of the Division is the access of individuals to food and its impact on nutrition, although access is the primary emphasis. Its research attempts to identify constraints to access of food and nutrients and to other nutrition inputs such as care, as well as the means to alleviate them. The current programmes are Financial Policies for Food Security of the Poor (MP5); Urban Challenges to Food Security and Nutrition (MP14); Gender and Intrahousehold Aspects of Food Policy (MP17); Targeted Policies and Programmes for Poverty Prevention and Reduction (MP18, previously called Safety Nets for Food Security); and Agricultural Strategies to Overcome Micronutrient Malnutrition (GRP6).
The current portfolio has evolved from several lines of work indicated by those MPs that have come to an end during the period under review, including Famine in Africa (MP15); Food and Nutrition Monitoring (MP16); Labour Markets (MP6); and Non-food Inputs into Good Nutrition (MP20). These MPs have been ended either because major conclusions have been reached, as in MP15, the case studies were completed or the components have been incorporated into other MPs, as with MP6, MP16 and MP20.
The rationales for current topics include the importance of credit and savings facilities available to poor people in making the difference between grinding poverty and an economically secure life; the growing importance of urban food insecurity and malnutrition as urbanization increases, and the recent evidence of links between early malnutrition and prevalent urban chronic diseases in later life; the sometimes false assumption implicit in the unitary model of the household that all resources are pooled within a household, which limits policy measures that target the least-well-off individuals instead of households; well-targeted interventions are required to concentrate resources on the most food-insecure groups to balance the detrimental effects that interventions designed to promote general economic growth can have on vulnerable populations; the importance of micronutrients in the prevention of morbidity, and the need to increase the availability and access to
micronutrients of poor people who rely heavily on staple crops, as opposed to the international emphasis on increasing only the availability of calories that has persisted for the past two decades.
The 1998 budgets of the MPs varies considerably: Micronutrients US$ 412,000; Rural Finance US$ 589,000; Urban nutrition US$ 589,000; Gender and Intrahousehold US$ 1,335 million;
Targeted Interventions US$ 1,708 million. The range partly reflects the extent of work required to answer the research questions posed within each MP and also reflects the stage in the life cycle of the MP, for example, MPs 17 and 18 are in mid-cycle with most of the field work activity currently taking place. In general, the Division has been successful in obtaining funding, in part because of its particular niche in food security and nutrition. The exception is the micronutrient project.
2.2.3 Relevance of Research Topics
The mandate of the CGIAR is to alleviate poverty, improve food security and nutrition, protect fragile natural resources, and promote sustainable agriculture. FCND activities are relevant to the first two areas, which are closely but not exclusively interlinked. Financial Policies for Food Security of the Poor (MP5) focuses on the constraints of credit and savings for the security of the poor. Urban Challenges to Food Security and Nutrition (MP14) focuses on populations in intense poverty and food insecurity. The appropriateness of this topic in the research agenda of a CGIAR institution has been contested. However, urbanisation is an important topic in view of the increasing proportion of populations that is urban, due in large part to rural-urban migration, which links urban poverty and rural conditions. Little policy research has been conducted on urban poverty, food security, and nutrition despite the increasing proportions of the poor and undernourished that live in
urban areas. Gender and Intrahousehold Aspects of Food Policy (MP17) identifies patterns of inequality at the level of individuals and is, therefore, clearly relevant in providing information for the targeting of programmes to alleviate poverty and food insecurity, and for understanding how inequalities can stifle economic growth and impede economic efficiency. Targeted Policies and Programmes for Poverty Prevention and Reduction (MP18) is clearly within the remit of cost-effective poverty alleviation. Agricultural Strategies to Overcome Micronutrient Malnutrition (GRP6) is the only programme that includes and is primarily focused on crop production. The relevance of this programme for FCND has been questioned in light of the failures of past efforts in plant breeding intended to improve protein availability and quality, and on the grounds that other plant constituents limit the biological availability of the micronutrients. The relationship of crop production to poverty
alleviation is not so immediately clear, as its relationship to food security and improved nutrition will depend on yield and hence the potential economic viability of the cultivars, and also on the extent to which the nutrients are absorbed when consumed. However, initial results are promising. For example, cultivars with high iron and zinc content have higher yields on mineral-poor soils, and in animal studies the percent nutrient absorption is equivalent to that from current cultivars.
The Division's publication output during the review period has included important works on famine, rural finance, gender issues, and micronutrients. These have had a wide impact and are highly regarded in the academic and development communities. The work on indicators for food and nutrition monitoring proved disappointing in its outcome because of inadequate design and management, but many lessons have been learnt from the experience and are documented in a discussion paper. Total publication output over the period under review has been eight research reports, two food policy reviews and synopses, three books (one on famines, is also due for publication in 1998), eight occasional papers, four food policy reports, six food policy statements, two working papers, 67 reprints from academic journals and 41 discussion papers. The vast majority of publications are aimed at the academic community.
A major feature of the Division, along with EPTD and in contrast to other divisions, is the collection of primary data, both quantitative and qualitative. Data sets are available in principle for use outside IFPRI and are therefore an important international public good. They can also be used internally to investigate changes in poverty and food security, comparing them with new surveys of the same sites. Data collection and analysis have provided methodological lessons, which have been disseminated in publications such as the econometric manual (Microcomputers in Policy Research Working Paper Series 2) in addition to publications on policy.
FCND could be working on a variety of important food security and nutrition issues, and new issues will be selected in the near future when current MPs come to an end. MP5 is due to end in 1999. The Division is considering new MPs to begin during or close to the year 2000. Recent issues adopted are the roles of health and care in nutrition, as well as micronutrients. Other issues under consideration are food aid, water, HIV implications, food safety, social capital, conflict and food security, nutrition and productivity, institutions that improve nutrition, comparative malnutrition rates in Asia and Africa, and methods of calculating the extent of food insecurity. The Panel is satisfied that the process of selection of topics is sound. It involves extensive internal and external consultation about the importance of issues raised and examination of their consistency with the mandate, their innovativeness, and IFPRI's comparative advantage in addressing the topic.
IFPRI, including FCND, has been criticized in the past for not having any programmes that deal with the underlying political determinants of poverty. The lack of political studies could be related to the ideological perspective of IFPRI personnel, or possibly to deliberate restraint. The lack of work on political and institutional barriers to effective policy implementation was highlighted in the Internally Commissioned External Review (ICER) report. However, this deficiency is recognized internally, and efforts to address it have begun. For example, a political scientist has been hired as a long-term consultant to undertake a policy study in Egypt, and focus has been put on the institutional constraints in the South African works projects. In addition, the February 1998 FCND Discussion Paper No. 41, by Dan Maxwell, is on the topic of The Political Economy of Urban Food Security in Sub-Saharan Africa.
2.2.4 Methodologies and Disciplines
To carry out consumption studies, the Division uses a combination of two methodologies: cross-sectional multivariate methods familiar to economists and useful to indicate links between variables; and randomized sampling techniques that now take into account power calculations to compare groups over time or with and without interventions, to determine the impact of the intervention studied. They include both questionnaires and food and physiological measurements. Techniques from a variety of disciplines are necessary, and FCND does possess the greatest mix of disciplines within IFPRI, although the number of non-economists is still limited.
A respected interdisciplinary team reviewed the validity of methods in the ICER report, and found very few serious questions about the use of methodology in general, especially within the discipline of economics. The team suggested several improvements within the specific MPs; many of these have been implemented by the Division. The reviewers praised the creative approach to developing methods exhibited in some MPs and suggested some improvements of nutrition and other methodologies.
Although IFPRI studies have become more focused on individuals within households and therefore deal more closely with behavioural issues as well as with the effects of consumption on nutrition, there are surprisingly few non-economists within the organization (see Chapter 3.4.1). Several of the non-economists are on the staff of the FCND. There is recognition within IFPRI that these individuals bring a different perspective to the Institute's studies, especially in relation to improved survey design and interpretation; inadequate design has at times led to concerns regarding conclusions about the impact of policies or programmes on nutrition. It is claimed that economists understand well basic nutritional concepts, but that they are less familiar with the research designs required to determine statistical differences between groups, as well as the distinctions between evaluations of impact and process (i.e., other indicators of intermediary outcomes). The non-economists'
skills in these areas have been especially appreciated within IFPRI.
Maintaining this non-economist expertise within FCND has been problematic in the past, the lack of critical mass leading to feelings of isolation and disaffection among them (see Section 3.4.2). The head of FCND is consciously attempting to attain a better balance of disciplines through additional appointments, long-term Visiting Researchers and Rockefeller Fellows. For example, IFPRI and the UN Sub Committee on Nutrition (SCN) and have agreed to maintain a joint position for a nutritionist to work on the SCN 4^th World Food Situation document for 1999, which will benefit IFPRI through increased nutrition inputs and working links with the international nutrition network. Other means of interdisciplinary cross-fertilization are through academic collaborators on specific projects, including sociologists, medical anthropologists, nutritionists and legal specialists.
2.2.5 Comparative Advantage of FCND
IFPRI has a pure mandate for food policy research and outreach, placing it at an advantage in relation to universities, which are relatively constrained by teaching demands and more restricted expertise in the wide variety of food policy issues addressed by IFPRI, which cross-fertilizes its research. IFPRI has built up a large collection of data sets designed within the organization which can be used for intercountry or intertemporal comparisons. It may be at a self-imposed or financially-imposed disadvantage compared with universities in requiring large amounts of funding, which may restrict political economic enquiries. It has an advantage over financing institutions such as the World Bank because it is free from justifying lending policies. Institutions comparable to IFPRI are other development policy institutes such as Overseas Development Institute in the United Kingdom, but these have broader mandates less focused on food.
2.2.6 Concluding Comments
The Panel is gratified to confirm that FCND continues to have a distinguished record on food policy issues related to poverty, consumption and nutrition; that its work is widely recognized as being both of high quality and high outcome; and that it is responding to issues raised by external reviewers and commentators, such as interdisciplinary mix, methodologies, and topics of research.
2.3 Markets and Structural Studies Division (MSSD)
2.3.1 Origin, Mission and Mandate
2.3.2 The Direction of MSSD's Work
2.3.3 Linkages with Other Divisions and Other CG Centres
2.3.4 Output
2.3.5 Dissemination of Results
2.3.6 Assessment
2.3.1 Origin, Mission and Mandate
IFPRI's Market and Structural Studies Division was established in 1991, after the 1990 EPMR recommended to split the former production policy division into MSSD and EPTD. The underlying logic had its foundation in the observation that many processing activities were taking place between the producer and the final consumer, and that these activities had perhaps even more impact than agricultural production itself in the final cost of food. Another consideration was that institutional and structural arrangements shaping the markets were crucial in determining the efficiency of the whole system (hence the name of the Division),
2.3.2 The Direction of MSSD's Work
The general direction of the Division's work shows why it is essential to the IFPRI general programme: whereas trade liberalization (both externally, in international markets, and internally, in national or regional markets) has been advocated as the universal remedy for any difficulties in matching supply and demand, the thrust of the Division's activities is to identify market failures and design institutions likely to avoid them. In so doing, the Division not only helps to create the conditions necessary for markets to function smoothly and efficiently, conditions that are not necessarily met naturally - it also indicates the places where compensations are needed to prevent the losers from being sacrificed to the general interest. Very often, the losers are also the poor, so this exercise falls directly within the mandate of the Institution.
The Division's method relies primarily on surveys and case studies, a sound approach, the main merit of which is that it provides fresh data and direct grassroot contacts. It produces many outstanding results and some excellent reports. Among the results, one of particular importance is the conclusion that output market reforms have not met expectations in Africa, primarily because not enough care has been devoted to finance and infrastructure. The conclusion that market reform can lead to an over-exploitation and exhaustion of soils may also be important, and addressing it should be given priority in rural areas institutional design, particularly in regions such as the Sahel. Also worth mentioning is the demonstration of the importance of sequencing in setting up reforms: input markets must be created before the liberalization of output markets - an idea that may not be shared everywhere, and is yet of the utmost importance for the very success of liberalization. The likely
consequences of diversification are already in the research agenda: diversification does not only affect crop production, but the marketing system as well, by creating economies of scale and new activities.
2.3.3 Linkages with Other Divisions and Other CG Centres
The Division is leader in four programmes out of 24 (Input Market Reform, Output Market Reform, Policies for Agricultural Commercialisation, and Priorities for Public Investment), with all other divisions participating in at least one of them. The Division participates in seven other programmes; the Division's links with the rest of IFPRI are therefore solid.
Given the Division mandate, numerous links with other CGIAR activities would not be expected, since few other CGIAR institutes are dealing with the particular questions the Division is investigating. Nonetheless, the Division's relationship with ILRI is now expanding, especially in light of the increased importance of milk and feed trade. The Division has also made contacts with ICLARM, with a common project on fisheries in developing countries. With CIAT it is involved in a study on starch in agricultural processing and other activities. As these examples indicate, the particular expertise of this Division is important to the CGIAR as a whole.
2.3.4 Output
Between 1993 and 1998, the Division produced roughly 10 journal articles or book chapters, 8 research or donor reports, 14 seminar and refereed discussion papers, two books being processed for publication and 8 other documents of scientific interest annually, a fairly good record by quantitative measure for a group of 15 persons, including assistants; the output may be considered normal for an excellent research centre. The academic quality is indicated by the number of articles published, as they are usually submitted to in-depth evaluation by referees.
2.3.5 Dissemination of Results
In addition to its primary activities, the Division leads important outreach operations to disseminate its findings. For example, the organization of a course on policy analysis for about 40 Ministry of Agriculture staff members in Vietnam was successful because the course was in full continuity with a research project the participants considered important. This success should be set against other IFPRI outreach activities which were not closely tied to activities in the research divisions.
The Division made a major contribution to the IFPRI data portfolio, although not in a systematic way, creating the challenge of making efficient institutional use of these data (this challenge is not created only by this Division).
2.3.6 Assessment
The activities of the MSSD are worthy of praise, and the Division is clearly on the right track. The only weakness worth mentioning here, is in the Division's methodology as opposed to the substance of its studies. Surveys and direct field observation are obviously the primary research methodologies, and just inferring hypotheses from the mere inspection of data (or even from the sophisticated analysis) is not sufficient for establishing valid results. A synthesis is often necessary just as in chemistry a synthesis brings the proof that an analysis is complete. In some cases, the Panel's impression was that, although synthesis of data was certainly not excluded from the activities of the Division, it could have proved productive to place more importance on it. In particular, original models explaining poor market integration over geographic space, such as was observed, for instance, in Vietnam or in Egypt by the Division, or in other locations by various authors, are badly
needed. Similarly, sectoral models of food processing industries should be systematically explored, in view of the growing importance of urbanisation, which increases the complexity of the channels between producers and consumers. The models should have a dynamic component and should often include financial and risk considerations (particularly in view of its findings regarding those constraints in Africa), thereby being suitable not only for ad hoc studies, but also as inputs for macro models, such as those developed by the Trade and Macroeconomic Division.
In recent years, MSSD has increasingly been working and publishing on international trade policy aspects. Given its mandate, it is difficult to avoid doing so. Indeed, the Panel encourages MSSD to continue do so.
Indeed, the Panel would push the logic to other divisions in IFPRI as well and recommends that:
In designing its research every division within IFPRI should bear in mind that developing countries now have increasingly open economies, and that the planned research should take into full account the country's interactions with the rest of the world.
Another type of study the Division should consider adding to its research portfolio is in the field of political science: how are decisions about food policy made at government or regional levels. A better understanding of decision processes would likely make the application of the Division's findings easier and their impact deeper. Such research could even help IFPRI to avoid inappropriate outreach policy. However, care must be taken to connect the political science strongly to the mainstream of the Division's work. In addition, although the sociology of organizations is a science with universally accepted principles, IFPRI staff must be aware that its applicability to any particular situation is subject to quickly evolving contingencies, thus making findings in this domain difficult to generalize.
2.4 Trade and Macroeconomics Division (TMD)
2.4.1 Background
2.4.2 The General Equilibrium Approach to the Analysis of the Agricultural Sector
2.4.3 Trade
2.4.4 Output
2.4.5 Conclusion
2.4.1 Background
The Trade and Macroeconomics Division (TMD) is the smallest in IFPRI, with 9 percent of the budget and 8 percent of senior-scientist years. Its portfolio consists of only one MP (MP12: Macroeconomic Policies, Rural Development, and the Environment), and one GRP (GRP2: Global and Regional Trade). Both titles are representative of the kind of work done in the Division. In addition, the Division provides methodological support for work under the MPs and the GRPs led by other divisions.
During the 1980s the Division's predecessor (International Trade and Food Security Program) pioneered the research leading to the policy debate that centred on the role of trade and macroeconomic policy distortions in shaping the development of the agricultural sector; the research culminated in the World Bank-sponsored study led by Krueger, Schiff and Valdes. The current write up of the MP in the Medium-Term Plan still has in it a whiff of that earlier work, a point the ICER Panel has also remarked upon. However, in the Division's presentation to this Panel, and in the discussions during the December 1997 Internal Programme Review, it became clear that there had been an evolution away from the concerns that motivate the earlier body of work. The Division has begun work that looks at economy-environment interactions jointly with EPTD, and in conjunction with FCND, at farm households that make simultaneous production and consumption decisions.
2.4.2 The General Equilibrium Approach to the Analysis of the Agricultural Sector
Since the current Division Director took charge in 1994, the unifying theme for TMD has primarily been its research methodology as opposed to its subject matter. Specifically, the Division now has considerable expertise in the modelling technique known as the Computable General Equilibrium (CGE), a powerful tool for the analysis of economy-wide changes. The Division Director, an economist widely respected in the field, not only contributes directly to the work in the Division, but is also able to draw young, high-calibre researchers to the Institute.
The primary problem with the CGE methodology is its demanding data requirements. Consequently, it may seem to be an inappropriate technology for poorer countries, which form the core of IFPRI's natural constituency. The Division is well aware of this problem and has tackled head-on the methodological problem of estimating "a comprehensive and consistent data set using scattered and often inconsistent data from input-output accounts, national income and product accounts, international trade accounts, government expenditure and revenue accounts, agricultural surveys, manufacturing surveys, and household surveys."^1
^1 "Trade and Macroeconomics Division: Accomplishments in 1997 and Plans for 1998", Paper presented in the Internal Programme Review, International Food Policy Research Institute, December 1997.
Making the most efficient use of the small amount of information available, it has called on highly advanced econometric techniques, which are being applied to selected southern African countries, but which can subsequently be replicated in other countries. The effectiveness and appropriateness of these techniques remain to be tested. The Panel merely notes that use of advanced techniques to resolve the specific problems of the poorer countries falls squarely within the mandates of the CGIAR Centres.
A similar and more valid complaint is that such high-tech models and techniques will increase the dependence of the in-country researchers on continued work by or collaboration with IFPRI, since many of them will not be able to keep up with these frontier techniques. In this respect, TMD has run workshops on economy-wide modelling in El Salvador, Honduras, Egypt, Morocco and Zimbabwe. TMD has pending proposals jointly with the Outreach Division, to do a mix of research and capacity building in Malawi, Tanzania and Morocco, and plans to submit proposals for South Africa and Botswana.
Perhaps the more fundamental objection to the use of CGE models in the context of developing countries is the static, single-period nature of these models, which renders them somewhat impotent in addressing the more serious growth and development issues. Nevertheless, the Division has put significant effort into inferring the influence of various sector-based growth strategies on growth and equity in The Philippines. The sequential method used in this exercise sidesteps rather than resolves the basic objection against the CGE model. For the time being the policy community should be satisfied with such a stratagem, until the state of the art in this area advances further.
The TMD's decision to use a single research tool for its various efforts in macroeconomic analysis is open to criticism. The Panel rejects such a criticism. From the beginning, IFPRI has always (and in the Panel's view rightly) been concerned with the role of agriculture in an economy-wide framework. In the past, it had to be both eclectic and opportunistic in its use of research tools, largely because CGE either was not available or else was considered too esoteric and experimental for an applied centre such as IFPRI. Now that this tool, which is precisely tailored to the need of economy-wide studies, has become more commonplace, there is less reason for TMD to return to its previous opportunistic methods.
2.4.3 Trade
Some commentators have expressed concern that, in its concentration on the CGE technique, TMD has neglected working strictly on trade issues. It is now doing a considerable amount of work (perhaps even too much) on regional trade integration, involving a large number of country groupings. It has been suggested that perhaps it could do more on global trade issues, particularly as the WTO Agreement on Agriculture is to be the subject of negotiations again in a few year's time. However, work on many of these trade issues is also being done in other institutions, notably WTO, UNCTAD, and the World Bank, as well as universities in advanced countries.
While the global impact of multilateral trading arrangements is studied by many organizations, IFPRI may wish to consider an inadequately filled niche. Many countries are uncertain of the negotiating position they should take on various agricultural issues discussed in the international arena. This gap in knowledge is perhaps most seriously felt in the Ministries of Agriculture, which are the most visible stakeholders of IFPRI (and CGIAR).
Work on trade in IFPRI is done not only in TMD, but also in many other divisions. As IFPRI conducts research in many countries, most of which are small, open economies, trade issues must always be given consideration, if not placed at the forefront. Other divisions have therefore undertaken trade-related work - which is as it should be.
Strangely enough, there is no work being done in the Division on the long-term evolution of global food trade, which IFPRI does address through the 2020 Program. The model developed as part of that programme (the Impact model), is quite effective in tracing the effects of policy and exogenous changes on the world food markets. Since the researcher leading that modelling exercise happens to be located in EPTD, the model has the attractive feature of carefully specifying the influence of technology change and resource deterioration. However, it is a partial-equilibrium model^1 and thus does not have a rigorously specified feedback loop through the income changes brought by the policy and exogenous changes. Without that feedback loop, analysis of Impact on poverty is impossible. To specify this loop rigorously, a CGE model is necessary. The Panel hopes that IFPRI will successfully merge the virtues of the Impact model and the general-equilibrium approach, and thereby make an
even more significant contribution to the analysis of the global food system.
^1 A partial equilibrium model examines demand and supply conditions and how they affect prices for a single or several markets, ignoring the impacts to and from the rest of the economy. A general equilibrium model, by contrast, would examine all markets in the economy simultaneously.
2.4.4 Output
The output of the Division appears to be extensive, although at the moment it consists of large amounts of grey literature. Between 1992 and 1997, the Division published only three IFPRI Research Reports, the last one in 1995. The last book published using the Division's work was in 1993. This gap in publication appears to be a lagged reflection of the long period between the departure of the previous Director in 1990 and the arrival of the current Director in 1993. However, the Panel has been informed that publications from this Division should pick up in 1998, as the new projects launched since the arrival of the new Division Director are coming to an end.
Given that the Division is using advanced techniques in its work, it is surprising that there has not been any publication in the elite journals of the developed countries. Instead, articles have appeared frequently in the regional journals and those in developing countries. This was a stated distribution policy of the Division, and although it may be of some help to researchers in the developing countries, frequent visits from the Division's staff to present papers and provide training to the countries' economists who are working on food and agriculture would be more helpful. Outside of Latin America, visits to only four countries were reported in the 1997 Internal Program Review document. It is possible that funding availability may have limited a wider coverage.
2.4.5 Conclusion
It is the Panel's impression that in this area, IFPRI has chosen its niche well. TMD's analytical work that clearly places agriculture in an economy-wide context is crucial to the Institute. The relative size of the TMD is appropriate: more work can always be done on trade and macroeconomics, but other divisions can make similar claims. The Division's choice of work on trade takes into account work being done elsewhere. If the trade part of the Division's work lacks a sense of coherence, it is because IFPRI has to pick and choose its niche among many actors, and it is only a small actor.
The main improvement needed from this Division is an increase of published output to reflect the acceleration of the work since the current Division Director took over at the end of 1993.
2.5 Outreach Division (OD)
2.5.1 Programmes - An Overview
2.5.2 Panel Assessment of IFPRI Outreach: Suggestions and Recommendations
The Outreach Division (OD) was established in 1992. It currently is in a state of flux and redefinition, with an ongoing search for a new director for the Division. A new head of the information programme within it has been hired, but is not yet on board. The director of the country programmes is leaving IFPRI and a replacement has yet to be named. A full time position on impact evaluation also has been created, but is yet to be filled.
The OD is one of the conduits through which the research and capacity building outputs of IFPRI flow towards eventual impact on the policy process, policy change, and policy capacity in developing countries. As such, the question of generating impact is a key one here, as it is in the case of the research divisions. Impacts are discussed in chapter 3, in terms of cross cutting issues related to measurement and the evidence on IFPRI's impacts that exists to date.
The OD has the following four broad objectives, all in a developing country context:
· to provide relevant information to policymakers;
· to facilitate improvements in two-way communication between researchers, policy analysts, policymakers, and government officials;
· to strengthen capacity for food, agriculture, and natural resources policy research, analysis and implementation; and
· to assure a high degree of relevance of IFPRI's research.
In addition, the OD also has as its mission to further the awareness of IFPRI and its work through its activities in public awareness and media relations.
2.5.1 Programmes - An Overview
After the most recent consolidation and shifting around of programmes, the OD has ended up with six programmes, including: information, training and capacity-building; country programmes; regional networks; policy seminars; and impact assessment. Most of the programmes primarily involve institute wide activities (e.g., networks and country programmes, training and seminars, library) or service functions to the research divisions (e.g., publications, specific training activity support, specific seminars and workshop support). All except the library are oriented almost exclusively toward external clients.
Information Programme
For the outcomes of IFPRI research to have impact, the results must become part of the intellectual equipment and knowledge base of potential users in the developing countries, and of the international and bilateral agencies that support development. The single most important vehicle IFPRI uses to ensure its message gets in the hands of its constituents is the Information Programme. In addition to providing policy information to its users, IFPRI's Information Programme also has the objectives of (1) providing access to methodologies for use by developing-country researchers both directly in research and in training, and (2) communicating information about the Institute and its work to broader audiences, including the media in developing and developed countries, important to its success.
Publications: In 1997, IFPRI sent out nearly 21,000 copies of publications in response to some 5,500 orders. Total number of publications during 1997 is down from 1996. Plans call for an increase in publications during 1998, including five research reports and three books that will be completed during the year. An additional 10 research report manuscripts are expected in 1998. In 1997, some 56 division discussion papers were produced during 1997.
Internet: IFPRI presence on the World Wide Web continues to grow, with the addition of texts of many shorter publications in addition to general information on IFPRI, its publications, and staff biographies. Individual divisions have begun to develop their own detailed sites on the Web; and a major effort is underway to translate web offerings into French and Spanish.
Public awareness and media relations: IFPRI continues to expand its interactions with news media. The visibility of IFPRI was increased substantially through the 2020 exercise. Media training was held for a number of senior level researchers to help enhance their interview skills. All major wire services carried stories about IFPRI's work in 1997, and there is an increase in the number of stories appearing in developing country media outlets.
Library: The library continues to evaluate the needs of research staff. A full-time technical services librarian was added during 1997 to replace a part-time position. Interlibrary loan requests have continued to expand rapidly, which makes it difficult for the staff to keep up with requests.
Training and Capacity Strengthening Programme
The overall objective of IFPRI's work in training and conferences is to strengthen the capacity of developing-country counterparts to conduct food, agriculture, and natural resources policy analysis and to enhance the capacity of developing country institutions to provide training in policy analysis on a continuing basis. This is accomplished through training programmes based in strong national institutions in developing countries; through a small number of global and regional IFPRI training courses in areas where the Institute has special expertise; through participation of individuals from developing countries in IFPRI research activities in ways integrated with their professional advancement; and through seminars, workshops, and conferences for experts and participants from both developed and developing countries.
IFPRI is involved in long term institutional and research capacity strengthening in such countries as Malawi, Ghana, and Mozambique, and through regional groups in Latin America and South Asia. It also is involved in short-term training courses, such as the recent one developed jointly with the University of Maryland on food, agriculture, and natural resources policy analysis. This course involved nine faculty members from the University of Maryland and ten staff members from IFPRI. Ten policy advisors, researchers, and instructors from Kenya, Malawi, and Uganda were participants. Next year a similar course is planned that would focus on food security in drought-prone environments.
From 1993 through 1997, some 449 participants were trained in IFPRI sponsored and organized courses. About two-thirds of the participants were from developing country governments, with the rest coming from developing-country academic institutions, NGOs and other organizations. About 30 percent of the participants were women. By the year 2000, the training team hopes to double the number of people trained.
IFPRI supports graduate student research, both through its country projects and through the provision of data sets for graduate student research (as suggested in the Policy Stripe Study).
Some graduate students are hosted at IFPRI headquarters. IFPRI also has a Visiting Research Fellow Programme. In 1997, there were three participants in each of these programmes. By the year 2000, IFPRI training staff hope to more than double the visiting researchers to IFPRI and the number of graduate students from developing countries at IFPRI.
Training activities are evaluated by the participants. However, IFPRI has not yet developed a systematic process for outside evaluation of its training activities, as recommended in the Stripe Study of Policy Research in the CGIAR System.
Policy Seminar Programme
As part of its strategy of disseminating policy research to a wide audience through the spoken word, the Policy Seminars Programme facilitates exchange of information on institute-wide thematic concerns locally, regionally, and globally. Seminars, workshops, and conferences bring together collaborators, policymakers, and IFPRI research staff to discuss research design, methodologies, and findings.
16 seminars were held in 1997, compared to 11 in 1996. The seminars focused on topics that would be of interest to a broad audience. In 1998 IFPRI will begin to host 2020 seminars as part of its seminar series. From 1992-1996, the programme sponsored 57 workshops, symposia, and conferences; 26 policy seminars, and 161 informal seminars.
Country Programmes
The Office for Country Programmes was moved from the Director General's Office into the Outreach Division in August 1997 based on Board and SMT discussions. The Programme was developed to further enhance IFPRI's outreach activities, to develop more specific, in-country expertise, and to strengthen the Institute's policy impact in particular countries. Although the generation of research results with characteristics of international public goods continues to be IFPRI's central objective, the Institute has realized the value of focusing IFPRI's research on a specific country's food policy issues to strengthen the quality of the research and policy impact in the study country. Country programmes are underway in China, Egypt, Ghana, Malawi, Mozambique, Uganda, and Vietnam. Discussions concerning new directions for and structure of Country Programmes are underway in the SMT.
Regional Networks
IFPRI is planning to establish a network of IFPRI Associates that will help IFPRI keep its research and outreach activities relevant to, and informed by the policy issues and policy environment where IFPRI works in the developing world. In addition, IFPRI is facilitating the establishment of networks in East and West Africa to stimulate and help countries to develop their own 2020 Visions and take steps to implement them.
Impact Assessment
Formal impact assessment is a relatively new activity in IFPRI, although it has been doing research on impact assessment methodology and approaches for some time. The work is spread across divisions, with activity particularly in OD and EPTD. IFPRI is working to develop a more strategic approach to assessing the Institute's impact. A senior-level staff member will be hired soon to undertake this work in conjunction with the CGIAR Impact Assessment and Evaluation Group. As mentioned, more detailed discussion of IFPRI impacts is provided in Chapter 3.
2.5.2 Panel Assessment of IFPRI Outreach: Suggestions and Recommendations
2.5.2.1 Issue 1: Closer Integration of Outreach with Research
2.5.2.2 Issue 2: Facilitating Mechanisms in Partner Countries
The present DG and IFPRI Board have made a commitment to expand and professionalize the outreach functions of IFPRI and to integrate the outreach methods more closely with the research activities of the Institute. As stated by the ICER, IFPRI's "movement down the twin paths of professionalization (of communication services) and integration (of research with outreach) is in order." The EPMR team also applauds this intention; and, indeed, it sees some evidence that these improvements are taking place.
At the same time, the Panel considers that the greatest uncertainty surrounding IFPRI at present is the future direction and role of outreach and several of the programmes within it. Little uncertainty and no strategic issues exist concerning the publications and library support functions of the OD, the typical functions found in a communications division. However, there are some questions about the intended role of the newly enlarged OD in proactively initiating outreach training and capacity strengthening activity, in co-ordinating or facilitating IFPRI work in partner countries, and in establishing and managing 2020 networks.
Since IFPRI has not yet developed any firm positions on these latter activities, preferring to wait until a director of the new OD has been identified and come on board, the Panel can only raise questions and provide some of its thoughts on various options. The basic issues the Panel addresses below are:
· (1) How does IFPRI best generate a closer integration of outreach with research, in terms of a) specific research programmes within divisions, and b) in cross-cutting themes which IFPRI should address?; and
· (2) How should IFPRI proceed in establishing facilitating mechanisms in partner countries that can help IFPRI projects in the countries take advantage of complementarities and avoid duplications and conflicts, ensure a continuity of activity and a longer term presence of IFPRI, and create mechanisms for funding of relevant projects in the countries?
2.5.2.1 Issue 1: Closer Integration of Outreach with Research:
The Panel agrees with IFPRI's view and the ICER comment that a feeling of outreach ownership in research programmes is a prerequisite for securing adequate participation in such activities from researchers, particularly senior ones. However, the ICER also noted there is a strong attitude in some IFPRI researchers that outreach is not their responsibility and that it is a drain on their precious time. At most, they are interested in outreach to other scientists and academics, mainly in developed countries, working on similar problems. They are not interested in the appropriate audiences in their partner countries in the developing world. While the EPMR also found some of that attitude still present, it appears that management is starting to persuade researchers that there is no choice, that outreach in a form that is appropriate to developing countries is a real and actual requirement of every researcher's job. The problem is to get this feeling of ownership spread among
researchers on a voluntary basis, which is the only way in which it really will work. The question thus arises: In what ways should the OD work with the research divisions to foster such ownership of the activities that link their research to application and use by developing country policy makers, policy analysts, and researchers?
Links Between Outreach and Research Divisions
The IFPRI Vietnam project developed by the MSSD is a good example of a case where such ownership developed and contributed to the highly successful IFPRI related outreach activities in that country, involving technical training, policy analysis training, study tours, visiting fellows activity, and transfer of a spatial equilibrium model built by IFPRI researchers. This project indicates that researchers, appropriately supported by training specialists, can develop effective and efficient outreach and capacity strengthening activities. IFPRI has had other similar successes. However, other examples exist where researchers have worked in isolation, with little concern for what is left behind in the way of improved capacity and understanding.
There is no one universal model to ensure success in integrating outreach with research. However, some prerequisites (necessary but not sufficient conditions) for success in integrating research and outreach include the following:
· the incentive structure for researchers must include outreach as an explicit output right from the beginning of a project;
· researchers should be made accountable for outreach in annual performance evaluations;
· financial and time incentives need to be in place;
· there must be ready access to the professional knowledge and skills required to efficiently mount an effective training or capacity building activity under diverse conditions; and
· the materials (research results, methods and approaches) to be used in the training and capacity building activities must be appropriate for the intended target populations.
The question is: How does IFPRI best ensure that these prerequisites are in place? Does it do it through an equal partnership between researchers and outreach people? Does it do it through placing greater emphasis on researcher responsibilities in outreach (using various incentives) while making professional outreach expertise available through various mechanisms for co-operation in the Institute between outreach experts and researchers? Or does it adopt some other approach? The Panel believes that in a research institute such as IFPRI, and given its self-imposed boundaries as described above, the training and capacity strengthening has to be riven by the substance of the research and research methods, with the specific outreach mechanisms chosen being a function of how best to transfer or communicate the specific subject matter. This would imply a co-operating, facilitating, and service role for outreach in the training and capacity strengthening area.
Ultimately, IFPRI has to develop the approach that fits its own institutional culture best. But it does need to move forward aggressively with the task at hand, recognising the opportunity to make much better use of the wealth of information, techniques, and other valuable knowledge existing in the Centre that has not adequately reached researchers, analysts, and policy makers in developing countries.
The Panel thus suggests that:
IFPRI (1) develop an internally consistent approach to ensuring researcher ownership of, and incentive for outreach associated with research projects; and (2) determine how such ownership and participation best can be fostered within the institutional culture of IFPRI.
The appropriate elements will include consideration of the possible incentives and their likely effectiveness in the IFPRI culture and the professional outreach services needed and how best to supply them - in-house or contracted.
Cross-Cutting Outreach Activities
Some will be quick to point out that there are certain key outreach themes and activities that cut across research divisions. The argument is that these are a form of institute wide "public goods," i.e., research divisions do not individually have sufficient incentive to initiate and follow through on such themes. Yet, they are worth pursuing within the context of IFPRI's mandate and priorities. It is reasoned that these will only be produced if some cross cutting mechanism exists outside the research divisions. The new OD within IFPRI is envisioned in this role for such activities as general conferences on policy processes or other themes that cut across divisions.
The question is: How will the OD develop the incentives for individual division participation in such activities, given the great numbers of activities and obligations and demands on their time that already exist? If research division ownership and participation are not forthcoming for these cross-cutting activities, then does the OD have any business being involved in them?
An alternative model to having the OD initiate these is that IFPRI creates the incentives (financial or other) to encourage direct interaction between divisions or between MPs in a given division to develop the substance of such cross-cutting theme seminars, conferences, training, or other activities, relying on professional outreach expertise within OD to organize and provide the logistical input for them. This again would cast OD more in a support or cooperating role, rather than in an initiating role.
Ultimately, the initial ideas for such cross-cutting themes should be able to come from anywhere within or outside the Institute, particularly from developing country fora, with a relevant, ad hoc committee of those researchers most closely associated with the theme passing judgement on the idea's relevance and priority. If deemed to be a priority, then the requirements for making it a productive activity also would be considered by the committee. Incentives will be required to make such a system work. It cannot easily be forced on researchers. A source of seed money funding to develop promising ideas into full-scale proposals is needed.
2.5.2.2 Issue 2: Facilitating Mechanisms in Partner Countries
The felt need for a longer term, continuing presence in partner countries grew steadily in IFPRI after the current DG made explicit the concept that countries in which IFPRI works have to be treated as partners in need of longer term capacity building in addition to being data points in cross sectional research aimed at producing IPGs. The "country programme" concept derived from this focus on longer term impact in the countries which participate in IFPRI research. The country programme activity was recently moved from the DG's office to OD. There is no head at present (the past one resigned recently to take another position). This is an opportune time to revisit the country programme concept and activities.
Should such country programmes exist? If so, how should they be chosen - what are the appropriate criteria? How should they be managed at headquarters (i.e., is current placement in OD appropriate, or should they be returned to the DG's office where cross-cutting facilitating mechanisms also cut fit)? If they stay in the OD, then how should the newly expanded OD work with research divisions in terms of country programmes and networks? On this latter point, it again is recognized that there is need for a facilitating mechanism that ensures: (a) co-ordination and compatibility among IFPRI research projects in a given country and region, (b) a convenient, visible presence to help the host country and IFPRI tap into new sources of funding for work in the country; and (c) continuity of activity in countries and regions beyond the completion of specific research projects to ensure adaptation and eventual adoption of the innovations and ideas produced in IFPRI/host country
projects. At present, it is envisioned that the country programmes would be staffed by longer term positions in the partner countries.
There is need for more consistency in country programmes and need for clearer lines of authority and responsibility and accountability. In such cases, where considerable and diverse activity exists or is planned in a given country, one might be able to justify a country office and local country facilitator. At the same time, the Panel considers that in-house country programme staff in IFPRI-Washington is difficult to justify. IFPRI is not large enough to justify such additional overhead costs, given the likely numbers of projects and overall size of IFPRI budget in any given country involved. Further, if IFPRI has a visible, longer term presence (different from a temporary research presence) there is a risk that IFPRI will become involved in local disputes over the appropriate pathways for agricultural development.
The Panel thus suggests that
IFPRI assess very carefully the need for, location of, and appropriate modus operandi of, a country programmes office. A detailed set of criteria and process of justification for each newly established country programme should be developed, if the conclusion remains that country programmes are desirable. The assessment also should be applied to the "high concentration countries" (HCCs) recognized by IFPRI, i.e., those countries in which IFPRI has or has had a high concentration of projects and staff.
The two should be brought together in developing a consistent approach to meeting the needs expressed above related to continuing of activity, improving effectiveness of outreach, and building on the complementarities among IFPRI activities in a given country.
A number of questions also surround the establishment of what IFPRI calls 2020 regional networks. The relevant questions are discussed in the following section, which deals specifically with the 2020 Vision programme.
In Summary
The Panel recommends that:
a) the respective roles of the research divisions and the outreach division in outreach activities are clarified and that the outreach function is well integrated with research;
b) there is mutual reinforcement of research and outreach, with research driving outreach on the dissemination of research findings and outreach influencing research on the identification of research problems;
c) if a country programme format is used, it recognizes the need for integration of research and outreach, provides an efficient mechanism for management, and is reasonably consistent across countries in which IFPRI operates.
2.6 The 2020 Vision Initiative
2.6.1 Context
2.6.2 Outputs and Achievements
2.6.3 Future Developments
Many would argue that IFPRI's 2020 Vision Initiative, started in 1993, is the single most important activity to have been launched in IFPRI, It has provided a means to synthesize some of its research and to get much of it out to a wide audience of policy makers, donors, countries, NGOs and civil society in general. This activity has helped IFPRI establish its name in agricultural and food policy related circles worldwide. It has helped to bring agriculture and food related issues back to the forefront for some donors and many policymakers. It has facilitated understanding of what is known, what is imperfectly known, and what is not known about the world agricultural and food situations,
The 2020 Vision initiative has two primary objectives: (1) to develop and promote a shared vision and consensus for action for meeting food needs while reducing poverty and protecting the environment; and (2) to generate information and encourage debate to influence action by national governments, non-governmental organizations, the private sector, international development institutions, and civil society. These objectives fit within the broader 2020 Vision of a world where every person has access to sufficient food to sustain a healthy and productive life, where malnutrition is absent, and where food originates from efficient, effective, and low-cost food systems that are compatible with sustainable use of natural resources. The Panel notes the agreement between this vision and that of the CGIAR in general.
2.6.1 Context
IFPRI was well-suited for the 2020 Vision initiative: it had the expertise, stock of knowledge, the resources, and the intellectual and political independence required. All these conditions are not often found in policy research institutions dealing with policy research. Any one of these reasons would have been sufficient to launch such an activity. All of them together provide a powerful argument for the exercise. The Panel commends IFPRI for the initiative.
Preparation of the study papers in preparation for the 1995 2020 Vision conference imposed an additional burden on the staff, which led to some temporary complaints. Following the conference, the activity was redesigned to avoid such a burden. Thus, there is a steering committee consisting of the DG and the division directors who best can assess the implications of given activities in terms of staff time. They decide on whether an activity should go forward. Furthermore, staff are covered for their activities from 2020 funds, so they become incorporated in their workplans. In fact, 2020 activities are part of their workplans. In addition to the internal controls, the initiative has an international advisory board made up of distinguished scholars, and policymakers.
2.6.2 Outputs and Achievements
The number of papers produced under the heading of 2020 is enormous: In addition to the newsletter there have been 10 booklets, 23 discussion papers, 47 policy briefs, 4 major synthesis papers, and several videos and a widely distributed poster. In addition, there have been some 100 follow-up activities held in more than 40 industrialized and developing countries including Indonesia, Japan, Denmark, South Africa, Colombia, and Germany, and more are scheduled. These events have involved a large number of people including host-country ministers, other key leaders, and the media, seminars, workshops, conferences, and presentations held in many different countries. To produce this many products of good quality in a few years is impressive.
IFPRI and the 2020 messages now are known the world over in concerned circles; and IFPRI frequently is called upon for advice and opinions on topics related to its broad spectrum of expertise. The 2020 Vision initiative has been written about in more than 300 newspaper and magazine articles, including feature stories in the New York Times, the Financial Times, Asian Wall Street Journal, Berlingske Tidende, Yomiuri, and the India Monitor.
The Panel considers that another major achievement is the development of a simple formal model of the world food equilibrium, enabling researchers to perform additional simulations or build their own models from the ideas developed at IFPRI. It must be noted that the IFPRI model is both simpler and in many respects (for instance, by explicitly taking into account water scarcity) more comprehensive than many similar ones.
In terms of other follow-up activities to extend further the 2020 Vision and the various products that came out of this activity, IFPRI:
· is in the process of placing all the 2020 publications, including discussion papers, on the worldwide web;
· has joined forces with the Public Broadcasting System (PBS) to advise the producers of a new series of programmes on people and their environment;
· sis working directly with developing country governments and international and bilateral agencies regarding the lessons from 2020 Vision initiative;
· is continuing its work with media to explain the issues addressed by the 2020 Vision initiative.
2.6.3 Future Developments
Phase I of the 2020 Vision initiative concluded in December of 1996. Phase II was initiated in January of 1997 and is currently in progress. The emphasis is on helping developing countries design and implement their own 2020 strategies and action plans. In this second phase, IFPRI is addressing three thrusts:
· to generate timely, state-of-the-knowledge information on key issues, paying particular attention to emerging issues that could potentially influence the 2020 Vision;
· to communicate the 2020 Vision to diverse audiences, including increased efforts to reach the next generation(s) of policymakers, analysts, and researchers, and member of civil society - the ones who will be carrying through the 2020 strategies and action plans; and
· to provide a forum for dialogue, debate, information sharing, and consensus building, paying particular attention to including not only policy makers, but also members of NGOs, the private sector; and the media.
In addition. Phase II will focus on helping individual developing countries to design and implement their own 2020 strategies. Thus, IFPRI is helping to establish subregional 2020 Vision networks for East and West Africa. Countries will organize collaborative activity through such regional networks. The networks will help in establishing, assisting, and reinforcing the work undertaken by individual country research teams and enable them to learn from each other for the purpose of improving the knowledge base for policymaking in the regions.
The Panel notes that IFPRI's role in these networks will be limited to strengthening the conceptual and analytical capacity of the country teams, co-ordinating the meetings and other activities of the network, and facilitating the impact of the output of the country teams on policies to achieve the country-specific goals underlying the 2020 Vision. The network activities will be designed and implemented in close collaboration with donor sponsored activities to promote agricultural development, sustainable use of natural resources, and improved health and nutrition in the countries of the regions. The regional activities of IFPRI will primarily be of an outreach nature; and for this reason the networking activity within the 2020 framework will be placed as a programme in the OD.
The Panel agrees with IFPRI's assessment that the 2020 Vision will only be realized if individual countries conduct their own 2020 Vision-type research and outreach activities. As such it supports the intention of IFPRI to become involved in the activities as planned. It also supports IFPRI's intention to only become involved in an advisory and outreach/capacity strengthening role, with the intention of devolving the activity to regional associations and groups after five years or so. This will be a new type of activity for IFPRI (a main focus being on outreach rather than research). As such, the Institute should be able to learn a great deal from the activity.
A word of caution is in order. While the demand for this type of activity undoubtedly exists and countries could gain significant benefits from such a perspective exercise, most countries will not have sufficient analytical capacity on hand to actually carry out the substance of the necessary assessments. Nor will there be much local capacity to organize and co-ordinate the diversity of inputs necessary for this exercise. As such, some frustration could result both on the part of the countries and on the part of IFPRI unless realistic targets are set. IFPRI should therefore be realistic in its expectations of what can be accomplished at the country level.
IFPRI also intends to continue at a lower level of intensity to fill in gaps in its global activity. To this end, IFPRI has established a position of 2020 co-ordinator in the DG's office. In carrying forth this activity, IFPRI should consider the desirability of updating the present global model used for the 2020 Vision projections, perhaps transforming it into a full CGE model, and then use it to bring evidences to bear in the domains where 2020 has been considered as controversial. (See also Section 2.4).
The Panel supports the various intended activities. At the same time, the Panel urges IFPRI to continue to (1) keep 2020 Vision activities in perspective as an outreach activity in the context of its main mission of carrying out high quality policy research and transferring its experience and expertise through capacity strengthening activities; and (2) formalize more the process of gaining feedback through the 2020 for use in planning its research programme and priorities.
<section>9</section>
Chapter 3 - Cross-Cutting Themes
3.1 Priorities and Priority-Setting
3.2 Quality of Research
3.3 Relevance and Impacts of IFPRI's Work - What for Whom
3.4. Research Environment
3.5 Institutional and Scientist Linkages
The preceding chapters provided an overview of and an initial assessment of divisional activities in research and outreach. This chapter focuses on cross-cutting programmatic themes. Organization and Management themes are addressed in Chapter 4.
3.1 Priorities and Priority-Setting
Priorities for policy research that bear on poverty alleviation, food security and environmental sustainability are not easy to establish, especially when global, regional and even country level issues fall within its purview. The credibility of the exercise will then lie in the process by which policy issues were identified, the criteria that were applied in assessing their relative importance, and the expertise and breadth of experience of those who made the final choices. The research agenda that emerges from this process will no doubt depend also on the donor resources available during the period involved. Under the circumstances, what matters most in determining the credibility of the choices resulting from priority-setting, is the quality and commitment to developing country policy concerns of the people involved in the process, rather than further refinements of the process. It is not surprising, therefore, that reasonable people tend to agree with a process for
priority-setting, and yet differ on the actual outcomes in terms of priorities.
After an assessment of the priority-setting process that IFPRI uses, the range of consultations that have taken place, and the criteria deployed, the Panel is satisfied that the way the Centre has gone about priority-setting, as well as the research agenda its Board finally approved are both appropriate and timely, given the outputs available from other policy research bodies, the comparative advantage of the staff of the Centre, and the uncertainly about donor resources. While donor preferences have no doubt influenced the final research agenda, there are also cases where the Centre has accorded high priority to some projects (e.g., research on water), although it has not been able to mobilize adequate funds for them.
IFPRI uses a pragmatic process that recognizes the impossibility of carrying out a highly sophisticated quantitative priority-setting exercise in policy research. Rather, IFPRI depends on client input, and input from peers in the policy research field, and the IFPRI researchers' judgement. The Panel fully accepts the good quality of the latter two inputs. At the same time the Panel suggests that IFPRI more fully exploit the means available to gain input in its priority-setting from developing country policymakers, researchers and analysts. For example, there appear to be opportunities to design outreach activities that are more explicitly two way communication exercises and that go beyond the specific research in question. This could generate new ideas for research modification or for new projects and provide input for priority-setting.
At the same time the Panel cautions that, as a CGIAR Centre, IFPRI should be focusing on international public goods research, i.e., research that would not be undertaken by any one country in isolation, yet would be of benefit to many if undertaken. In such cases, there can be some direct conflicts between listening to a given country's priorities for research as opposed to synthesizing the ideas from many countries where a given issue is important, yet not the top priority in any one country. In this case, IFPRI is balancing a "quality" of choice criterion related to international public goods research against criteria that any given country would apply in their own national priority-setting framework.
A final question is whether IFPRI's resources are being allocated in harmony with CG goals and priorities. This is not an easy question to answer because programmes and projects have multiple goals not all of which will be limited to specific CG goals and priorities. Some activities such as 2020 have broad goals that serve the entire spectrum of priorities. An approximate fit between IFPRI's resource allocation and CG goals and priorities can be had by reviewing the pattern of allocation of funds among the relevant groups of programmes in IFPRI. IFPRI's research on consumption and nutrition, for example, which has a direct bearing on the goals of poverty alleviation and food security accounted for the use of 31% of the Centre's funds during the period under review. Its research on environmental and technology issues accounted for the use of 27% of the funds. This work was largely concerned with the themes of environmental sustainability and poverty alleviation. IFPRI's
research in respect of trade and macroeconomic issues and markets (inputs and outputs) which are more general themes added up to only 24% of its funds, while outreach accounted for 18%.
3.2 Quality of Research
3.2.1 The Selection of Research Inputs
3.2.2 The Quality of Research Methods at IFPRI
3.2.3 The Quality of Published Research Output: Internal and External Quality Control
3.2.4 The Incentives for Quality at IFPRI
One can think of quality of research at different stages in the research process. Thus, there is quality of the problem formulation (discussed in Section 3.1). quality of the inputs used in the research process (related to the data collection processes), quality of the research itself (methodology), quality of the output (mainly the publications and other written form in which the output is presented, where quality is measured in terms of the intended audiences and their abilities to comprehend and use the results). All these dimensions of quality are relevant in the case of a CGIAR Centre, and thus in the case of IFPRI.
The Panel concludes that IFPRI's work is of good quality at all stages in the research process. It also appears that quality at IFPRI receives good marks from other institutions. These high marks are a consequence of a careful selection of research problems and methods, quality standards being applied to inputs - researchers and data, and use of an efficient internal quality control system. The system of incentives used within IFPRI also rewards quality in output. Care should be taken, however, not to smother new and original ideas which would not conform, initially at least, to current mainstreams of thinking and thus conventional quality criteria.
3.2.1 The Selection of Research Inputs
The two essential inputs for economic research are researchers and data. Researchers are recruited through careful procedures, described and commented on in Chapter 4. The Panel's judgement is that IFPRI researchers are of high academic quality. IFPRI is known for designing primary data collection methods which stand as models for others long after their completion. It is one of a few economic research institutes producing a significant proportion of the primary data that they utilize. It must be stressed that these primary data also are utilized, and highly demanded by, numerous other academic institutions and their Ph.D students. This relates to the linkage issue addressed in Section 3.4.
3.2.2 The Quality of Research Methods at IFPRI
The Panel commends IFPRI for its foresight in assembling a distinguished list of independent experts, chosen for their familiarity with the themes addressed by IFPRI and for their methodological rigour, to carry out a thorough Internally Commissioned External Review of IFPRI's research methodology. As discussed earlier, the Panel cannot improve on the ICER review of quality and appropriateness of the research methods used by IFPRI. The study was detailed and covered all research programmes. In general the ICER gave IFPRI high marks, with some specific minor reservations or differences of opinion here and there that IFPRI for the most part has addressed and either adopted or rejected for clear reasons. The Panel reviewed the ICER output in great detail, as well as the IFPRI responses and is fully satisfied with the work of the ICER and the IFPRI's responses to its recommendations.
The Panel encourages IFPRI to continue with the ICER process, perhaps focusing on research issues in addition to quality of methods. Also, when the new OD is fully up and running and has an operational plan in implementation, an ICER looking at the quality of outreach also would be in order.
3.2.3 The Quality of Published Research Output: Internal and External Quality Control
Overall, the Panel judges IFPRI's published research output to be of high quality.
The internal quality control begins when a research project is being planned, long before any publication is considered. Before any project is accepted in the framework of an MP or of a GRP, the methodology is reviewed by an external reviewer, proposed by the head of the division and nominated by the DG. Usually a seminar is organized, with participants from the World Bank or from universities being invited to comment. The high quality of collected data relies mainly on these procedures.
During the process of execution, projects are submitted to regular review. An internal review at the whole institution level is conducted annually, with any staff member invited to comment on the operations of divisions and selected programmes. In some cases, when a programme is complex (for instance MP17), external interdisciplinary advisory boards are set up and meet annually to provide advice.
Finally, any IFPRI labelled paper, even a discussion paper, must go through an internal quality control process. IFPRI staff members are free to write whatever they like in their own name and researchers are encouraged to publish any article in any refereed journal. Reprints are submitted to the Information Programme and are approved for publication by the Director General. The nature of the control varies with the series the paper is published in: discussion papers are reviewed by one staff member; research report manuscripts contemplated for publication have to be presented at a seminar, thus allowing for the collection of criticisms, remarks and suggestions from the audience, and are subsequently examined along with books by a publication committee. The latter does not perform the entire review by itself, but nominates at least one internal and two external individuals before giving the IFPRI stamp to any document. Usually, a dialogue takes place between the author(s) and
the reviewers, with successive versions of the document being prepared before publication occurs. Furthermore, books (especially the famous John Hopkins University Press IFPRI series) are submitted to the publishers' scrutiny regarding sales and other commercial aspects.
All these procedures not only avoid publication of inferior material but also guarantee that the audience of a document will understand the true nature of the delivered message. The Panel commends IFPRI for its thorough internal review and quality control process.
Other items that deserve mention are the short policy briefs and project briefs that currently are being produced. They are of high quality and extremely useful for the non-research person involved in policy-making. The Panel commends IFPRI on the decision to produce these. However, a gap has been noted by some development policy analysts between broad policy statements and publications that are highly theoretical and full of equations. They have expressed a need for intermediate publications that explain the assumptions used to help clarify analytical methods and facilitate their application.
The Panel urges all IFPRI divisions to systematically consider the balance in its written output, making sure not to neglect the needs of those who wish further details on research methods and assumptions used.
3.2.4 The Incentives for Quality at IFPRI
There is no formal incentive system for research and publication quality. Yet, it is clear that for a researcher to have a good publication record is a major asset in salary discussions, either within IFPRI or outside, as well as for future employability. The internal institutional culture also plays a large role in maintaining a high demand for quality, as was made apparent by the number and the nature of interventions during the 1997 internal review.
A bibliometric study, showing that IFPRI's publications are often quoted and given authority provides quantitative evidence of the relevance and implied quality of these criteria (see also Section 3.3 on impacts).
However, the system of quality control also has its costs, both financial and intellectual. In terms of financial costs, the time devoted to reading and correcting manuscripts can be significant in IFPRI, and to some extent contributes to the allegedly "high cost" of an IFPRI internationally recruited researcher.
In terms of intellectual cost, the review process, although extremely efficient in avoiding dramatic mistakes and the publication of unwarranted statements, is also at risk of preventing new "shocking ideas " to be expressed publicly. For instance, it can very well be imagined that the early works of Louis Pasteur on microbiology would have been refused by the IFPRI reviewing system, had the latter been operational at the time, simply because his ideas were unacceptable then. There are no indisputable ways of avoiding the risk of rebuffing a good manuscript, except by carefully choosing broad and open minded reviewers. The Panel is, however, satisfied that IFPRI has often called into question commonly accepted principles.
Whatever the financial (opportunity) and intellectual costs of quality control because of the necessary large commitment of time, these costs, must be incurred, otherwise research would lack all justification. Furthermore, there are some hidden benefits that researchers derive from review of their peers' work. First, they keep abreast of what others in their fields are doing and thinking. Second, even an experienced researcher can learn from a thorough review of a colleague's work.
3.3 Relevance and Impacts of IFPRI's Work - What for Whom
3.3.1 IFPRI's Overall Work in Impact Assessment
3.3.2 IFPRI's Impacts
3.3.3 Impacts on Capacity Strengthening in Developing Countries
3.3.4 Case Studies of Impacts on Policy Decisions in Developing Countries
3.3.5 Concluding Comments
The ultimate objective of IFPRI is to have an impact on poverty reduction, food security, and sustainable development. In IFPRI's case, these impacts will come via changes in policies, which is its research and outreach domain. The impacts will come through two types of outputs: directly through the policy relevant information it provides policymakers; and indirectly through capacity strengthening (that strengthens the ability of local policy researchers to produce needed information on policy options).
In both cases, impacts will depend on (1) the relevance (and quality) of the information and techniques developed and extended to target groups; and (2) the number and nature of such target groups effectively reached with relevant knowledge.
The CGIAR System increasingly is focusing on impacts of its investment in agricultural and related research. It rightly requires centres to develop improved and expanded measures of their impacts, both for accountability purposes and because work in this area helps centres focus on the key objectives and the indicators and milestones that can help them determine whether they are on the right course as they proceed down the research path. IFPRI is taking very seriously this charge from the System, partly because it has been involved in work on impact assessment for some time, and partly because it agrees with the benefits that can be derived from a better understanding of impacts - both in guiding ongoing research and in setting priorities for future research.
While considerable progress has been made over the years in measuring the impacts of biophysical research, e.g., plant breeding and production research, such results cannot be applied readily to social science and particularly policy research that is of quite a different nature in terms of final impacts. In fact, the Panel believes that it will be a long time off before definitive, quantitative assessment of the final impacts of policy research on the human condition and sustainable development will be possible. As a result, the Panel cautions against expecting such impact assessment results. Rather, IFPRI's clients should expect good progress from IFPRI in providing measures of the intermediate impacts of its work - measures of the impacts of its written output (in terms of usefulness and extent) and impacts of its capacity strengthening activities in terms of the quality and relevance of work produced by those clients involved in such strengthening activities. In addition,
as is already the case, IFPRI's clients should expect more anecdotal evidence of impacts, or at least evidence that the results indicated by IFPRI's work are consistent with policy changes that actually have or are taking place. In fact, as indicated below, the Panel concludes that IFPRI is making good progress on all these fronts.
3.3.1 IFPRI's Overall Work in Impact Assessment
IFPRI is involved in two types of work related to impacts. One, which is more of a research activity, deals with the development of social science methods for assessing the impacts of agricultural, food, and natural resources research. That work is taking place mainly in EPTD.
The other activity is related to assessing the impacts of its own policy research, or social science research more broadly considered. For this work a new position has been created, but not yet filled. The focus in this section is on the latter thrust.
Progress is being made in understanding the conceptual underpinnings of the impacts of policy research. In fact, IFPRI is on the forefront of this work and has sponsored several recent activities that bring together the best thinking on this subject. The resulting papers are being edited for publication in a book. IFPRI is to be commended for its activity in this area. IFPRI researchers have recognised that the topic is a multidimensional one, and that specification of the possible paths of impacts is an important task at hand. Researchers at IFPRI also have explored the various issues surrounding the problem of attribution when it comes to linking policy research to ultimate impact on poverty alleviation and other measures of human welfare. At the same time, IFPRI has been exploring impact assessment potential from different perspectives, and in terms of different stages along the path from research input to final impact.
3.3.2 IFPRI's Impacts
As mentioned above, the Panel considers that the impact of IFPRI's research in a practical sense depends on two conditions First, the research must be relevant to the problems at hand, i.e., the perceived priority issues and options faced by the countries to which the research is addressed. Given that necessary condition, the impact then is the result of how well and how widely the research results - either substantive results or methods and techniques - are extended and integrated into the target country research and policy arenas. This is where the outreach function becomes a critical one (see Section 2.5).
The issue of relevance of IFPRI's work in its various research divisions was discussed under each of the division headings in Chapter 2. The general conclusion that emerges is that nearly all of IFPRI's chosen topics during this MTP are of high priority and very relevant to the agricultural, food, nutrition, and natural resources issues faced by developing countries. Thus, in terms of the discussion of impacts, the Panel concludes that the first necessary condition for having significant impact has been met in IFPRI; it is working on issues and research methods that are relevant to resolving the policy issues that exist in developing countries. Below we discuss the second dimension - the effectiveness of IFPRI's extension of its research and technical knowledge to the relevant actors in the research and policy arenas of its target countries and regions.
The Panel believes that a reasonable approach to, and emphasis on impact assessment is being taken by IFPRI. On the one hand, it is at this stage focusing on intermediate impacts, recognising that final impacts on poverty alleviation and sustainable development are difficult if not impossible to measure at this stage in our understanding of the processes involved. On the other hand, IFPRI is moving ahead aggressively to develop with its partners further conceptual underpinnings and methods for assessing the impacts of policy research at increasingly more distant points along the continuum from research input, through research output, transfer, and ultimate use in policies that contribute to poverty alleviation, food security and environmental protection.
While the Panel agrees in general with this approach, it also wishes to point to the need for IFPRI to devote more effort to developing effective milestones for all its projects, i.e., key intermediate targets necessary for achieving and/or delivering a project's output within an agreed timeframe. Such milestones along the research path indicate whether in fact IFPRI is moving towards achievement of the ultimate objectives of the research projects. Such milestones could include the holding of training sessions, workshops, and conferences, reference to IFPRI research in local media sources, number of persons trained at given levels, number of publications and papers, and so forth.
At present, IFPRI is exploring its intermediate impacts at the stage of its outputs - its publications, training courses, and outreach activities. Thus, IFPRI recently has been involved in a number of activities that further an understanding of its publications and the audiences and uses of its publications. It has been exploring through an independent survey organization the nature of its readers and their satisfaction with its written outputs; it has been looking at the use of its science output by other researchers; and it has a continuing process of evaluating its courses by participants. It also is developing some anecdotal information that further links its activities, at least in a qualitative sense, to actual policy change. The evidence gathered so far from these various activities is discussed below together with the Panel's assessment of the activities and their results.
3.3.3 Impacts on Capacity Strengthening in Developing Countries
Capacity strengthening has become an increasingly important goal of IFPRI over the review period. What is the evidence of the impacts of such activity? First, one proxy measure is the number of policy researchers that have been involved in such activity. Second, the impacts of IFPRI's written work - publications and other papers - can be assessed through reader surveys and through analysis of the use of IFPRI publications. The Panel considered a number of different measures of such intermediate impacts. The overall conclusion is that IFPRI is doing a good job, but that it could improve the impacts of its outreach activities as discussed below.
Training courses and other related activities. IFPRI has formal training activity associated with most of its research activity, in addition to its more informal approach of involving researchers from developing countries in training through association and joint work with IFPRI researchers. In the area of training, a number of examples of activity provide a perspective on the dimensions of IFPRI's involvement. For example, IFPRI conducted courses for more than 110 Malawi policy analysts and regional training for 30 participants from other Southern African countries. Virtually all the trained people are now working in governments in those countries. In Pakistan, IFPRI collaborated with the government in training more than 60 people in policy-related data collection and analysis, including econometrics; and data generated by IFPRI's collaborative project in Pakistan has been used in more than 100 master level dissertations related to food policy.
The Panel concludes that the anecdotal evidence available indicates that IFPRI is doing a good job in capacity strengthening, but that it could do a better and more consistent job of it, if it developed a more focused approach within the context and guidance of a general strategy for capacity strengthening and outreach.
The capacity strengthening impact from IFPRI's projects appear to be highly variable. Thus, some additional structuring of this function across the Institute could have benefits. In fact, the Panel notes that IFPRI intends to develop such focus and structure once it has its new OD fully staffed and operating. A key issue, as discussed elsewhere is generating researcher motivation to participate by building ownership for outreach into the research divisions.
IFPRI has recently commissioned three studies on its publications, one on research citations and two on readership surveys as described below:
Bibliometric Study of IFPRI Scientific Output: Citation Analysis Results. IFPRI recently completed a thorough study of the use of its scientific writings in English-speaking countries. Comments on the implications of this study regarding linkages between IFPRI scientists and other researchers in the field are provided in Section 2.5. As indicated, those linkages are good in the case of linkages with researchers in advanced institutions. One can thus infer that the impacts of IFPRI on the scholarly community of policy researchers are satisfactory.
However, the Panel notes that this bibliometric study of interactions was limited to the scientific output, and particularly to the journals included in the Science Citations Index and the Social Science Citations Index (SCI and SSCI). Further, the database includes few journals that publish in languages other than English and that come from the developing world. Thus, the picture that emerges provides indications of intermediate impacts in terms of use of IFPRI's scientific output mainly in developed countries, and considering a very narrow range of outlets and citation evidence.
IFPRI Readership Survey. In 1996, IFPRI commissioned a study to learn about readers' views on the Institute's publications. A four-page survey was mailed out in November 1996 to about one-third of the general mailing list and to all of the subscribers affiliated with the CGIAR, and by the time of writing the report 394 surveys had been returned (16%). Of these, the majority were from North America (34%) and Western Europe (20%), followed by Asia (17%), sub-Saharan Africa (14%) and Latin America (9%). The most regularly read IFPRI publications are Abstracts of Research Reports (65%), IFPRI Report (62%), 2020 Vision publication (56%) and Food Policy Reports (55%), The least read are the John Hopkins University Press publications (16%) The publications are found to be most useful for general interest, research and writing articles, but more than half also use the publication to prepare policy advice, formulate policy and for teaching and business purposes, 30% of respondents
believe the publications play a major role and 40% a minor role in helping developing countries devise their food policy. Only a third of respondents were aware that the 'IFPRI Newsletter' and Abstracts are available in other languages. The survey found that 63 percent of the respondents use the Internet now and 24 percent plan to do so in the next few years. Yet only 27 percent were aware of IFPRI's site on the World Wide Web and only 12 percent have accessed it. IFPRI have noted that this indicates that an effort should be made to promote awareness of the Web site. The mean age of the respondents to the survey was 50 years, which could mean that younger readers are accessing IFPRI's information electronically, IFPRI noted that this needs to be confirmed, and concludes that IFPRI should develop strategies and programmes to broaden its subscriber base to include younger people who are involved in food policy development and decision-making. The Panel supports this
conclusion.
A Survey of 2020 Vision Readers. This recent survey was independently carried out for IFPRI through a mail insert into the News and Views newsletter to 3,356 readers of whom 452 (13%) responded in time for inclusion. The majority of respondents were North American (32%) or Western European (20%), but 20% were from sub-Saharan Africa, and 14% Asian.
They were fairly equally divided between teachers, researchers, policy advisors and general managers working in higher education (34%), government (18%), non-government (14%) and research (13%) organizations, with 16% being affiliated with the CGIAR. As might be expected from the survey method the respondents were well aware of the publications, especially the 2020 briefs, News and Views and discussion papers. More telling is the response that they found the 2020 Vision publications to be useful, or very useful (74%), for general interest, formulating policy, research and article preparation and for stimulating dialogue within or outside their organization, and that they found the writing style and visual approach to be effective. The Panel concludes that although the audience is mainly North American and Western European, a relatively high proportion of the publications also reach readers in developing countries who find them very useful for policy and research purposes.
3.3.4 Case Studies of Impacts on Policy Decisions in Developing Countries
As mentioned above, a second way (in addition to capacity strengthening) that IFPRI can have an impact is through use of the substantive results of its research in actual policy debates and decisions. IFPRI has developed a number of anecdotal indications of its impacts on policy changes in its target countries. These indicators are limited to testimonials and correlations between IFPRI research results and policy changes. In some cases there are concrete indications that IFPRI outputs entered directly into policy debates. At the same time, IFPRI is careful not to focus on attribution of policy change to IFPRI research. That is for obvious reasons: A policymaker who makes a positive impact through policy change naturally is reluctant to give up ownership of the change by attributing it to IFPRI research. If IFPRI makes claim to the change, (i.e., suggests causal relationship between its research and the change), then it may risk reduced acceptance and future impact of its
work. (As an aside, if the policy change results in a negative impact, then attribution to IFPRI obviously would be much more likely).
A case study has just been completed of the association of IFPRI research with a critical decision made by Pakistan policymakers in 1987 to eliminate the wheat flour ration shops in Pakistan. The case study illuminates the workings of the policy process, examines the role of IFPRI's research in policy-making, and suggests how IFPRI might improve the relevance and impact of its research activities. The study was conducted in collaboration with the Pakistan Institute of Development Economics (PIDE) in Islamabad, Pakistan, and funded by a grant from the Dutch Government. The study is a first step in IFPRI's broader attempt to research and understand the role information in the policy process. The study also indicates, through the input of a number of Pakistani decisionmakers, that IFPRI output and involvement played a significant role in the policy change.
Less formal assessments have indicated similar results. For example, IFPRI work in Pakistan and Bangladesh was assessed by outside agencies to have resulted in a saving of 200 million dollars in fiscal costs. The research dealt with policy changes associated with ration shops, food subsidies, credit programmes and other policies related to food and agriculture. IFPRI research in Vietnam was utilized in policy changes even before it was published. This work related to liberalization of Vietnam's export quota system. In Mozambique, results from collaborative IFPRI research have formed the basis for current restructuring of a poverty relief programme. Famine prevention research results have been used by several countries, including Ethiopia and Sudan.
IFPRI should develop further case studies correlating its work to specific policy changes, in the context of a given hypothesis on the use of information in the policy process. As a focal point on policy impact, the Panel again commends IFPRI on its policy briefs. Comments and evidence from a wide variety of sources indicate that they are widely read and appreciated, Their impact remains to be assessed.
3.3.5 Concluding Comments
Based on the Panel's assessment, it concludes that:
First, definitive, quantitative assessment of the impacts of policy research on improvements in the human condition (poverty alleviation, food security, environmental improvement) is difficult if not impossible to do with the present state of knowledge. Thus, IFPRI should continue as it is to focus its empirical impact assessment work on intermediate outputs, using a variety of techniques as indicated above.
Second, IFPRI is doing a good job in terms of the advancement of the field of policy research impact assessment. It should continue to work in this area, making contributions as possible to the other centres in the CGIAR System and to the newly established CGIAR Impact Assessment and Evaluation Group (IAEG).
Third, IFPRI is addressing issues that are relevant to solving the key agricultural and food problems facing developing countries. Thus, its potential for more widespread impact in these countries is significant. However, to meet this potential IFPRI needs to focus more systematically on developing a strategic framework for its outreach activity. This brings us back to the recommendation made in Section 2.5 that suggests, in general agreement with the conclusion of the ICER, that IFPRI develop a more proactive, explicit, and systematic approach to integrating capacity strengthening directly into research projects. Accomplishing this implies development within IFPRI of a clear strategy for outreach and measurement of its impacts, strong support services, including improved communication capacity, incentives for research leaders and researchers to take on board outreach functions, and a culture that treats effective information dissemination and capacity strengthening as equal
objectives with research. Given the understandably strong career market orientation of most IFPRI researchers, this latter need will be a significant challenge, since an academic career focus dictates that the key output for the researcher is peer reviewed publications; and many of these will be rather distant from the priority information and capacity strengthening needs in developing countries.
The Panel recommends that with respect to Impact Assessment. IFPRI should:
a) continue to assess the impact of its activities mainly in terms of the outputs for which it can be held accountable (intermediate impacts of its publications and capacity strengthening efforts, for example);
b) continue its activities related to developing improved understanding of, and means for assessing, impacts of policy and social science research; and
c) develop further in-depth case studies of its impacts in partner countries, and also surveys of the use of its outputs in other, non-partner countries.
3.4. Research Environment
3.4.1 The Characteristics and Motivation of IFPRI's Research Staff
3.4.2 The Constraints on Individual Researchers
3.4.3 Interactions among Researchers
3.4.1 The Characteristics and Motivation of IFPRI's Research Staff
IFPRI's research staff is increasingly young, of high calibre, and highly motivated (in certain directions to be discussed below).
The typical IFPRI researcher is recruited from the U.S. and other developed countries' academic market (interpreting the term to include the more research-oriented parts of the World Bank). If, for any reason, he (38 out of 52 senior research and outreach staff are men) has to leave IFPRI, he would return to this market. He would also most likely belong to the economics profession, which dominates IFPRI's staff (of the senior research staff, 90 per cent are economists). All of these are true regardless of whether he was originally from a developed or a developing country (a quarter of the senior staff are from developing countries).
With these characteristics, IFPRI researchers are driven to maximize their value in the academic marketplace by responding to its demands. In one respect, IFPRI's Management has further reinforced this responsiveness by maintaining a limited term appointment. Consequently, the output from IFPRI's research staff has been of consistently high quality (see Section 3.2). In this respect, IFPRI has fulfilled an important part of CGIAR's mission: to bring the highest quality science to work on the problems of poverty.
But scientific quality is surely not the sole criterion by which IFPRI is to be judged, for if it were, we have the universities which can provide work of the same or better quality at a cheaper cost than IFPRI. IFPRI was set up precisely because the CGIAR's stakeholders expect more from it. They expect it to have an impact on the welfare of the poor people. They expect it to spread new ideas about policies to the governments of the world, to contribute to and stimulate policy debates within many developing countries, to participate in international debates concerning global policies, and a great deal more. And they expect it to find the finances to do these wonderful things, an exercise which is not entirely without cost.
From the point of view of the individual researcher, none of these activities will earn him additional kudos in the academic marketplace. It therefore falls on IFPRI's management to fashion a system of motivation within the Institute that will guide individual researchers somewhat away from a single-minded pursuit of their academic goals.
One method open to IFPRI's management is to bring in a different mix of skills to IFPRI's research divisions. It can reduce the heavy academic presence by bringing in, for example, people with extensive exposure to the process of policy-making in developing countries. At one time, IFPRI used to have more such personnel, but now that number is reduced to a few, all of whom are quite productive in the academic sense of the term. The Panel suggests that IFPRI makes a more concerted effort to recruit such personnel who have experience in policy-making and implementation.
Another option is for IFPRI to hire more non-economists. Of the 52 senior research and outreach staff, 46 are primarily economists. The non-economists include one nutritionist, epidemiologist, rural sociologist and political scientist, and two geographers. IFPRI has attempted over the years to hire in researchers in such other non-economist disciplines. These attempts have not been trouble-free, with lack of a critical mass leading to isolation, disaffection and departure, and some divisions have switched to hiring in expertise from the universities as and when needed. The advantage of external collaborators is that they maintain their own support system in their field of specialization, but access to their advice is less flexible unless they are long-term visitors and full integration into IFPRI work is less likely. The ICER addresses this issue of increasing diversity of methods, it commends IFPRI for being firmly rooted in economics and, although it recognizes the need
for greater diversity of staff, does not recommend increasing staff in other disciplines as the numbers needed to achieve a critical mass would be financially too great. It recognizes the problems IFPRI has had in the past with short-term consultancies and suggests partnerships with other high quality organizations not dominated by economists but working on similar issues. The Panel expects that IFPRI will have to experiment with different approaches before it attains a happy medium.
3.4.2 The Constraints on Individual Researchers
The first and most palpable constraint put on individual researchers is the requirement that they raise the bulk of their research funds. This certainly was not the wish of IFPRI's management, but was merely the consequence of the funding constraint faced by it, as IFPRI could obtain only half of its resources on an unrestricted basis. From the point of view of the staff, the fund-raising imposes a major burden, which in some cases is enormous - as much as a quarter or a third of their time.
Such a close relationship with the donors would make IFPRI researchers much more responsive to the donors, and therefore "relevant" (at least from the donor's point of view, if not necessarily the poor's or their governments'). There is a danger that such a decentralized system of fund-raising would lead to a highly opportunistic choice of research topics, and a gradual decline in IFPRI's status to that of a consulting house. IFPRI's management has effectively prevented such a development by requiring that all research activities in the Institute fall into one of the agreed-upon MPs or GRPs, which have undergone a thorough vetting both for content and method.
The second mechanism to influence research in the direction of the Institute's goals is the use of unrestricted funds. The Institute uses these revenues first of all to pay for the administrative overheads not covered by those charged to special projects (See Section 4.4.1). The remaining amount is then transferred to the research divisions in proportion to their shares as laid out in the Medium-Term Plan. Note that this proportionate topping up merely adds to the amount raised by each division, which amount may or may not be proportional to the priorities of the plan, depending on funding exigencies.
Once a division is allocated its share of the unrestricted funds, it then passes on these to the programme leaders, after deducting for its own administrative overheads. One division tends to allocate the amounts in proportion to the budgets shown in the MTP. The others tend to make up for the shortfalls of each programme, so as to maintain the programmatic integrity of the division - the "free-rider" disincentive problem being averted by peer pressure among a small group of about five or six persons. In both cases, the DG does not influence these division-level decisions, except to ensure that the process remains transparent.
Because the unrestricted funding available to IFPRI is not very large, the Management is quite constrained in its ability to maintain institute-wide programmatic integrity. Occasionally what is deemed very important by the Institute has gone unfunded for years. Thus far, the SMT, which oversees such decisions, has been extremely reluctant to play the gap filling role.
The third mechanism used by the Institute is the evaluation of the research personnel. At the beginning of each year, each research fellow submits his or her own work programme for that year, at the end of which a self-evaluation form is submitted (together with the following year's work programme). This procedure is used by the senior management to pass on the Institute's policies, as they pertain to the particular person. Thus, at present, the Director General is concerned about the low output of IFPRI Research Reports and has therefore let it be known that he will value the staffs contribution in that area highly in future evaluations.
IFPRI's management has thus effectively combined the use of incentives, peer pressure and negotiations to direct individual researchers somewhat away from a single-minded pursuit of academic excellence toward other goals that the Institute may deem important. The one area where researchers may be encouraged a little bit more is outreach. As discussed in Section 2.5, IFPRI needs considerable rethinking in this area. The Panel's suggestion there is toward a far more active participation of the researchers in outreach.
3.4.3 Interactions among Researchers
A productive research institute requires constant cross-fertilization of ideas among its personnel. The drive of each individual researcher to achieve academic excellence detracts somewhat from this goal, as interaction with fellow researchers take time away from their work, without clear gains. At IFPRI, there are brown-bag seminars that discuss some specialized topics among five or ten researchers, but other than this there is less of the sort of in-house seminars which discuss some broader policy issues which would bring different divisions together.
IFPRI does have policy seminars which also bring in outsiders. While such seminars may be useful as one of the many ways that IFPRI disseminates its results, they cannot be as successful in encouraging intra-IFPRI exchanges. Whatever inter-divisional cross-fertilization exists, is in the context of joint work on an MP or GRP, which as indicated in Chapter 2, is typically a collaboration among more than one division. Another very useful device is the annual Internal Program Review which has been an important means of communication within IFPRI.
The ideal that should be sought after in an institute the size of IFPRI is that every research fellow has a clear understanding of what other research fellows are working on. It is not our impression that this ideal has been attained or has neared attainment. This is surprising as IFPRI's intellectual climate is dominated by economists, who comprise the overwhelming majority of the research staff. With such near uniformity of backgrounds, the low level of staff interaction is hard to explain.
3.5 Institutional and Scientist Linkages
3.5.1 IFPRI Linkages with Other CGIAR Centres: Systemwide and Other Joint Activities
3.5.2 Systemwide Activities
3.5.3 Other Inter-Centre Joint Activities
3.5.4 IFPRI Linkages with Non-CGIAR Advanced Institutions
3.5.5 IFPRI Linkages with Institutions and Individuals in Developing Countries
As mentioned in Chapter 1, one of the concerns that led to the Stripe Study on Policy Research in the System was the issue of IFPRI's linkages with other centres in the System. Some considered IFPRI as a "service" centre for the rest of the System. The Stripe Study identified two issues that it felt the IFPRI EPMR should address: Synergy that could be derived from inter-centre projects; and the role of IFPRI in ecoregional initiatives.
Additional questions have arisen since the Stripe Study concerning:
(i) the strength of IFPRI's linkages upstream with advanced policy research institutions relative to its linkages downstream with the more applied, developing country policy research and analysis groups; and
(ii) IFPRI's participation in Systemwide Activities. These various issues are addressed below.
At this point, it suffices to say that in general the Panel is satisfied that:
· IFPRI's linkages with other CGIAR Centres, both in terms of formal and informal linkages are good. It is one of the most active collaborators in the System;
· IFPRI's links to advanced institutions are excellent. It works closely and smoothly with a great variety of organizations, mainly in North America, but also in other parts of the world. IFPRI's work is widely cited in scholarly journals.
· IFPRI's linkages with less developed country policy research and analysis institutions are adequate in a relative sense, but could be strengthened, as in fact is the intention of IFPRI during the current MTP period.
3.5.1 IFPRI Linkages with Other CGIAR Centres: Systemwide and Other Joint Activities
A particular problem faced by IFPRI in the past, and that was flagged in the Stripe Study on Policy and Management Research, was the perception of other CGIAR Centres that IFPRI should serve in an advisory, and in some instances service role to the other centres. As an example, IFPRI received far more requests than could reasonably be handled from other CGIAR Centres to work with them, particularly in developing their ecoregional and other Systemwide policy-related programmes. It was necessary to develop a set of research priorities that best enabled IFPRI to meet its own MTP objectives, and also to only link up when funding and staff resources permitted. The most difficult cases are Systemwide activities that demanded frequent participation in planning meetings, but which never actually led to new sources of funding or to new research.
While this confusion existed a few years ago, other Centres now appear to accept the fact that IFPRI is not a service centre, and that IFPRI has a legitimate research mandate of its own that it must pursue. Probably, the Stripe Study helped to clarify the role of IFPRI in the System. IFPRI staff are less frustrated now than they were when the Stripe Study was initiated, since the Institution has clarified the conditions under which inter-centre activity will be initiated and terminated.
At the same time, the Panel points out that IFPRI probably is the most active CGIAR Centre in terms of inter-centre activity, since it has working relations with all the centres. Some of this interaction is informal, as in the case of an agricultural policy research priority-setting exercise in Malawi convened by IFPRI and its Malawi partners and involving some six other CGIAR Centres working in a collaborative mode to identify the particular policy related topics on which they had expertise and interest. Other interaction is formal, for example through shared staff appointments (e.g., with IIMI, ILRI, and ICARDA) and through participation in Systemwide activities.
Within the CG System, both IFPRI and ISNAR are the two centres who specialize in the areas of policy and management research. There are collaborative projects between them, but also some potential for overlaps. In a world in which the policy terrain is truly vast, and the resources and staff of any one Centre are small, some degree of duplication of efforts must be tolerated, and may even be desirable, as indeed the work of IFPRI and FAO on similar issues has shown. The recent Strategic Plan of ISNAR will provide the two centres an occasion to assess whether there is in fact more than a marginal overlap between the research agenda of the two centres. Some of the titles of research programmes look similar. On the other hand, the target audience of ISNAR is NARS, whereas IFPRI works primarily with economic research institutes, universities and ministries in developing countries. The range of issues and their implications for these audiences could be different even when the
themes look similar. Thus, for example, ISNAR may look at the implications of environmental policies for the management tasks of NARS, IFPRI may assess the implications for the concerned ministries (Agriculture, planning, etc). The Panel did not have access to the needed documents to probe this matter further. It is an issue for the IFPRI and ISNAR Boards to examine.
3.5.2 Systemwide Activities
At present, IFPRI is a partner in seven Systemwide programmes and convenor of two of these. These include:
· The Property Rights and Collective Action Systemwide Programme, convened by IFPRI, began in 1995. The goal of the programme is to contribute to policies and practices that alleviate rural poverty by analyzing and disseminating knowledge on the ways that property rights and collective action institutions influence the efficiency, equity, and sustainability of natural resource use. In addition to the 15 other CGIAR Centres that are participating, membership includes researchers at NARS, NGOs, and universities. Much of IFPRI's work in MP11, Property Rights and Collective Action in Natural Resource Management, will be carried out in conjunction with this Systemwide programme. One of the innovative activities initiated by IFPRI is the interactive network related to the programme. As indicated in the discussion of the EPTD, a number of publications are coming out of this activity already.
· The Agricultural Research Indicators Systemwide Initiative, co-convened by IFPRI and ISNAR, the objective of this initiative is to keep national, regional, and international decision-makers fully apprised of the global state of agricultural research and development investments and provide a periodic series of policy assessment on these trends. These activities are linked to IFPRI's work in Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Policy, GRP1. The initiative has not been funded at a level that would permit much activity. IFPRI and ISNAR are, therefore, no longer pursuing it as a Systemwide initiative, but have consolidated it into a normal collaborative research project between both Centres. The Panel believes that this is an activity that should be more centrally funded by the System, since it is producing information that will be useful across the System, and more to some other centres than to IFPRI.
· Alternatives to Slash-and-Burn Agriculture Systemwide Programme (ASB) is a worldwide research and development project to reduce tropical deforestation and promote rehabilitation of degraded land by providing farmers who practice slash-and-bum agriculture with alternative ways of using the land. IFPRI will continue to provide socioeconomic and policy guidance, particularly through its work in Brazil (MP8), in 1998-2000. IFPRI collaborates with other ASB research efforts that are under way in Indonesia and Cameroon.
· Water Management Systemwide Programme, convened by IIMI, is designed to increase the productivity of water in agriculture in an environment of growing scarcity and competition. IFPRI leads two of the four components (multiple users and river basin allocation issues). Up to now, this has not been an active initiative due to lack of funding, although through the EPTD there has been associated joint activity with IIMI, including a shared staff appointment. The water area in general is one in which the EPMR Panel believes there is opportunity for considerable expansion in work.
· Livestock Research Programme works to improve the sustainable production and utilization of feed resources. IFPRI will continue to participate by providing policy linkages to livestock issues. If the programme expands into dairy issues during the next MTP, IFPRI will increase its involvement through its work under MP7. IFPRI has a shared staff appointment with ILRI.
· Systemwide Genetic Resources Programme, formed in 1994, contributes to the global effort to conserve agricultural, forest, and aquatic genetic resources and promotes their use in ways that are consistent with the Convention on Biological Diversity. IFPRI is not very active in this activity at present, although the intention to become more active in it during the coming years. IFPRI is expected to provide the Systemwide programme support on policy and socio-economic issues in genetic resources conservation and use, particularly on intellectual property rights. These activities are linked to IFPRI's research work in agricultural research policy, GRP1.
· Desert Margins Initiative was started to increase the food security of poor, rural populations and contribute to poverty alleviation by halting or reversing desertification. IFPRI, one of eight CGIAR Centres involved in the initiative, provides research on policies and institutional options for improved natural resource management. This initiative is linked to IFPRI's work in less-favoured lands, GRP5.
In addition to the Systemwide programmes, IFPRI is involved in several of the ecoregional activities in the System, e.g., the Central American Hillsides, and the East African Highlands.
3.5.3 Other Inter-Centre Joint Activities
From 1992 to 1997, IFPRI has established numerous joint research activities with other CG Centres, involving joint fund raising and the hiring of jointly appointed staff in complementary to its involvement in the Systemwide programmes. For example, in the case of the EPTD, these include collaboration
(i) with ICARDA on the development of sustainable intensification strategies for the low-rainfall areas of North Africa and West Asia, with two jointly appointed Post-Doctoral Fellows based in Aleppo;
(ii) with ILRI on analysis of the links between property rights, risk and livestock production systems in Africa, with a jointly appointed Post-Doctoral Fellow based in Nairobi;
(iii) with ILRI on the development of sustainable intensification strategies for the East African Highlands, with a Post-Doctoral Fellow to be recruited later this year for placement in Ethiopia;
(iv) with CIAT on development of GIS methods and databases for impact analysis of past agricultural research in Latin America and for priority-setting for future agricultural research, with a jointly appointed senior research scientist based in Cali; and
(v) with IIMI on water management policies, with a jointly appointed senior researcher based in Washington. There are also joint projects with other Centres which do not involve jointly appointed staff.
The Panel commends IFPRI on its Inter-Centre activities, which range from intense collaboration to policy support in areas where IL. RI also has research ongoing or completed.
At the same time, the Panel cautions IFPRI on expanding such involvement, since the transactions costs can be substantial,
3.5.4 IFPRI Linkages with Non-CGIAR Advanced Institutions
IFPRI has good linkages with the policy research community in advanced institutions, both governmental and non-governmental ones. A recently completed citation analysis of IFPRI's work in relation to that of other similar institutions places IFPRI solidly in the middle in terms of output and citations by others in the scholarly journals in developed countries. Thus, the Panel concludes that IFPRI is doing well in this area. During the past five years, IFPRI staff have published more articles in peer reviewed scholarly journals than during any other period in the organization's history. Analysis of co-authorship - an indication of communication and linkage with other scholars - indicates that IFPRI is actively involved with leading scientists in the policy analysis research community. In the case of research reports, the links are strongest with researchers from developing countries. In the case of peer reviewed scholarly journals listed in the International Science Index,
the linkage is with World Bank and top echelons of U.S. academic research institutions in the field. The Panel notes that this fits well with the dual roles of IFPRI as a member of the policy research community of scholars as well as an active participant in the application-oriented policy communities, primarily in developing countries. IFPRI serves the role of a "knowledge intermediary" between the scholarly community and policy clienteles.
3.5.5 IFPRI Linkages with Institutions and Individuals in Developing Countries
IFPRI has relatively good links with policy researchers and their institutions in developing countries. The dilemma in many countries is the scarcity of such institutions and trained researchers. It is with that in mind that IFPRI has increased its focus on capacity strengthening and training, including longer term presence in key partner countries.
At present IFPRI has some 125 individual and institutional collaborators, with considerably more than half of these in developing countries. Over the 1998-2000 MTP period, IFPRI plans to increase this number to more that 250, with over 70 percent being with developing country entities.
In an attempt to gain some further insight on IFPRI collaboration with developing country researchers, the EPMR Panel gathered data on field projects and the production of working papers and other in country documents prepared under the project auspices by developing country researchers. This review led the Panel to the following conclusions: under the surface of IFPRI's scholarly output in formal publications - which quite naturally is dominated by IFPRI staff authorship - lies a large volume of country level working papers, briefs, theses, and other outputs, a majority of which are authored or co-authored by researchers from the partner countries. These provide evidence that complementary to the scholarly publications that are necessary to maintain IFPRI's credibility and links with the top minds in the policy research field, there is a strong IFPRI linkage to developing country policy researchers, most of them being formally or informally involved in the capacity building
activities undertaken by IFPRI research divisions.
The Panel believes that IFPRI is active with, and is providing benefits to the policy research communities both in its partner countries and in other developing countries. However, at the same time, the Panel urges IFPRI to intensify its efforts to improve its linkages with developing country researchers and to carry it on to the stage of involving more developing country researchers as co-authors in its own formal publication series. The benefit can be two ways: relatively less experienced developing country researchers can benefit from the experience such exacting activity involves, while IFPRI researchers can benefit from the special knowledge held by those from the countries with which the research deals. Thus, IFPRI's twin objectives of improved outreach and integration of such with research can benefit.
Improved capacity building depends naturally on more than jointly authoring papers and publications. An example of good collaborative links with national researchers and institutions in developing countries is that of the EPTD, which defines its working style in terms of such links. A good case is the Arresting Deforestation (MP-8) activities in Brazil, where the collaboration with EMBRAPA is sufficiently strong that it is helping to pay for the research, in addition to providing office space, vehicles and administrative support at the Amazon field site. Other examples are IFPRI's activities in Vietnam and Bangladesh which are being financed partly by the Governments of these countries.
<section>a</section>
Chapter 4 - Governance and Management
4.1 Governance
4.2 Leadership
4.3 Organization and Structure
4.4 Finance and Administration
4.1 Governance
Overview: The history of IFPRI serves as a useful illustration of the value of good governance. For the period during the late 1980s - when IFPRI appeared to have a strong staff, good programmes, and stable finances - the Board's job was perceived to be relatively easy, entailing little more than enjoying the collegiality of the group, applauding achievement, and providing advice when asked. When crises occurred in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Board was charged with finding solutions. To do this, it had to reassert itself, clarify its responsibilities, and rethink its composition and structure. To become a body with both the responsibility and the capacity to provide accountability, it had to re-establish its role as a governing body rather than an advisory body.
As of 1998, the IFPRI Board has the focus and the working habits of a strong governing body. Having worked since 1990 assiduously to come to a clear understanding of its role in the organization, the Board is conscious of its need to sustain organizational accountability and maintain its independence by carefully differentiating its role from that of Management. This consciousness is matched by that of the Director General, who acknowledges and supports the role of the Board.
The strengths of the Board are manifold. Its members are highly accomplished professionals whose reputations in their spheres of work enhance the credibility of IFPRI, and their work on the Board is attentive and engaged. Attendance at Board meetings is strong, preparation is taken seriously, and members feel free to engage the DG, the staff, and each other in serious and challenging discussions.
Approach: The Panel adopted the following four criteria against which to measure the Board's performance as the governing body of the Institute:
- Hiring and evaluating the Director General,
- Setting strategies and Institute-wide policies and monitoring their implementation,
- Fiscal oversight, and
- Board structure and operations.
Hiring and Evaluating the Director General: The Board identified and hired the current DG in 1992 after a thorough search, and it recently renewed his contract. This in itself is an expression of the Board's confidence in the person at the helm of the Institute. The DG's performance is assessed annually by the Board and forms the basis for decisions respecting both his tenure and remuneration The Board genuinely appreciates the DG's ability and respects his and his staffs accomplishments. The DG is careful in his relationship with the Board to avoid usurping their prerogatives.
Setting Strategy and Policy and Monitoring Implementation: Within the CGIAR System the boards are expected to guide the centres by clarifying their vision, setting strategies to accomplish that vision, approving institute-wide policies, and monitoring their implementation. However, the boards depend entirely on each centre's management for analyses and proposals in these areas and for information about progress toward achieving of agreed-upon objectives, This dependence on management for information and analyses can easily turn a board into a "rubber-stamping" body. To avoid this, a board needs to be actively engaged in the shaping of the centre's vision and strategy, even if there is no fundamental difference between the views of the board and management. Lack of participation in the articulation of fundamental principles and institutional directions encourages passivity on the part of a board, reduces ownership, and limits the potential of board members in their advocacy
and resource-development activities.
When a board, such as that of IFPRI, is composed of prominent individuals with enormous talent, experience, and diverse backgrounds, every minute of the board's time is a precious resource that should be used carefully to add the most value to the performance of the body it governs. A key area in which such a board can greatly contribute is in the formulation or review of the vision and strategy of the centre. Now that the necessary framework and mechanisms for the reorganization and reinvigoration of IFPRI are in place, the Panel believes that the IFPRI Board will be able to devote more time to fundamental issues of major importance to the future and long-term directions of the Institute.
Fiscal Oversight: Fiscal oversight is a principal responsibility of the Executive and Finance Committee, which takes its task seriously. The quality of this Committee's work is very high. In recent years the Committee's chairs have all been highly regarded and competent individuals who have led with rigour. For instance, at the February 1997 meeting, the Committee thoroughly discussed the selection of the auditor.
The Board meets once a year, with a second meeting every third year. The Board should consider holding two full meetings per year. Alternatively, and to balance the need for timeliness with the requirements of accountability, the Chair might consider the use of small ad hoc task forces assigned to work with the DG on time-sensitive issues to broaden participation in decision-making between Board meetings.
The Panel suggests that the Board review the adequacy of its current number of meetings.
Board Structure and Operations: The process of identifying and recruiting new Board members is exemplary. The Nominating Committee has been able to identify a strong set of potential candidates. The Committee is careful to view the Board's composition strategically and to recruit for diversity of all kinds, including the professional backgrounds of potential board members. As a result, the Board is comprised of men and women who represent a cross-section of ages and geographic areas, and includes people with backgrounds and perspectives of increasing importance to IFPRI.
The Panel makes the following observations on the Board's structure and operations:
· The Panel has already stressed in this document the need for more frequent meetings of the Board. This obviously would tax the members, the staff, and the budget. But the awkward truth is that a Board primarily fulfils its responsibilities when it meets. By creating committees and task forces, a board is only delegating work, not relinquishing responsibility or accountability.
· IFPRI is fortunate in that it currently functions in a manner that does not demand much attention from its Board, but a board loses some of the habits of good governance unless it is given opportunities to reinforce and practice them.
· On a related note, the agenda for the February 1997 Executive and Finance Committee meeting that preceded the Board meeting almost wholly overlapped that of the full Board. Some members of the full Board justly complained about revisiting decisions that had already been made. This Committee should rethink the agenda for its meetings, and clarify whether its job is to approve proposals or make recommendations to the full Board.
· The work of IFPRI's Board is immeasurably enhanced by the level of staff support available to it. The assignment of a competent staff person as secretary to the Board has enabled the Board to receive the kind of information and attention it needs.
The Board has not assessed its own functions and operations since the overhaul of governance in 1990-91. As the membership of the Board is completely new since that time, and as IFPRI is gearing up for new challenges in the millenium, a self-assessment would be in order.
The Panel suggests that the Board conduct a self-assessment of its role and operations.
4.2 Leadership
The DG of IFPRI has been at the helm of the Institute since 1992. His vision, leadership, and participatory management style have been instrumental in contributing to the successful growth of the Institute. His intellectual leadership and vision led to the development of the highly acclaimed and well-received 2020 Vision Initiative. He has selected and maintained able staff and has managed the Institute in an open fashion, with due regard to the need for control of resources and programme quality.
The quality of the DG's leadership is reflected in several ways throughout the Institute, including the development of appropriate and effective management systems for both the programme and administration divisions; in delegation to and sharing of responsibilities with directors, unit heads, and staff; in the creation of task forces and committees to foster team building and team work; and through the introduction of incentive structures.
Table 4.1 Members of the IFPRI Board of Trustees
4.3 Organization and Structure
IFPRI is organized along functional lines with four programme divisions, an outreach division, and a finance and administration division (Figure 4.1). Each division is headed by a director. These six directors, along with the DG, constitute the Senior Management Team (SMT).
Since its formation in 1992, the SMT's operating effectiveness and decision-making procedures continue to evolve and improve. The SMT has become a much more cohesive, coherent management team, which benefits the whole institution. The decision-making and management procedures have become more transparent and participatory. This decentralized yet tightly co-ordinated management style has provided the flexibility that allows IFPRI to implement its research and outreach activities more effectively and efficiently.
The management of the Institute's staff and resources is decentralized, with authority and responsibility delegated to directors, unit heads, senior researchers, and project leaders.
Co-ordinating mechanisms include committees, task forces, teamwork, and clearly delineated roles and responsibilities, along with associated incentive programmes. Fund raising is also decentralized, with the bulk of restricted fund raising being delegated to directors and research scientists, whereas unrestricted fund-raising tends to remain a function of the DG's office.
One of the key organizational issues is time management, characterized as time "famine" within the Institute, and its associated impact on staff morale. However, this and most other organizational culture issues are not unique to IFPRI. In fact, they are shared by universities and other research institutes.
To address the problems of time famine and staff morale, IFPRI Management initiated an Organizational Strengthening Programme (OSP) in 1996 with a general objective to review programmatic goals, activities, and organizational issues. At the time of this review, the OSP was quite advanced. Several of the recommendations that have emerged, have already been implemented.
The Panel strongly supports the initiative taken by IFPRI to address organizational culture issues, but also notes that a great deal of time and energy are being spent by IFPRI on this and similar exercises and they all involve extensive and comprehensive consultations involving staff at all levels.
4.4 Finance and Administration
4.4.1 Finance
4.4.2 Human Resources
4.4.3 Computer Services
4.4.4 Administrative Services
Since 1992, IFPRI's Finance and Administration Division has undergone a number of changes that have both improved the functions of its units and, at times, affected its ability to operate at an optimal level. During 1995-1996, several senior staff from this division left the Institute for various reasons. These staffing shortfalls left the units strained and unable to provide consistently high levels of service. However, the Division is rebuilding and the services it provides are improving. Its new director, hired in 1997, is making the provision of enhanced services to the research and outreach staff his top priority. The Chief Financial Officer (CFO), appointed in late 1996, is reassessing the roles and responsibilities of her staff to strengthen the functioning of the Finance Unit. The new head of Human Resources, appointed in mid 1997, is focusing on rebuilding her staff in order to enhance responsiveness to staffs human resource concerns, on simplifying IFPRI's
personnel manual, and on improving services to outposted staff. Computer Services has benefited from a much more stable staffing situation with the same unit head for several years.
In the Panel's opinion, the Division is now well structured and has adequate, competent staff to serve the needs of its internal and external clients.
Figure 4.1: IFPRI Organizational Chart
4.4.1 Finance
Growth/Funding: From 1992 through 1996 IFPRI's financial health improved considerably and funding increased by an average of 25 percent. By the end of 1997 it will have increased by nearly 40 percent over 1992. This increase is largely attributable to growth in the number of donors from 32 in 1992 to 43 in 1997. IFPRI believes that its growth will level off at roughly US$ 19 million in 1998, a level which it feels is manageable, given its current programmes and human resources (See Figure 4.2).
The proportion of restricted to unrestricted funding has increased slightly over the same time period, with the ratio levelling off at roughly even in 1997. This ratio is somewhat typical of the current trend within the CG System.
Operating Reserves: Based on draft 1997 financial statements, IFPRI's operating reserve (formerly called working capital) currently exceeds US$ 2.4 million (an increase from US$ 0.280 million in 1992) and represents 65 percent of total unrestricted net assets. This operating reserve is equivalent to approximately 50 days' worth of operating expenses. It is important to note that cash assets (cash and short-term investments), although subject to seasonal fluctuation, are in excess of the operating reserve. IFPRI has not had to resort to short-term borrowing to fund its operations since 1993. The Panel considers the operating reserve to be prudently managed.
Overhead Costs: Budgeted indirect costs at IFPRI are 40 percent for headquarters and 20 percent for offsite activities. The Institute has an aggressive policy in which all restricted projects are budgeted on a full-cost-recovery basis. Thus, costs such as staff time, travel, and others related to restricted projects are allocated on a charge-back basis, and proposals to donors are fully costed out with direct and indirect costs clearly defined. This practice compares favourably with those of other Centres within the CG System. This approach clearly identifies any decision to co-finance restricted grants with unrestricted funding. The CFO has set as a priority the overall review of the Institute's cost accounting structure with the objective of identifying any indirect costs that can be more causally related to direct project costs. Funding proposals to donors are also carefully reviewed by the Finance and Administration Division, and the DG signs off on them before they are
sent out. The Panel endorses this practice of charge-backs.
Management of Funds: IFPRI's investment guidelines were approved by the Board of Trustees in December 1994 and govern the investment of in-hand funds above one month's operating expenses; the guidelines encourage low-risk investments with no more than 10 percent of the financial portfolio in obligations of any one issuer, other than money market funds, government agencies, and repurchase agreements, and are therefore consistent with prudent cash-management practices.
Figure 4.2 IFPRI's Unrestricted and Restricted Support for 1990-1998
Audit Function: IFPRI does not have an internal audit unit, in large part because its operation is relatively small. It does not own its offices, nor does it have laboratories, housing and training facilities, or other infrastructural facilities typically found in international centres. It discharges the internal audit function through a series of periodic test audits conducted by external auditors. The current external auditing firm, KPMG Peat Marwick, conducted a test audit in late 1997. No major issues were highlighted, but several recommendations were made. Most of these were accepted by Management and the Board and are being implemented.
It is the Panel's view that the audit function receives sufficient attention by the Board. After examining the auditor's reports and meeting with the auditors, the Panel also concluded that the audit functions were adequately performed at IFPRI and that there were no major issues of concern.
Travel Costs: Travel costs represent a significant proportion of the Institute's overall budget - 10 percent in 1996. The CGIAR average for the same year was 7 percent, with the highest Centre at 13 percent and the lowest at 5 percent. The Panel queried the appearance that travel costs are higher at IFPRI. The principal reason given was that the Institute does most of its research offsite in developing countries (contrary to most other Centres, which have onsite research facilities). In addition, a higher percentage of costs associated with travel tends to be a function of the size of a Centre's budget: the larger the Centre, the lower the percentage. It should be noted that in 1996, 63 percent of total travel costs were direct charges to restricted projects. The Panel reviewed the Institute's travel policy and found it to be clear and well enforced, with the bulk of travel being done by the most economical means. A fare audit recently commissioned by the Travel Task Force
revealed that over a two-month period between 1 June and 31 July 1997, 37 out of 40 fares were offered by the Institute's travel agency at the best fare available.
In the Panel's view the travel policy and procedures of the Institute are appropriate.
4.4.2 Human Resources
Staff Composition and Balance: Staff composition and balance was highlighted in the preceding EPMRs, and it is an area in which the Board and Management of IFPRI have made significant attempts to correct imbalances.
The number of IFPRI staff has grown 23 percent, from 112 in 1992 to 138, in 1997, A downward trend was reversed in 1994 and the number of staff has grown each year since then. IFPRI has also improved the gender balance of its senior staff, largely through a concerted effort to increase the number of women in its applicant pool. In 1992, approximately 8 percent of the applicants for senior positions at IFPRI were women. By 1997, this number had jumped dramatically to approximately 47 percent, double the rate of all other Centres. As a result, women comprised 15 percent of the senior research staff in 1992 and over 25 percent by December 1997 (See Table 4.2).
The Panel benefitted from a special study commissioned by IFPRI 'Gender and Workplace Issues at IFPRI'. In its findings, it was reported that 43 percent of the senior administrative staff in 1992 were women, and by the end of 1997 this figure had risen to 80 percent. Data from a study funded by the CGIAR Gender Programme show that the percentage of CIFOR's and IFPRI's internationally recruited staff that are women are about the same (25 percent), well above all other CGIAR Centres.
IFPRI is striving to increase the number of senior staff from developing countries, as the ratio between developing and developed countries has not improved since 1992. Table 4.3 shows the current distribution of staff by nationality and country of origin.
The Institute's senior management can be improved in terms of gender and nationality balance. Currently, the SMT consists of five directors and the DG, all of whom are male, and four of whom are from the North. One position is currently vacant, that of the director of the Outreach Programme. Recruitment to fill this position is underway.
Recruitment: Recruitment policies and procedures are well designed and generally consistent with those in other CG Centres. All international positions are filled through a highly competitive process, with due regard to international balance and gender. The direct-hire approach is seldom used, but when it is, carefully controlled procedures and processes are followed.
International recruitment is a lengthy process, taking six to ten months to complete. Some positions attract large numbers of candidates, which accounts in part for the length of time required to complete the process. For example, the position of director of Finance and Administration attracted 250 applicants; the director of the Outreach Division attracted 160, and the Information Programme head position attracted 150. The numbers for other internationally recruited staff- such as research and postdoctoral fellows - are not as dramatic: applicants ranged from 14 to 25 for the period from January 1996 to June 1997.
The Institute believes that the length of the recruitment process continues to be a problem and will consider it within the framework of the Organizational Strengthening Programme mentioned earlier.
The attrition rate at IFPRI is reasonable. It averaged 15 percent over the past three years, with approximately one quarter of the departing staff coming from the ranks of the internationally-recruited.
Classification: The Institute's classification system is consistent with that used by comparable institutions in the United States It is regularly reviewed and updated as required, with appropriate benchmarking to ensure its relevance and competitiveness. The classification system appears to adequately meet the needs of internationally recruited staff, at least based on the Institute's ability to attract and retain staff.
Compensation: The Institute's compensation system is maintained and updated annually to ensure both local and international market competitiveness. Comprehensive salary surveys are conducted annually to establish a proper basis of comparison against other employers in the Washington, D.C. area and the international market. The Institute attempts to maintain itself in the better employer category within the D.C. market, and its benefits package is better than that of most local institutions. However, its allowance structure is not entirely comparable to that of other CG Centres, as IFPRI staff are not paid housing and other allowances.
It is the view of the Panel that the compensation package offered by IFPRI is adequate to attract and retain high quality staff.
Performance Appraisal: IFPRI has a useful performance appraisal system with guidelines that are concise and to the point for different staff groupings. Currently, the Institute is examining the possibility of introducing a multisource feedback system (360 degree) of performance appraisal. This more complex system could provide an additional tool to monitor skills and achievements in areas such as collaboration and teamwork, communication with internal staff and collaborators, participation in training activities, and supervision of staff, all areas which were identified as issues to be addressed in the organizational strengthening effort described earlier.
However, in view of the additional burden this kind of system puts on all concerned, along with additional time needed for each appraisal, IFPRI should carefully weigh the benefits and the costs. As two other Centres are interested in testing such a system, IFPRI should compare notes with them before making a final decision on this issue.
Personnel Policies and Procedures: IFPRI revised and expanded its personnel manual in 1992. Now all policies, rules, regulations, and procedures for the Institute are combined into one comprehensive document. New policies approved by Management are first distributed electronically to staff. In addition, general policies, such as the full array of benefits to which employees are entitled, are described in more detail in a series of booklets available to all staff. The Personnel Manual will soon be put on the internal local area network.
Table 4.2: IFPRI Staff by Gender (Salaried and Hourly^1 Staff Members) December 31, 1997
Table 4.3: IFPRI STAFF BY NATIONALITY (Salary and Hourly Staff Members) As of December 31, 1997
Country of Nationality
Senior Staff
Support Staff
Total Staff
Argentina
Australia
Bangladesh
Belgium
Canada
China
Denmark
Egypt
Ethiopia
France
Germany
Honduras
Hong Kong
India
Italy
Japan
Kenya
Lebanon
Malaysia
Nepal
Netherlands
Pakistan
Philippines
Senegal
Sweden
Tunisia
United Kingdom
U.S.A.
Total
The Institute's Conflict of Interest Policy is incorporated into the Board Handbook and the Personnel Manual. The DG has the ultimate responsibility for its application and enforcement, although the Head of Human Resources generally serves as the first contact point. The DG reports to the Board on conflict-of-interest issues as necessary. In addition, the Chair of the Board is responsible for the enforcement of the policy among the membership of the Board.
A policy area requiring improvement is that of personnel matters of outposted staff. Staff interviewed during the course of this review expressed the view that their briefing was not as complete as expected. More important, the Panel noted that conditions and benefits tend to vary between individuals, depending on the location of their assignments (national institutes versus sister CG Centres, for example) and the existence or lack of country agreements.
The Panel suggests that IFPRI develop more standardized policies and procedures with respect to outposting, including the negotiating of country agreements.
4.4.3 Computer Services
The computer services unit continues to provide state-of-the-art equipment and software for IFPRI staff in order to enhance the Institute's food policy research capabilities and results. In 1993, IFPRI converted from stand-alone computers to a fully networked system, allowing staff to share files and communicate through an electronic mail system. The new electronic mail system has further facilitated IFPRI's ability to communicate and collaborate both inside and outside the Institute. The Institute owns its computer equipment and is not considering leasing arrangements at this time.
Computer equipment is replaced on a regular basis, with new equipment assigned to programme staff, and older, less powerful equipment assigned to persons who do not need the same level of capacity for their everyday needs. Thus, the effective life of computers is extended, which tends to be more cost-effective.
All staff currently have access to Institute-wide information files, accessible through the computer network. However, IFPRI has no comprehensive strategy for managing its administrative information. Most information collected or distributed by staff is stored in inconsistent and unstructured formats that are difficult to use and extract. These problems were identified by Management as part of the OSP and are being addressed in the following ways by computer services:
· a management information system is being developed as a priority with a target completion date of May 1998;
· support is being given to the finance unit to develop and upgrade the management reporting capability of the financial system; and
· it is intended to extend the use of the microsoft outlook-exchange programme to gradually improve the management of administrative data.
The Panel supports the Institute's initiatives to enhance its management information systems.
4.4.4 Administrative Services
The Administrative Services Unit is relatively small and low cost, at least in comparison to those of other Centres with larger infrastructures. The only issue of note at this time is that of the forthcoming move of IFPRI in May 1998 to another building in the Washington, D.C. area. The move is precipitated in large part by the increasingly unacceptable physical climate within the building (air flow and quality, poor heating and ventilation, poor space expansion prospects, and so forth). The reasons for this move, along with the associated costs and implications, were reviewed and approved by the Board of Trustees at meetings in 1996 and 1997. During these deliberations, the Board also considered the possibility of a move to an overseas location, but decided to defer any action on it.
Though there are costs associated with terminating the current lease prematurely, these will be offset largely by the more favourable conditions of the new lease which will make the long-term cost per square foot over the life of the lease roughly equivalent to current costs, with the added advantage of more state-of-the-art facilities with expansion potential. The Panel is satisfied that the move has been carefully considered by both Management and the Board.
<section>b</section>
Chapter 5 - Conclusions and Emerging Challenges
5.1 Conclusions
5.2 IFPRI in the 21st Century: Emerging Challenges
The Panel endorses the findings of the Stripe Study on Policy and Management Research that the CGIAR's involvement in this area is "important (1) for the System itself and for servicing the needs of its clients and partners, (2) to maximize the impact of technological innovations in agriculture on the welfare of humanity, and (3) to provide solutions to some of the broader problems addressed by the CG, such as the reduction of rural poverty, improvement in human nutrition, and sustainable ecoregional development."
The Panel reaffirms the need for strong food policy research activity in the CGIAR and has no doubt that IFPRI will continue to play a significant role in this area.
The Panel also agrees with the Stripe Study that there are important changes which may call for a reorientation of CG policy research in the future.
5.1 Conclusions
The major conclusions of the Panel and their implications are as follows:
1. The overall performance of IFPRI has been impressive during the period under review. It has achieved a good balance between the quality and relevance of research, strong linkages with other CG Centres and developing country institutions, initiation and formalization of multiple outreach activities to enhance the impact of its policy research, and a significant expansion of financial and human resources. The gender balance at the senior research staff level has improved, but there has been no improvement in the proportion of developing country professionals at that level. IFPRI's published outputs have increased more in respect of articles in major professional journals than by way of research reports. The Panel has learned, however, that a large number of draft research reports are in the pipeline and that the output in terms of research reports will more than double in the next two years.
2. IFPRI's 2020 initiative has received well deserved praise internationally for its timely focus on the likely global trends and their policy implications, drawing upon the Centre's past work and other relevant evidence from elsewhere. Within IFPRI, it offered an innovative approach towards the synthesis and integration of the different streams of outputs and insights from its various divisions and for the effective use of the resulting information to achieve greater visibility for the Centre and attract the attention of donors as well as developing country policy makers. The Panel is, however, of the view that IFPRI should set realistic targets for its involvement in the follow-up activities being planned at country and regional levels, given the limited analytical and organizational capabilities of its potential collaborators.
3. The leadership of the Centre has done an outstanding job of restoring organizational cohesion, morale and stability after a period of internal turmoil and uncertainty. The Director General, Board of Trustees, the Senior Management Team and the entire staff deserve credit for this turnaround and for working together to steadily expand and strengthen the Centre's output, productivity and impact. IFPRI now has effective governance. The initiative under way for further organizational strengthening is a step in the right direction.
4. IFPRI's current mission and priorities are on the whole consistent with CG goals and priorities. The research issues on its agenda and its major research outputs are pertinent to the tasks of poverty alleviation and the achievement of food security and environmental sustainability in developing countries. Its resource allocation among major research programs reaffirms this finding. But the strategy IFPRI has set for itself is also more complex and demanding than that of conventional research organizations because of its dual emphasis on both research and outreach. The integration of the strands of research and outreach is by no means simple or self sustaining, and will call for careful planning, orchestration and monitoring by senior management. Its nurturing will require a sensitive balancing of the professional commitment to quality and standards with the concern for enhancing the Centre's influence on developing country policies.
5. The Panel has offered a number of suggestions to improve the integration of research and outreach in IFPRI. Research and outreach should not be seen as separate activities conducted by two separate groups. Much of the responsibility for outreach should be embedded within research activities. IFPRI can enhance the quality of the integration and increase the relevance of its work by synthesizing more of its outputs for the benefit of its policy audiences. It needs to take advantage of new ways to listen to and incorporate developing country concerns in its programmes. It is necessary to bring on board more persons who combine research and policy experience, especially developing country professionals, at the senior staff level. The Centre should define the scope and limits of its outreach function more carefully and put in place organizational mechanisms to achieve effective integration with research so as to maximize institutional cohesion and create a greater sense of
identification with the new challenges being placed before the staff.
5.2 IFPRI in the 21st Century: Emerging Challenges
The original rationale for establishing IFPRI as a centre for policy research was that it complements the work of other CG Centres and contributes to the creation of supportive policy environments in countries for the effective utilization of their research results. In the Panel's view, this rationale will continue to be valid in the 21^st century. Policy distortions at the macro and sectoral levels, dysfunctional incentive structures and inefficient allocation of scarce resources are bound to recur or persist in many countries in the years to come. These tend to act as barriers to the diffusion and adoption of new technologies. IFPRI's research and outreach could be expected to influence the policy debate on these and related issues and assist in creating and strengthening the capacity of developing countries to resolve them more effectively over time.
IFPRI has positioned itself well to deal with major policy issues currently confronting the world in the areas of agriculture, food security, and environmental sustainability. Through its 2020 Vision activity, it also has identified a number of issues that are likely to emerge in the future. IFPRI plans to continue the global activity, filling in gaps related to a number of issues identified in the first round of papers. The Panel endorses this activity as well as IFPRI's attempt to secure funds for problem analysis work on policy issues that currently do not attract funding, but which IFPRI and many of its partners in the CGIAR believe will emerge as major issues in the 21^st Century.
Developing countries are likely to face much greater uncertainties in their international environments as a result of new phenomena such as globalization, information explosion and financial integration. The interactions between these forces will accelerate the response time for decisions and actions that will be required of developing country governments and their policy makers. The East Asian economic crisis is the latest illustration of the implications of these developments. The volume and direction of trade and capital flows, patterns of financial sector regulations, etc., could shift in unexpected ways as a result of such crises. These are, of course, macro economic and political issues and IFPRI may not claim expertise in these areas. But their implications for vulnerable populations are enormous. Among those who can be hurt most in the process are the poor. Developing countries will gain most from the insights and policy advice they can get to grapple with these
problems. Simultaneously, capacity building in policy research that occurs in these countries, partly as a result of IFPRI's own work, will make it less necessary for them to depend on outside help to answer many of the standard and predictable policy issues. The gap that will remain is the inability of countries to effectively deal with a set of issues that are global or regional and that can appear with little warning. Clearly these developments will take some time to make their impact felt. As these trends emerge more clearly, it may be necessary for IFPRI to reposition its research to be of more effective assistance to developing countries on the more global issues that the former are unable to cope with on their own;
IFPRI already is dealing with many of the emerging and mounting issues, such as water as the key scarce resource in the 21^st century, and property rights issues, especially intellectual property rights, but also land and resource use rights. IFPRI is pursuing to some extent issues related to globalization policies, as well as the implications of privatization for agricultural development in developing countries (e.g., the implications from the fact that most progress in biotechnology is contained in proprietary outlets). In addition, the Stripe Study on Policy Research indicated several broad areas that it saw emerging related to
(i) the "expansion of the CGIAR and its goals... and the needs for more comprehensive social science analyses than the types of analyses typically promoted by centres in support of technology design" and other functions of the centres; and
(ii) "descaling of the role of the state implies emergence of a set of new actors and institutions in research and development...." The Panel agrees with the importance of all of the areas mentioned.
In addition to the topics mentioned above, the EPMR Panel considers that the following research and management themes also merit consideration by IFPRI in its forward looking assessment of future policy research and outreach needs:
1. Inter-Sectoral Opportunities and Needs
As rural populations in most parts of the developing world expand, particularly in rainfed agricultural areas, solutions other than agricultural ones will have to be found to deal with the poverty alleviation, food security and environmental sustainability objectives. These solutions may include out-migration, creation of alternative sources of off-farm employment, new technologies for post-harvest activity, and development of alternative land uses. In all cases, the alternative solutions will have to be blended and integrated with basic agricultural improvements - productivity enhancing and resource conserving technologies - to ensure complementarity of activities and a unified approach to poverty alleviation, food security, and environmental sustainability. Thus, IFPRI will have a central role and it may find that it needs to position itself better to deal with the integration of agriculture and natural resources with the research needed to find non-complementary
agricultural solutions. In sum, the Panel sees a greater need for IFPRI to become involved in inter-sectoral issues as it enters into the 21^st Century.
2. Networks of Learning
As recognized by IFPRI (including from evidence already gathered in its reader survey) it must position itself on the forefront of food policy research more effectively to (i) transfer information and knowledge, (ii) interact with clients and potential clients; (iii) augment capacity of developing country policy researchers and analysts to address critical local issues; and (iv) strengthen interactions among policy researchers, and among policy researchers and others in the CGIAR System. In fact, IFPRI has begun using the worldwide web in many of these areas. Given the steady expansion of access to the internet in developing countries, the Panel strongly supports IFPRI's intentions to move more aggressively into this area. In this regard, IFPRI should set up a more formal mechanism to interact with experts in this area who already have developed the systems to take advantage of the power of the web. This should be an area where funds would be readily available, perhaps
through unconventional sources, for IFPRI.
Work in all of these areas also will require foresight on the part of the donors. Funding will need to be forthcoming to permit IFPRI to address any of the above themes and to position itself better in terms of being able to address in a timely fashion the emerging issues as they take on priority in a developing country context.
3. Balancing Scientific Rigour and Impact
Over the years, IFPRI has achieved a well deserved reputation for its scientific rigour in the area of policy research. Unlike other scientific and crop oriented CG Centres, it is not easy for IFPRI to establish measurable links between research inputs and their impacts. The tension between the push for scientific rigour and the need to make an impact can easily tilt in favour of the former in the absence of such measures. Its research divisions are now based largely on sub-disciplinary roots. There are even dominant tools associated with different divisions. Thus FCND is largely a survey using group. EPTD has its roots in production economics. MSSD is biased towards partial equilibrium models. TMD is known for its general equilibrium models. The problem is rendered even more difficult because of the relative newness of its information and outreach efforts. It is imperative, therefore, that IFPRI focus ever more sharply on the task of increasing the impact and relevance of
its research to developing country policy makers through more effective research-outreach integration. No impact can be made without the target audiences being aware of the research results or being able to understand or adapt them to their contexts. Clearly, the starting point has to be the clarification of the concept and scope of outreach more fully by highlighting the proposed tasks on both demand and supply sides. The Panel has made a number of suggestions in this regard.
IFPRI can nudge its research staff in several other ways to work towards a better balance between rigour and relevance in order to maximize its overall impact. It could encourage researchers to publish more often in developing country journals and other media, with local co-authors wherever possible. It could design schemes to assist doctoral students working in developing country universities to do research at IFPRI under proper supervision for short periods. IFPRI could also motivate researchers to pay greater attention to impact by recognizing outstanding outreach work.
4. The Board's Role in Ensuring Relevance and Impact
In the course of this report, the Panel has proposed a number of suggestions for the Board to consider. IFPRI's Board consists of several eminent persons with considerable policy experience and vast knowledge of different regions and countries. The staff, on the other hand, is limited in terms of such knowledge and first hand experience in countries. The Board's active role in both raising issues of relevance and impact in the context of the research agenda and monitoring the progress on these fronts will be of great value in improving IFPRI's effectiveness and a learning experience for the staff. In contrast, the processes available for ensuring research quality and rigour are easier to define and manage.
In view of the directional changes implied in the Panel's proposals on the scope and integration of IFPRI's research and outreach activities, the Panel suggests that IFPRI Board and Management review its current strategy and revise or adapt it to suitably reflect the proposed changes.
The Panel recommends that IFPRI, in order to enhance the relevance of its activities, should:
a) further strengthen its mechanisms for priority setting by seeking new ways to identify and take account of developing country policy concerns;
b) diversify its skill mix by recruiting persons with both research and policy experience, with greater flexibility in appointments, if necessary.
The Panel further recommends that:
the IFPRI Board should play a more active role in ensuring and monitoring the relevance and impact of the Institute's work.
<section>c</section>
Acknowledgements
The Chair and Members of the EPMR Panel would like to express their sincere appreciation to the Board, Management and staff of IFPRI for their generous support during all stages of the review. Particular thanks are due to Dr. Per Pinstrup-Andersen, Director General, for his constructive and cheerful attitude throughout the process. He and his wife, Birgit, were also marvelous hosts. The Panel is also grateful for the strong support received from the Board Chair, Dr. Martin Piñeiro, and the members of the Senior Management Team.
Stacy Roberts, Special Assistant to the Director General, served as focal point to the Review team and to the TAC Secretariat in the logistical and organisational aspects of the review. She did a great job with good humour and made sure that the Panel could do its work at all times under optimal circumstances. The quality of the documentation provided to the Panel was excellent. Laurie Goldberg took good care of the Panel's accommodation requirements. Staff of Computer Services, in particular Aamir Qureshi and Mary Snyder provided superb support throughout the review.
The Panel visited IFPRI's outreach programmes in Mozambique and Malawi, and was very grateful for the hospitality, support and time generously provided by the Institute's collaborators in the respective Government agencies, Universities and National Research Systems. The support provided by IFPRI's staff in the region, Drs. Jan Low and Ashu Handa, is also gratefully acknowledged.
Staff of the TAC Secretariat in Rome provided strong assistance throughout the Review Process and particular thanks are due to Jane Garrioch for help with the organization and logistics, and to Irmi Braun-Castaldi for making travel and administrative arrangements. Timni Mahase of the CGIAR Secretariat helped with the distribution of documentation to the Panel.
Finally, special words of thanks are due to Ann Drummond for able support with word processing and in compiling the report. She worked hard and late hours, but kept smiling at all times. Ann was thereby assisted by Audrey Howard and Vickie Lee whose charm and efficiency were also greatly appreciated by the Panel.
<section>d</section>
Appendix I - IFPRI's 1998 Response to 1990 EPMR
LIST of 1990 EMR RECOMMENDATIONS LABELLED as "NOT IMPLEMENTED" in THE 1992 MID-TERM REVIEW and STATUS IN 1998.
5. A Deputy Director General for Research and Development (DDG) should be appointed.
ACTIONS as of 1992 Interim Review:
(a) The Board endorsed this recommendation in its formal response to the EMR and considers the appointment of a DDG important in the long run.
(b) After thorough discussion during its meeting in October 1990, the Board concurred with the Director General's decision that during his tenure a Deputy would not be appointed. Accordingly, the functions which were intended to be performed by a DDG are being performed partly by the Director General himself and partly shared among other senior staff.
RESPONSE in 1998: As noted above, the interim director general determined and the Board of Trustees concurred that a DDG not be hired until the new director general was brought on board. The current DG joined IFPRI in July 1992. After a one year assessment, the management recommended and the board agreed that a DDG be hired to take over the role of the DFA, who was retiring, and to represent the DG in his absence. An extensive recruitment process led to the hiring of a DDG in 1995. She left after five months for personal reasons related to dual-career families. An assessment of the experience gained during the period when IFPRI had a DDG and further review of IFPRI's needs resulted in the conclusion that it was unlikely that IFPRI would be able to find a person who would have the necessary expertise, background, and interest to span the requirements for finance and administration as well as those required of a DDG in the area of research, outreach and IFPRI representation
and image. Management, therefore, recommended and the Board approved that the DDG position not be refilled, but that the DFA position be recreated and filled. The DFA position was filled as of September 2, 1997.
7. Create a position for a Director of Outreach which combines the present functions of Information Services and External Relations; and recruit as Director a respected scientist who understands policy issues and can participate in training as well as be able to organize conferences and seminars.
ACTION as of 1992 Interim Review: Before creating this position and recruiting a specialist to manage the outreach functions, the Director General and staff see a need to explore more thoroughly and in detail what the Institute can and should do in the area of formal and informal training and other outreach activities in the 1990s. In the meantime, therefore, the EMR recommendation is on hold for a period of experimentation and discussion that will define more clearly IFPRI's outreach strategy for the 1990s.
RESPONSE in 1998: The Outreach Division (OD) was created in late 1992 in large part in response to a recommendation made in the 1990 review and to preliminary results from the 1994-1998 MTP planning process. The director for the division, the former director of the Special Development Studies Division, was assigned in 1993. Although a staff committee on outreach had already determined the nature and scope of the new division, the director crystallized the specific direction of the capacity strengthening and information program. During 1992-1997, outreach activities, including capacity strengthening and public awareness, have been a growing emphasis for IFPRI. The Outreach Division (OD) was established to disseminate policy information IFPRI generates and to help strengthen the capacity of developing countries to conduct policy research. Through several recent strategic planning processes and in response to a 1996 internally commissioned external review, IFPRI has decided to
further strengthen its Outreach Division to improve information dissemination, capacity strengthening, country programs, impact assessment, seminars, and networking.
21. The long-term employment prospects of Research Assistants/Analysts (RAs) should be clarified.
ACTION as of 1992 Interim Review: Long-term employment prospects of RAs was taken up as part of the general review of personnel policies and among the concepts embodied in the Salary Administration Plan. Position descriptions and responsibilities were clarified in consultation with RAs' representatives. A number of issues related to the role of RAs in the Institute remain under discussion. Promotions from assistant to analyst, which were suspended, have resumed, and in some cases made retroactive.
RESPONSE in 1998: As of 1997, all IFPRI employees are hired with limited-term appointments that range from several months to five years, all of which can be renewed. Those RAs hired prior to this time are "grandfathered in" and are not subject to term limits. However, performance of RAs is reviewed annually, as it is for all staff, and high standards of performance are expected from RAs, regardless of their term status. There are now three levels of RA positions at IFPRI: research assistant, senior research assistant, and research analyst.
If qualified, RAs can be promoted to a higher level RA position, without using a competitive process. RAs are also welcome to apply for internationally-recruited, senior research positions for which they qualify.
SECTION C - OTHER
4. When appointing trustees, the CGIAR should give special attention to ensuring that the Board has sufficient management expertise in its membership. (Also appears under Section A.)
ACTIONS as of 1992 Interim Review: This IFPRI progress report cannot speak for actions taken by the CGIAR. However, the CG generally appoints Trustees in close consultation with IFPRI's Chairman, who makes clear to the Secretariat the criteria the Board is seeking for new appointees. Moreover, the Nominating Committee, as part of the operational changes noted in paragraph 2, has been instructed to define its criteria more explicitly and to take whatever steps are necessary to ensure that Board membership contains the appropriate mix of experience and points of view. Three persons appointed to the board in the period following the external reviews have considerable administrative experience in addition to being familiar with issues of food policy.
Response in 1998: The IFPRI Board has considerably diversified its disciplinary mix and experience and the Board includes trustees with experience, capacity, and interest in management and finance as well as in key IFPRI research and outreach areas. When selecting new members, the Board makes an explicit effort to identify gaps in the composition of the Board and to seek candidates to fill those gaps.
23. The CGIAR Secretariat should clarify the responsibility of the centers to inform the CGIAR before making material commitments which are not included in the currently approved budget or medium-term plan.
ACTIONS as of 1992 Interim Review:
(a) This report cannot speak for the CGIAR Secretariat.
(b) For its part, IFPRI management has established and is actively using open channels of communications with the CG Secretariat.
Response in 1998: The CGIAR Secretariat has decentralized much of the financial planning and implementation to the CGIAR Centers.
Thus, IFPRI has more flexibility to make material commitments which are not included in the approved budget, as long as we can cover the costs through identified restricted or unrestricted support. The Institute does, however, remain committed to conducting only those research and outreach activities that are part of our MTP, which in turn are part of the agreed upon agenda for the CGIAR.
LIST of 1990 EPR RECOMMENDATIONS LABELLED as "NOT IMPLEMENTED" in THE 1992 MID-TERM REVIEW and STATUS IN 1998.
2. A primary data bank that archives IFPRI's household surveys needs to be organized with assistance from a data management expert and core funding support. (This recommendation would assign the data bank function to Computer Services and require additional staff financed by the core budget.)
ACTION as of 1992 Interim Review: As a result of scrutiny by the Director's Advisory Committee and discussions in meetings of the senior research staff in the context of program restructuring, the responsibility for the organization of the data bank was placed alongside the remaining food data evaluation function and located in Special Development Studies Division. In the budget review for 1992, the director of this division was asked to make a specific proposal for consideration by the RAC and the Director General of steps to be taken under this recommendation.
Response in 1998: Computer Services has taken over the function of archiving IFPRI's data sets and serves as a clearinghouse for requests. Most data sets are now clear and well-documented, and a well-defined policy for their use is in place.
7. The International Trade and Food Security Programme needs to be expanded to take on new research and outreach responsibilities.
ACTIONS as of 1992 Interim Review: Resource constraints have limited progress in this direction. One Senior Trade Economist has been recruited, and another is under recruitment to allow expansion of the activities of the division following priorities of IFPRI Research Strategy and Medium Term Plan.
RESPONSE in 1998: With the arrival of a new Division Director at the end of 1993, Trade and Macroeconomics Division (formerly International Trade and Food Security Program) reorganized its research program around two themes or multicountry programs
(MPs): "Macroeconomic Policy Reforms, Agricultural Growth, and Rural Development" (MP12), and "Regional Integration, Agricultural Trade, and Food Security in Developing Countries" (GRP2, formerly MP13). MP12 incorporates the first two themes (incentives and stability in food supply) and GRP2 the second two themes (the impact of trade negotiations and increased food security through regional trade). In 1998, Division staff includes five research fellows (three full time and two part-time visitors), one post-doctoral fellow, and six research analysts/assistants.
10. Staff performance should be thoroughly reviewed when contracts come up for renewal.
ACTIONS as of 1992 Interim Review: Procedures have been put in place for tracking termination dates of employment agreements and making a considered decision on extension taking account of performance factors inter alia.
RESPONSE in 1998: Guidelines have been developed for staff whose contracts are terminating which allow sufficient notice of the impending date. Contracts are renewed based on employee performance and the needs of the Institute. Performance evaluations play a vital role in these decisions. Details of the guidelines for these procedures are transparent to all staff as they can be found in IFPRI's intranet on the SMT's Human Resource decisions.
11. The Institute should reinforce its outreach and developing country capacity-building in policy research according to a well-defined strategy.
ACTIONS as of 1992 Interim Review: This relates to the issue of a Director for Outreach which is addressed in connection with the EMR. IFPRI decided to focus on these issues in developing its research strategy document, which is complete, and its medium-term program which remains to be done. The
Institute notes that CGIAR priority for capacity-building has weakened as reflected in a lower core allocation for this purpose to IFPRI in the resources envelop suggested for the MTP.
RESPONSE in 1998: See the response to Question 7 in the EMR.
14. IFPRI should design and implement a strategy for post-research follow-up activities to secure sustained collaboration with the developing country policy research communities.
ACTIONS as of 1992 Interim Review: This is part and parcel of the issue of outreach strategy which is being addressed, as mentioned in item 11 above. A great deal of follow-up is undertaken at the divisional level usually in the form of second and third phase research collaboration. We also need to consider the competition for resources between follow-up in areas where research is no longer being conducted and new research.
RESPONSE in 1998: It has been decided to establish a network of IFPRI Associates. Implementation will take place soon after the new Outreach Division director is in place.
<section>e</section>
Appendix II - IFPRI'S Response to Institute Specific Policy Stripe Recommendations
(Prepared December 1997)
Suggest that the databases at IFPRI and other centers be made available for gratuate students thesis results.
Response. IFPRI is committed to facilitating the use of data by collaborators and graduate students to conduct research that is consistent with the primary mission of the Institute. IFPRI has guidelines for access to the Institute's data sets which clearly describe IFPRI's policies for issues such as unpublished proprietary secondary data, publicly available secondary data etc., and are available upon request. Numerous data sets have been made available to graduate students throughout IFPRI's study countries. For example, in Pakistan over 100 M.Sc. and M.Phil dissertations and 11 Ph.D. dissertations have been completed using IFPRI's data sets.
Suggests that, building on its experience, IFPRI consider opportunities for developing regional courses in collaboration with appropriate regional organizations, local, and leading foreign universities that could contribute to such courses and at the same time provide the continuity after IFPRI moves on.
Response: IFPRI, through its Outreach Division, has sponsored a number of short-term training courses in Sub-Saharan Africa (mainly Malawi, Mozambique, and Ghana). These courses have involved over 350 participants, many of whom are our research partners. In Malawi we have worked intensively with the Bunda College of Agriculture to implement these courses, in Mozambique we work with the Eduardo Mondlane University, and in Ghana with the University of Ghana. In Mozambique and Malawi, we also work with the Southern African Development Commission. The goal for these collaborative relationships is for IFPRI to work itself out of a job by building the capacity of these institutions to conduct research in food policy analysis. These courses offer quantitative methods in policy analysis, agricultural policy analysis, food and nutrition policy analysis, and environmental and natural resource policy analysis. The Institute has also developed and implemented a training of trainers
course, designed so that its participants can return home and train other people in their home institutions. IFPRI has also made it a priority to develop training materials that are targeted to specific training audiences and that can be used by participants in their home offices.
In addition to the training activities that the Outreach Division undertakes, research divisions organize both formal and informal training in conjunction with their research projects. For example, in the rice market study project in Vietnam, the project team conducted four different training activities: a training in data collection and data entry, a course in food policy analysis, a course in the design and use of a computer model designed to simulate food markets, and a study tour of rice markets in Thailand.
Suggests that IFPRI set in place mechanisms for course evaluation by external experts and course participants.
Following each IFPRI training course, questionnaires are circulated to participants in order to evaluate the training course. We will consider assessing our training courses with expert evaluators in the future.
Suggests that IFPRI pay due consideration to the organization of regional workshops for assessing priorities for policy and management research.
In preparation for our medium-term plan, we conferred with over 300 organizations and incorporated the feedback we received into our plan. In addition, numerous regional workshops were organized as part of the 2020 Vision initiative to assess regional priorities for achieving food security. IFPRI facilitated the development of regional strategies in South Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Latin America. These regional strategies influence IFPRI's research and outreach priorities. IFPRI has received a number of requests from several countries to help them design and implement their own 2020 strategies through regional networks. This approach will lead to the development and use of better information for policy design and implementation. Networks are being planned in East and West Africa and possibly Southern Africa. Finally, many participatory workshops are held in conjunction with individual research efforts to discuss project plans and activities. For example, under the
Macroeconomic Reforms and Regional Integration in Southern Africa project, a project advisory group with representatives from each of the partner countries was formed. The advisory group plays a key role in providing country-specific policy perspectives to the research being conducted and providing feedback to IFPRI on research methodologies and results.
IFPRI should devote some thinking to the issue of generic versus country-specific policy studies.
IFPRI (and other centers) continue to adhere to the principles of international relevance and strategic research, but that they seek ways to give greater country-level policy relevance to their research, in part as an instrument for institution strengthening.
The central focus of IFPRI's work continues to be the generation of international public goods. At the same time, however, IFPRI has been developing more specific, in-country expertise to strengthen its policy impact in collaborating study countries. IFPRI now has 14 senior and 1 junior staff members outposted - the highest number in IFPRI's history - to help achieve this objective. By outposting staff, we also increase the amount of networking and in-country partners, such as NGOs, universities, and government officials. The Office of Country Programs was established to improve the management of IFPRI's activities in focal countries, to improve linkages among individual IFPRI activities in a country, and to strengthen the quality of research and policy impact in the country. Although the generation of international public goods continues to be the overriding emphasis for IFPRI, we have increasingly realized the value of focusing on a specific country's food policy issues to
strengthen the quality of the research and policy impact in the study country.
IFPRI's outposted staff be increased when consistent with key research projects, and when it enhances a center's policy research capacity.
When the Stripe study was completed in 1995, IFPRI had seven senior staff outposted. As mentioned above, we now have 14 outposted senior staff, which represents nearly 30 percent of IFPRI's research fellows, Rockefeller fellows, and post-doctoral fellows. Our objective is to keep at least the same percentage of outposted staff over the medium-term period.
IFPRI consider appointing research fellows to be liaison persons with specific centers with which it works.
IFPRI believes that effective working relationships with other CGIAR centers are best established by working on specific project activities. Having liaison persons for each center would add another level of bureaucracy to these collaborative relationships that could hamper their effectiveness. In fact, not having liaison persons has not slowed down IFPRI's collaborations with other centers; we now collaborate with all 15 other centers.
IFPRI assess feasibility, advantages, etc. of using Internet for interactive activities related to specific themes.
IFPRI held an electronic mail conference on gender and intrahousehold issues, which brought together participants from 30 countries, many of whom were from developing countries. Commissioned papers were put on the email conference site and discussed for one month, including a presentation of key issues by the author of the lead paper, commentary by two formal discussants followed by general discussion and replies from the paper's authors. At the conclusion of the conference in early 1996, surveys were sent out to all the participants and the response was overwhelmingly positive. The conference yielded four papers that will be published soon by the journal World Development. A proceedings volume of the electronic conference exchange has been distributed. This January, a new 3-month electronic conference will be launched on micronutrients. Every two weeks an issue paper will be put on the site and discussed.
In addition, IFPRI's Web site (http://www.cgiar.org/ifpri) was launched in 1995, providing a wide-range of information, including an overview of IFPRI, position openings, details about specific programs within individual divisions, and our publications lists. The Web site has been instrumental in dramatically increasing the number of publications requests IFPRI receives. IFPRI's work is also widely disseminated through other web sites.
IFPRI review and assess the proportions of project funding in the various programs of the Institute and their implications for program effectiveness.
In preparation for the IFPRI's 1998-2000 MTP, IFPRI senior staff qualitatively used the priority setting criteria to establish the relative proportions of funding that IFPRI's MPs and GRPs would receive. For example, although funding for Water Resource Allocation: Productivity and Environment Impacts was not receiving sufficient funding through restricted sources, given its importance to future poverty reduction, IFPRI decided to increase the unrestricted allocation to the program. There are other examples of this occurring, especially with newer and synthesis programs.
IFPRI review and consider the desirable level of involvement in policy science research and approaches through which policy science research can be pursued.
IFPRI uses the most appropriate scientific tools for the analysis required by a project. Our research is empirical and focused on specific policy problems. IFPRI does not feel it is appropriate to undertake highly theoretical research.
IFPRI should assess the extent to which IFPRI publications are cited by peers; and that IFPRI should analyze the feasibility of making available on-line more of its recent publications.
IFPRI recently began a bibliometric study or intensive literature survey to determine how widely our research and outreach results are used in other research efforts, and to assess where, how often, and by whom IFPRI is cited. Several other institutions in CGIAR network and one U.S. food policy research organization will be assessed for comparative purposes. The Institute for Scientific Information, publishers of the Social Science Citations Index, are conducting the analysis based on their bibliographic and citation records.
Shorter publications are available through IFPRI's Web site, such as research report abstracts, food policy statements, and 2020 briefs and syntheses. Readers can easily order the lengthier publications by sending an email.
<section>f</section>
Appendix III - Panel Composition/Biographic Information
PANEL COMPOSITION
BIOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
PANEL COMPOSITION
Panel Chair: Samuel Paul
Chairman, Public Affairs Centre
27, SB1 Colony, Block 3, Koramangala
Bangalore 560 034
India
Tel/Fax: (91-80)5537260 (Off.)
Tel: (91-80)5531753 (Home)
Eml: pacblr@blr.vsnl.net.in
Members:
Gerald Bourrier
Bourrier International Consultants Inc.
12 Roseglen Private
Ottawa, Ontario
K1H 1B6 Canada
Tel: (1-613) 2477291
Fax:
Eml: bourrier@netcom.ca
Jean-Marc Boussard
INRA-ENGREF
19 Avenue du Maine
75732 Paris cedex 15
France
Tel: (33-1) 45498974
Fax: (33-1) 45498882
Eml: boussard@ivry.inra.fr
Catherine Geissler
Department of Nutrition and Dietetics
King's College London
Campden Hill Road
London W8 7AH
UK
Tel: (44-171) 3334351
Fax: (44-171) 3334185
Eml: catherine.geissler@kcl.ac.uk
Hans Gregersen
College of Natural Resources
University of Minnesota
1530 N. Cleveland-Ave.,
115 Green Hall
St. Paul, MN 55108, USA
Tel: (1-612) 6246298
Fax: (1-612) 6255212
Eml: hgregers@forestry.umn.edu
Ammar Siamwalla
The Thailand Development Research Institute Foundation
565 Soi Ramkhamhaeng 39 (Thepleela 1)
Ramkhamhaeng Road, Wangthonglang
Bangkapi, Bangkok 10310, Thailand
Tel: (66-2)7185460
Fax: (66-2)7185461/2
Eml: ammar@leela1.tdri.or.th
TAC Secretariat:
Panel Secretary: Guido Gryseels
Deputy Executive Secretary, TAC
SDRC - D442
FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel: (39-6) 57055442
Fax: (39-6) 57053298
Eml: Guido.Gryseels@fao.org
CGIAR Secretariat:
Selcuk Ozgediz
Senior Management Adviser
CGIAR Secretariat
World Bank
1818H Street, NW
Washington DC 20433
USA
Tel: (1-202)4738937
Fax: (1-202)4738110
Eml: SOZGEDIZ@worldbank.org
Consultant:
Maureen Robinson
Director of Education
National Center for Nonprofit Boards
2000 L Street, NW, Suite 510
Washington DC 20036
USA.
Tel: (1-202)4526262
Fax: (1-202)4526299
Eml: npboards@aol.com
BIOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
Samuel Paul (India) is Chairman of the Public Affairs Centre in Bangalore, India. He is a former Director and Professor at the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad. From 1985-91, he was Advisor to the World Bank on Public Sector Management in Washington. He has taught at Harvard and Princeton Universities. He has also been a Senior Advisor to the United Nations and ILO, and a consultant to many other international organizations). In 1992 he served as a member of the External Programme and Management Review (EPMR) of ICLARM. In 1995-96, he chaired the EPMR of ISNAR.
Gerald Bourrier (Canada) is a professional manager with over 25 years of increasingly responsible line experience in technical programming, administration and management. Positions held with a Canadian Crown Corporation (the International Development Research Centre) include Regional Director, West and Central Africa, Director, Fellowships and Awards Division, Director, Human Resources Division, and Deputy Director, Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Sciences Division. Prior to his 25 years with IDRC, he spent 10 years in the Canadian private sector working as an extension agronomist. His academic background is in Extension Agronomy. Bourrier currently heads a small management consulting company which he founded in 1996 - Bourrier International Consultants Inc. He has undertaken several international consultancies in corporate management systems with the following organizations: ICRAF (Internally Commissioned External Review of the Finance and Administration Division); IDRC
(organized and directed a training workshop; conducted a comparative study on different models of program delivery); CGIAR (External Program and Management Review of IFPRI); and Renaud Foster Management Consultants (participated in an international executive search commissioned by IDRC).
Jean-Marc Boussard (France) was first educated as an agronomist. He subsequently completed a doctorate in the Paris's faculty of economics, and entered the Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, where he is presently directeur de recherches. He is well known for his works on modelling agricultural systems, especially by introducing risk and uncertainty considerations into farm and macro economic models. He studied also dynamics and investments, both from a private and public point of view, and contributed to the project evaluation literature for irrigation. He is teaching in various institutions, among which the Institut National Agronomique, and the University of Paris I. He was awarded "outstanding journal article " in the American Journal of Agricultural Economics in 1972. He was president of the French Society of Agricultural Economists from 1992 to 1996. He has been elected fellow of the French Academie d'Agriculture in 1995.
Catherine Geissler (UK) graduated from the University of Edinburgh, and undertook postgraduate studies at the University of California Berkeley, where she obtained a PhD in Human Nutrition. During this period she worked for two years at the Institute of Nutritional Science and Food Technology in Teheran and carried out field studies in urban and rural areas of Iran. She was subsequently appointed to the Department of Nutrition at King's College, University of London. She has carried out community and clinical research work on a variety of nutrition issues in the UK and in several countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America. She has also been food and nutrition consultant to FAO, the World Bank, and other agencies, in Africa and the Middle East. In 1990 Catherine Geissler was Visiting Professor at Cornell University where she worked on the analysis of a large epidemiological survey of nutrition and health in China. On her return to London she was appointed Head of the
Department of Nutrition, a post she held for 5 years before being promoted to her current position as Head of the Division of Health Sciences. She also serves on the Food Advisory Committee to the UK government.
Hans Gregersen (USA) is professor of forest economics and policy at the University of Minnesota, with a joint appointment in the Departments of Forest Resources and Applied Economics. He has bachelors and masters degrees in forestry and a PhD in natural resources economics from the University of Michigan. He worked for the U.S. Forest Service and spent three years with FAO in the forest planning and policy area. He has served for six years on the Technical Advisory Committee of the CGIAR. During that time, he served terms as chair of the standing panel on natural resources, forestry and agroforestry and the standing committee on external reviews. In addition, he worked on the TAC Stripe Review on Policy and Management Research and on several other stripe studies dealing with natural resources and marginal lands. As a consultant and adviser over the past 25 years to the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the United Nations Environment Program, the OECD, the
World Commission on Forests and Sustainable Development, and many other groups, Gregersen has been involved in interdisciplinary forest and watershed economics and policy programs in Latin America, Asia, and Africa. Gregersen's main research interests are in the areas of forestry for sustainable development, watershed management economics and policy, natural resources valuation, sector analysis and planning, and natural resources policy. He is the author of more than 160 publications dealing with these subjects. Many of these publications represent results of collaborative work with hydrologists, watershed managers, foresters, sociologists, and anthropologists.
Ammar Siamwalla (Thailand) is an economist, having obtained his B.Sc. Econ. from the University of London, and his doctorate from Harvard University. He was Research Fellow at the International Food Policy Research Institute between 1978 and 1984. He then returned to Thailand to become Program Director for Agriculture and Rural Development and later (1990-1995) President of Thailand Development Research Institute, Bangkok, where he is currently Distinguished Scholar. He has also served as a member of the Technical Advisory Committee to the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research between 1993 and 1996.
<section>g</section>
Appendix IV - IFPRI Project Descriptions
Title: Input Market Reform and Development (MP1)
Although many developing countries have adopted market reform as a policy objective and have started implementation, the specific policies and institutions needed for markets that will work effectively under local economic and social conditions are frequently absent, particularly regarding rural areas. Countries making the transition from command to market economies have special difficulties. Little knowledge exists on how the principles of free markets can be applied with success to the problem of bringing to the poor in rural areas the agricultural inputs needed to facilitate the use of better technology with a consequent increase in production and incomes. The order in which reforms should be undertaken, for example, is not at all clear. The overall objective of this program is to understand the conditions for reform of markets for agricultural inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, and livestock services. The research output is expected to contribute to the
development of an efficient marketing system able to accelerate and sustain agricultural growth without adverse effects on the income of small farmers.
Title: Output Market Reform and Development (MP2)
Crucial to the process of economic growth is the efficient operation of markets to coordinate production and consumption decisions within and across domestic sectors and thereby guide the optimal allocation of economic resources. After decades of extensive state intervention in the domestic distribution of agricultural products, many developing-country governments have recently initiated programs aimed at establishing private sector-based marketing systems. In many cases, the rate of success has been much less than expected, and the transition from state-run to private-sector marketing has been slow. The objectives of the present research program are: (1) to better understand the institutional, structural, and policy-related factors that impede the process of transition, and (2) to help guide policymakers in designing and implementing domestic market reform programs.
Title: Rural Financial Policies for Food Security of the Poor (MP5)
While most formal rural credit programs in the past failed to reach the poor, there are now an increasing number of bottom-up, informal programs that seem to be more effective. Basic to this research program is the premise that a better understanding of the functions and arrangements of existing informal institutions at the household and community level may provide the key to designing rural financial systems that will serve the poor. The research draws on recent and ongoing IFPRI work in Bangladesh, Cameroon, Ghana, Madagascar, Mali, Nepal, and Pakistan. Additional studies have been implemented in Bangladesh, China, Egypt, and Malawi to expand the range of agroecological and social conditions covered by the research. The individual studies address four broad questions: (1) What is the scope for enhanced access and participation of the poor in formal and informal credit and savings arrangements? (2) How can the direct and indirect effects of access to credit and savings
services on poor household's income, consumption and nutrition be improved? (3) Can formal financial institutions be linked with existing informal savings and credit systems to create a sustainable rural financial system, and (4) how can formal financial services and their institutional arrangements be altered to enable enhanced and sustainable access by the poor to financial services?
Title: Marketing, Institutional, and Infrastructure Policies for Agricultural Commercialization, Diversification, and Export Promotion (MP7)
Most developing countries are dependent on agriculture for foreign exchange and - directly or indirectly - for employment of the majority of the population. They are faced with the need to revise agricultural strategies in the light of the effect on domestic relative prices of a major realignment of international prices, domestic macroeconomic reforms, and urbanization. They typically adopt agricultural diversification policies to promote adjustment to these structural changes. Such policies typically seek to promote an increase in value added in tradable sectors from changes in the composition of output mix. In many Asian countries, success in meeting domestic food needs through growth in rice output following the Green Revolution has led to a need to diversify into other crops with export markets if agricultural growth is to continue. Many other developing countries, especially in Africa, are in the early stages of agricultural commercialization and transformation. These
countries are often characterized by the widespread prevalence of subsistence consumption of agricultural products, imperfect markets and high transfer costs, which render a large share of rural production nontradable. The objective of this program is to identify more effective marketing, infrastructure, and institutional policies to facilitate the adjustment of farmers to change in incentives arising from long-term structural changes in agricultural markets. It will have a particular concern to better incorporate those rural people left behind by structural change into the mainstream of new economic growth opportunities.
Title: Arresting Deforestation and Resource Degradation in the Forest Margins of the Humid Tropics - Policy, Technology, and Institutional Options (MP8)
Tropical forests are under great pressure from both present inhabitants and new migrants seeking land for agricultural and other purposes. Many of those involved are poor. There is a paucity of knowledge of the process itself, of the motivations of those involved, and of the technologies, institutional forms, and policies that might be used to slow the pace at which forests are disappearing. In ways consistent with other economic and social goals, the purpose of this research program is to identify new combinations of technologies, policies, and organizational/institutional arrangements capable of slowing the rates of deforestation and other natural resource degradation at the margins of tropical moist forests, while improving the welfare of inhabitants of these areas, To achieve these goals, a three-year program of research is being be conducted at sites in the Brazilian Amazon, and support provided to comparable policy and socioeconomic work being conducted at sites in
Cameroon, Indonesia, and Peru by other CGIAR Centers and their collaborators as part of the Alternatives to Slash-and-Burn (ASB) initiative.
Title: Water Resource Allocation: Productivity and Environmental Impacts (MP10)
Demand for water for agriculture, household use, and industry continues to increase rapidly, while watersheds, the irrigated land base, and the quality of water delivered to the final user are deteriorating. Scarcity of water has led to demand for policy reform, but many questions concerning feasibility, costs, and likely effects of alternative water allocation policies in developing countries remain unanswered. This research program seeks to address these issues in ways that will be directly relevant to national governments and international donors for choosing appropriate water policies and establishing priorities for reform of institutions and incentives that affect water resource allocation. Specifically, the research will determine the effectiveness of alternative water allocation mechanisms and seek to understand their productivity, equity, and environmental impacts. Research is planned in several countries and regions with varying agroclimatic conditions, levels of
economic development, and degrees of water scarcity. In each case, there will be analysis of the nature and evolution of existing systems of water allocation and of the impact of water allocation on agricultural and industrial productivity, consumer welfare and equity, and resource degradation. The methodology involves integrated analysis of water policies within a river basin, including institutional, economic, and environmental aspects.
Title: Property Rights and Collective Action in Natural Resource Management (MP11)
Property rights are an important determinant of agricultural productivity and natural resource management. They determine long-term incentives for the sustainable management and improvement of resources. Property rights systems also play a key role in determining patterns of equality or inequality in access to resources. These systems are in a state of transition in many regions as population growth and increased commercialization lead to greater competition and conflict over scarce resources. Many traditional communal ownership systems are evolving toward greater privatization of rights, while others are degenerating toward open access regimes that allow overuse and resulting degradation of the resource base. Relatively little is known about the effectiveness of different ownership and management systems, and how they are coping with growing pressures. The purpose of this multicountry research program is to explore the causes and consequences of the choice of property
rights institutions and of the role of collective action in natural resource management.
Title: Macroeconomic Policies, Rural Development, and the Environment (MP12)
Poor performance of the agriculture sector has been associated with the poor economic performance that has characterized many developing countries in the last three decades. While external developments have had adverse effects, the influence of inappropriate domestic policies has been increasingly recognized, leading to the adoption of major programs of macroeconomic and sectoral policy reforms, aimed at stability and growth. Relatively little work has addressed the impact of such policy reforms on agriculture and rural performance, and the further repercussions on income distribution, overall growth, and the environment. The purpose of MP12 research is to investigate the interactions among agriculture, the environment (water and. forestry resources), and macroeconomic policy reforms. The goal is to determine better mixes of policies that achieve macro goals, eliminate biases against agriculture, support poverty alleviation, and protect the environment. This goal is being
approached through a series of a dozen or more case studies in Africa, Latin America, and Asia. The case studies will then be compared and contrasted to generalize the results to a variety of country settings.
Title: Urban Challenges to Food and Nutrition Security
Within the next 20 years, more poor and undernourished people in developing countries will live in the cities than in the countryside. Rapid rates of urbanization mean that urban food insecurity and malnutrition are concerns even for Africa and Asia, which currently have relatively low levels of urbanization. Although available studies indicate that malnutrition is usually more severe in rural than in urban areas, such general statements mask significant differences in levels of malnutrition within urban areas. Malnutrition in the poorest areas of cities often rivals that found in rural areas. Nevertheless, despite the severity and extent of the problem, few comprehensive studies of the determinants of urban food insecurity and malnutrition exists. This research program aims to (1) better document trends in urban poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition; (2) better understand the main determinants of urban poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition; (3)document and analyze
successful community, NGO and local government responses to the pressures that urbanization places on the attainment of urban food security and malnutrition; and (4) document and analyze public policy affecting food and nutrition in urban areas.
Title: Gender and Intrahousehold Aspects of Food Policy (MP17)
The success of policy - from macro policies such as structural adjustment to micro initiatives such as home gardens - depends on an ability to anticipate the responses of individuals to changing incentives. Often, however, actual responses differ from anticipated responses. One important reason for this divergence is a poor understanding of how rights, responsibilities, and resources are allocated within the household. This program addresses the policy question, when and how can food and agricultural policies be improved through a better understanding of intrahousehold processes? The research team will test the assertion that a better understanding of intrahousehold resource allocation is essential to predict the outcomes and consequences of policies, regardless of whether the policy is targeted at the household or individual level. This will be done through intensive research at the household level in four countries, and by adding a gender and intrahousehold perspective to
ongoing research by IFPRI collaborators in up to 10 other countries. The understanding gained will be used to generate information that will assist in the development of policies, programs, and projects that are high-performing precisely because they take intrahousehold allocation processes into account.
Title: Targeted Interventions to Reduce and Prevent Poverty (MP18)
The basic objective of this research program is to provide information to policymakers in developing countries to help them assess the appropriate balance between interventions that promote growth and those that prevent destitution, with particular reference to food security. The program will focus on three components (1) poverty identification and characterization; (2)comparative analysis of anti poverty interventions; (3) methodological innovations and improvements. Drawing on past IFPRI research on food subsidies, labor markets, nutrition monitoring, and famine prevention, this MP will study actual experience in six or more countries to determine how vulnerable groups can be identified, to analyze public and private programs that show success in addressing the causes of poverty and food insecurity, and to seek understanding of the role of fiscal, political, and logistical constraints.
Title: Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Policy (GRP1)
Judgments by national authorities and development agencies, even by CGIAR institutions, about policies and investments related to institutions generating and disseminating agricultural technology in developing countries, are severely hampered by a lack of information about those institutions and the consequences of alternative policy choices. The overall goal of this GRP is to remedy that situation by providing more information and analyzing its implications for issues facing decision makers. The current objectives of the GRP are organized around several research themes. They are: 1: to measure and monitor the global pattern of investments in agricultural R&D and provide policy interpretations of these developments for national and international decision makers; 2: to continue development of systematic, economic approaches to evaluating and setting priorities for agricultural research and initiate work on the evaluation of social science research; 3: to gain a more complete
understanding of the productivity, distributional, and environmental consequences of agricultural research and other public sector investments targeted to the agriculture sector; 4: to explore alternative policies regarding the economics of financing, organizing, and managing agricultural R&D; and 5: to undertake a program of research on agricultural genetic resources policies.
Title: Global and Regional Trade (GRP2)
During the long period of Uruguay Round negotiations, regional trade arrangements gained increased favor among developed and developing countries, in part as alternatives in case the global negotiations should fail. Since the completion of the GATT agreement, regional trade arrangements have remained important and new ones are appearing, with a combination of economic and political goals. The importance of these arrangements and of the GATT agreement itself for the food sector in developing countries is uncertain, and policy choices are difficult because of the uncertainty. The objective of this research program is to evaluate the impact on agriculture, the rural economy, and poverty alleviation of(l) regional arrangements to promote economic integration and (2) global trade reform. This goal will be pursued through a series of case studies of actual and potential regional trade agreements in Sub-Saharan Africa (SADC), Latin America (NAFTA, Mercosur, Andean Pact, Central
American Common Market), and Asia (APEC, ASEAN), plus synthesis work to generalize the results to a variety of country settings.
Title: Priorities for Public Investment in Agriculture and Rural Areas, and Appropriate Institutional Arrangements (GRP3)
During the last decade, developing countries have witnessed some fundamental structural changes, driven by market-led development, that have affected the allocation of public resources to agriculture and rural development. As a result, governments' hitherto pervasive interventions have been reduced and the scope of the private sector in economic activities has expanded. However, the reduction in public expenditures has resulted in a shrinking allocation to agricultural research, irrigation and water control, rural infrastructure, and agricultural credit. This GRP will look at how national and local governments can maintain their commitment to market-led development, while increasing their allocation to strategic subsectors of agriculture and rural development where the private sector is not likely to invest. This project will get started in 1998.
Title: The 2020 Vision for Food, Agriculture, and the Environment (GRP4)
The 2020 Vision for Food, Agriculture, and the Environment was launched in 1993 to identify solutions for meeting the world's food needs to the year 2020 and beyond, while reducing poverty and protecting the environment. The initiative builds on food policy research by IFPRI and others and relies on data from many sources. In addition to conducting analyses and syntheses on many topics related to food, agriculture, and the environment, the initiative has brought together policymakers, analysts, and officials of governments, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and the private sector in workshops and consultations to share their knowledge of selected topics and bring that knowledge to bear on recommendations for action.
During Phase II, the 2020 Vision initiative will 1) generate timely, state-of -the-knowledge information on key issues for which better knowledge is required to realize the 2020 Vision; 2) communicate the 2020 Vision to diverse audiences around the world to raise awareness of the world's food and environmental problems and what can be done to solve them; 3) provide a forum for dialogue, debate, information sharing, and consensus building among policymakers, policy analysts, researchers, and members of nongovernmental organizations, private sector, and media through seminars, workshops, and conferences; and 4) help individual developing countries to design and implement their own 2020 strategies, mainly through regional networks. Initial emphasis will be on sub-regional networks in East, West, and Southern Africa.
Title: Sustainable Development of Less-Favored Lands (GRP5)
Past agricultural development strategies have predominantly emphasized irrigated agriculture and "high potential" rainfed lands in the attempt to increase food production and stimulate economic growth. This strategy has been spectacularly successful in many countries and was responsible for the Green Revolution. But at the same time, large areas of less-favored lands have been neglected, and with rapid population growth, these lands have become or are becoming major areas of rural poverty, food insecurity, and resource degradation. About 500 million people now live in less-favored lands and, if current conditions persist, this number could increase to more than 800 million people by 2020. It is becoming increasingly clear that, on poverty and environmental grounds alone, more attention will have to be given to less-favored lands in setting priorities for policy and public investments. This leads to two key policy issues. First, what level of investment in these areas can be
justified, including expenditures on agricultural research? Second, how should the resources allocated to less-favored lands be spent to promote sustainable economic development? The objectives of the proposed research are to provide empirical evidence on (1) the productivity, poverty, environmental and food security consequences of targeting agricultural investments, including agricultural research, to less-favored agricultural areas compared to more favored areas, and (2) the appropriate development strategies for different types of less-favored lands.
Title: Agricultural Strategies for Micronutrients (GRP6)
The problems addressed in this project are the existence of widespread malnutrition caused by lack of important micronutrients in the diet and the intractability of this problem, which persists even when foods containing adequate supplies of calories and proteins are consumed. Under this GRP, IFPRI and collaborating institutions are investigating the feasibility and cost- effectiveness of breeding for micronutrient-rich staple food crops. Crops being addressed by appropriate research centers include rice, wheat, beans, maize, and cassava. IFPRI recognizes that this is just one approach of many that need to be undertaken together to address widespread malnutrition. IFPRI coordinates this project's research and collaborates with a broader group of nutrition professionals that are looking at methods such as nutrition education, fortification, and supplementation. In addition, GPR6 researchers coordinate with other IFPRI research that assesses the interface of economic factors
such as household income, food prices, and adoption of new technologies on nutrition.
Title: Outreach (PP20)
Outreach activities, both within the Outreach Division and within the Institute as a whole, have been a growing emphasis for IFPRI during the 1992-1997 period. IFPRI's outreach activities are divided into the following six programs.
Training and Capacity Strengthening Program - In much of the developing world, weakness or absence of institutional capacity to conduct policy research and analysis is a severe constraint on the ability of governments at all levels and of private-sector institutions, to make well-grounded choices of policies and programs in the food and related sectors. The overall objective of IFPRI's work in training and conferences is to strengthen the capacity of the developing-country counterparts to conduct food, agriculture, and natural resources policy analysis and to enhance the capacity of developing country institutions to provide training in policy analysis on a continuing basis. This is accomplished through training programs based in strong national institutions in developing countries; through a small number of global and regional IFPRI training courses in areas where the Institute has special expertise; through participation of individuals from developing countries in IFPRI
research activities in ways integrated with their professional advancement; and through seminars, workshops, and conferences for experts and participants from both developed and developing countries. We collaborate with national and regional institutions in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, particularly in Malawi, Ghana, and Mozambique.
Information Program - For the outcomes of IFPRI research to have impact, the results must become part of the intellectual equipment of potential users in the developing countries and in the international and bilateral agencies that support development. The single most important vehicle IFPRI uses to ensure our message gets in the hands of our constituents is our Information Program. In addition to providing policy information to its users, IFPRI's Information Program also has the objectives of(l) providing access to methodologies for use by developing-country researchers both directly in research and in training, and (2) communicating information about the Institute and its work to broader audiences, including the media in developing- and developed-countries, important to its success.
Country Programs - The Office for Country Programs was moved from the Director General's Office into the Outreach Division in August 1997 based on Board and SMT discussions. The program was developed to further enhance IFPRI's outreach activities, to develop more specific, in-country expertise, and to strengthen the Institute's policy impact in particular countries. Although the generation of research results with characteristics of international public goods continues to be IFPRI's central objective, the Institute has realized the value of focusing IFPRI's research on a specific country's food policy issues to strengthen the quality of the research and policy impact in the study country.
Networks - We are planning to establish a network of IFPRI Associates that will help IFPRI keep its research and outreach activities relevant to and informed by the policy issues and policy environment where we work in the developing world. In addition, we are establishing networks in East and West Africa to stimulate and facilitate countries to develop their own 2020 Vision and take steps to implement it.
Seminars Program - As part of its strategy of disseminating policy research to a wide audience through the spoken word, the Policy Seminars Program facilitates exchange of information on institute-wide thematic concerns locally, regionally, and globally. Seminars, workshops, and conferences bring together collaborators, policymakers, and IFPRI research staff to discuss research design, methodologies, and findings.
Impact Assessment - IFPRI is working to develop a more strategic approach to assessing the Institute's impact. A senior-level staff member will be hired soon to undertake this work in conjunction with the Impact Assessment Committee. In addition, IFPRI has six impact assessment activities underway or recently completed. They include: 1) estimating the quantitative return to policy-oriented social science research (underway), 2) investigating the qualitative impacts IFPRI's research has had on governments' policy choices and whether the research has a demonstrable impact on poverty, food security, and malnutrition (underway); 3) a bibliometric study or intensive literature survey to determine how widely our research and outreach results are used in other research efforts, and to assess where, how often, and by whom IFPRI is cited (underway); 4) a readership survey to solicit feedback from IFPRI's general and 2020 Vision readership and found that IFPRI is successfully meeting
the needs of both audiences (completed); 5) a history of IFPRI, that although its central theme is not the measurement of IFPRI's impact, the work will provide an overall view of the Institute's cumulative accomplishments (underway); and 6) a two-year project on the impact of agricultural research on poverty alleviation for the CGIAR's Impact Assessment Evaluation Group (proposal underway).
<section>h</section>
Appendix V - Terms of Reference for EPMRs
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR EXTERNAL PROGRAMME AND MANAGEMENT REVIEWS OF CGIAR CENTRES
BACKGROUND
Context
The Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) is an informal association of over 50 members that supports a network of 16 international research centres in agriculture, forestry and fisheries. The CGIAR aims, through its support to the Centres, to contribute to promoting sustainable agriculture for food security in developing countries. Because the Centres constitute the core of the CGIAR, the effectiveness of each Centre is crucial to the continued success of the CGIAR (as a System).
Each Centre is an autonomous institution operating within the mandate assigned to it by the CGIAR, and is governed by a legally constituted Board that has full fiduciary responsibility for managing the Centre. To ensure accountability in an essentially decentralized system, each Centre is expected to be responsive to the CGIAR, which provides financial support for its work.
The CGIAR has established a tradition of External Programme and Management Reviews (EPMRs) to provide a mechanism of transparency and accountability to the Members and other stakeholders of the CGIAR System. EPMRs are the joint responsibility of TAC and the CGIAR Secretariat, and are conducted for each Centre approximately every five years. As each Centre is autonomous, EPMRs provide a measure of central oversight and serve as an essential component of the CGIAR's accountability system.
Integrated System of Reviews of Each Centre
Besides the EPMRs, Centre Commissioned External Reviews (CCERs) are undertaken at each Centre. These CCERs are commissioned by the Centre Boards to periodically assess the quality and effectiveness of particular aspects of a Centre's work. The terms of reference (ToRs) for each CCER are determined by the Centre, based on broad principles endorsed by the CGIAR at ICW95 (ref. document entitled Improving the Quality and Consistency of CGIAR's External Centre Reviews, dated October 24, 1995).
EPMRs complement the CCERs by providing a CGIAR-commissioned and comprehensive external assessment of the Centre's program and management, especially its future directions and the quality and relevance of its research. The ToRs for the EPMRs (which update the "standard ToRs" endorsed by the CGIAR at MTM95) are provided below. Guidelines for undertaking the reviews are issued separately.
TERMS OF REFERENCE
Objectives and Scope
EPMRs seek to inform CGIAR members that their investment is sound, or recommend measures to make it so. Members of the CGIAR and other stakeholders can be informed whether the Centre is doing its work effectively and efficiently, EPMRs are both retrospective and prospective; and help ensure the Centres' excellence, relevance and continued viability, and the CGIAR System's coherence. Each review is expected to be strategic in orientation and as comprehensive as the situation warrants.
The broad objectives of EPMRs are to:
a) provide CGIAR members with an independent and rigorous assessment of the institutional health and contribution of a Centre they are supporting; and
b) to provide the Centre and its collaborators with assessment information that complements or validates their own evaluation efforts, including the CCERs.
The EPMR panel is specifically charged to assess the following:
a) The Centre 's mission, strategy and priorities in the context of the CGIAR's priorities and strategies;
b) The quality and relevance of the science undertaken, including the effectiveness and potential impact of the Centre's completed and ongoing research;
c) The effectiveness and efficiency of management, including the mechanisms and processes for ensuring quality; and
d) The accomplishments and impact of the Centre's research and related activities.
The topics expected to be covered by the EPMRs are listed below.
TOPICS TO BE COVERED
A. Mission, Strategy and Priorities
· The continuing appropriateness of the Centre's mission in light of important changes in the Centre and its external environment since the previous external review.
· The policies, strategies, and priorities of the Centre, their coherence with the CGIAR's goals (of poverty alleviation, natural resources management, and sustainable food security), and relevance to beneficiaries, especially rural women.
· The appropriateness of the roles of relevant partners in the formulation and implementation of the Centre's strategy and priorities, considering alternative sources of supply and the benefits of partnerships with others.
B. Quality and Relevance
· The quality and relevance of the science practised at the Centre.
· The effectiveness of the Centre's processes for planning, priority setting, quality management (e.g., CCERs, peer reviews and other quality and relevance assurance mechanisms), and impact assessment.
C. Effectiveness and Efficiency of Management
· The performance of the Centre's Board in governing the Centre, the effectiveness of leadership throughout the Centre, and the suitability of the organization's culture to its mission,
· The adequacy of the Centre's organizational structure and the mechanisms in place to manage, coordinate and ensure the excellence of the research programs and related activities.
· The adequacy of resources (financial, human, physical and information) available and the effectiveness and efficiency of their management.
· The effectiveness of the Centre's relationships with relevant research partners and other stakeholders of the CGIAR System.
D. Accomplishments and Impact
· Recent achievements of the Centre in research and other areas.
· The effectiveness of the Centre's programs in terms of their impact and contribution to the achievement of the mission and goals of the CGIAR.
<section>i</section>
Appendix VI - Acronyms
ACIAR
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research
ADB
Asian Development Bank
BAPPENAS
National Planning Agency, Indonesia
BARC
Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council
BIDS
Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies
CAER
Center for Agro-Economic Research, Bogor, Indonesia
CEDRES
Centre d'Etudes, de Documentation de Recherches Economiques et Sociale, Burkina Faso
CFO
Chief Financial Officer
CGIAR
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
CIAT
International Centre for Tropical Agriculture
CIFOR
Centre for International Forestry Research
CILLS
Comité Permanent Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Sécheresse dans le Sahel
CIMMYT
International Centre for the Improvement of Maize and Wheat
CIP
International Potato Centre
CIPA
Centro de Investigación y Promoción Amazónico, Peru
CIRAD
Centre de Co-opération Internationale de Recherches Agronomiques pour le Développement, Paris, France
CIRES
Centre Ivoirien de Recherches Economiques et Sociales, Côte d'Ivoire
DSE
Deutsche Stiftung für Internationale Entwicklung, Germany
EEC
European Economic Community
EMR
External Management Review
EPR
External Programme Review
EPTD
Environment and Production Technology Division
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Switzerland
GAPA
Grupo Análisis de Política Agraria, Peru
GIAP
Gujarat Institute of Area Planning
GRPs
Global Research Programmes
GTZ
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit
HCCs
High Concentration Countries
IAEG
Impact Assessment and Evaluation Group
IAEPD
Institute Andino de Estudios en Población y Desarrollo, Peru
IARC
International Agricultural Research Centre
IARI
Indian Agricultural Research Institute
IASRI
Indian Agricultural Statistic Research Institute
IBPGR
International Board for Plant Genetic Resources
ICIPE
International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology
ICRISAT
International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
IDB
Interamerican Development Bank
IDRC
International Development Research Centre, Canada
IEA
Institute of Economic Growth, India
IER
Interim External Review
IFA
Institut Facultaire des Sciences Agronomiques, Zaire
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFDC
International Fertilizer Development Center
IIM
Indian Institute of Management
IIMI
International Irrigation Management Institute
IITA
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture
ILRI
International Livestock Research Institute
INRAN
Institut National de Recherches Agronomiques au Niger
IPGRI
International Plant Genetic Resources Institute
ISNAR
International Service for National Agricultural Research
ISRA
Institut Sénégalais de Recherches Agricoles
JNU
Jawaharlal Nehru University, India
MPs
Multi-Country Programmes
MRD
Ministry of Rural Development (Malawi, Senegal, Togo)
NEDA
National Economic Development Authority, Philippines
NIA
National Irrigation Administration, Philippines
OD
Outreach Division
OECD
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
OPAM
Malian Cereals Marketing Board
OSP
Organizational Strengthening Programme
PBS
Public Broadcasting System
PIDE
Pakistan Institute of Development Economics
RAU
Rajendra Agricultural University, Bihar
RDSB
Rural Development Studies Bureau (Zambia)
RU
Rutgers University, USA
SADCC
Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference
SACCAR
Southern African Centre for Co-operation in Agricultural Research
SAFGRAD
Semi-Arid Food Grains Development Project
SCI
Science Citations Index
SCN
Sub Committee on Nutrition
SDC
Swiss Development Co-operation
SMIP
Sorghum and Millet Improvement Program
SMT
Senior Management Team
SPAAR
Special Programme for African Agricultural Research
SSA
Sub-saharan Africa
SSCI
Social Science Citations Index
SWI
Systemwide Initiative
SWPs
Systemwide Programmes
SYNs
Synthesis Activities
TAC
Technical Advisory Committee
TMD
Trade and Macroeconomics Division TMD
TNAU
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, India
UA
University of Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire
UM
University of Madras, India
UO
University of Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso
UPLB
University of the Philippines, Los Baños
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WARDA
West Africa Rice Development Association, Cote d'Ivoire
WFP
World Food Programme
ZARS
Zambian Agricultural Research System
