<title>Planning in Government Forest Agencies How to Balance Forest Use and Conservation: Agenda for Training Workshop</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Agenda 21 and the "Forest Principles" adopted by UNCED in 1992 emphasized the need to protect the environment and for people's participation to achieve sustainable development in the long run, in addition to maintaining the contribution of forests to economic development. With this shift in emphasis in forest development has come a need for new approaches and processes for forestry planning.
The Planning and Statistics Branch of the Policy and Planning Division of the Forestry Department of FAO, under the supervision of Yves C. Dubé, Forestry Officer (Planning), with the support of an interdisciplinary group from various Divisions in FAO, has issued in September 1996, a Working Paper titled "Planning for Forest Use and Conservation: Guidelines for Improvement". Dr. Jan G. Laarman from the Forestry Department of the North Carolina State University drafted the original version.
This Agenda for Training Workshop corresponds to a revised version of the September 1996 Working Paper, following the recommendations of an expert meeting organized in Accra, Ghana, in January 1997, by the FAO Regional Office for Africa in collaboration with the National Forestry Programme Coordinating Unit and the Forestry Policy and Planning Division of the FAO Forestry Department.
It is hoped that this publication will be an important reference framework for senior managers, planning leaders and trainers in government ministries and agencies as they review their planning systems for forest use and conservation and that the approaches recommended will be widely tested and adopted and thus contribute to the enhancement of capacities called for by UNCED's Agenda 21.
Lennart Ljungman
Director
Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of planning for forestry development is to establish a workable framework for forest use and conservation which incorporates the economic, social and environmental dimensions on a sustainable basis. The framework is about creating a shared vision of how forests will be used and protected. This can be summed up in a single central question: Trees and forests for whom and for what? The question is not new but what is new is the perception that so many different groups have an interest in the reply.
Forestry planning has traditionally been mainly concerned with the production of timber for industry and other wood products, and with forest industry development. Planning for environmental goals also has a long history but was largely restricted to designated areas for exclusive conservation. National forestry development agencies were essentially responsible for the sustained yield management on protected public forest lands and for reserved forests. The term "sustained yield" was mostly limited to wood production and therefore excluded the majority of other forest products and services. Although most forestry agencies have made progress towards multiple-use management, planning remains often biased towards timber in a wide range of countries. Many of the actions taken in order to stimulate forestry development in the immediate failed to sustain the momentum of growth in the longer term. Short term achievements sometimes resulted in degradation or destruction of the stock
of natural capital needed in order to maintain growth in the future or reduced options for future end uses by degrading the forest capital.
Today, forestry planning must adapt to rapidly changing social, economic, and political circumstances. Around the world, the forestry profession is challenged to embrace new goals, principles, and management approaches. These changing perspectives (see Box 1) imply that forestry planning has to adjust as follows:
· To manage forests not only for industrial timber, but also for nontimber products and for aesthetic, spiritual, cultural, and environmental contributions;
· To account for both the private and public goods supplied by forests, and to search for helpful processes that determine how much of each to produce;
· To apply multiple criteria in order to compare forest options in terms of biological diversity, social acceptability, total economic value, and overall sustainability;
· To expand the spatial scope of planning from individual forest sites to entire ecosystems;
· To conduct planning in a manner that will recognize biological, social, and environmental uncertainties;
· To make greater efforts to reflect the interaction of forestry with other sectors like agriculture in particular with reference to food security;
· To recognize that policies outside the forestry sector such as macroeconomic policies, population growth, agricultural, energy or environmental policies play an important role in forest use and conservation;
· To emphasize the potential contribution to poverty alleviation and the priorities of vulnerable groups such as indigenous people, women and children, people at the lowest levels of subsistence, and those in future generations;
· To recognize that disagreements about forest uses occur within a world of sharply divided values and preferences, and that forest-based communities are local and global.
Among the leading themes in forestry planning are: (1) wide participation by interest groups, (2) negotiation of competing rights to forest resources, and (3) decisions that lead to forest sustainability. These themes are relevant everywhere, even though their context varies from one country to another.
Box 1. Changing Perspectives on Forestry
Yesterday
Today
Forest products are timber, game, fuelwood, and water.
Forest produces not only commodities, but also biological diversity, protection benefits, indigenous homelands, preservation values, and other cultural and spiritual benefits.
The natural world can be managed and controlled.
Humans have profound impacts on the natural world, and many of these impacts are beyond our capacity to understand and control.
Forest-dependent communities are local farms and villages.
Communities which benefit from forests are local, regional, national, and global.
Forest management should sustain harvests (of industrial wood, fuel, etc.).
Forest management should sustain the forest as a complex ecosystem.
Private property owners have every right to do as they wish with their forests.
Governments take an interest in property rights in order to protect the public good.
The forester is expert and decisionmaker.
The "public" is decisionmaker. The forester is technical advisor.
The shift in emphasis of forestry development towards improvement of the welfare of people and protection of biological diversity and of long term local and global environmental benefits requires associated shifts in the planning process. Many old ideas about planning are being discarded. Traditional planning has been too ambitious, Utopian, and inflexible. Traditional planning has attempted to control, but has done little to empower. In principle, the new emphasis is on planning as a means for empowerment.
This Agenda for Training Workshop provides a framework of principles, strategic approaches and new ways of thinking (see Worksheet 1) regarding how to achieve sustainable forest development in the long run. First, the concept of planning in relation to forests is revisited. Chapter 2 presents a typology of useful planning methods and tools in relation to forests. Chapters 3 and 4 advocates the integration of participation and conflict management into the planning process with a view to strengthening the (internal and external) planning environment and building partnership. Finally, Chapter 5 proposes orientations for effective forestry planning. At the end of the publication, three appendices are presented. The first is a glossary to define planning terms. Many terms have meanings not found in ordinary dictionaries. Secondly, references are provide for those who want to go deeper into planning concepts and methods. Thirdly, 38 training worksheets are provided. The worksheets
are user-friendly and can be used separately or group by sub-themes. They are also flexible insofar as the user can adapt, expand or reformulate them to fit his own planning situation and needs.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 1: FORESTRY PLANNING REVISITED
1.1 Planning as a Process of Continuous Improvement
1.2 At the End of a Process that Never ends: What are the Results of Planning?
1.3 Planning Cycle Stages: How it should work
Forestry planning could be organized by administrative levels, geographical units, and functional purposes (see Box 2). In this publication, the term "sector planning" is minimized. This is because much previous planning in relation to forests has failed to cross sectoral boundaries. Instead, the term "strategic planning" is preferred where a strategy is a careful plan or method to achieve defined goals.
1.1 Planning as a Process of Continuous Improvement
In recent years, management consultants have worked hard to give planning an action orientation. Planning aims for "total quality management," also expressed as "continuous improvement." In relation to forest use and conservation, planning is: a continuous process of decisions and actions about alternative ways of using and conserving trees and forests, with the intent of achieving particular goals in the medium and long term. Planning is only as good as the number of constructive actions that come from it. It is not an end in itself. Rather, it has to be an instrument of policy and management. Even under the best of circumstances, planning may result in goals that are poorly selected, and strategies that fail. But if the experience produces a kind of learning, then planning becomes more "intelligent" as it learns from past mistakes. For most organizations, this is the most challenging part!
The planning cycle consists of seven stages (Box 3). In this planning cycle, success consists of small positive accomplishments that reinforce each other through the years. Or as shown at the bottom of Box 3, progress expands outward in the form of a spiral.
The process appears simple, but this can be deceptive. An organisation needs capable management in order to (1) know when and how to organize and supervise the planning, (2) adapt planning to be appropriate for a country's unique circumstances, and (3) learn from planning's successes and failures. The whole of the process relies on management, creativity, and cooperation. Any of these can be limiting. But for each constraint, the response is the same: to work for continuous improvement.
1.2 At the End of a Process that Never ends: What are the Results of Planning?
Strategic planning in relation to forests has the following characteristics:
· It is a means to visualize actions to increase the social, cultural, economic, and environmental benefits from trees and forests;
· It has a strong management orientation, since a strategy should state specific goals, specific activities, and specific people;
· It is much more than a short-term operational plan, since a strategy begins by reviewing missions and goals;
· It is much more than a set of projects, although projects can be one type of instrument for achieving certain goals;
· It often leads to questions about institutional capacity (and how to increase it); and
· It is an iterative process of testing, evaluating, and learning from some actions that succeed and others that fail.
Box 2. Planning in Relation to Forests Is of Several Types....
National Development Planning
Development plans set economic and social targets in relation to population growth, economic production, savings and investment, income distribution, and other macroeconomic measures. National development planning determines the budgets for sectors, agencies, and programs (e.g., in forestry).
Regional and Area Planning
When it works well, planning in regions and local areas is coordinated with national development planning. In forestry, regional and area planning are important because of the way forests are separated by gradients of climate, watersheds, transportation infrastructure, and other biophysical aspects.
Sector Planning
The forestry sector refers to linkages among the owners, managers, and users of trees and forests. Sectoral planning considers the different ways these owners, managers, and users will gain and lose because of alternative options for forest use and conservation.
Land-Use Planning
Land-use planning occurs at different levels and scales, from continental to local. It indicates the advantages and disadvantages of a specific use on a particular unit of land according to physical, economic, and social criteria.
Project Planning
Projects attempt to combine resources to achieve results in an efficient manner. Usually, projects are defined by well-specified objectives, budgets, time frames, and beneficiaries. In top-down planning, projects support goals at sectoral, regional, and national levels. In bottom-up planning, projects are specified prior to being considered for plans at sectoral, regional, and national levels.
Forest Management Planning
Management planning chooses among production and conservation options for specific forests. The "manager" is a person or an entire organization, depending on the context.
Forest Enterprise Planning
Enterprise planning refers to business operations (not always for profit) that use one or more forest goods and services. Enterprises are owned and managed by governments, communities, private companies, and individuals. Enterprise planning focuses on resource supply, production technology, and product marketing.
Box 3. The Cycle of Continuous Improvement
1. Define missions and roles. What is the mission of the forestry agency and of other groups (governmental and non-governmental) in protecting and managing forests? Planning begins by clarifying these purposes for one's group in relation to others.
2. Select improvement goals. Goals state what the agency will do to carry out its mission. Because the agency is searching for improvements, goals should aim for a higher level of accomplishment ("national good") than previously.
3 Set objectives. Objectives are the details about expected accomplishments. What type of results does the agency want, and in what quantity?
4 Select action strategies. Strategies are the operational means to achieve the improvement goals. Strategies are specific actions.
5 Negotiate major issues. To carry out its strategies, the agency needs cooperation from people within and external to it. Most of this cooperation has to be resolved in early stages of the planning. But for remaining issues, what are the points to be negotiated, and with whom?
6. Implement the strategies. Specific people perform specific actions as part of specific strategies. Implementation succeeds or fails in relation to communications, empowerment, supporting resources, and reward systems.
7. Evaluate results, make adjustments, and repeat the process. Are the strategies of the agency working? Are its objectives being met? The agency cannot know this without checking and evaluation. When there are failures, who is responsible for adjusting missions, goals, objectives, and strategies?
Strategic planning never truly ends, but there are milestones along the way to mark the progress. The results of planning can be the following:
1. Bottom-up and top-down communications that help integrate the different units within an agency. In this way, planning contributes to team building and a sense of shared purpose. But when these communications are poorly managed, they create resentment and frustrations.
2. Partnerships between the forestry agency, other agencies, and interest groups. For this to be effective, the forestry agency must genuinely want and respect the ideas it receives from persons not employed there. Just as importantly, the forestry agency cannot leave out any key groups - since that creates more problems than it solves. The risks of badly managing outside participation may partly explain the past reluctance of many forestry agencies to invite it.
3. A vision of the future and a path to get there. To plan is to create a shared vision of the future. Worksheet 2 presents a checklist of elements found in a good strategic plan for forest use and conservation, although the format may be different between organisations.
1.3 Planning Cycle Stages: How it should work
The rest of this chapter examines each planning stage to provide more explanation on how it should work.
Planning Cycle - Stage 1
Mission: An Agency Cannot Plan Without One
Each forestry agency has functional, geographical, and legal responsibilities that are different from every other organization. The mission - the broad general purposes for which an organization exists - of forestry agencies in relation to other organizations - both public and private-are changing dramatically. The starting point is to focus on the agency's mission in relation to the missions of all other groups whose actions affect forest use and conservation. Almost everywhere, this list of groups is longer every year.
Most readers of this publication are familiar with the almost continuous restructuring of agencies responsible for forests, watershed management, protected areas, wildlife, coastal zones, soils, and other natural resources. In numerous countries, forestry is moving from agricultural ministries to new organizations for environment and sustainable development. It is also quite common to find new units for agroforestry and community forestry. Some forestry agencies are removing themselves from wood processing and marketing. Others are privatizing their tree nurseries. For functional areas such as community forestry and protected areas, a number of NGOs now play a very prominent role. These many re-organizations are one of the reasons that planning environments can be chaotic.
The planning environment is even more complex due to an inflow of new ideas, influence, and power affecting forest use and conservation. Some people refer to this as a "paradigm shift." This refers to the increasing number of people who oppose tree cutting, and who value forests primarily for preservation benefits.
Although these ideologies originate in the industrialized countries, they are by now increasingly attractive to opinion leaders in the developing countries. This is a relatively new presence that now challenges forestry agencies on matters of authority and competence in forest concessions, reforestation programs, and other traditional roles. In the face of these challenges, the mission of government agencies for forests is increasingly difficult to define. Perhaps it is broader than before? Perhaps it is narrower? For certain, it is changing.
For this reason, it is very important for strategic planning to begin by asking: (1) What does the agency do? (2) How is this changing, and how should it be changing? (3) How does this affect where and how the agency should use its influence and resources? In essence, the agency is trying to avoid the following frustrations:
· Important functions for watersheds, coastal zones, etc., are neglected because there is no accountability for them. Each agency (or department) assumes that "somebody else" is responsible.
· In a functional or geographical area, the agency is doing the same type of work as another organization, but with conflicts or duplicated efforts.
· In policy and program development, the organization is slow to act upon the directives coming from top levels.
· In a geographic area, the missions of other organizations (e.g., for agriculture, minerals, roads, land reform, etc.) interfere with the agency's role to protect and manage forests.
· Different agencies, NGOs, and interest groups misunderstand each other. Even worse, many do not talk with each other.
These problems are widespread. Hundreds of management consultants agree that there is no easy way to solve them. But for planning, the agency must attempt to define a clear and concise statement of its mission in relation to other missions (Box 4). If this is done well at the national level, it can provide the basis for missions at subordinate levels (e.g., for regions, provinces, and districts).
Box 4. What an Agency Should Expect in a Good Mission Statement
A good mission statement should........
· cover all of its organization's functional, geographical, and service commitments;
· complement (not conflict with) the missions of other government and private organizations;
· be realistic, concise, and easy to understand.
Discussions about missions can be long and seemingly endless. This is a situation to be avoided. Management experts make the following recommendations:
1. Convene workshops or meetings in a neutral place, and use the services of a preferably neutral person (someone outside the organization) to facilitate group discussion about roles and mission. Invite leaders from organizations (public and private) that have the greatest interest and most questions about the mission of the agency.
2. Start by having everyone individually answer Worksheet 3. Then initiate group discussions about these questions. This has to be handled carefully. Each special interest, and each unit of the agency, will interpret the mission in a different way.
3. Based on these discussions, write a draft of a new or revised mission statement. This can be the responsibility of a small team. Do not be overly constrained by laws, regulations, and other legislation. In most agencies, many important roles are not written in laws and documents. Moreover, the agency is aiming to produce a statement of what its mission should be. This is the improvement you seek.
4. Circulate the draft to the invited leaders, as well as across and down the agency. Ask for comments, and revise the draft accordingly. When properly managed, this can be a powerful means of communication and team building.
Box 5 presents a sample mission statement for the fictional XYZ Forestry Department. The mission statement cannot be a "dead document," but on the contrary should motivate the work of the whole agency. In countries where it is appropriate, different regional and functional offices should write their own mission statements that start from the national model - modifying it to reflect the special circumstances of that region or office. At all levels, a clear statement of the mission is highly important for defining improvement goals, as follows.
Box 5. Example of a Mission Statement for a Forestry Agency
The XYZ Forestry Department contributes to the protection, utilization, and management of the nation's trees and forests in ways that are socially, environmentally, and economically sustainable by:
1. Continuously assessing areas, conditions, and trends in tree and forest cover, and making the information widely available.
2. Protecting public forestlands from encroachments, fires, insects, diseases, and other threats to the healthy condition of trees, forests, and associated natural resources.
3. Maintaining a system of natural areas protected from harvesting and other intensive uses in order to promote ecosystem preservation, environmental services, and scientific research.
4. Providing harvesting and other utilization rights to individuals, communities, and commercial enterprises in selected zones of public forests, and insuring that harvesting is sustainable.
5. Assessing and efficiently collecting a fair revenue for government from the individuals, communities, and enterprises which utilize products and services of the public forests.
6. Providing low-cost and efficient extension services in relation to trees, forests, and associated resources for farmers, communities, and private businesses.
7. Providing policy analysis on forest-related issues to the highest level of national authority and decisionmaking.
8. Interacting cooperatively with international assistance agencies, donor groups, and NGOs in the programming of external aid for forest protection and management.
Interacting cooperatively with authorities in public and private organizations on matters of shared concern relative to trees and forests in national defense, agricultural and pastoral development, water and power supply, public health, infrastructural development, and cultural and educational affairs.
Planning Cycle - Stage 2
Improvement Goals; Filling Performance Gaps
Goals are statements of what your organization intends to do in order to carry out its mission. But unlike missions, which are indefinite and continuing, goals can be accomplished. At any point in time, an organization's goals should determine its main activities.
The agency's search for continuous improvement is driven by the following question: In what main functions must the agency perform well in order to succeed? This question can be asked for each element of a mission statement. This will identify the key factors affecting the agency's performance.
Box 6 illustrates improvement goals for a mission element of the XYZ Forestry Department. An agency should define its own improvement goals with the help of Worksheet 4. Worksheet 5 is a supplementary framework to bring out institutional issues that cut across many different parts of a mission. Strategic planning cannot go far without attention to institution building. The combined use of these two frameworks should produce many improvement goals to be compared, sorted, and given priorities.
In view of past problems, many forestry agencies will do well to pursue socially-oriented improvement goals. It is perfectly acceptable to state qualitative goals such as "to improve the Department's relationships with indigenous communities." Other acceptable goals are "to employ more women in professional and technical positions," and so on. Many such goals are not forestry goals per se, but they may be social goals for the country as a whole. Therefore, the agency should include them.
Many people find it difficult to specify the factors that determine their performance. Their answers may be too general, such as "the agency's budget is too small." And technical staff often leave out social goals. By convening workshops and providing assistance, an agency may be able to raise the quality of how people state their improvement goals.
Box 6. Example of Improvement Goals to Support a Mission Element
Mission Element
Improvements Goals
(Next Five Years)
Factors for Success
"Providing harvesting and other utilization rights to individuals, communities, and commercial enterprises in selected zones of public forests, and insuring that harvesting is sustainable." (see fourth mission element in Box 5)
To increase field monitoring where harvesting takes place
Understanding where, when, and how harvesting is occurring.
To work with Dept. of Land Reform to improve where and how concessions are granted.
Resolving conflicting tenure claims.
To grant more forest concessions to regional and local interests, especially in South Region.
Revised criteria for granting concessions.
To refine and expand the method of selling timber by competitive pricing.
To obtain more support for the Department's programs from indigenous leaders in South Region.
Improved relations with indigenous communities.
To apply and evaluate positive incentives for good logging.
Effective sanctions and incentives for appropriate harvesting methods.
Sometimes, a forestry agency can have so many improvement goals that they become meaningless. Any single goal is lost in the middle of others, and it is impossible to monitor all of them. Almost always, there are more improvement goals than can be implemented at one time. For obvious reasons, the effort to consolidate and prioritize goals has to be a careful exercise in diplomacy.
Worksheet 6 classifies improvement goals by three levels of priority. Also, an agency can employ methods in Chapter 3 to show how proposed goals relate to each other, to national priorities, and to feasibility factors. The mix of goals should:
· respond to the highest level of national priorities;
· complement and reinforce each other; and
· be within the capacity of the agency to supervise, monitor, and evaluate.
Planning Cycle - Stage 3
Objectives: Setting Targets
Objectives (see Box 3) state specific results to be achieved. For an improvement goal, an objective should be clear about: what, who, when, and how much.
Objectives rely on indicators to quantify how much. For technical goals, this normally does not present a problem. But for intangible and institutional goals, the desired improvements may be difficult to measure.
The higher is the administrative level, the more challenging it can be to quantify the objectives (e.g., objectives to improve communications and public relations). But the planning is no less rigorous even though an agency cannot quantify everything in it. Rather, the agency states its objectives in terms that are indirect and qualitative.
In setting its objectives, the agency needs to know where it is now! That one simple truth can cause enormous frustrations. The frustrations are constructive if they lead to an honest search for information. They are not constructive if they make planners invent "creative" numbers that have no basis in reality. But if the search for baseline data is diligent and earnest, everyone will learn an enormous amount about current operations.
Worksheet 7 provides suggestions on how to write objectives, and Box 7 shows examples. For strategic planning that looks ahead many years, do not invest too much time trying to make the objectives precise. The agency is aiming for a reasonable approximation.
Planning Cycle - Stage 4
Strategies: Action Ideas
Strategies indicate how objectives will be achieved. For any objective, what obstacles stand in its way? And what positive factors increase the chances that it can be achieved? These are excellent questions for group discussion, such as through the techniques of brainstorming and force-field analysis (see Chapter 3). Each strategy group should invite wide participation from outside the agency in order to enlarge the range of ideas. The various ideas are screened, grouped, and studied for administrative and budget feasibility. The actions for each objective:
· follow a logical sequence;
· are placed in a time schedule;
· specify resources (e.g. budget) to accomplish them; and
· are assigned to individuals who are accountable for carrying them out.
Box 7. Examples of Objectives in Support of Improvement Goals
Improvement Goals (examples from Box 6)
Performance Indicators
Objectives
To increase field monitoring where harvesting takes place
No. of forest concessions regularly inspected for harvesting impacts
To increase monitoring from present 30% of concessions to target of 80% by end of year 2002. Responsible: Chief of Forest Utilization Section, XYZ For. Dept.
To grant more forest concessions to regional and local interests, especially in South Region
Share of forest concessions (by area) in hands of companies and individuals who live in South Region
To increase this share from current 18% to target of > 40% by end of year 2002. Responsible: Executive Director, XYZ For. Dept.
To obtain more support for the Department's programs from indigenous leaders in South Region
No. of "positive" exchanges between Department and indigenous groups in South Region
To increase the "positive" exchanges from current < 50% to target of > 90% by end of 1999. Responsibility: Regional Coordinator for South Region
Planning often fails at this stage of proposing action ideas. For example, the agency usually makes a mistake when it proposes actions "for" somebody who does not actually participate in the planning. Secondly, action ideas may suffer due to unrealistic cost estimates. Often this is because of too little attention in the office to budget and financial management.
Box 8 illustrates actions to accomplish objectives (and see Worksheet 8). The action statements should be prepared by the persons directly responsible for the objectives. Note, too, that not all actions have to be written on paper, especially if they do not need approval at higher levels.
Planning Cycle - Stage 5
Negotiation: Seeking Agreement and Compromise
If the planning is done well, many disagreements will have been resolved by this stage. Ideas are moving laterally as well as up and down when people discuss mission, goals, objectives, and actions. Obviously, the quality of this discussion varies with:
· the amount of careful preparation to support the planning;
· the diversity, knowledge, and creativity of the people who participate in the planning;
· the level of genuine interest in making the planning succeed; and
· the managerial skill to coordinate the planning.
Box 8. Examples of Actions in Support of an Objective
Objective: "To increase monitoring from present 30% of concessions to target of 80% by end of year 2002." Responsible: Chief of Forest Utilization Section, XYZ For. Dept. (from Box 7)
Actions
Responsibility
Time Frame
Make at least one visit to every forest concession to review harvesting practices
Self (Chief, Utilization Section, XYZ Forestry Dept.), with staff assistance
By December 1998
Select, hire, and train 7 staff members for harvesting inspection teams
Self in collaboration with Training Director, Technical Services Division
1^st group - June 1999
2^nd group - Dec. 1999
Obtain transportation and operational budget for inspection teams (vehicles, fuel, travel allowances)
Self in collaboration with Budget Director, Central Office
By June 1999
Evaluate effectiveness of inspection teams
Self in collaboration with Training Director, Technical Services Division
1^st review - June 2000
2^nd review - June 2001
But even in the best circumstances, some issues will need further negotiation at this point. On this, there is a huge difference across societies in the amount of bargaining and negotiating that is expected. There are also differences in the amount of decision authority at subordinate levels of the agency.
Therefore, an agency needs to determine the major actions that need to be negotiated, both within and with people external to it (Box 9 and Worksheet 9). This can be organized by objective, by administrative level, and so on.
Planning Cycle - Stage 6
Implementation: The Management Dimension
The time arrives when the planned actions need to be implemented. An agency should plan on having implementation problems virtually 100 percent of the time. Many of these problems are impossible to foresee, but others can be anticipated. For those difficulties that can be foreseen, what are the strategies to avoid or minimize them? The leader of a planning team should make a simple worksheet to show: (1) potential problems, and (2) strategies to avoid or minimize them (Worksheet 10).
Box 9. Examples of Issues to Be Negotiated
Objective: "To increase monitoring from present 30% of concessions to target of 80% by end of year 2002." Responsible: Chief of Forest Utilization Section, XYZ Forestry Department (from Box 7 and Box 8)
Issues That Need Negotiation
With Whom Is Agreement Needed?
1. Hire personnel for inspection teams
· Executive Director, Central Office
· Personnel Manager, Central Office
· Green Future Society (NGO that promotes forest protection)
· National Association of Forest Products Industries (industry association)
2. Transportation and operational budget
· Procurement Manager, Central Office
for inspection teams
· Regional Coordinator, South Region
· World Bank Representative (regarding grant funding)
3. Training for inspection teams
· Training Director, Technical Services
Many planning guides rely heavily on the Critical Path Method, Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT), and related scheduling methods. These methods indicate the most efficient way to schedule planned activities in order for others to begin immediately after them. These techniques are widely available in computer software at reasonable prices. The leaders of planning groups should become familiar with these techniques, and possibly apply them.
However, not too much emphasis will be given to them here. They work best where organizational systems are stable. They are far less useful where politics are volatile, the government is re-organizing every six months, and the agency's budget may be cut by half. Many managers do just as well with a big chart on the wall, and an eraser to correct it every month.
This publication is not about management per se. However, strategic planning implies a management orientation. The strategies have to be broken down into the parts that can be implemented, evaluated, and improved. Essential elements in this are communications and supporting resources (budget, training, organization, and supervision). Additionally, the people who are responsible for carrying out objectives must have the authority to do so. Finally, there must be a system of incentives to reward good performance. All of this is management.
Planning Cycle - Stage 7
Evaluation and Adjustment: Learning from Experience
An agency needs to anticipate how it will evaluate the successes and failures of its planning (Worksheet 11). How will it know what went wrong? What has to be done better next time, and why? This is the self-correcting feedback for continuous improvement.
There are ways to be conscious of both the planning process and its results. First, the agency should study the previous strategic plan and evaluate its successes and failures, and the reasons for them. Secondly, the people who participate in the current round of planning should discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the process. This also refers to individuals outside of the agency who have been participating.
Finally, the individuals responsible for carrying out the specific actions of the plan will be reporting their problems and progress over the years. Was the planning too ambitious? Or too cautious? Did anything happen that was totally unexpected? What was the role of good luck and bad luck? Or was the luck created through human factors? Where problems occurred, were they because of faulty concept or poor implementation? This kind of reporting is very instructive. However, it demands an "institutional memory" to track results and make them available for the next generation of planners.
<section>4</section>
CHAPTER 2: TYPOLOGY OF PLANNING METHODS AND TOOLS
2.1 Methods to Clarify Issues and Problems
2.2 Methods to Examine Spatial and Inter-Sectoral Relationships
2.3 Methods for Social, Environmental, and Economic Analysis
2.4 Methods to Discuss the Future
Strategic planning relies on a number of methods and tools to define and interpret information for comparing alternatives. This chapter identifies selected planning methods according to four purposes:
1. Methods to clarify issues and problems. - All planning teams need creativity and analytical rigor to define problems and compare options. Several structured techniques promote both creativity and rigor.
2. Methods to examine spatial and inter-sectoral relationships. - Strategic planning for forests has to account for cross-cutting functional and spatial relationships. The methods for this rely on maps and area planning, together with computer simulations and models in regional economic geography.
3. Methods for social, environmental, and economic analysis. - The planning team needs to anticipate the social, environmental, and economic impacts of its proposed goals and strategies. Several frameworks are available for this.
4. Methods to discuss the future. -Planning is about forecasting the future and deciding how to prepare for it. The planning team should practice and learn from techniques of "futures analysis."
Planning tools do not have to be quantitative to be useful. Quantitative models can be important, but they are not the only or best techniques to promote the "systems approach" in thinking about a problem and its possible solutions. Box 10 presents criteria to help an agency evaluate the appropriateness of different planning methods and tools, whether alone or in combination. Let these criteria guide its selection.
Insufficient application of planning tools leads to disorganized thinking. The discipline of the tools keeps the planning focused and organized. But an agency wants the tools to serve your process, not to control it. It is often easy to allow the tools to become ends in themselves. Especially in the industrialized countries, some expensive efforts in forest planning have failed exactly for this reason.
2.1 Methods to Clarify Issues and Problems
All organizations, private and public, employ a variety of methods to clarify issues and problems. An agency needs to develop competence in selecting these methods, and in assisting planning groups to use them. This can be important for building up working relationships within the planning team, with the advisory committees, and with the interest groups.
Box 10. Criteria for Evaluating the Appropriateness of Planning Tools
Criteria
Appropriateness
Relevance
In what ways does this method help an agency answer important questions and focus on key issues?
Acceptability
How well is the method developed, and to what extent is it accepted as a standard instrument? (In own country's context)
Cost
How much time and how many resources does an agency need to adapt and apply this method?
Data Requirements
Does an agency have - or will it be able to generate - the data for a reliable application of the method?
Breadth and Versatility
To what extent can the method represent cultural, intrinsic, aesthetic, and other non-market aspects of forests?
Distributional Aspects
Does the method help address gains and losses: (i) across the society, and (ii) between present and future generations?
Communications
To what extent can ordinary people understand this method?
Sustainability
What are the chances that you will continue to use this method (and therefore to refine and improve it in the future)?
Source: Adapted from Nilsson-Axberg (1993), Forestry Sector and Forest Plantations Sub-Sector Planning in South and South-East Asia, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, SIMS Report 34, Uppsala, p. 145.
The best sources of problem-solving tools for an agency are books, articles, and videos in management science (see Appendix II, Part C). These are increasingly available in even the remotest places of the world - and in an increasing number of languages. Here, we briefly mention some of the classical methods that your planning team is most likely to need:
· Brainstorming. - Brainstorming is generally superior to conventional committee meetings for rapid generation of creative ideas. Suppose that an improvement goal has been defined, such as to increase the effectiveness of an agency's agroforestry program. In brainstorming, team members make rapid suggestions on how to achieve this. Somebody writes down all of the suggestions (e.g., on a large sheet of paper) - even those that at first may seem strange or impractical. All ideas are acceptable, and nobody is allowed to criticize another person's suggestion. The agency's aim is to quickly produce ideas which only later will be evaluated for feasibility, cost, and other decision criteria. In the end, it will arrive at a smaller set of proposals after the initial ideas are modified, combined, or eliminated (Worksheet 12). Box 11 summarizes three variations of this method.
Box 11. Variations of "Brainstorming" to Generate Creative Ideas.
1. Call Out Ideas Freely in Any Order
Each person calls out as many ideas as possible in random order. Each idea is recorded where everyone can see it. Continue until the time limit is reached, or until nobody has anything to add.
· Advantages: Spontaneous and fast: no restrictions.
· Disadvantages: Quiet persons may not speak out; a few powerful persons may dominate; the process can be chaotic if everyone talks at the same time.
2. Call Out Ideas in Orderly Sequence
· Advantages: Everyone has the chance to participate; it is more difficult for powerful personalities to control the session.
Each person presents an idea in turn (e.g., by going systematically around a table). If a person has nothing to add, the person says "pass." Continue until the time limit is reached, or until nobody has anything to add.
· Disadvantages: People can be frustrated while waiting for their turn.
3. Each Person Writes Ideas on Paper
· Advantages: All contributions are anonymous; ideas can be recorded in an organized way.
Each person writes down as many ideas as possible on a piece of paper. The papers are collected, and the ideas are written where everybody can see them.
· Disadvantages: Creativity is lost because persons are not able to react to the ideas suggested by others.
Source: Adapted from James H. Saylor, 1992, TQM Field Manual, McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, p. 80-82.
· Problem Statement Guidelines. - Sometimes an agency's improvement goals are vague and poorly defined. It applies problem statement guidelines to sharpen the definitions of any problem into its what, when, where, who, why, and how dimensions. Each team member is asked to state the problem according to these guidelines. In a subsequent step, the agency compares these statements to make a final problem statement acceptable to the group as a whole (Worksheet 13).
· Strengths and Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT). - In relation to a given goal or strategy, an agency wants to take advantage of its strengths and opportunities. At the same time, it has to be aware of weaknesses and threats that will impede its progress. The SWOT framework helps the agency think about this in a direct and systematic way (Worksheet 14).
· Problem Trees. - for complex issues, an agency systematically identifies causes and effects with the help of a problem tree. A problem tree is a diagram of boxes and arrows that show causes at a low level, leading to effects at a higher level (Worksheet 15). The causes are the roots of the tree, and the effects are the fruits. The team lists different problems, and then connects them with arrows to show linkages. It repeats this several times until the problem tree is complete and logical. The problem tree directs the attention of the team to fundamental, deep-rooted explanations. Box 12 presents an example.
Box 12. Example of a Problem Tree
Insufficient Cooperation Between NGOs and The Forestry Agency in Policies and Actions for Forest Conservation
Source: Adapted from FAO, 1994, Formulation of Agricultural and Rural Investment Projects: Planning Tools, Case Studies, and Exercises, Volume 2 (Reconnaissance), Rome, Italy, Tool No. 5.
· Logical Framework. - The logical framework encourages planners to specify cause-and-effect relationships, and to explicitly state all assumptions. At the top of the framework is a clearly defined goal. Lower levels of the framework specify the why, what, and how to achieve this goal (Worksheet 16). For these linkages to be possible, the internal logic of planning must be sound, and the assumptions of the agency must be valid. Box 13 illustrates for a strategy to reduce depletion pressures on fuelwood supplies.
Box 13. An Example of a Logical Framework
Summary
Indicators
Means to Verify
Main Goal
To reduce depletion pressures on fuelwood supplies
Reduce fuelwood removals from upland pine forests, South Region.
No. of headloads removed
Rapid appraisals; spot checks; periodic surveys.
Why?
(1) To lessen women's work;
(1) Fuelwood collection is time- consuming;
(1) Number of hours per week per woman for fuelwood collection;
(1) Focus groups; time studies;
(2) To aid forest regeneration and growth
(2) Trees are mutilated and regeneration is poor
(2) Field evidence of damaged trees and regenerating trees
(2) Walk-through spot checks; forest inventories.
What?
Fuelwood is more available and better utilized
Increase supply and decrease demand
Reduce average walking distance per headload; fewer headloads per week; smaller size of headloads.
Interviews; time studies; physical measurements (mass and volume).
How?
(1) Grow energy trees in home gardens;
(1) Promote clean- burning species;
(1) Plant 5,000 trees per year of species X, Y, and Z, starting in year 1998;
(1) Walk-by inspections and household surveys;
(2) Increase the adoption of cooking stoves;
(2) Only 1 in 50 families uses them now;
(2) Increase to 2 in 50 families by year 2001;
(2) Household surveys;
(3) Seek kerosene subsidies
(3) Debate through political means
(3) Reduce kerosene price 25% by 1999.
(3) Market studies.
· Force-Field Analysis. - Most goals are characterized by restraining forces that hold back an agency and driving forces that push it forward. In force-field analysis, the agency identifies these forces, and it assesses its degree of influence to control them. If the agency knows which forces are holding it back and which can carry it forward, then the planning focuses on how to reduce the former and exploit the latter. The agency rates the different forces for both importance and the extent of its control over them. The agency concentrates its actions on the high-rated forces (Worksheet 17). An example is presented in Box 14 for improving success in afforestation and reforestation.
Box 14. An Example of a Force-Field Analysis
The force-field is a diagram of driving forces carrying the agency to the right ("progress"), and restraining forces pushing the agency to the left ("obstacles"). The agency is now at position A, and it wants to be at Position B in the future.
Figure
In the following example of afforestation and reforestation, the agency lists all the driving forces and restraining forces. It rates each force by its importance (i.e., amount of impact) and by its degree of control over it. Let's suppose that these scales are measured from "1" (low) to "5" (high), and suppose that the ratings of the agency give the following results:
Importance
Your Control
Total
Driving Forces
Rising prices of wood products
Genetically-improved planting stock
Improved operational planning
Increasing public support
Restraining Forces
Decreasing agency budget
Irregular annual precipitation
Poor procedures for hiring and paying field workers
Losses to fires and grazing
If the agency can find some forces that explain others, the effectiveness of its actions will be greater. For example, suppose that "improved operational planning" can reduce "losses to fires and grazing" as well as "poor procedures for hiring and paying field workers." Because it has these cross-impacts, the agency gives special attention to "operational planning."
· Comparison Matrix. - Frequently, an agency needs to rank several options in a systematic way to arrive at a single choice. The comparison matrix does this through one-by-one comparisons, indicating how any one option (Choice A) compares with all others (Choices B, C, ...Z). The agency constructs a frequency table which shows how many times A, B, C, and Z are rated superior to the other options (Box 15 and Worksheet 18).
Box 15. The Comparison Matrix
The comparison matrix lays out the options of the agency in vertical and horizontal rows. Working in a group or as individuals, the planning team makes one-by-one comparisons among the intersecting pairs. This is a systematic approach to choose among several options, such as when the agency needs to compare programs that have different elements in them. For illustration, suppose that an agency has the following program options and the following decision criteria:
Social Equity
Annual Expenditure
Biodiversity
Political Acceptability
Option A
High
Very Large
Option B
Neutral
Large
Option C
High
Modest
Option D
Poor
Large
Construct the Comparison Matrix:
Option B
Option C
Option D
Option A
Choose A
Choose C
Choose A
Option B
Choose C
Choose B
Option C
Choose C
In these hypothetical comparisons. Option C is preferred three times. The next best choice is Option A, selected twice.
· Role Playing. - An agency wants members of its planning team to interpret problems and feel emotions in the same way as its actual interest groups. The use of role playing can be surprisingly effective for this. The agency assigns different team members to "act" as if they are personalities among its interest groups (Worksheet 19). Role playing is never a substitute for genuine participation by these groups. But it can be used within the planning team to widen perceptions, compare options, and prepare for comments by the real personalities.
2.2 Methods to Examine Spatial and Inter-Sectoral Relationships
Some of the most important information for strategic planning comes from good maps and land-use plans. To the extent an agency relies on maps and land-use plans, it is likely to need the collaboration of other government agencies. This can be an excellent opportunity for inter-agency and "inter-sectoral" dialogue. In addition to maps and land-use plans, the agency may decide to explore spatial and inter-sectoral aspects with the help of simulation models and regional economic models:
· Maps and Land-Use Plans. - Worksheet 20 indicates several types of information that the agency may want presented in the form of maps. Simple techniques, such as overlaying different kinds of maps to show a composite picture of selected areas, can be perfectly adequate in strategic planning. Seldom does an agency need Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to cover all areas, particularly during the early stages of identifying problems and issues. Rather, it relies on simpler and less expensive methods. The agency considers GIS only where detailed analyses will be warranted because of sensitive issues or particularly important land-use tradeoffs.
· Computerized Simulations. - Some computerized simulations show how land uses will change because of population growth and migration, agricultural expansion, and so on. These simulations can be helpful for discussing where and how fast forests are likely to be converted to non-forest uses. Some simulation models illustrate environmental impacts of forest conversion at a regional scale. Others are able to project future demands for forest products and services. An increasing number of these models will become available as computer software continues to improve, and as more packages are adapted for international use. At the same time, an agency wants its planning team to be aware of the many intangible and non-quantitative details that simulations cannot address.
· Models in Economic Geography. - Regional models are helpful for indicating how different kinds of investments-such as in forest plantations, tourist facilities, etc. - will create demands for credit, transport services, infrastructure, and employment. To explore these issues, an agency may want to employ input-output models, regional trade flow models, and production linkage studies. Other models show how populations locate in response to economic and social "growth poles." These and related approaches are described in the references on regional economic development (see Appendix II, Part B).
2.3 Methods for Social, Environmental, and Economic Analysis
All planned changes to use and conserve forests aim to stabilize or improve social, environmental, and economic conditions. Good strategic planning has to anticipate the type and magnitude of impacts to be expected. The principal techniques for this are social assessment, environmental assessment, and benefit-cost analysis. These approaches are increasingly mixed and integrated, e.g., benefit-cost analysis of environmental changes, social assessment of capital investments, and so on:
Social Assessments. - Social assessments have many forms, ranging from ethnographic studies to formal surveys. Some ethnographic studies may take a trained anthropologist several years to complete. Formal surveys can also be time-consuming and expensive, especially if they attempt to include hundreds of people. For these reasons, an increasing number of practical cases aim at an intermediate level of analysis, such as "rapid rural appraisal" (RRA) and "participatory rural appraisal" (PRA). In RRA and PRA, you rely on a combination of interviews, direct observations, and small-group discussions to identify social issues and problems (see Worksheet 21). For most medium and long-term strategic planning, this should be adequate. In other cases, your initial findings will suggest that you need wider coverage or deeper analysis, leading to subsequent stages of fact finding.
· Environmental Assessments - Ideally, environmental assessments provide an agency with a complete ex ante forecast of biophysical impacts, their distribution in space and time, and an analysis of the best ways to mitigate negative impacts. But in practice, it is unlikely to achieve this within the time frame of the planning of the agency. Rather, the agency may need to be satisfied with checklists that state possible impacts (Worksheet 22). In truly complex or controversial cases, the planning team has to allow for the time and costs of a specialized environmental impact assessment (EIA). Manuals on EIA are available from most of the United Nations agencies, international development banks, and international aid agencies. These can be satisfactory if an agency adapts them for the circumstances of its own country. Moreover, an increasing number of national governments are writing their own EIA policies and procedures.
· Benefit-Cost Analysis. - An agency wants its strategic actions to be measured by standards that are financial and economic, e.g., through the application of benefit-cost analysis (BCA). For each major component of a strategic plan, the agency should indicate what levels of investments and recurrent expenditures will be needed. Moreover, the agency tries to establish measures of private and social profitability to guide selection among planning options. This demands a fairly complete set of prices and values, now and into the future. This is almost always a large task, but is generally worth the effort if the planned investments are large. The planning team needs to understand the difference between financial vs. economic BCA, as well as techniques for extending BCA to cover environmental benefits and costs (Worksheet 23).
Seldom an agency is able to completely estimate the social, environmental, financial, and economic impacts of a strategic plan in quantitative terms. Even if possible, it has no way to combine these dimensions in one measure, e.g., monetary value. In principle, planners solve this dilemma through multi-criteria analysis that uses mathematical programming. But in practice, multi-criteria analysis is a sophisticated planning tool that few of the interest groups and team members will be able to understand.
On the other hand, almost everyone should be able to understand a matrix for trade-off analysis. The agency accomplishes this by ranking proposed actions according to different evaluation criteria (Box 16). This can be another way to build participation into planning, and to favor a "systems approach" in comparing alternatives.
Box 16. The Trade-Off Matrix
The trade-off matrix helps the agency choose among alternatives when it has multiple decision criteria to consider. (See Box 15 and Worksheet 18 for another approach to multi-criteria decisions.) In the trade-off matrix, it ranks proposed actions according to each criterion. In the example below, the ''total score" is the horizontal unweighted sum of the rankings.
Strategy or Option
Social
Ranking*
Environmental Ranking*
Economic Ranking*
Total Score**
A
B
C
D
E
* 1 = highest; 5 = lowest
** You may choose to weight some criteria more heavily than others. Suppose that you want to emphasize social more than environmental and economic factors. Depending on the weights you apply, this may favor Strategy B over Strategy A.
Source: Adapted from Yves C. Dubé, 1995, "Macroeconomic Aspects of Forestry Sector Planning", p. 69 in D.G. Brand (ed.). Forestry Sector Planning: Proceedings of a Meeting Held 18-22 September 1994 in Anchorage, Alaska. Canadian Forest Service/Food and Agriculture Organization, Ottawa, Canada.
To conclude, the social, environmental, and economic tools an agency selects for its strategic planning should be determined by:
· the importance and sensitivity of a proposed policy, program, or project;
· the time and budget for conducting the analysis;
· the technical and administrative capacity within the agency - or through the help of external assistance - to undertake the analysis; and
· the extent to which the interest groups will accept the analysis as useful and valid.
2.4 Methods to Discuss the Future
Planners are forecasters. In every country, events are occurring that will change the way people ask and answer the question, "Trees and forests for whom and for what?" In the planning, an agency is expected to anticipate these questions and answers, and to assess what consequences they have for its improvement goals and strategies. An agency will be greatly assisted in this if it can apply a few techniques of forecasting and futures analysis. The techniques help the agency add rigor to judgments that otherwise remain less than fully developed.
There are many books, articles, and training manuals on forecasting techniques. The approaches range from highly quantitative to purely qualitative:
· Trend extrapolation. - In this approach, an agency extends past and current observations into the future, usually through quantitative relationships. For example, if the agency knows fuelwood consumption per capita, and if you also have a forecast of population growth, then you are able to project the growth of aggregate fuelwood consumption into the future. At the same time, the agency needs to identify what may happen because of possible new trend components (e.g., changes in subsidies for petroleum-based fuels). In more complex situations, the demand for one or more forest products is related to several explanatory variables simultaneously (e.g., population, income, prices of substitute materials, and others). Similarly, an agency can attempt to project deforestation rates, diffusion of agroforestry technologies, etc., in relation to their explanatory variables. These types of projections require reliable data sets and experts capable in advanced statistical methods,
both of which may be limiting in many situations.
· Scenario construction. - Here an agency uses perspectives from different people to explore alternative states of the future. The agency asks individuals to describe how they visualize future political, cultural, economic, and technological dimensions of a particular issue related to forests. It then applies qualitative judgments to separate likely scenarios from those which are less plausible. In another type of scenario construction, it asks individuals to imagine the future they want (i.e., in reference to a particular issue), and then to describe a series of events and conditions to achieve it.
· Historical analogy. - Sometimes an agency asks its planning team to look backwards to think about what may happen in the future. For example, it can ask everyone to view its interest groups in an ongoing historical struggle of forces and counterforces, goals and constraints, and actions and reactions. In a second kind of analysis, the agency asks its planners to describe a particular problem about forests and humans in terms of past and current social dilemmas. Then, what could happen in the future that would help the country to solve these dilemmas? In both cases, the agency is looking for historical patterns that signal that an important transformation is possible or even likely. (Also, see "force-field analysis" in section 2.1.)
· Delphi and other techniques based on collective opinions. - Several forecasting techniques rely on group interactions to arrive at a collective opinion. In the Delphi method, different persons respond individually and confidentially to a sequence of questions. At each stage in the sequence, the results from the preceding questions are revealed to everyone. Then, each member of the group is given the opportunity to change his or her assumptions and predictions. Because these changes are made confidentially, each individual is free to change a previous position without being influenced by personal relationships. In a variation of this method, the discussions are open and shared. However, this sometimes gives dominant personalities a great amount of influence, e.g., by getting other individuals to "agree" with them.
Note that all forecasts of the future apply the same basic approach. They identify patterns of behavior, and explore how these patterns will change or stay the same as a basis for anticipating what will happen in the future. In planning, an agency is doing its best to make the future "knowable" by carefully studying Factors A, B, and C that lead to Result Z. The agency uses theories and concepts to predict the future in relation to the present and past. In this sense, the planning team needs to appreciate that good forecasting is a science-it is not wild and undisciplined guessing.
An agency should be alert to books, articles, and videos for forecasting approaches that may be helpful. Particularly because of computer simulations, forecasting models are able to represent increasing numbers of variables and relationships. However, an agency should never accept these in the form of "black boxes." Somebody has to reason that A, B, and C lead to Z. For this, the methods of trend extrapolation, scenario construction, historical analogy, Delphi technique, panel of experts, etc., are basic and indispensable. They require that planners apply structured thinking, even if not always with the assistance of computers. The challenge of the agency is to practice these techniques, and to learn how to adapt them to meet its objectives (see Worksheet 24).
<section>5</section>
CHAPTER 3: INTEGRATING PARTICIPATION INTO THE PLANNING PROCESS
3.1 When Participation Works, What Does It Accomplish?
3.2 Design a Framework for Participation: Overview
3.3 Develop the Participation Plan
3.4 Work With Regions and Districts
3.5 Work With Other Agencies
3.6 Work With Interest Groups
3.7 Work With Advisory Committees
3.8 Prepare a Participation Summary
3.9 Hold the Door Open for Continued Participation
Participation is instrumental to ensure that planning will work towards reflecting the priorities and interests of all major groups and that they will be committed to playing their role in translating planning into action. Most public agencies agree with the principle of inviting citizens and interest groups to participate in strategic planning. But participation demands preparation, management, diplomacy, time, money, and hard work!
The challenge of an agency is to define who the different interest groups are, and then to interact effectively with each of them. Many forms of participation, from passive to active, can be appropriate in different circumstances and with different people. But when participation is not handled well, it can turn into a confrontation over competing ideas and interests. The agency's aim is to prevent this from happening by learning and practicing the principles of effective participation, as summarized in this chapter.
By inviting participation, a forestry agency will never satisfy everyone. On the other hand, the agency has to avoid the isolation that leads to bad choices. It has to encourage partnerships that go beyond what any forestry agency can do alone.
3.1 When Participation Works, What Does It Accomplish?
The interest groups are the individuals and organizations who claim rights and interests in the ways that forests are used and managed, now and in the future. As noted in preceding chapters, strategic planning is less useful when done for interest groups than when done by them. Key interest groups include:
· Large numbers of mainly rural people who depend on trees and forests to provide products and services for their subsistence (e.g., fuelwood, construction materials, food products, medicinal plants, and the like);
· Private businesses - both large and small - whose incomes derive entirely or in part from the use of forest goods and services;
· Environmental, educational, scientific, and related categories of NGOs;
· The administration and personnel in government ministries and agencies whose policies and programs affect forests.
The above interest groups are separated from each other by differences in power and influence, attitudes and values, and education and outlook. Almost always, they have different answers to "Trees and forests for whom and for what?" The purpose of having them participate in strategic planning for forests is to create a two-way exchange about (1) what they know, (2) what they value and believe, (3) what they must have in order to support chosen goals and strategies, and (4) what responsibilities they will accept for forest management.
When people see themselves as gaining or losing something in relation to forests, an agency must demonstrate the fairness of its planning and decision-making. This is particularly true when some people believe they are losing while others are gaining. If it is to be perceived as fair, the planning process must be highly visible and open. People must be able to see how the planning is done in order to believe that it is equitable.
The second and related principle of fairness is that all groups must have access to the agency and its planning process. If the agency director and planning team socialize regularly with an industry group but not with other groups, the planning process will not appear to be fair. When the amount of access is unequal, people assume that the amount of influence is unequal, as well.
Therefore, highly visible ways of participating must be made available so that people know how, where, and when to participate if they choose to do so. The agency tries to have all types of interest groups represented among the planning participants, even if it is difficult to know how much importance to give to each group. Secondly, the agency wants all groups to have access to the planning team and its leaders. Admittedly, this can be very challenging where communication is poor, where there is little history of participation in public planning, and where the administrative culture is unfavorable. Yet when participation in strategic planning works well, it holds out the promise of attractive results (Box 17).
3.2 Design a Framework for Participation: Overview
The participation of interest groups in strategic planning is not a casual matter to be organized at the last minute. On the contrary, it takes considerable preparation to know when and how to invite it, apply it, and respond to it. The main details are:
· Defining who the interest groups are in the different stages of planning, and finding effective means of seeking their participation in those stages;
· Defining the information that interest groups need from the agency, and vice versa, for participation to be productive;
· Anticipating the issues and conflicts that will arise, and how to handle them; and
· Preparing a participation plan that addresses the preceding points.
The ideal first step is to hold a series of interviews, community meetings, and focus groups to identify the pressing issues in forest use and conservation as perceived by organized groups and individual citizens. This is done in the forest regions, as well as in the main cities. This initial fact-finding (also known as "scoping") is the time to assess (1) what the issues will be during the rest of the planning exercise, (2) how the different interest groups feel about these issues, (3) which people hold the keys to the problems and solutions, and (4) what kinds of participation will be desirable and feasible.
Box 17. When Participation is Successful, It Offers Attractive Results..........
1. PROVIDES OPENNESS (TRANSPARENCY), FAIRNESS, AND ACCOUNTABILITY. This saves the planning from criticism by helping to make the process legitimate, credible, and socially responsive.
2. STRENGTHENS THE PLANNING BY INCREASING THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF INFORMATION AND IDEAS. Participatory planning is a means of communication. Through it, people provide facts, questions, perceptions, and opinions. This increases the quantity and accuracy of the "information" that goes into planning.
3. PROMOTES CONSIDERATION OF A BROAD RANGE OF INTERESTS IN FORESTS. Participation of a wide diversity of people helps a country discover the variety of wants, needs, and preferences in forest conservation and development.
4. ALLOWS DISAGREEMENTS AND COMPLAINTS TO BE EXPRESSED EARLY AND OPENLY. Participants who disagree on goals and strategies have the opportunity to discuss them. In planning, certain disagreements can be negotiated before they grow into major conflicts.
5. INFORMS INTEREST GROUPS ABOUT THE REALITY OF DIFFICULT CHOICES. By inviting outside participation, a forestry agency strives to get other people to understand its issues and problems. In the long run, this can help build political and citizen support.
6. INCREASES ACCEPTANCE OF PLANNING AND THE DECISIONS THAT RESULT FROM IT. Through participatory planning, a forestry agency increases the probability that the plan will be accepted at the conclusion of discussions ('the dialogue") about it. The participants who work in the planning develop an ownership of it, and this helps create the commitments for successful implementation.
The early definition of problems and issues can be one of the most difficult tasks in strategic planning because:
· The proposed solution for one group's issue is the problem for another group. To illustrate, the farmers' group that wants free seedlings is a problem for the private nurseries that want to sell them. The rural settlement that wants legal hunting rights in the forest is opposed by the NGO that wants this land for wildlife conservation.
· Many people will not say what they feel, especially in the presence of elites. It can require special intermediaries to bring out issues at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder. Leaders of NGOs, local governments, community associations, etc., are themselves elites who do not necessarily speak for the people they claim to represent.
For these reasons, it can be important to contact people who are not in organized groups. Unfortunately, many planning teams feel obliged to interact with group leaders only. In other cases, people in the communities will not speak out if a government official is present, particularly in a setting of illegal activities (e.g., game poaching and clandestine logging). This poses an obvious problem for choosing who to send on the fact-finding teams. Sometimes the agency avoids sending government personnel and relies instead on neutral intermediaries. This refers to independent advisors, civic or religious leaders, respected teachers, and the like.
Following the initial fact finding, an agency may want to organize one or more advisory committees to work with the planning team. Frequently, a citizens advisory committee is set up separately from a technical advisory committee. The technical committee can be an inter-agency mix of professionals and staff, perhaps joined by representatives of the key interest groups. The citizens committee can be a cross-section of community and civic leaders who are well respected.
The choice of people for these committees is not easy where political, ethnic, and other kinds of tensions divide a society. An agency has no formula other than to learn from committee structures that have worked in the past, either with the agency or in another context.
In small countries, the staff of the forestry agency can usually name all of the interest groups. But in other settings, the number of environmental and rural NGOs runs into the hundreds. This makes it more complicated to design a framework for participation. The means of identifying interest groups is then a combination of several approaches (Box 18).
Several studies conclude that, beyond a certain point, the list of key interest groups does not change, no matter how many additional search techniques you apply. On the other hand, the participation of citizens is a more open-ended selection.
In designing its participatory framework, an agency needs to think carefully about who should be active in the different planning stages. For convenience, it should recognize different groups and levels of participants, such as:
1. Administrators and staff in the agency's central office;
2. Administrators and staff in the agency's subordinate offices, e.g., regions and districts;
3. Administrators and staff in other agencies whose policies and programs interact with those of the forestry agency, or which affect forests;
4. High-level officials such as ministers and cabinet officers;
5. Leaders of forest products industries, environmental groups, peasant cooperatives, indigenous societies, workers associations, women's associations, and other NGOs;
6. Individual members of the organized groups and identifiable interests in (#5) preceding; and
7. Citizens not identified as members of organized groups.
Box 18. Approaches for Identifying Interest Groups
1 SELF-IDENTIFICATION. Some groups and individuals come forward and ask to participate in the planning. For this to happen, the agency makes prior announcements about the planning through highly publicized meetings, coverage in news media, and other information campaigns. However, the approach typically fails to reach people in small towns and remote regions. Secondly, the approach works best for people who already have good access to the agency, but not for people without these contacts.
2. STAFF IDENTIFICATION. Agency staff who have worked in an area for some time can identify groups and individuals who have interests in forest issues, and who are well informed about them. Often, the agency's field staff are the richest source of suggestions if the agency is seeking participation at decentralized levels.
3. CROSS-AGENCY IDENTIFICATION. This can be important when key problems are conflicting policies and the limits of agency authority. For example, the forestry agency can request the agency for land reform not only to represent itself in the planning, but also to recommend farmers and settlers who should participate, as well. The same approach is applied for other cross-agency relationships.
4. IDENTIFICATION THROUGH ADVISORY COMMITTEES. The technical and citizens advisory groups can be asked to recommend planning participants. However, an agency needs to insure the diversity of the people they recommend.
5. IDENTIFICATION THROUGH WRITTEN RECORDS. Most forestry agencies keep records of permit holders, attendees at important meetings, extension contacts, and other forms of registration. In many cases, these records identify the people directly affected by agency strategies. These records can be a means to choose planning participants, sometimes randomly so that their views will be representative.
During the first stages of planning, sometimes only the forestry agency (i.e., groups #1-2) defines the terms of reference, lays out the time schedule, and designs the participation strategy. However, a big mistake is to narrow the planning by not reaching other potential participants, even in these early stages.
The visibility and usually also the organization of the planning can improve by including people from categories #3-5 almost from the beginning. This is particularly true when the planning will cover issues that are controversial. From the start, the planning effort has to be politically credible. The contributions of the technical and citizens advisory committees can be very helpful at this point. Worksheet 25 will help an agency link participation with the stages of planning.
As indicated in Box 19, planning leaders should think about the desired exchange of information that needs to occur between the agency and the planning participants. This clarifies the methods of participation of the agency, and helps it organize for the planning. Usually, the agency looks to interest groups to define perspectives on what they perceive as improvement goals to use and protect forests. From communities and citizens, the agency needs responses to these ideas in terms of who will be affected, and suggestions on how to make the strategies more acceptable.
The best mix of participation approaches is determined by the special circumstances of the agency's planning environment. These circumstances are carefully reviewed in deciding how the agency will structure the participation (Box 20).
3.3 Develop the Participation Plan
Let us suppose that an agency has completed the work described in the preceding section. It held a series of interviews, community meetings, and focus groups to identify issues that will be prominent in the planning. The agency is able to recognize the diversity of interest groups, and it has preliminary ideas about how to involve them in the planning. In particular, the agency is able to recommend people to participate in the technical and citizens advisory committees. The agency has proposed a sequence of information exchanges between the planning participants and the agency. Finally, the agency has studied the special circumstances of the planning context as a guide to choosing participation approaches.
At this point, the ideas and proposals of an agency should come together in the form of a written participation plan. The participation plan is developed in consultation with the agency's subordinate offices and with the other agencies, interest groups, and citizens who will participate in the planning. The agency wants the planning to be visible and politically accountable. This means asking people if they can be satisfied with the proposed process before the agency actually implements it.
Box 19. Information Exchange Between An Agency and the Planning Participants
Planning Stage
Information Flow: From Agency to Participants
Information Flow: From Participants to Agency
Pre-planning and initiation
· Purpose and scope of the planning
· How different individuals define and interpret issues
· Types of issues that will be addressed
· Intensity of feelings on issues
· Opportunities for participation
· Who wants to participate, and in what ways?
Agency's mission
· Agency's own statements of who it is and what it does
· Critique of the agency's statements .
· Suggestions for change
Goals and objectives
· Specific improvement goals and targets
· Reactions to the goals as stated
· Suggested additions and deletions
Action strategies
· Proposed changes in laws, regulations, agency organization, policies, programs, and projects
· Perceived impacts of the actions
· Additional factors that should be considered
· Revisions that can make the actions more acceptable
Negotiate issues
· Legal and procedural frameworks that determine the limits of available solutions
· Interests and positions of the different interest groups
· Ranges of options, and how to expand them
Strategy implementation, monitoring, and evaluation
· Implementation plan
· Reaction on feasibility
· Proposed roles and responsibilities of the interest groups as agency partners
· Suggested modifications
· Agreement (or not) to the final plan and to later evaluation of it
Source: Adapted from J.L. Creighton, 1981, The Public Involvement Manual, Abt Books, Cambridge, MA, pp. 63-65.
Box 20. Choosing Participation Methods in Relation to Special Circumstances
Circumstances or Context
Implications for Participation
An agency is unable or unwilling to provide strong management support for the planning
Obligates a minimum participation approach, and use of mainly traditional methods (e.g., meetings).
An agency's credibility is low, or its past planning record is poor
Apply only the easiest participation strategies until they are mastered; do not attempt approaches that are beyond your agency's capacity to manage.
An agency's resources for the planning are very limited
Multiply the efforts by inviting selected "neutral" individuals or groups to co-sponsor the planning; seek joint planning opportunities in the context of other programs and initiatives.
Short or long duration of the planning period
A short planning process requires extensive preplanning and preparation; a long process requires continuous visibility (e.g., via newsletters, media events, and the like).
Technical complexity
Often demands a good technical advisory committee; can be an opportunity to build inter-agency relationships.
Small or large geographical coverage
Potential for workshops, meetings, and face-to-face discussions in small areas; participation events have to be repeated in different places in large areas.
Level of interest in forest issues
Where interest is low, use highly visible media announcements, public meetings, and information campaigns. Where interests are intense and competing, use conflict negotiation in workshops, advisory committees, and mediation sessions.
Hostile interest groups
May require prolonged pre-planning to give hostile groups an opportunity to express themselves early. May demand early mediation approaches to avoid larger problems later.
Source: Adapted from J.L. Creighton, 1981, The Public Involvement Manual, Abt Books, Cambridge, MA, pp. 77-78.
As indicated in Worksheet 26 and 27, an agency can present the proposed participation activities to allow for easy review and comment. The sequence of activities to accommodate the participation can be organized in a schedule.
The agency develops the participation plan for comment by the agency's director, and usually also by the technical and citizens advisory committees. Worksheet 28 is a guide to help one think about the plan's contents and structure.
A good planning team schedules periodic reviews along the way to determine if the participation is effective. Perhaps the agency overestimated participants' interest in some areas, and underestimated it in others. Or perhaps it relied too much on large meetings, but too little on small-group negotiations. The review is the agency's feedback to help it redirect the participation through the remaining parts of the planning cycle.
3.4 Work With Regions and Districts
Two main advantages of decentralized planning are: (1) it empowers regional, district, and other sub-national offices with their own improvement goals, and (2) it allows these sub-national units to take advantage of their special priorities, capabilities, and forest conditions. The more that planning is about empowerment, the more that it has to rely on a bottom-up process. But for the decentralized approach to work effectively, you need to resolve several issues (Box 21).
Box 21. Success Factors in Decentralized Planning
1. LEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Decentralized planning starts with authorization from the agency director. The principal element in this is trust, accompanied by clear and practical definitions of what is to be planned at sub-national levels. If this has not happened in the past, what could make it happen now?
2. RESOURCES FOR THE PLANNING. The lower-level units must control adequate resources in terms of coordinators, advisory committees, support staff, travel budgets, and the like. The farther one moves down the administrative ladder, the less likely one is to find these resources. What can the agency do to strengthen planning resources at the bottom levels?
3. MECHANISMS TO ACCOMMODATE REGIONAL DISPARITIES. Sometimes one or two regions (or districts) have adequate planning resources, and all others do not. This means that decentralized planning can widen cross-regional and cross-district disparities. What are the possibilities to assist the weakest units?
4. MECHANISMS TO SUPPORT NATIONAL POLICIES. Regional and district planning usually concentrates on projects and operations, but leaves out legal and policy considerations that can be addressed only at the national level. What is the approach of the agency to make bottom-up projects consistent with top-down policy?
5. MECHANISMS FOR COORDINATION AND NEGOTIATION. Information sharing, "clearing house" functions, cooperation and conflicts resolution are essential components of decentralized planning that call for close coordination between different levels of planning.
Worksheet 29 helps an agency explores these issues. Decentralized planning is never easy. Its greatest danger is to create false expectations. This occurs when low-level units send their plans to higher levels, which then ignore or disapprove them because of apathy or disagreements (e.g., over budget and authority). The challenge is to insure that the lower levels are truly empowered.
3.5 Work With Other Agencies
Participation in the planning should extend to government agencies for agriculture, national parks, energy, industry, and other functional and sectoral areas. These agencies are interest groups because the strategies of the forestry agency have consequences for each of them.
When they are partners, these other agencies can help create a favorable political climate for the planning. But if they are ignored or consulted too late, they have less reason to support proposals from the forestry group.
As noted earlier, trees and forests are "inter-sectoral" resources that cut across divisions of land ownership and government programs. For this reason, the approach to get other agencies to participate is critical. Generally, an agency has several opportunities to encourage inter-agency participation (Box 22).
Box 22. Opportunities to Encourage A Variety of Government Agencies to Participate in the Planning for Forests
1. PLANNING SCOPE AND DESIGN. The top administrators of key agencies need to participate in the early stages of planning, especially in decisions about its scope and design. If reports merely given to these agencies to review after the planning is underway, their "ownership" of the process is minimal. Moreover, they will not understand the tradeoffs and conflicts unless they participate from the beginning.
2. TECHNICAL ADVISORY COMMITTEES. If it works well, inter-agency participation helps link strategic planning for forests with initiatives and plans elsewhere in the government. In some cases, inter-agency cooperation provides access to studies and data that otherwise would be difficult to obtain. Importantly, only an inter-agency group can coordinate strategies for river basins and other bio-geographical regions. If the emphasis is ecosystem or land-use planning, the agency relies on inter-agency cooperation for the "systems approach."
3. PERIODIC REVIEWS. As noted, a good participation plan provides for periodic reviews to evaluate progress and problems. These reviews provide additional opportunities for the forestry agency to call upon the other agencies.
INTER-AGENCY COMMISSIONS AND TASK FORCES. In principle, improvement goals for forest use and conservation can be distributed across several agencies. For example, a rural extension agency may have goals to expand its agroforestry services, while a research institute has goals to expand its tree seed collection. Other agencies take on responsibilities for yet other improvement goals, e.g., for wildlife and watersheds. In the end, several agencies share responsibilities in a cross-organizational plan for land use.
Especially because of past fragmentation, inter-agency committees attract considerable attention. More and more forestry officials will find themselves working within these new organizational structures, often in response to government reorganizations for sustainable development.
In these inter-agency committees, the success of strategic planning for forests depends on accountability for results. Accountability, in turn, depends on clear mission statements and clear lines of authority. It also depends on how the new organizations deal with management complexities and inter-agency rivalries. Worksheet 30 helps an agency discuss a number of key points.
3.6 Work With Interest Groups
Strategic planning provides an excellent opportunity to foster public-private partnerships for forest management. By inviting them into the planning, the agency obtains the perspectives and advice of forest industries, social and environmental NGOs, and other interest groups. But this must be done carefully (Box 23).
Box 23. Guidelines for Working with Interest Groups
Principle
Explanation
1. The invitation to interest groups should be open and transparent. Do not deliberately exclude any of them.
The invitation to participate must be democratic and fair.
2. If participation of community groups and small NGOs will be extensive or new, consider using specialists to support it.
The effort to involve grass-roots groups often requires facilitation skills and time not otherwise available.
3. Invite the participation of key groups early in the planning cycle.
Early participation promotes "ownership." Also, the agency needs early discussions to define issues and design the planning.
4. Ensure that the groups understand the planning time frame, and the limits of the planning team's authority.
Participants need realistic expectations of what can be accomplished.
5. Verify the support base of each group's representatives
Some "representatives" are not backed by the groups they claim to represent.
6. If you anticipate antagonism, deal with these groups separately and early. Make personal contacts in advance of meetings.
Build as much trust as possible, and avoid unnecessary confrontations.
7. Practice approaches for managing hostile meetings (e.g., active listening, procedural rules, mediators, humor, etc.)
The facilitation style is more effective than the authoritarian style.
8. Use negotiation techniques in your meetings with difficult groups (see CH 4).
Negotiation helps disputing groups look for common ground and joint interests.
Source: Adapted from J.L. Creighton, 1981, The Public Involvement Manual, Abt Books, Cambridge, MA, pp., 217-225
Unfortunately, partnerships are not always possible. This is clearest in the case of NGOs that exist because of their opposition to a political party or government policy, e.g., on forests. If they participate as partners with the forestry agency, these NGOs risk compromising their independence.
In a second situation, conflicts among interest groups can be too deep to allow them to sit together at the same table with the agency. This is characteristic of struggles between environmental NGOs and industrial groups. Moreover, many of the forest products enterprises compete with each other, just as different NGOs can be rivals for influence and funding. The conflicts are not only between competing positions, but also among different individuals on any side of them.
For these reasons, some groups perceive advantages in not participating. An agency may not be able to change this. In other cases, the agency tries to work with difficult groups separately from others, and it applies approaches to minimize potential hostilities. Chapter 5 will expand on principles and approaches of conflict negotiation.
3.7 Work With Advisory Committees
Advisory committees, working groups, and steering committees can determine the success or failure of the planning. They usually are the main link between an agency and its external environment. In principle, the committees should be able to represent the full range of views on issues and strategies. Additionally, committees may be able to resolve differences on an informal basis rather than through major arguments at the end of the planning. An agency wants advisory committees that are able to contribute in the following ways:
· Help define issues and problems important for the design of the planning;
· Serve as communications links between the forestry agency and other agencies, interest groups, and communities;
· Help design, organize, and co-sponsor the participation plan;
· Assist in informing high levels of government, interest groups, and the communities about the importance of the planning;
· Help select individuals or groups to carry out background analyses, participatory assessments, and other tasks in support of the planning;
· Help evaluate the adequacy of technical, social, and environmental information that goes into the planning;
· Help resolve conflicts among various interests; and
· Assess the quality control of planning reports before they are released more widely.
Obviously, these are important responsibilities. Yet when committees are poorly selected or organized, they cause continuing frustrations for the agency and the committees themselves. The agency faces several potential problems to be avoided or minimized (Box 24).
Box 24. Problems to be Avoided When An Agency Chooses Advisory Committees
1. DISTRUST BETWEEN A CITIZENS COMMITTEE AND A TECHNICAL COMMITTEE. This happens when one committee perceives it has less status and influence than the other. To attempt to prevent this, the agency provides both committees the same materials and access so that one committee does not feel neglected relative to the other. The agency promotes communications between the committees by appointing some persons to sit on both of them. They are the bridge of communications. Moreover, the agency insures that each committee is fully occupied with genuinely important tasks.
2. UNCLEAR OR CONTESTED ROLE IN THE PLANNING DECISIONS. A forestry agency is striving to give "ownership" of the planning to citizens and interest groups, but that can be carried too far when advisory committees want control of final decisions. The final decisions rightfully remain with the agency. To avoid misunderstandings, it clearly defines the limits of an advisory group's authority in advance of its participation, preferably in writing.
3. ADVISORY COMMITTEES AS POWER ELITES. Because of the information and influence they acquire, advisory committees can turn into power elites. They can become the authorities on particular issues, and they can manipulate decisions to suit personal interests. The longer a group exists, the greater are the possibilities for this to happen. One way to try to prevent this is to limit the existence of advisory committees to the duration of the planning period.
4. MEMBERS OF ADVISORY COMMITTEES ARE NOT REPRESENTATIVE. When individuals participate in advisory committees, they often moderate their views as they begin to appreciate the many tradeoffs in the issues they face. This can be excellent for the agency and the country. But it may anger constituency groups if they do not understand the reasoning behind various compromises. To these interest groups, their "representatives" are out of touch with reality. The best prevention is to make sure that two-way communications keep flowing. This puts the emphasis on frequent briefings, open meetings, and other means to facilitate information flows.
The main challenge in selecting people to serve on advisory committees is to satisfy everyone that the agency is including the appropriate mix of interests. Box 25 reviews the advantages and disadvantages of several approaches.
Box 25. Methods of Identifying Members for The Advisory Committees
Method
Comments
1. The agency directly chooses the committee members in order to try to balance different interests.
This can raise suspicions that the agency selects people that it can control, while excluding its critics.
2. The agency chooses the interest groups and communities, and the interest groups and communities choose the committee members.
The agency should be open to inviting a wide variety of interest groups and communities, including those it does not know well.
3. The agency turns to neutral organizations to choose the committee members.
The agency asks a civic group, NGO, external aid agency, or other third party to appoint the advisory committees. This requires trust and good communications between your agency and the partner organization so that each understands what the other needs.
4. The agency announces that it is seeking committee members, and individuals come forward to volunteer (self-selection).
This usually favors privileged interests and individuals. People who are remote, poor, and politically inexperienced are least able to volunteer.
5. The agency uses advisory committees that have worked in the past, but perhaps for purposes unrelated to forests.
The committee members have experience in working together (an advantage). But they are not necessarily the main interest groups in forests (a disadvantage).
6. Members of advisory committees are elected by popular vote.
This may work for a citizens committee where there is an election infrastructure and a timely opportunity to vote. But ordinarily, forest planning is not raised to this political level.
7. The agency combines two or more of the preceding methods.
For example, the agency selects some of the members. They, in turn, select others and also invite volunteers. The selection of the first members is important, since they are responsible for choosing others.
Source: Adapted from J.L. Creighton, 1981, The Public Involvement Manual, Abt Books, Cambridge, MA, pp. 234-236.
A forestry agency has two other primary responsibilities in working with advisory committees:
· It responds to the requests of advisory committees for information and resources. The potential goodwill with advisory groups is ruined if the agency does not meet their needs for information, staffing, travel support, and other resources. Agreements about these resources have to be established from the beginning.
· It must assign the agency's top executives to interact with the advisory committees. Advisory committees are seldom content to meet solely with an agency's liaison staff. If the advisory groups cannot meet regularly with the leaders, then they are showing that their priorities are elsewhere. This can be very damaging for an agency which claims a commitment to a participatory process.
3.8 Prepare a Participation Summary
At some stage, the formal planning comes to a temporary end in the planning cycle. The "plan" is released. At that point, it is very important for the agency to acknowledge the participation it received along the way. This is accomplished in a brief report on:
· The type of participation that occurred (drawing from the participation plan to summarize what, when, where, who, why, etc.);
· The issues and viewpoints raised by the planning participants; and
· The ways in which this participation influenced the strategic plan of the agency.
The participation report helps protect the agency from potential accusations that its planning process was closed. Secondly, the report informs citizens and interest groups that their participation matters. Finally, the report is a valuable means to communicate on issues of forest use and conservation.
The participation report should use simple and direct language. It needs to be issued simultaneously with (or only shortly after) the strategic plan. An agency can express its gratitude for the participation in a number of ways:
· Letters sent by the agency to each participant;
· An official document distributed to participants through the planning team and its advisory committees;
· News articles for newspapers, radio, and television; and
· Speeches at conferences and public gatherings,
The agency is striving to indicate that it is both responsive to and grateful for the participation. To be avoided is a report that defends unpopular elements in the agency's plan, or that neglects the viewpoints of some of the participants. In other words, the participation summary has to be developed with considerable diplomacy by individuals who have excellent skills in communications.
3.9 Hold the Door Open for Continued Participation
In this chapter, we discussed participation in the context of strategic planning. An agency should be able to learn from participation successes and failures to expand and improve participation in the future. This is particularly critical for agencies facing deep conflicts over forest uses and priorities. After the "plan" is finished, an agency wants to pursue options to continue participatory interactions (Box 26).
Box 26. Ways to Continue the Participation of Citizens and Interest Groups in The Agency's Activities
1. MONITORING AND EVALUATION. An agency can engage citizens and interest groups to work as partners with the agency in monitoring and evaluating the improvement goals, such as on a review cycle of every 2-3 years. These details should be an integral part of the participation plan.
2. INFORMATION ACTIVITIES. These include radio and television messages, articles in newspapers, educational programs in schools, art contests, celebrity dinners, and so on. Often, the strongest partners in this are NGOs and international agencies.
3. FIELD TRIPS AND EDUCATIONAL EVENTS. Especially in the case of controversial issues, field trips give people the opportunity to learn from direct experience. They hear and see for themselves. This demonstrates the agency's concern, and may help to moderate extreme positions. These opportunities have to be built into the budget.
4. PERIODIC CONFERENCES AND WORKSHOPS. If an agency does not already schedule them, it should consider periodic public meetings to discuss progress and problems in forest use and conservation. This can be a forum to identify new issues, to discuss new options, and to respond to complaints before they grow into conflicts. The meetings should be scheduled well in advance - and at a convenient time of the year - so that citizens and interest groups can make plans to attend. An agency may need to rotate these by region, or hold both regional and national events.
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 4: INTEGRATING CONFLICT MANAGEMENT INTO THE PLANNING PROCESS
4.1 Understand Your Opportunities to Negotiate
4.2 Identify the Agency's Negotiating Goals
4.3 Choose the Agency's Negotiating Strategy
4.4 Create a Positive Climate for Negotiation
4.5 Improve the Agency's Negotiating Strength
4.6 Turn to Outside Negotiators
All planning for forest use and conservation faces conflicts over "Trees and forests for whom and for what?" (Box 27). These conflicts result from differences in what people want and value, and how they define priorities. Conflict negotiation is when two or more persons with different priorities attempt to reach solutions that will be acceptable to everyone.
A planning team faces several forms of conflict. First are disagreements within the planning team and its advisory committees.. Second are disagreements between the forestry agency and one or more interest groups. Third are disagreements between two or more interest groups external to the agency, but which need to be resolved in order for the planning to move forward.
Depending on how well they are managed, these conflicts can be a productive aspect of the planning. They indicate the existence of multiple viewpoints, and the competition of ideas. But when serious conflicts are not resolved, they can totally destroy the planning process.
In this chapter, a few basic principles of effective negotiation are reviewed. The capacity of an agency to translate these principles into results depends on its commitment and negotiating skills. Like other skills in planning, negotiation needs to be continuously improved through a process of goals, actions, and feedback.
4.1 Understand Your Opportunities to Negotiate
An agency begins by distinguishing conflicts that are negotiable from those that are not. Each individual in a conflict needs a clear view of what it wants, and how this requires the cooperation of another person. Each individual must perceive that negotiation offers a positive gain or reduction of a potential loss. Third, each individual must recognize what the other person's need is, and then be willing to discuss a range of solutions that may satisfy those needs. If one or more of these conditions is not met, there can be no negotiation.
An agency is not in a good position to negotiate without a clear assessment of (1) the conflicting sides to an issue, and (2) the behavioral strategies that people will employ to get their way. It needs to thoroughly research these issues. Moreover, the agency needs to choose the leaders of the planning team and advisory committees for their skills in negotiation. In many practical cases, this should be the primary criterion for their selection. Worksheet 31 helps an agency examine the attitudes and behavior of good negotiators.
Box 27. Frequent Conflicts in Strategic Planning for Forests
· Land-use competition between forestry, grazing, agriculture, and minerals.
· Disagreements over the size, location, and composition of a permanent forest estate.
· Conflicts between de jure (legal) and de facto (traditional) tenure in forested regions.
· Competition between commercial and subsistence interests in forested regions.
· Outdated laws on lands and forests, and conflicts among these laws.
· Overlapping concessions on public forest lands.
· Impractical laws and regulations for trees and forests on private lands.
· Concentration of forest use rights in the hands of politically influential persons.
· Forced relocation of communities when forested lands are set aside for national parks, infrastructure projects, and other developments.
· Disagreements about use rights for timber, water, game, fuelwood, and other forest resources.
· Inadequate consultation with women as forest users at the community level.
· Disagreements over planting native vs. exotic tree species.
· Disagreements about criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management.
· Lack of communication between and among interest groups
· Disagreements among the national government, external aid agencies, and NGOs on priorities for forest use and conservation.
4.2 Identify the Agency's Negotiating Goals
Before an agency negotiates either formally or informally, it should try to anticipate the best and worst possible results that could occur. Good negotiators are able to visualize the best possible outcome of a negotiation process, and work hard to achieve it. This is the ideal goal, and the maximum an agency can expect when everything goes well. At the same time, an agency must define the minimum it can accept. This minimum is the "walk away" position of the agency, meaning that it has a better option than to continue the negotiation.
An agency must know its ideal goal, and introduce it early in the negotiation. It also must have a clear idea of its "walk away" position, but it reserves it for later. An agency may have to adjust it frequently, since options tend to appear and disappear with the dynamics of bargaining. Thus a good negotiator knows beforehand which trade-offs he or she is prepared to make. At the same time, a good negotiator decides in advance which principles and points not to concede under any circumstances. Worksheet 32 helps an agency think about the goals, compromises, and alternatives that define the negotiation framework.
4.3 Choose the Agency's Negotiating Strategy
Negotiation often occurs without a well-prepared strategy. Instead, most people interact with each other according to personal styles developed in their families, religions, and communities. Thus rather than pursuing a particular type of strategy, many individuals negotiate on the basis of habit, intuition, and stereotypes about other persons.
In comparison, truly effective negotiators apply a variety of negotiating strategies in different situations. With practice, each of these strategies can be learned. The planning team must be able to call upon a variety of negotiating strategies that vary with the different types of conflicts it faces. Three basic strategies are:
1. Cooperative strategy. - This is also called the "soft bargaining" approach. It minimizes the degree of conflict by generating trust and kindness. The agency is looking for common ground and joint interests, and it wants everyone to benefit. The agency compromises, and it expects other people to do the same. The approach is at its best when other individuals similarly cooperate. But it does not work when others regard the agency's "soft" approach as a weakness that they can exploit.
2. Competitive strategy. - This is "hard bargaining" in which the agency gives nothing and demands everything. The agency applies pressure to get its way. This approach is important when an agency absolutely must win, even if other persons will lose. The approach works well when an agency faces weak or confused negotiators. It is less appropriate when a long-term relationship has to be maintained, or when the opponents are well prepared.
3. Analytical strategy. - In this approach, negotiation is a problem-solving exercise to create options that benefit everyone. This is sometimes called "interest-based bargaining," or "principled negotiation." The agency tries to: (1) separate the people from the problem; (2) focus on interests, not positions; (3) generate options for mutual gain; and (4) use objective criteria to make decisions.
The negotiator who favors "principled negotiation" does not rely on a forceful personality, or on a position of power in the relationship. Rather, he or she recognizes that everyone has legitimate interests to be satisfied. These interests are met through a search for mutual agreement rather than by application of one-sided force.
Yet this analytical approach also has its limitations. The two or more sides to an argument are not always logical. It can be impossible to avoid taking positions when individuals on the other side of a dispute are being irrational. This is especially true when the conflict is largely about differences in beliefs and values.
A competent negotiator knows what kind of image he or she projects. Good negotiators also recognize and respond to the negotiating styles on the opposite side of an argument. For example, is the conflict with someone who generally needs social approval, and who therefore will favor cooperative negotiation? Or is the conflict with an aggressive personality who enjoys defeating an opponent? Other styles include negotiators who are intuitive, naive, deceptive, hostile, sarcastic, and so on. In each situation, an agency tries to understand its negotiating personality in relation to others. This increases the prospects for the negotiation to succeed.
Box 28 presents the advantages and disadvantages of the different negotiation styles. An agency should review them each time the planning team prepares to interact with people who strongly disagree with it, or with each other.
4.4 Create a Positive Climate for Negotiation
Especially in the presence of conflicts, the planning team needs a comfortable setting where people can talk openly and productively. The climate for negotiation is determined by both physical and emotional factors. By paying attention to these factors, an agency should be able to influence the quality of the discussion.
The choice of meeting sites is very important. An agency invites planning participants as honored guests, and it helps them feel comfortable in terms of how one dresses, the food and drinks its serves, and the choice of meeting room.
If an agency is making a special effort to have peasants and indigenous people participate in the planning, it may decide not to meet in a government building. Rather, the agency should choose a more neutral place where its guests will feel less intimidated. They may be particularly pleased if the planning team meets them in their own communities. This sends the message, "We care enough to spend the time and money to travel here and talk with you." On the other hand, an agency needs a completely different kind of setting in negotiations with forceful personalities.
In negotiation, the physical climate contributes to the emotional climate. But the emotional climate also depends on the manner in which an agency conducts the discussions. Generally, the leader of the planning team sets the tone for communications. A good discussion leader wants the other side to speak freely and comfortably.
Box 28. Strengths and Weaknesses of Different Negotiating Styles
STRATEGY
STRENGTHS
WEAKNESSES
1. Cooperative
· People respond positively to others who are friendly and agreeable.
· Kindness can be perceived as a weakness (i.e., you are "soft" and easy to control).
· You want an agreement that is fair for everybody.
· Soft bargaining elevates a relationship (it shows that both sides care about each other).
· If you represent a group, your cooperation with a conflicting interest lessens your credibility with your constituents.
· You trust the other side.
· The strategy works well for people who know each other, and who share a common picture of issues and choices.
· In their desire to maintain a relationship, negotiators who use the cooperative approach may give up more than they should.
· You compromise when necessary, and you expect the compromise to be reciprocated.
2. Competitive
· "Hard bargaining" may be essential when there is too much at stake to lose.
· The competitive approach does not work if there is a long-term relationship to protect.
· Your aim is to win, even if it means a fight.
· People often accept the proposals of a competitive negotiator when they have no good alternatives of their own.
· Hard bargainers have to maintain force, and this consumes their time and energy.
· You do not trust the other side, and you believe they will take advantage of you at every opportunity.
· There may not be time or resources to mount a defense against a strong competitor.
· People avoid hard Bargainers in order to interact with someone else.
· You insist on your position, and you apply as much pressure as necessary to force it through.
· If "soft spots" are exposed in hard bargainers, they lose effectiveness.
3. Analytical
· This offers advantages for a weak group that confronts a strong opposition (by stressing principles, not power).
· By refusing to take a position, you may unnecessarily prolong the time to settle a conflict.
· You emphasize objectivity and the use of information.
· The approach is one of the best means to create "win-win" solutions in a wide variety of conflicts.
· Analytical methods do not work when the problem is the persons, not the issues.
· You try to persuade the other side by presenting facts, standards, civility, and mutual benefit.
· "Objective standards" usually favor the status quo (i.e., what is, not what should be).
Source: Adapted from R.A. Johnson, 1993, Negotiation Basics, Sage Publications, London, pp. 68-93.
People are quiet and defensive at meetings if their leaders:
· Are preoccupied with maintaining their own control;
· Draw attention to their own self-importance;
· Use manipulation to get their way; and
· Judge each person's ideas against their own opinions about "right" and "wrong" thinking.
Conversely, negotiation goes better when participants feel a spontaneous and open environment for discussion. Hence a good negotiation leader has more questions than conclusions, and shows more empathy than superiority. An agency can refer to Worksheet 33 to help determine whether it provides a comfortable negotiating climate.
4.5 Improve the Agency's Negotiating Strength
An agency cannot hope to negotiate a conflict in strategic planning - such as over competing forest uses - without a source of negotiating strength (or "power"). The environmental NGOs, forest industries, and other interest groups give conflicting answers to: "Trees and forests for whom and for what? In strategic planning, the agency is expected to resolve these differences, often through negotiation. But what is its negotiating strength, and how and where does it originate? Can an agency estimate how much negotiating strength it actually has? Specifically:
· Does it have sufficient strength to convince the different interest groups to negotiate (with it, and with each other)?
· Does it have sufficient strength to produce an acceptable agreement?
The negotiating strength of the agency relative to the other side has three sources: (1) it applies pressure due to its authority, status, and control.; (2) it has something the other side wants, and they are willing to trade for it; and (3) it is credible because its arguments are legitimate and reasonable.
The first source of an agency's negotiating strength is force, i.e., it is bigger and stronger than the other side. The forestry agency derives its authority from laws and regulations. But in reality, the agency may be small, underfunded, and in other ways poorly positioned to negotiate on the basis of its authority. For example, its use of the law is ineffective without adequate enforcement capacity. Its strength is measured by a large number of sanctions and court judgments favorable to the agency. To date, many countries are unable to obtain this result. Moreover, the application of top-down authority as a source of strength can be inconsistent with the spirit of empowerment, i.e., working through bottom-up incentives.
Hence an agency's second source of negotiating strength is to trade something of value with the other side. What does the other side want that an agency can afford to give? The agency must accurately identify the needs of these individuals, and then convince them that a negotiated solution can meet their needs. The agency's approach is: "Our proposal is in your best interests".
Finally, negotiating strength depends on credibility. An agency is credible if the other side sees it as trustworthy, competent, and dynamic:
1. Trustworthy - Credibility is achieved by making and keeping commitments. A trustworthy agency is known for its integrity. It always fulfills its promises, and it always carries out its threats.
2. Competent. - A good negotiator prepares extremely well, and argues from a base of reliable facts and analysis. He or she speaks effectively, portrays confidence, and presents an attractive image. The agency (or person) with a history of negotiation failures - or no history at all - is not credible.
3. Dynamic. - The people who are credible deeply care about their issues. They fight hard for their position because they sincerely believe in it. Their passion signals the other side that they face an opponent who does not easily compromise.
An agency may not be able to call upon all of these strengths. For example, responsible forestry officials often seek a "middle way" on the issues. But the middle way seldom lends itself to passionate expression. Moreover, an agency's past experience in conflict management may be less than ideal. Thirdly, an agency may have a questionable record in delivering on its promises. Each of these can be a problem that lessens the agency's negotiating strength. In many cases, an agency may need to turn to one or more outside negotiators.
4.6 Turn to Outside Negotiators
In its strategic planning, an agency may need outside assistance to resolve conflicts that it cannot successfully negotiate alone. Similarly, members of the planning team may sharply disagree with each other on points of procedure or substance, and an agency may decide to invite an outside person to break the impasse. The use of such third-party interventions is important in the following situations:
· When the two or more persons in an argument recognize their own inability to reach an agreement;
· When one of the disputing persons judges another to be "irrational"; and
· When neutral assistance is needed to add information, conduct technical evaluations, and carry out other problem-solving tasks.
Third-party intervention is especially valuable in conflicts where consequences are serious, positions are rigid, and arguments are personal. It is also valuable where one side has much more power than another, but the agency needs a solution that will be fair to the weaker side. Outside persons may succeed because they have no immediate interest in the outcome. This can be a huge advantage where feelings are intense, and where the conflicting sides are struggling to win at all costs. Depending on the circumstances, an agency calls upon third parties for several different roles (Box 29).
Box 29. Outside Negotiators Can Help An Agency in the Following Ways
1. FACT FINDING. This is when an agency asks someone outside the conflict to review the facts and evidence of the situation, and to report his or her observations to the group.
2. CONCILIATION. The third party talks separately with the disputing sides in order to reduce tensions, and to develop a resolution process that will be agreeable to everyone.
3. MEDIATION. The third party participates in the negotiation process, and attempts to help the disputing sides reach an agreement. But he or she has no authority over the decisions that are reached.
4. ARBITRATION. The disputing sides select a third party who reviews the facts and makes a decision. In advance of this decision, the disputing sides agree to abide by it.
In some cases, an agency is looking for experts to resolve arguments over scientific or technical issues in forest use and conservation. Perhaps just as frequently, an agency is looking for a neutral person who can provide good judgment when a conflict is more about fairness than about forestry. Wisdom comes in both sexes, and in many colors and ages. In all circumstances, an agency needs someone who is widely trusted. This is almost always an individual well-known to the conflicting sides, since there is too much at risk to be entrusted to strangers. Worksheet 34 helps an agency define the characteristics it seeks in third-party negotiators.
<section>7</section>
CHAPTER 5: ORIENTATIONS FOR EFFECTIVE PLANNING
5.1 Link Planning With Decisionmaking
5.2 Develop Skills for Strategic Planning
5.3 Allow Adequate Time and Budget
5.4 Establish Action Teams for Implementation
5.5 Keep Records
5.6 Provide for Management Review
This chapter contains recommendations to help a forestry agency orient itself for effective planning. The actions an agency takes to organize, manage, and train for strategic planning have long-lasting impacts not only on the planning, but also on the agency itself. When strategic planning works well, it usually implies changes in how decisions should be made, how performance should be assessed, and how the different parts of an agency should relate to each other.
Strategic planning does not succeed without strong support for it at the top levels of the agency. Especially in the short term, some management factors are unchangeable. The institutional culture of philosophies, attitudes, and management styles of an agency may be slow to change. But other management factors can be added or modified through re-organization, training, and other administrative means.
5.1 Link Planning With Decisionmaking
Unfortunately, many agency officials regard strategic planning as "just one more requirement." This often happens when the demands for planning are imposed from above or outside, e.g., by planning ministries, budget authorities, executive commissions, and international organizations. Many forestry agencies engage in strategic planning mainly to comply with these requirements, and only secondarily because they want it for self-improvement.
The typical result is that the planning is separated from decisionmaking. Strategic planning becomes a low-priority task handed to a planning group with little or no real influence in the agency. This not only frustrates the agency's personnel, but also angers the interest groups an agency invites to participate in the planning. They feel betrayed when they discover they have been wasting their time in an exercise that has no real importance. This can be worse for an agency's public relations than no outside participation at all.
Thus the only valid organizational model is one that fully integrates strategic planning with administrative decisionmaking. In this model, the planning crosses all administrative and functional units. The planning is not the responsibility of isolated specialists called "planners," but rather of every professional and technical person in the agency. The planning team reports directly to the agency's highest administrator, not to the head of a division for planning.
However, it is easy to understand why agency directors may resist this. At times, the recommendations of a strategic plan for forest use and conservation may conflict with national policy. This can be the case of good intentions but poor execution, e.g., due to an ineffective planning leader. Just as importantly, agency directors worry about how the results of strategic planning will limit their power. In practical terms, it is almost always difficult to get an authoritarian director to fully support strategic planning. On the other hand, the planning team must work hard to win the confidence of the agency's top managers by:
· Having the agency's director assume a lead role in the design of the planning;
· Learning exactly what the director wants from the planning, and working hard to insure that these needs can be met;
· Scheduling frequent informal sessions so that the director is well informed of progress and problems during all phases of the planning; and
· Finding ways to give credit to the director for accomplishments that emerge from the planning.
The wise planning team accepts the responsibility for failures in the planning, but generously attributes its successes to the agency's director. To the extent that the director feels rewarded, he or she will be more likely to endorse the planning and to implement its recommendations. Conversely, no director can embrace a strategic plan that threatens his or her authority. The challenge is to create the right psychological and administrative setting for the strategic planning to reward rather than threaten the agency's leaders (Worksheet 35). This is frequently the single most important thing that can be done to promote the integration of strategic planning with decisionmaking.
5.2 Develop Skills for Strategic Planning
Almost anyone is a "planner" when he or she engages in planning activities. This is the situation of most people in planning teams. However, only a smaller set of individuals are "professional" planners. In either case, the role of a planner is defined in the same way (Box 30).
Box 30: The Role of a Planner Is
1. TO FACILITATE: support the planning process with reports, statistics, fact finding, interviews, meetings, media events, and other inputs.
2. TO COORDINATE: insure that everyone who should be participating in the planning is able to do so and is kept informed about changing circumstances, new information, and other events affecting the work.
3. TO NEGOTIATE: engage in the difficult task of resolving disagreements among individuals and interest groups who may give conflicting answers to "Trees and forests for whom and for what?" A good planner is fair and realistic - and does not impose his or her viewpoints on others. For many members of a planning team, this personal dimension is a greater asset than any amount of technical knowledge.
Strategic planning demands a wide range of abilities. The planning team and advisory committees require people who see planning problems from different viewpoints, and who have several different kinds of skills (Box 31).
In a typical forestry agency, a few key people may have several of these skills. Not all of these skills have to be supplied from within an agency. In fact, an agency often creates good will by inviting outside individuals to join the planning team. The amount of external participation is determined by: (1) the capacity of an agency to maintain oversight and control over the process; and (2) its ability to choose outside members who get along with each other and with the agency. In the final analysis, it is impossible to select for skills without also considering personalities.
Many of the necessary skills can be enhanced through training, although usually not solely for the purpose of strategic planning. Skills in leadership, communication, and conflict negotiation are useful in almost all contexts. Very likely, they are already among an agency's priorities for management development. Worksheet 36 helps an agency think about the skills it must have in the planning team.
Box 31. Planning Relies on Several Kinds of Skills
1. LEADERSHIP. The leader generally has few controls over the people in the planning team or its advisory committees. These groups usually function on the basis of good will and voluntary collaboration. The team leader must be able to generate commitment and motivation so that everyone works cooperatively and efficiently.
2. PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCE IN FOREST MANAGEMENT. Not everyone in the planning team has to be a forester, wildlife biologist, or other specialist in natural resources. Nor is it essential that the team leader have this background. However, an agency cannot undertake a credible planning exercise without professional competence in these technical areas.
3. COMMUNICATIONS. Planning is intensive in communications, especially speaking and writing skills. An agency wants team members who are articulate and confident in their speaking abilities. Good planning reports are written by persons who know how to be brief, focused, and understood by people who are not forestry specialists.
4. PARTICIPATION METHODS. An agency's planning team must be able to apply different techniques of participation by citizens and interest groups. This requires team members who can define interest groups, and who can choose among alternative methods to interact with them (CH 3).
5. CONFLICT NEGOTIATION. An agency needs team members who are good at developing options and compromises when people disagree over goals and strategies in "Trees and forests for whom and for what." The best negotiators are trustworthy, competent, and dynamic (CH 4).
5.3 Allow Adequate Time and Budget
Most forestry agencies have engaged in strategic planning in the past, but often not with a participatory emphasis. When the planning is highly participatory, it requires considerably more time and budget than an "in-house" exercise. Two of the most common flaws are: (1) to underestimate how much time and money will be required, and .(2) to forget that strategic planning is a never-ending process that requires never-ending support.
An agency needs to budget both time and money for pre-planning discussions, reconnaissance visits to the field, meetings with the agency's regional and district supervisors, meetings with interest groups and government agencies, selection of advisory committees, special fact-finding analyses, media releases, and publication activities. An agency is almost certain to have expenditures for travel, contracts, and report production and distribution. The estimates for a time chart and budget are helped if the agency divides the planning into its component parts. The total planning is broken down into a series of stages, each of which has action steps and an assigned schedule (see Worksheets 25, 26, and 27). An agency strives to realistically estimate what it will cost to accomplish each of the action steps, as well as to cover administration and overheads. Finally, an agency includes contingencies to allow for the effects of: "If anything can go wrong, it will."
As the planning moves into implementation stages, an agency will have an increasingly informed view of time and budget requirements. This will enable it to make periodic revisions as it goes along.
5.4 Establish Action Teams for Implementation
How does an agency monitor the implementation of its improvement goals? Many management experts recommend small action teams of about 3-5 persons per team. The leader of the action team is the person who proposed the improvement goal. The others in the team have authority, knowledge, etc., to be able to influence the achievement of this goal.
Normally, an action team does not require the formality of a committee structure. It is better to think of the action teams as working groups, not committees. Depending on the goal, an action team may include persons from outside the forestry agency. This can be a particularly effective way of building partnerships with the agency's interest groups.
The leader of each action team defines the roles the team members. This refers to both individual and collective responsibilities in observing progress, resolving difficulties, and reporting to the agency's director. Each action team should meet according to a schedule. Worksheet 37 gives an agency a format for recording each team's membership, role, and meeting schedule. Once or twice a year, the agency's director should gather the leaders of the action teams to inquire:
· What progress is the action team making?
· What are examples of recent improvements?
· What problems are the action team encountering?
· What is the action team doing to resolve these problems?
These periodic evaluations demonstrate the director's interest in seeing that the planning goals are achieved. In addition, they give the leaders of the action teams an opportunity to interact and coordinate with each other. The evaluation sessions may form part of a larger management review (see section 5.6).
5.5 Keep Records
In order to determine whether an agency is meeting its goals, it needs to keep a record of observations. That is, it sets up and maintains an information system. Depending on the context, this can be as simple as a notebook, or as complex as a computerized data base. The agency's records are its means to monitor progress and problems, and its way to report them within the agency. An agency wants to insure that each action team has a useful record-keeping system, and that this system is periodically updated for adaptability and relevance.
5.6 Provide for Management Review
The agency's director, working through the leader of the planning team, needs to apply management oversight to keep the planning on track. Management reviews are important during the planning itself, and in the implementation which follows. The management reviews are a form of monitoring and evaluation to keep current with planning successes and failures. In its simplest form, a management review asks:
What works? What needs improvement? How can the needed improvements be achieved? Worksheet 38 presents a framework for the management review.
Frequently, the most effective management reviews are confidential interviews, and often with people who are not leaders of the action teams. In this way, an agency is able to obtain candid evaluations from a variety of people, both inside and outside of the agency. Also, some agencies use bulletin boards or suggestion boxes (Box 32). However, an agency needs to validate all of this information in order to disregard erroneous information from people who are uninformed, who are engaged in personal rivalries, or who in other ways are unable to provide objective comment.
Box 32. On Using Bulletin Boards and Suggestion Boxes
Some agencies use bulletin boards or suggestion boxes to encourage people to submit opinions and recommendations. This demonstrates that comments are welcome. Suggestions can be signed or anonymous. Many of the suggestions will have the form: "We should do more to _________" Other submissions will be complaints. The capable administrator is able to find a constructive use for all of these comments.
The suggestions have to be acknowledged within two or three days. This indicates to team members and advisory committees that their ideas are taken seriously. However, the agency cannot place too much emphasis on this approach because it can lead to unrealistic expectations. Many of the institutional features about strategic planning take years to change. When a recommendation cannot be addressed in the short term, the appropriate response is: "We are holding your suggestion for later consideration."
<section>8</section>
APPENDIX I: GLOSSARY
Accountability: (in management science) The responsibility of an organization to provide evidence that its policies, programs, and projects satisfy its interest groups.
Action team: (in planning) A group of people who are responsible for implementing a specific improvement goal.
Administrative culture: The prevailing attitudes, values, beliefs, and rules for acting within an organization.
Benefit-cost analysis: Relationship of projected outcomes to projected costs, with both outcomes and costs expressed in monetary terms.
Bottom-up process: (in planning) To transmit ideas and recommendations from the bottom of an organization to its higher levels
Brainstorming: A structured method to address problems by asking people to rapidly propose ideas, while the group temporarily withholds its comments and criticisms.
Cause-and-effect analysis: (in planning) A method to help a group examine underlying explanations (causes) for what they observe (effects).
Capacity building: (in relation to development planning) The process of improving organizations, human resources, and legal and regulatory frameworks.
Consensus: A feeling within a group that its conclusion represents a fair summary of the conclusions reached by the individual members of the group. Each individual accepts the group's conclusion on the basis of logic and feasibility.
Continuous improvement: To raise the performance of an organization through a never-ending process of choosing and adjusting missions, goals, objectives, and action strategies.
Critical path method: (in planning and programming) A method of scheduling to show a logical and efficient order of activities and events.
Decentralization: The distribution of decisionmaking and operations to lower levels of government (and sometimes to non-governmental organizations).
Delegation: The transfer of planning and management functions to organizations which are funded by a central government, but which do not come under its operational control.
Delivery system: (in management science) Organizational arrangements to provide program services to the interest groups (activities, information, materials, physical outputs, etc.).
Delphi: (in forecasting the future) A method of obtaining forecasts from a panel of experts.
Distributional effects: The ways in which your policies, programs, and projects redistribute resources (and benefits and costs) in the general population.
Efficiency evaluations: (in management science) Analyses of the costs (inputs) of programs in relation to their benefits or effectiveness (outputs).
Empowerment: To transfer authority and resources to enable a person or organization to obtain a greater amount of autonomy and control.
Environmental impact assessment: Analysis of how a particular policy, program, or project may affect water, soils, flora, fauna, and human health and well-being.
Ex ante analysis: (e.g., in impact assessment) An examination of likely or probable effects prior to implementation of a policy, program, or project.
Ex post analysis: (e.g., in impact assessment) An examination that looks back in time to see what happened. While ex ante analysis is anticipatory, ex post analysis is historical.
Externalities: (in management science) Effects of a policy, program, or project that impose costs on (or give benefits to) people who are not in the target population.
Facilitator: (in planning teams) A group member whose role is to help the group function more effectively.
Feedback: (in management science) The information that returns to your organization about the consequences of your interventions. The feedback is available for "learning" so that behavior and decisions can be corrected to favor positive outcomes. See monitoring.
Force field analysis: A method of identifying favorable and hindering factors relative to achieving a particular goal.
Forecasting: (in planning) Views on what will happen in an "unknown" future.
Goals: (in planning) The particular results that an organization strives to produce in carrying out its mission.
Impact: The net effects of a policy, program, or project. See impact assessment.
Impact assessment: (in management science) Evaluation of the extent to which a policy, program, or project causes changes (e.g., economic, social, environmental) for a target population.
Inputs (in planning): The information, budget, personnel time, and other resources that go into and support a planning process.
Institutional development: To improve the laws, regulations, and human resources affecting one or more organizations (see capacity building).
Interest groups: (in relation to forests) Persons and groups who claim rights and interests in the ways that forests are protected and managed, now and in the future.
Intervention: (in management science) A planned effort to produce favorable changes in a target population.
Key result areas: (in planning) The tasks and activities that are most important in determining if an organization or individual will be successful (e.g., in achieving a goal).
Leadership: Guidance of a group of people to accomplish one or more goals.
Milestone: (in planning) The completion of an important event or activity in a longer sequence of events and activities (i.e., a measure of progress).
Mission: (in planning) The broad general purposes for which an organization exists.
Model (in planning) A simplified physical, conceptual, or mathematical abstraction of the real world to help understand relationships (such as cause and effect).
Monitoring: Assessing the extent to which a policy, program, or project is implemented in ways that are consistent with its intention.
Needs assessment: Systematic appraisal of the type, depth, and scope of a problem.
NGOs: Non-governmental organizations such as rural development societies, private businesses, workers groups, cooperatives, social and religious organizations, tribal associations, environmental organizations, and other collective units that are not controlled by a sovereign State.
Objectives: (in planning) Details about goals in terms of what, how much, when, and by whom an action is to be accomplished.
Opportunity cost: If you are following Plan A, then you give up the opportunity of alternative Plans B, C, etc. The value of what you give up (i.e., sacrifice or forego) is the opportunity cost.
Outputs: (in planning) The products that emerge from a planning process in terms of information, actions, and other results.
Ownership: (in planning) To agree with and accept a plan, especially because of having contributed to its formulation.
Pareto principle: The concept that most of a given set of results are due to a small number of causal factors (e.g., 80 percent of the results can be explained by 20 percent of the causes).
Participatory planning: To invite people to express their beliefs, preferences, and recommendations during the course of a planning exercise, especially when the participation extends to people outside the organization that does the planning.
Performance indicator: (in planning) The measurement or other type of evidence that shows whether or not a goal is being achieved.
Planning: The process of looking into the future and defining strategies (actions, interventions) to achieve goals.
Population at need: The elements of the population who have or will develop a particular need, want, or risk.
Role playing: Individuals (e.g., in a planning team) are assigned to act out opinions and behavior in a given situation. This builds understanding of different perspectives, and helps the "players" anticipate real-world interactions.
Root cause: The underlying reason for a symptom, problem, or result.
Scenario: An account or story about what may happen (actions) in a particular set of circumstances (possible environment).
Social impact assessment: Analysis of how different elements of a population gain or lose because of a policy, program, or project. Social impact assessment pays particular attention to the interests of the poor, ethnic minorities, and women.
Social indicator: Measurement of a particular indicator of social welfare in order to track the course of a social issue or problem through time.
Steering committee: A group of advisors who provide information and advice at an executive level.
Strategy: (in planning) A broad course of action, chosen from among alternatives, to attempt to achieve a stated goal.
Survey: Systematic collection of information about a defined population, often by means of interviews of a subsample of the population.
Target population: The persons, households, organizations, and communities to be reached with your interventions (policies, programs, projects).
Team: A group of people working together for a common purpose, e.g., a planning team.
Top-down process: (in planning) To transmit decisions and controls from the high levels of an organization to its lower levels.
Transfer of functions: The handover of some planning and management powers from governments to non-governmental organizations.
Uncertainty: (in planning) The lack of confidence associated with a particular set of predictions or forecasts about the future.
<section>9</section>
APPENDIX II: SELECTED REFERENCES
A. The Nature and Scope of Development Planning
B. Planning with Emphasis on Forests, Land Use, and Rural Development
C. Planning in Relation to Management Science
D. Participatory Methods in Planning
E. Top-Down and Bottom-Up Coordination
F. Conflict Management
G. Methods to Assess Economic, Social, and Environmental Impacts
H. Forecasting Techniques and Futures Analysis
A. The Nature and Scope of Development Planning
Boettke, Peter J. (ed.). 1994. The Collapse of Development Planning. New York University Press, New York. The "Austrian School" of political economy argues that development planning fails when it imposes too many controls and when it weakens market initiatives. Case studies examine planning performance in Europe, Japan, South Korea, China, India, Sri Lanka, and Africa.
Caiden, Naomi, and Aaron Wildavsky. 1974. Planning and Budgeting in Poor Countries. John Wiley and Sons, New York. A classic on how and why development planning has to change in order to become more useful.
Conyers, Diana and Peter Hills. 1984. An Introduction to Planning in the Third World. John Wiley and Sons, New York. Comprehensive overview with extensive references on planning approaches, techniques, and organization. Excellent one-volume overview.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). 1995. Planning for Sustainable Development: Country Experiences. Paris, France. Background and summaries of a workshop on preparing and implementing national plans for sustainable development, following the 1992 UNCED.
Waterston, Albert. 1979. Development Planning: Lessons of Experience. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. A classic and comprehensive work on the subject, this book was first published in 1965.
B. Planning with Emphasis on Forests, Land Use, and Rural Development
Bendavid-Val, A. 1991. Regional and Economic Analysis for Practitioners. 4th ed. Praeger, New York. Location analysis, comparative advantages, regional income, and other concepts and methods in regional planning. Requires intermediate preparation in economic theory.
Brand, David G. (ed.). 1995. Forestry Sector Planning. Natural Resources Canada with Food and Agriculture Organization, Ottawa: Ontario. Concept papers that define the tasks and challenges of planning for forest protection and management, plus several case studies (Canada, Chile, India, Japan, eastern and southern Africa, Mozambique, and Senegal).
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 1984. Land Evaluation for Forestry. FAO Forestry Paper 48. Rome Italy.
FAO. 1986. Guide for Training in the Formulation of Agricultural and Rural Investment Projects. Development Policy Studies and Training Service, Policy Analysis Division. Rome, Italy. Five volumes that lead analysts through all the stages of designing and carrying out field projects in rural settings.
FAO. 1988. National Parks Planning. FAO Conservation Guide 17. Rome, Italy.
FAO 1993. Guidelines for Land-Use Planning. FAO Development Series 1, Inter-Departmental Working Group on Land Use Planning. Rome, Italy. A complete step-by-step guide to principles and methods of preparing land-use plans. Helpful checklists, tables, figures, and diagrams.
Haynes, Richard, Patrice Harou, and J. Mikowski (eds.). 1991. Forest Sector Analyses for Developing Countries. Proceedings of Working Groups S6.12-03 and S6.11-00, Tenth World Forestry Congress, Paris, France. Quantitative market models.
Laconte, P., and Y.Y. Haimes. 1985. Water Resources and Land Use Planning: A Systems Approach. NATO Advanced Studies Institute Series, Nijhoff, Netherlands.
Miller, Sandra E., Craig W. Shinn, and William R. Bentley. 1994. Rural Resource Management. Iowa State University Press, Ames. Frameworks for defining and resolving problems, and using group processes to arrive at decisions. Easy to read, pragmatic.
Nilsson-Axberg, Goran. 1993. Forestry Sector and Forest Plantations Sub-Sector Planning in South and South-East Asia. Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, SIMS Report No. 34, Uppsala, Sweden. Lessons learned from national planning exercises in several Asian countries.
OAS (Organization of American States). 1984. Integrated Regional Development Planning: Guidelines and Case Studies from OAS Experience. Washington, DC. Describes successes and failures of regional planning in Latin America, and discusses lessons that were learned.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). 1995. Developing Environmental Capacity: A Framework for Donor Involvement. Paris, France. Overview of needs and approaches to strengthen institutions for environmental management.
Porter, Douglas R., and David A. Salvesen (eds.). 1995. Collaborative Planning for Wetlands and Wildlife. Island Press, Washington, DC. Case studies in the USA of reconciling problems between environmental protection and economic development, using methods of special-area conservation planning.
Sargent, Frederic O., Paul Lusk, Jose A. Rivera, and Maria Varela. 1995. Rural Environmental Planning for Sustainable Communities. Island Press, Washington, DC. Describes methods and cases of a citizen-based approach to rural planning in the USA, emphasizing how to balance positive economic development with measures to protect forests and other natural resources.
Sheng, T.C. 1990. Watershed Management Field Manual, Watershed Survey and Planning. FAO Conservation Guide 13/6. Rome, Italy.
C. Planning in Relation to Management Science
Bowden, Peter. 1988. National Monitoring and Evaluation. Avebury, Aldershot, England. Overview of principles and practices in project management, monitoring, and evaluation.
Brinkerhoff, Derick W. 1991. Improving Development Program Performance: Guidelines for Managers. Lynne Rienner Publishers, Boulder, CO. Written for program managers in developing countries who are interested in improving the performance of their organizations.
Bryson, John M. 1988. Strategic Planning for Public and Nonprofit Organizations. Jossey-Bass Publishers, San Francisco, CA. Frameworks and processes for defining an organization's mission, and for managing its external and internal environments. Includes many planning tools and worksheets.
Chadwick, G. 1978. A Systems View of Planning, 2nd ed. Pergamon Press, Oxford. A formal and analytical presentation of the systems approach.
Deming, W. Edwards. 1993. The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA. Written by a pioneer in productivity research and quality improvements. Emphasizes the systems approach, leadership, and cooperation in organizations. Readers may want to consult other books by the same author.
Grundig, James E. (ed.). 1992. Excellence in Public Relations and Communication Management. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers, Hillsdale, NJ. Comprehensive volume that ranges widely over many topics on excellence in management.
Harrison, Michael I. 1987. Diagnosing Organizations: Methods, Models, and Processes. Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA. Reference on how to define and interpret organizational problems, and how to improve organizational effectiveness.
Ickis, John C., Edilberto de Jesus, and Rushikesh Maru (eds.). 1986. Beyond Bureaucracy: Strategic Management of Social Development. Kumarian Press, West Hartford, CT. How public management must change to become more people-oriented. Principles and case studies. Not a "how to" book.
Israel, Arturo. 1987. Institutional Development: Incentives for Performance. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. Excellent conceptual framework of institutional and managerial issues in the' developing countries, written by an advisor to the World Bank.
Kiggundu, Moses N. 1989. Managing Organizations in Developing Countries. Kumarian Press, West Hartford, Connecticut, USA. Defines the operating and strategic tasks of public organizations, and how these tasks should contribute towards important goals (e.g., decentralization, technology transfer, human resource development, and others).
Mayo-Smith, Ian, and Nancy L. Ruther. 1986. Achieving Improved Performance in Public Organizations: A Guide for Managers. Kumarian Press, West Hartford, CT. An extremely useful guidebook that presents a step-by-step process tested in more than 30 countries where Mayo-Smith and Ruther worked as management consultants.
Morrisey, George L. 1976. Management by Objectives and Results in the Public Sector. Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading Park, MA. Clear exposition of how to work for improvements in government agencies.
Peters, Thomas J., and Robert H. Waterman, Jr. 1982. In Search of Excellence. Harper and Row, New York. Examples of management success, mainly in private businesses, but with applications for all organizations. Also, see other books by these same authors.
Saylor, James H. 1992. TQM Field Manual. McGraw-Hill, New York. Methods to work towards "Total Quality Management," emphasizing processes and tools.
Shearer, Clive. 1994. Practical Continuous Improvement for Professional Services. American Society for Quality Control (ASQC) Press, Milwaukee, WI. Step-by-step guide to work towards the goal of "Total Quality." Written by a structural engineer, but with applications for most service-oriented organizations.
D. Participatory Methods in Planning
Anthony, William P. Participative Management. 1978. Addison-Wesley Publishing, Reading, MA.
Aubrey, Charles A., and Patricia K. Felkins. 1988. Teamwork: Involving People in Quality and Productivity Improvement. American Society for Quality Control (ASQC) Press, Milwaukee, WI.
Clement, Francois, and Deo Gratias Kabamdana. 1995. Decentralized and Participatory Planning. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, Italy. Guidelines and methods for bottom-up development planning.
Cohen, John M., and Norman Uphoff. 1977. Rural Development Participation: Concepts and Measures for Project Design, Implementation, and Evaluation. Cornell University, Ithaca, New York.
Creighton, James L. 1981. The Public Involvement Manual. Abt Books, Cambridge, MA. Principles and methods of how to organize for public involvement. Clearly developed, and easy to understand. Highly recommended.
Davis-Case, D'Arcy. 1989. Community Forestry: Participatory Assessment, Monitoring, and Evaluation. FAO Community Forestry Note 2, Rome, Italy. Concept, methods, and tools for PAME in community forestry, but adaptable for participation in strategic planning. Highly recommended.
Davis-Case, D'Arcy. 1990. The Community's Toolbox: The Idea, Methods, and Tools for Participatory Assessment, Monitoring, and Evaluation in Community Forestry. FAO Community Forestry Field Manual 2, Rome, Italy. Can be used as the field manual to accompany the preceding reference. Highly recommended.
Driver, C.A. 1990. People's Participation in Environmental Projects in Developing Countries. IIED, London, UK.
Esman, Milton J., and Norman Uphoff. 1984. Local Organizations: Intermediaries in Rural Development. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Garcia-Zamor, Jean-Claude. 1985. Public Participation in Development Planning and Management: Cases from Africa and Asia. Westview Press, Boulder, CO.
Jedlicka, Allen. 1987. Organizational Change and the Third World. Praeger, New York. Principles and guidelines for helping agencies understand the views and attitudes of their interest groups.
Korten, David C., and Rudi Klauss (eds.). 1984. People-Centered Development: Contributions Toward Theory and Planning Frameworks. Kumarian Press, West Hartford, CT.
Salmen, L.F. 1987. Listen to the People. Oxford University Press, New York.
E. Top-Down and Bottom-Up Coordination
FAO. 1990. Toward Improved Multilevel Planning for Agricultural and Rural Development in Asia and the Pacific. FAO Economic and Social Development Paper No. 52, Rome, Italy.
Kochen, M., and K.W. Deutsch. 1980. Decentralization: Sketches Towards a Rational Theory. Oelgeschlager, Gunn, and Hain, Cambridge, MA.
Maetz, Materne, and Maria G. Quieti. 1987. Training for Decentralized Planning: Lessons from Experience. Development Policy Studies and Training Service, Policy Analysis Division, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Rowat, D.C. (ed.). 1980. International Handbook on Local Government Reorganization. Aldwych Press, London.
Stohr, W.B., and D.R. Fraser-Taylor (eds.). 1981. Development from Above or Below? The Dialectics of Regional Planning in Developing Countries. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
F. Conflict Management
Brown, Valerie, David I. Smith, Rob Wiseman, and John Handmer. 1995. Risks and Opportunities: Managing Environmental Conflict and Change, Earthscan Publications, London. Outlines five stages in managing environmental conflicts, and discusses skills and techniques for problem solving. Includes case studies of conflicts over environmental issues, and gives examples of tools for conflict management.
Casse, Pierre. 1992. The One-Hour Negotiator. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, UK. A practical guide to get ready for negotiations when you have only one hour to prepare. Considers negotiating styles, behaviors, and dynamics.
Fisher, Roger, and William Ury. 1991. Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving In, 2nd ed. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA, USA. Excellent overview and often used as a reference. The interested reader should consult other books by these authors, as well.
Fuller, George. 1991. The Negotiator's Handbook. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Very good one-volume treatment of principles and approaches in negotiating.
Johnson, Ralph A. 1993. Negotiation Basics: Concepts, Skills, and Exercises. Sage Publications, Newbury Park, California. Excellent overview of theory and principles in negotiating.
Pendzich, Christine, Garry Thomas, and Tim Wohlgenant. 1994. The Role of Alternative Conflict Management in Community Forestry. Forests, Trees, and People Program - Phase II, Working Paper No. 1, Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome. Overview of skills needed to mediate conflicts in community forestry. Includes case studies from Latin America.
G. Methods to Assess Economic, Social, and Environmental Impacts
Economic:
Dixon, John A., D.E. James, and P.B. Sherman. 1989. The Economics of Dryland Management. Earthscan Publications, London, UK.
Dixon, John A., and M.M. Hufschmidt (eds.). 1986. Economic Valuation Techniques for the Environment: A Case Study Workbook. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.
Dixon, John A., R.A. Carpenter, L.A. Fallon, P.B. Sherman, and S. Manopimoke. 1994. Economic Analysis of the Environmental Impacts of Development Projects. Earthscan Publications, London, UK. Broad survey of economic techniques for valuing environmental goods and services.
Gregersen, Hans M., K.N. Brooks, J.A. Dixon, and L.S. Hamilton. 1987. Guidelines for Economic Appraisal of Watershed Management Projects. FAO Conservation Guide 16, Rome, Italy.
Gregersen, H.M., J.E.M. Arnold, A.L. Lundgren, and A. Contreras-Hermosilla. 1995. Valuing Forests: Context, Issues, and Guidelines. FAO Forestry Paper 127, Rome, Italy. Useful and clearly presented valuation concepts and applications, with many references. Highly recommended.
Markandya, A., and J. Richardson. 1992. The Earthscan Reader in Environmental Economics. Earthscan Publications, London, UK. Can be helpful background to frame important issues.
Panayotou, Theodore. 1993. Green Markets: The Economics of Sustainable Development. Institute of Contemporary Studies Press, San Francisco, CA., Can be helpful background to frame important issues.
Pearce, David W., A. Markandya, and E.B. Barbier. 1989. Blueprint for a Green Economy. Earthscan Publications, London, UK. Can be helpful background to frame important issues.
Pearce, David, E.D. Barbier, and A. Markandya. 1990. Sustainable Development: Economics and the Environment in the Third World. Aldershot, Elgar, UK. Can be helpful background to frame important issues.
Sang, Heng-Kang. 1995. Project Evaluation. Ashgate Publishing Ltd., Hants, England.
Intermediate treatment of benefit-cost analysis. Clearly presented, many numerical examples.
Thompson, Mark S. 1980. Benefit-Cost Analysis for Program Evaluation. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, California. Very clear and direct presentation, with many examples.
Winpenny, J.T. 1991. Values for the Environment: A Guide to Economic Appraisal. HMSO, London. Many examples and clear presentation. Useful as an overview.
Social:
Cernea, M.M (ed). 1985. Putting People First: Sociological Variables in Rural Development. Oxford University Press, New York.
Cernea, M.M. 1991. Using Knowledge from Social Science in Development Projects. World Bank Discussion Paper 114, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Finsterbusch, Kurt, Jasper Ingersoll, and Lynn Llewellyn (eds.). 1990. Methods for Social Analysis in Developing Countries. Westview Press, Boulder, CO. Issues and framework, followed by case studies of different approaches.
Molnar, A. 1989. Community Forestry: Rapid Appraisal. Community Forestry Note 3, Forestry Department, FAO, Rome, Italy. Context of rapid rural appraisal, and presentation of methods.
Rossi, Peter H., and Howard E. Freeman. 1993. Evaluation: A Systematic Approach. Sage Publications, Newbury Park, California. Comprehensive treatment of how to assess programs and projects that have social objectives.
Smith, L. Graham. 1993. Impact Assessment and Sustainable Resource Management. Longman Scientific and Technical, Essex, England.
Environmental:
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 1992. Environmental Guidelines for Selected Agricultural and Natural Resources Development Projects. Manila, Philippines.
Biswas, A.K., and Q. Geping (eds.). 1987. Environmental Impact Assessment for Developing Countries. Tycooly International, London, UK.
Carpenter, R.A. 1983. Natural Systems for Development: What Planners Need to Know. East-West Center, Honolulu, Hawaii. Handbook of diagnostic methods and management practices for soil erosion and salinization, pest management, wildlife management, and air and water pollution.
Carpenter, R.A., and J.E. Maragos. 1985. How to Assess Environmental Impacts on Tropical Islands and Coastal Areas. East-West Center, Honolulu, Hawaii.
ECE (Economic Commission for Europe)/FAO. 1992. Application of Environmental Impact Assessment Principles to Policies, Plans, and Programs. Environmental Series No. 5, Geneva, Switzerland.
Edward-Jones, G., and M. Gough. 1993. ECOZONE: A Knowledge-Based Computer System for Training in Environmental Impacts of Agricultural Projects. Internal Document 18, FAO/ESPT, Rome, Italy. Computer software demonstrates the environmental impacts that result from programs and projects.
Erickson, Paul A. 1994. A Practical Guide to Environmental Impact Assessment. Academic Press, San Diego, CA. Good reference on the principles and methods of carrying out an EIA. Addresses different ecosystems (aquatic and terrestrial), as well as social, cultural, and economic aspects. Highly recommended.
FAO. 1982. Environmental Impact of Forestry: Guidelines for Its Assessment in Developing Countries. FAO Conservation Guide 7. Rome, Italy.
Kozlowski, J. and G. Hill (eds.). 1993. Towards Planning for Sustainable Development: A Guide for the Ultimate Environmental Threshold (UET) Method. Ashgate Publishing, Hants, England. A land-use planning method to identify and screen harmful environmental effects of development proposals. Concepts, illustrations, and cases.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). 1994. Project and Policy Appraisal: Integrating Economics and Environment. OECD, Paris, France. Useful overview of economic principles to value environmental services. Concepts, examples, some theory.
UNDP (United Nations Development Program). 1990. UNDP's Handbook and Guidelines for Environmental Management and Sustainable Development. UNDP, New York.
UNEP (United Nations Environmental Program). 1986. Environmental Impact Assessment: Basic Procedures/or Developing Countries. Nairobi, Kenya.
UNEP. 1986. Environmental Guidelines for Rural Roads. Nairobi, Kenya.
U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service. 1995. Environmental Analysis: A Decision Making Process [VIDEO]. USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC. A 75-minute training film on how to conduct an environmental assessment, using an example of road building in Latin America. Available in English, Spanish, Portuguese, and French.
Wathern, P. (ed.). 1988. Environmental Impact Assessment: Theory and Practice. Unwin Hyman, London, UK.
Winpenny, J.T. 1991. Valuing the environment: A guide to economic appraisal. London: ODA.
World Bank. 1992. Environmental Assessment Sourcebook. Technical Paper 139, Washington, DC.
Wrammer, P. 1987. Procedures for Environmental Impact Assessment of FAO Field Projects. Rome, Italy.
H. Forecasting Techniques and Futures Analysis
Armstrong, J. Scott. 1985. Long-Range Forecasting: From Crystal Balls to Computer. 2nd ed. John Wiley and Sons, New York. Comprehensive treatment of a wide range of topics, with extensive references. Relies heavily on statistical and mathematical approaches.
Casti, John L. 1990. Searching for Certainty: What Scientists Can Know About the Future. W. Morrow, New York.
Elwell, Frank W. 1991. The Evolution of the Future. Praeger Publishers, New York.
Flechtheim, Ossip Kurt. 1987. Forecasting in the Social and Natural Sciences. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA.
Godet, Michel. 1994. From Anticipation to Action: A Handbook of Strategic Prospective. UNESCO Publishing, Paris.
Helmer, Olaf. 1983. Looking Forward: A Guide to Futures Research. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, California.
Saaty, Thomas L., and Luis G. Vargas. 1991. Prediction, Projection, and Forecasting. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA. Summarizes various methods to predict and control the future, mainly through examples. Schwarz, Brita, Uno Svedin, and Bjorn Wittrock. 1982. Methods in Future Studies. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Wheelwright, S.C., and S. Makridakis. 1989. Forecasting Methods for Management, 5th ed. John Wiley and Sons, New York. Presents 24 forecasting techniques.
Willis, Raymond E. 1987. A Guide to Forecasting for Planners and Managers. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
<section>a</section>
APPENDIX III: WORKSHEETS
Worksheet 1. Evolution in Planning: Toward New Ways of Thinking
Worksheet 2. The Contents of a Strategic Plan for Forest Use and Conservation
Worksheet 3. Questions to Define and Clarify the agency's Mission
Worksheet 4. Improvement Goals to Support Mission Elements
Worksheet 5. Cross-Cutting Improvement Goals: The Institutional Factors
Worksheet 6. Assigning Priorities to Improvement Goals
Worksheet 7. Guidelines for Writing Objectives
Worksheet 8. Actions in Support of Objectives.
Worksheet 9. Major Issues to be Negotiated.
Worksheet 10. What Problems Can an Agency Predict in Implementation?
Worksheet 11. How Will an Agency Monitor, Evaluate, and Adjust its Planning?
Worksheet 12. Guidelines for Effective Brainstorming.
Worksheet 13. Guidelines to Clarify the Statement of a Problem.
Worksheet 14. Strengths and Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats.
Worksheet 15. Constructing Problem Trees.
Worksheet 16. The Logical Framework.
Worksheet 17. Force-Field Analysis.
Worksheet 18. Constructing a Comparison Matrix.
Worksheet 19. Role Playing.
Worksheet 20. Checklist of Information Needed in Maps.
Worksheet 21. Designing a Social Assessment.
Worksheet 22. Issues in an Environmental Assessment.
Worksheet 23. Frameworks of Benefit-Cost Analysis.
Worksheet 24. Exercises for Forecasting and Futures Analysis.
Worksheet 25. Participation in the Different Stages of Planning.
Worksheet 26. Proposing a Set of Participation Activities.
Worksheet 27. Schedule of the Participation Activities.
Worksheet 28. What Goes Into a Participation Plan?
Worksheet 29. Issues in Multi-Level Planning.
Worksheet 30. Issues in Working With Other Agencies.
Worksheet 31. Attitudes and Behaviors of People Who Are Good Negotiators
Worksheet 32. Goals, Compromises, and Alternatives in a Negotiation Framework
Worksheet 33. The Physical and Emotional Climate for Negotiation
Worksheet 34. Successful Behavior in Conflict Conciliation and Mediation.
Worksheet 35. Rewards and Threats for the Agency's Top Executives.
Worksheet 36. Evaluation of Team Skills for Strategic Planning.
Worksheet 37. Action Teams for Plan Implementation.
Worksheet 38. Questions to Guide a Management Review.
Worksheet 1. Evolution in Planning: Toward New Ways of Thinking
In each row, check the column (left or right) that best describes the prevailing philosophy in the agency. Is it traditional? Or is it moving towards the new thinking? Each member of the planning team should answer individually. Then, compare and discuss your points of agreement and disagreement.
TRADITIONAL PLANNING: PLANNING AS CENTRAL CONTROL (TAKING POWER)
NEW THINKING: PLANNING AS RECOGNIZING/SETTING ROLES, RESPONSABILITIES AND BENEFITS
Planning is the government's blueprint to move the country in directions proposed by government planners.
Planning is the government's method of learning how it can support local communities, private enterprises, and other non-governmental interests.
Planning concentrates on economic growth. Its framework and tools are mainly those of economics.
Planning tries to harmonize economic growth, social equity, and environmental quality. Its frameworks and tools are highly multi-disciplinary.
The product of a planning exercise is a document called a "plan."
Planning does not always lead to a formal "plan." Alternative products of planning include organizational charts, budgets, and memoranda on desired actions.
Governments first establish high-level policies, and then draw up plans to fulfill them.
Policies and plans are mixed and overlapping. Policies are impractical without attention to how they will be implemented (i.e., through planning).
Planning is about inventing an entirely different and wonderful future (a Utopian dream).
Planning moves forward in small and incremental steps. Planning creates a better future by working to overcome practical problems in the present.
The planning team spends most of its time in the office to study documents and write a plan.
The planning team spends most of its time in other agencies and with interest groups to learn what they want, and why.
The main responsibility for planning is with professional planners, who prepare plans for the chief administrator.
The main responsibility for planning is with your director, who calls upon the whole organization to contribute to the planning.
Planning is a sequential and hierarchical process that ends when a plan is officially approved.
Planning is a circular and iterative process of many simultaneous actions, and it never ends.
A good plan can take years to write.
Writing a plan take just a few days. But it can take months of fact-finding, meetings, and consultations to know what to put into it.
Worksheet 2. The Contents of a Strategic Plan for Forest Use and Conservation
Evaluate the agency's current planning document for forests. Does it contain the following elements? Use check marks, and then discuss with others in the planning team.
Executive Summary
Opens with introduction by the minister, director, or other high-level executive
Gives brief statements of goals and expected benefits.
Highlights (very briefly) new or modified policies, institutions, programs, projects, and budgets to reach the goals.
Background and Scope
Defines the planning period, and states when and how the planning was done.
Describes relationships with other planning and plans (past, present, future).
Describes composition of planning team(s), and acknowledges all sources of collaboration and support.
Contributions of Forests in National Development: Present Situation and Future Possibilities
Summarizes the situation (problems, trends, opportunities) in forest resources (but puts most details into appendices)
Highlights the importance of forests in national policy according to functional areas such as: (1) economic contributions, (2) social and cultural contributions, and (3) environmental contributions. Note: Keep this brief by using tables, graphs, and charts to summarize.
For each of the functional areas, discusses (i) current issues and problems, and (ii) future possibilities. Strongly emphasizes inter-sectoral support (forests in relation to agriculture, energy, parks and protected areas, industry and commerce, tourism, education, and so on). Note: Keep this focused and brief.
Strategic Directions
Recommends strategic directions (actions and policies) to break constraints, fill gaps, and make progress towards the selected goals. Discusses how the priority goals for forests contribute to priorities at top national levels. Describes and quantifies (when possible) benefits and costs of the recommended strategic directions. Note: This is the core of the plan, and it deserves corresponding attention.
Specifies objectives to be attained according to a time schedule (often presented as a matrix).
Implementation Plan
Presents requirements for re-organization, budget, personnel, and training to implement the initiatives (often presented as tables or matrices).
Proposes when and how the plan will be reviewed and evaluated.
Note: This part of the document usually does not circulate widely. Sometimes, it is included in the appendices.
Appendices
Includes supporting materials (forest statistics, maps, consultants' reports, budget projections, and so on).
Worksheet 3. Questions to Define and Clarify the agency's Mission
An organization's mission is the broad general reason for its existence. Answer the following questions, first individually and then in group discussions. This can be helpful at both national and decentralized levels. It can provide the focus for workshops that convene leaders from other agencies, NGOs, community groups, industry associations, and other interest groups.
1. What are our principal functions and services? In other words, why does our organization exist? What is unique about us?
2. What are our priority programs at the present time? What do we spend the most money on? What activities occupy the most personnel? Should this be changing? How and why?
3. What philosophical issues are most important in our organization? (related to public image, environmental matters, division of public and private activities, and so on)
4. What interest groups do we principally serve? Is this what is intended by existing legislation, national development plans, and policy statements?
5. What groups and individuals do we not serve well? What are the reasons for this?
6. With what organizations do we compete or overlap (public and private), and in what ways?
7. In what ways are we different and the same than these other organizations? What are our special capabilities and strengths? And what are our weaknesses?
8. For functions and services that we provide now, which could be transferred to other agencies, private enterprises, NGOs, and community groups? What are the advantages and disadvantages of this (for each case)?
9. What is different about what we do now as compared with five years ago?
10. What will (or should) be different about our mission five years in the future?
Worksheet 4. Improvement Goals to Support Mission Elements
This can be the format of tables the agency distributes to groups and individuals who participate in workshops and planning. For elements in the agency's mission, use this format to specify success factors and improvement goals. The framework applies at both national and decentralized levels. (For an illustration, see Box 6 in the text.)
Mission Element.
Success Factors
Improvement Goals
Copy from the mission statement
Key problems to be fixed or opportunities to be tried. Identify each item with no more than a few words. Limit to just a few key factors for each mission element.
Keep the statements short. Focus on what, but omit when and how. You can have several goals for each success factor. (He may need more paper than it is provided here.)
Worksheet 5. Cross-Cutting Improvement Goals: The Institutional Factors
Many things that need to be improved are institutional factors like leadership, working relationships, professional capacity, and public image. Make and photocopy a worksheet similar to this one (but specific to the agency circumstances). These issues can be sensitive, and an agency needs to be very careful how it conducts this exercise. Encourage participants to state improvement goals that lead to constructive actions. What specific improvements are needed?
Issue (Questions and Problems)
Improvement Goals
(use additional paper to give you space for writing)
1. Quality of Leadership and Vision in the Organization
2. Quality of Vertical Relations Between Forestry Agency and Top Government Authorities (i.e., cabinet level)
3. Quality of Vertical Relations Between National and Subordinate Units (e.g., regional and district offices)
4. Quality of Horizontal Relations Between Forestry Agency and Other Functional (Sectoral) Agencies
5. Quality of Legal and Regulatory Framework and Instruments
6. Capacity in Policy Analysis and Programming
7. Capacity in Budgeting and Financial Management
8. Capacity to Collect, Process, and Use Information (forest inventories, production statistics, market and trade data, etc.)
9. Capacity of Field Staff (e.g., to implement programs and projects)
10. Quality of Relationships with Private Industries
11. Quality of Relationships with NGOs (social, environmental)
12. Quality of Relationships with Rural Communities
13. Quality of Relationships with News Media
14. Other Issues
Worksheet 6. Assigning Priorities to Improvement Goals
This should be clear in relation to the goals stated in Worksheets 4 and 5. Each administrative level should make its own choices before sending them for review at higher levels.
LEVEL 1 - Absolute Highest Priority. Urgent and imperative; demanded by the highest levels; our survival depends on this.
LEVEL 2 - Necessary for Improved Performance. Vital for effective growth; important in the long run; will contribute to our progress.
LEVEL 3 - Desirable. New approaches; responses to outside suggestions.
Worksheet 7. Guidelines for Writing Objectives
Study the existing planning document to determine if its objectives are well written. Does each objective meet the criteria listed below? Use check marks to help you. Leaders of planning teams should refer to this checklist when they help planning participants write objectives.
The Statement of an Objective Should Met The Following Criteria......
It starts with the word "to" and is followed by an action.
It states what and when; it purposely avoids why and how.
It is consistent with higher-level roles and missions.
It states one result to be accomplished.
It states a result that can be verified (i.e., observed, demonstrated, proved)
It is specific and quantifiable (when possible). But it avoids useless measures and false data.
It is realistic, but it represents a significant challenge.
It is easy to understand.
It is very clear about who has the responsibility for implementation. It avoids ambiguous and dual accountability.
It facilitates constructive discussion regarding how to assess performance.
For people who are not good at stating objectives, how can the agency help them? Consider workshops, training courses, and the like.
Worksheet 8. Actions in Support of Objectives.
For each objective, list the actions to support it. Who has the responsibility for each action? And when will the action be completed? (For an illustration, see Box 8 in the text.) Budget requirements is not shown in this table, although many planning teams include them at this stage. (One may need additional paper.)
Objective:
To...
Action
Responsibility
Time Frame
No.
No.
Worksheet 9. Major Issues to be Negotiated.
This worksheet helps an agency organize issues that need to be negotiated. Photocopy it for the individuals in the planning team. (For an illustration, see Box 9 in the text.)
Objective:
To...
Issues That Need Negotiation
With Whom Is Agreement Needed?
Worksheet 10. What Problems Can an Agency Predict in Implementation?
With respect to carrying out the actions in the plan, what may go wrong? And what will an agency do to avoid or minimize these problems? Use this worksheet to help the agency focus on these questions. (One may need additional paper.)
Actions (from Worksheet 8)
Potential Problems
Strategies to Avoid or Minimize These Problems
No.
No.
No.
No.
Worksheet 11. How Will an Agency Monitor, Evaluate, and Adjust its Planning?
From the beginning, the agency needs to consider how and when it will evaluate the successes and failures of its planning. Ask each planning participant to answer the following questions. Then compare and discuss the responses.
1. For the improvement goals within a functional area, who will be responsible for monitoring progress and problems?
2 What information and records will the agency need in order to evaluate successes and failures? And what steps is it taking to insure that this information will be collected?
3. What is the agency's schedule for evaluation? What factors could change this?
4. How will the agency actually use the results of it monitoring and evaluation to help it adjust its goals and strategies?
Worksheet 12. Guidelines for Effective Brainstorming.
Use this worksheet to decide how the agency will set up and summarize its brainstorming sessions. Choose a method that fits its context.
1. Generate Ideas Rapidly
· For a given period of time (e.g., 15 minutes), ask the members of your group to call out as many suggestions as they can to solve a defined problem. Do not allow anyone to question or criticize any of the ideas at this stage.
· Record these ideas on large sheets of paper where everyone can see them. Record all ideas, even the "crazy" ones. The ideas can be serious or humorous.
2. Evaluate the Ideas
· Ask the group to define criteria for choosing which ideas they want to explore in more detail (e.g., reasonable cost, political feasibility, legal conformance, etc.). For the problem at hand, what are these criteria?
3. Focus Your Attention
· Combine, modify, and discard ideas according to criteria in Step 2 preceding. For all ideas that now remain, which one(s) will you focus on?
Worksheet 13. Guidelines to Clarify the Statement of a Problem.
An agency can apply these guidelines to sharpen the definition of any problem. Ask each team member to individually complete Steps 1-2. Then, share and discuss the worksheets among everyone (Step 3). At the end, get the group to agree on the final wording of the problem (Step 4).
Step 1. Answer the following questions (some may not apply):
What...
· is the opportunity for improvement?
When and where....
· does the problem occur?
Who.....
· wins and loses from the situation as it is now?
· wins and loses if the situation can be changed?
Why.....
· is it important to resolve this problem?
How....
· important are the consequences?
· much is the cost (financial, political, psychological, etc.) to do something, and not to do something?
Step 2: Based on your responses above, write a brief and clear statement of the problem here:
Step 3: Discuss what you wrote in Step 2 with other team members.
Step 4: Now re-state the problem, based on your discussion in Step 3.
Source: Adapted from Clive Shearer, 1994, Practical Continuous Improvement for Professional Services, ASQC Quality Press, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, p. 163-165.
Worksheet 14. Strengths and Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats.
An agency can explore the feasibility of any goal or strategy by listing strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats in a simple 2-column table. In the left column, list all strengths and opportunities. In the right column, list all weaknesses and threats. A "threat" is any indication of a future problem or difficulty.
Improvement Goal or Strategy:
Strengths and Opportunities
Weaknesses and Threats
Worksheet 15. Constructing Problem Trees.
An agency can show causes and effects in the hierarchy of a problem tree. Begin by listing different problems on small slips of paper. Move the slips around, and draw arrows to link each problem with its causes. Each of these causes is itself a problem that may have other causes underneath it. Continue until you reach the most fundamental causes at the bottom (roots) of the tree. (For an example, see Box 12 in the text.) Practice by constructing problem trees for the following issues (if they are relevant):
1. poor data on forest cover and conditions;
2. costly and careless timber harvesting;
3. insufficient diffusion of agroforestry technologies;
4. insufficient investment in forest plantations;
5. low amount of revenues collected from the public forests;
6. other issues important in your planning agenda.
Draw your problem tree here:
Worksheet 16. The Logical Framework.
The vertical logic of the framework connects a goal at the top with supporting analysis (why, what, how) beneath it. The horizontal logic has summary statements at the left, supported by indicators at the right. This technique has its main applications in project analysis, but also tests the logic of proposed policies and programs. Use these column headings and row headings to test the logic of goals in your strategic planning. (For an example, see Box 13 of the text.) One will need to use additional paper for writing space. The cells are numbered 1-12 to help you organize for this.
Summary
Indicators
Means to Verify
Main Goal
Cell 1
Cell 2
Cell 3
Why is this goal important?
Cell 4
Cell 5
Cell 6
What do you want to achieve?
Cell 7
Cell 8
Cell 9
How will yon achieve this goal?
Cell 10
Cell 11
Cell 12
Worksheet 17. Force-Field Analysis.
In trying to reach any goal, an agency takes advantage of helpful factors (the driving forces). It removes or decreases factors that hold it back (the restraining forces). In force-field analysis, it lists these forces and rates their importance and its degree of control over them. It concludes by identifying the key forces on which to focus its action strategies. (For an example, see Box 14 of the text.)
Importance [Scale 1-5]
1 = low;
5 = high
Your Control [Scale 1-5]
1 = low;
5 = high
Total
Driving Forces:
Restraining Forces:
Cross Impacts: Among the high-rated forces above, which are the most important in explaining others? List them below as a focus for your actions.
Worksheet 18. Constructing a Comparison Matrix.
Use this technique for multi-dimensional comparisons. Define the options, the criteria for comparing them, and then make the one-by-one comparisons. (For an example, see Box 15 in the text.) Here we show space for five options and four criteria, but you can apply this method with any number of options and criteria.
Step 1: Define The Options (write in a few words).
Option A............................................................................................................................
Option B............................................................................................................................
Option C............................................................................................................................
Option D............................................................................................................................
Option E............................................................................................................................
Step 2. Define The Criteria for Comparing the Options (write in a few words).
Criterion 1. ............................................................................................................................
Criterion 2. ............................................................................................................................
Criterion 3. ............................................................................................................................
Criterion 4. ............................................................................................................................
Step 3. Rate Each Option According to Each Criterion (fill each cell with words, symbols, or numbers to indicate how each option meets each criterion). One will need to use additional paper for writing space.
Criterion 1
Criterion 2
Criterion 3
Criterion 4
Option A
Option B
Option C
Option D
Option E
Step 4. Construct the Comparison Matrix. In each pair below, which option is preferred? (in each cell, write the superior option)
Criterion 1
Criterion 2
Criterion 3
Criterion 4
Option A
Option B
Option C
Option D
Step 5. Count the Number of Times Each Option Is Preferred Over Another.
Worksheet 19. Role Playing.
Many of the decisions an agency face in its planning are about conflicting interests, and about winning and losing from different strategic actions. An agency can help members of the planning team understand these consequences if it has them play ("act") the roles of key personalities.
An agency can assign different persons in the planning team to represent an entrepreneur, a speaker for the indigenous group, a logging worker in South Region, the top political official in South Region, the director of the wood products association, the agency's supervisor for South Region, and so on.
Additionally, an agency appoints someone to play the role of the agency's director, and to ask questions such as: "How do you feel about this issue?" "What options should our agency be considering? " "How would you solve this problem if you had the authority to do so? " To make the role playing as effective as possible:
· Make sure that your "theater" is informal and relaxed.
· Encourage your "actors" to truly think and speak like the persons they represent. Allow them time to prepare. If this is not going well, make substitutions until the right persons are found.
· Use large name tags so that everyone can identify who is being represented.
· Humor is good, so long as you do not attack the character of the real people is not attached.
Exercise: Play out the drama described above for South Region, and answer the following questions. Or focus on a conflict that the agency is facing now, choose "actors," and begin!
1. What are the strengths and weaknesses of this approach, based on what you observed?
2. If you will repeat this exercise in the future, how can it be improved? Consider place, time, choice of "actors," and preparations.
Worksheet 20. Checklist of Information Needed in Maps.
Maps are one of the best methods to display and integrate a large amount of information for strategic planning. Below are examples of information that an agency may want in mapped form. Use check marks to indicate which maps are available and satisfactory. Then, specify additional maps that may be needed, but which are not presently available. Also, which maps are not compatible with each other?
Climatic zones (precipitation, temperature, evapotranspiration)
Forest cover (vegetation classes, primary vs. Second-growth, open vs. closed, etc.)
Topography (and elevation)
Soil types (and geological factors)
Watersheds (drainage patterns)
Water availability
Eco-regions (based on combinations of climate, topography, soils, etc.)
Potential land uses (capability for irrigation, intensive farming, grazing, forestry, etc.)
Present land uses
Political boundaries (provinces, departments, districts, municipalities, etc.)
Population density
Population growth (current and projected)
Internal migration patterns (i.e., from Region X to Regions Y and Z).
Colonization zones (active forest clearing)
Land ownership
Indigenous territories
Transportation routes (present and future)
Pipelines, gaslines, electric grid, and other infrastructure (present and future)
Forest regions (administrative units)
Forest reserves, national parks, wildlife refuges, etc. (i.e., officially protected areas)
Forest concessions (i.e., leases and utilization contracts on public forests)
Areas of harvesting and processing forest products
Areas reforested or afforested (present and future)
Areas covered by forestry projects
Zones of greatest land-use conflict
What other information does the agency need in the form of maps? And which maps need to be re-made?
Worksheet 21. Designing a Social Assessment.
In social assessment, an agency obtains a range of perceptions about who will gain and lose because of alternative plans, policies, programs, and projects. Most often, it does this through rapid rural appraisal (RRA) or participatory rural appraisal (PRA). Below is a framework to help an agency design its assessment. Place check marks to describe issues the agency will investigate, the type of team to conduct the assessment, and the methods it will use.
1. What Are the Issues The Agency Will Investigate?
Increased or decreased use rights on forested lands (tenure and control)
Gains and losses in economic livelihood (subsistence agriculture, paid employment, other)
Implications for cultural and religious values (tribal homelands, sacred forests, etc.)
Working conditions (e.g., in forest industries, plantation projects, etc.)
Implications for health and education (e.g., clinics and schools by forest industries)
Equity considerations (by region, ethnic group, gender, socioeconomic level)
Subjective views on changing quality-of-life (e.g., because of community growth, job training, regional migration, etc.)
Working relationships with your agency (level of trust, respect, cooperation)
Other issues:
2. Who Will Conduct the Assessment?
No fewer than three people (to insure a diversity of perspectives)
Both men and women (for the same reason)
Mix of backgrounds (social sciences, technical fields)
Experienced team leaders (who in turn can teach others)
Individuals who personally know the people to be contacted (to establish confidence)
Individuals who can work well with outside partners (such as NGOs)
3. What Methods Will The Agency Use? And What Is Its Experience With Them?
Key informants (mayors, tribal leaders, association leaders, etc.)
Household interviews
Open meetings
Structured surveys
Conflict matrix, community map, land-use transect, rural calendar, etc.
Other methods:
Source: Adapted from Karen Schoonmaker Freudenberger, 1994, Tree and Land
Tenure: Rapid Appraisal Tools, FAO, Rome, Italy
Worksheet 22. Issues in an Environmental Assessment.
Most parts of the strategic plan will improve rather than harm environmental quality. But an agency cannot take this for granted, especially if the plan proposes road building, forest harvesting, plantation establishment, and other high-impact activities. Here is where an agency needs structured environmental assessments. They give it preliminary indications of environmental problems to be avoided, as well as possible mitigation measures. Which of the following issues are important in the planning? What are the approaches to carry out the assessments?
In Reforestation and Plantation Development:
Soil erosion and compaction from site preparation
Smoke control (from vegetation burning)
Soil erosion and compaction from harvesting
Loss of nutrients by removing biomass from the site (in harvesting)
Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers affecting water quality
Depletion of soil moisture (in arid and semi-arid zones)
Fire hazard from built-up combustible materials
Displacement of natural ecosystems (reduced biodiversity)
Risk of massive loss by pests or pathogens
Risk of planted species becoming "weeds"
In Natural Forest Management:
Over-harvesting of rare or endangered species
Erosion and compaction of the forest floor (by logging)
Insufficient natural regeneration (logging's impact on light, temperature, and soil)
Invasion of weeds when the forest canopy is opened
Wind damage following logging
Disruption of habitat for fisheries and wildlife
Increased poaching of wildlife due to influx of people
Changes in water runoff (following logging)
Stream sedimentation (following logging)
Changes in water temperatures following canopy disturbance (alters aquatic biology)
In Road Construction and Use:
Changes in vegetation, landscape, and soil along the road corridor
Interruption of drainage patterns
Impacts to wetland ecosystems and wildlife corridors traversed by roads
Erosion from road cuts (sediment in surface waters)
Landslides, slips, and other mass soil movements
Wind-blown dust
Road damage (ruts and holes) because of heavy timber loads
Water contamination because of herbicides for vegetation control
Entry of shifting agriculture, wildlife poachers, and other uncontrolled land uses
In Transforming Raw Materials from the Forest (i.e., at Processing Sites):
Siting of processing operations near sensitive habitats (e.g., for fish and wildlife)
Water contamination from chemicals and organic wastes
Air pollution (smoke, dust, odors, and chemical pollutants)
Noise pollution
Accumulation of solid wastes in the area (e.g., wood scraps and residues)
Accidental release of hazardous materials (e.g., dangerous chemicals)
Occupational health risks because of preceding factors
Other Issues of Importance:
Source: Adapted from World Bank, 1992, Environmental Sourcebook, Washington, D.C.., Tables 8.1, 8.6, and 8.9
Worksheet 23. Frameworks of Benefit-Cost Analysis.
Use this worksheet to identify what forms of economic analysis an agency needs for the planning issues it faces. Each member of the planning team should know the strengths and limitations of the methods-possibly through training sessions. These techniques are complex, and their application is a matter for experienced economists.
Economic Framework
Applications in Your Strategic Planning
Financial Analysis. - Here an agency estimates the private profitability of a proposed action using market prices. Taxes and subsidies are treated as costs and returns, respectively. The analysis takes the viewpoint of individual enterprises and landowners.
Private profitability has to be estimated for the following proposed actions:
Social Benefit-Cost Analysis. - This determines the social attractiveness of a proposed action, using "shadow" or "accounting" prices. Taxes and subsidies are treated as transfer payments. The analysis takes the viewpoint of society as a whole. It values resources that have no market prices, or that have "incorrect" market prices (because of government controls, monopolies, etc.)
Social BCA is needed where resources have social value but distorted market prices such as in the following proposed actions:
Extended Benefit-Cost Analysis. -Social benefit-cost analysis is extended to include as many environmental impacts (both positive and negative) as possible. This requires that you account for on-site and off-site impacts. The agency attempts to recognize and quantify Total Economic Value (TEV) of the forest resources.
It is important for the agency to focus on TEV in the following proposed actions:
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis. - This approach is used when benefits cannot be valued in monetary terms. For a given target in your plan (e.g., number of community meetings in South Region), the analysis specifies the most efficient (least-cost) means to achieve it.
An agency is able to estimate costs but not benefits in the following proposed actions:
Weighted Social Benefit-Cost Analysis. - This method weights benefits and costs according to who pays and who receives. Benefits and costs are weighted heavily if they accrue to favored socioeconomic group (e.g., women, landless people, tribal groups, and so on). Conversely, the agency assign smaller weights to benefits that accrue to "the rich."
Proposed actions that require specific attention to the distribution of benefits and costs include:
Worksheet 24. Exercises for Forecasting and Futures Analysis.
Assign groups to determine the forecasting needs, and to suggest techniques for making the forecasts. Below the types of forecasts that may be important. Are illustrated. Place check marks to indicate which forecasts are relevant in your context. Use brainstorming (Worksheet 12) to add to and modify this list to fit your circumstances. Then, convene the full planning team to discuss these recommendations.
Changes in the legal framework for forest protection and management - next 5 years. Your agency's budget and organizational structure - 5 years from today.
The availability of skilled foresters, hydrologists, wildlife specialists, and related professionals in your country - 5 years from today.
Tendencies in international aid for forest development and conservation - next 5 years (funding levels, program shifts, changing composition of aid agencies).
New social and demographic issues in relation to forests - next 10 years.
Changes in transportation routes and transportation technology that will affect the area and composition of forests - next 10 years.
Changes in agricultural demands and agricultural technology that will affect the area and composition of forests - next 10 years.
Emergence of new or larger enterprises that use raw materials from forests and woodlands - next 10 years.
Changes in domestic demand for pulp and paper - next 10 years. New markets for non-timber forest products - next 10 years.
Changes in the composition and quantity of imported and exported forest products - next 10 years.
The physical areas, types, and composition (species, age classes, stocking, etc.) of your country's forests and woodlands - 10, 25, and 100 years from today.
Other forecasting needs (and modifications of the preceding topics):
Worksheet 25. Participation in the Different Stages of Planning.
Below logical sets of participants are indicated in the various stages of the planning. On a separate sheet of paper, write in the names of people who should participate in each stage, including people outside the forestry agency. Distribute this worksheet to other individuals who can also supply names, and then compare your lists.
Planning Stage
Appropriate Participation
Pre-planning:
Sets out planning terms of reference, planning budget, guiding philosophies, and identifies team leader(s)
Director of forestry agency.
Selected regional directors.
Selected cabinet officials.
Selected agency directors, other "sectors."
Leaders of organized interests, wide mix
Initiation:
Identifies issues, designs participation plan, defines special background studies and anal
Director of forestry agency.
Selected regional directors.
Selected agency directors, other "sectors."
Leaders of organized interests, wide mix
Agency's mission:
Clarifies who the agency is, and what it does
Director of forestry agency.
Selected regional directors.
Selected agency directors, other "sectors."
Leaders of organized interests, wide mix
Goals and objectives:
What will be improved, when, by whom, an how much?
Director of forestry agency.
All directors of regional and subordinate office
Selected agency directors, other "sectors."
Leaders of organized interests, wide mix
Action strategies:
Compare alternative actions in terms of benefits and costs, fairness, and environmental aspect
Director of forestry agency.
All directors of regional and subordinate offi
Many agency directors, other "sectors."
Selected cabinet officials.
Leaders and members of organized interests, wide mix.
People speaking as citizens, e.g., citizens advisory groups
Negotiate issues:
Seek agreements, compromises, and cooperation
Variable, depending on the issues at stake
Strategy implementation:
Implement scheduling, budgeting, training, reorganization, and so on
Director of forestry agency.
All directors of regional and subordinate offices
Monitoring and evaluation:
Check progress and problems, and adjust missions, goals, objectives, and strategic activities
Director of forestry agency.
All directors of regional and subordinate offices
Selected agency directors, other "sectors."
Leaders of organized interests, wide mix.
Worksheet 26. Proposing a Set of Participation Activities.
The agency needs to define participation activities in the planning. Normally, these activities correspond to the desired flows of information from the agency to the participants, and from the participants to the agency (Box 19 in the text).
Photocopy the following worksheet, and propose one activity (or event) per sheet. Each participant can fill in several worksheets. Then discuss these ideas as a basis to combine, modify, and organize them. The Agency will develop the participation schedule and workplan from this information (see Worksheets 27-28).
Participation Activity or Event
1. What is it? (briefly describe)
2. What does the agency need to achieve with it? (purpose)
3. When should it occur? (calendar dates, or before or after other events)
4. Who will be responsible for it? (which person?)
Worksheet 27. Schedule of the Participation Activities.
When everyone has agreed on the participation activities (Worksheet 26), an agency needs to organize them in a logical schedule. The agency can distribute blank forms of this worksheet to members of the planning team. Ask each individual to propose a schedule, and then compare the ideas.
Normally, the agency will need to add details in appendix pages. Each appendix page should summarize the activity, the purpose to be achieved, the time schedule, and the person responsible for implementation (i.e., present the details from Worksheet 26).
Planning Stage:_________________________________________________________________
Activities and Events:
Worksheet 28. What Goes Into a Participation Plan?
Please review the following guide when an agency prepares its participation plan. Directly or indirectly, the plan should address each of these topics, although the agency may prefer some other sequence of presentation.
Summary of initial visits and consultations ("fact finding "and "scoping"): With whom did you discuss the proposed strategic planning? (Give names, dates, and circumstances.)
Forestry agency, central office
Forestry agency, regional and other subordinate offices
Other government agencies, institutes, committees, etc.
Cabinet officials
Leaders of organized interests
Members of organized interests
Citizens (not representing groups)
Major issues likely to arise in the planning: Briefly identify concerns, interests, and positions. Comment on the intensity of feelings.
Etc.
People to participate in the advisory committees: Gives names and reasons for the people you recommend to be on the technical committee and the citizens committee (where appropriate). Who should be the chairpersons? How will the committees interact with the agency?
Technical committee: (names, backgrounds, chairperson, reporting mechanism)
Citizens committee: (names, backgrounds, chairperson, reporting mechanism)
Strengths and weaknesses of the forestry agency to conduct participatory planning: Consider personnel, external relationships, previous experience, etc. Where there are weaknesses, what can be done to overcome them? Consider outside guidance, contracted specialists, assistance of other institutions, etc.
Schedule of participation activities: This should show the projected sequence of participation activities and events through all planning stages, including periodic reviews (see Worksheet 27.)
Means of recording the participation: How will your agency keep a complete and accurate record of the participation it will receive? Consider careful attendance records, appointing people to take notes, use of tape recorders, and so on.
Proposed budget: Prepare itemized budget for the planning to include travel and communications, rentals of meeting places, secretarial services, specialists' services, report production and distribution, and other direct and indirect expenditures.
Worksheet 29. Issues in Multi-Level Planning.
Use this worksheet to think about how to coordinate strategic planning for forests at national, regional, and lower (province, district, and municipal) levels. Allow each member of the planning team to answer the questions individually. Then meet to compare the responses.
Scope and authority:
1. Which sub-national offices will participate in the planning, and when and how will their participation take place?
2. How will the national and sub-national offices coordinate efforts in the early fact-finding stages of the planning?
3. What are the terms of reference for each of the participating sub-national units? Who will prepare them, and when?
4. How can your agency's director fully empower the sub-national units in the planning?
Resources for planning:
1. Indicate what an agency can do to strengthen planning resources at sub-national levels in terms of: (i) planning leaders, (ii) advisory committees, (iii) meeting facilities, and (iv) support budgets.
2. Can planning resources be shared, such as between the national office and regional offices? Between regional offices and district offices?
Mechanisms to accommodate disparities:
1. Which regions, districts, etc., are most disadvantaged for the planning? In what ways?
2. What special attention do they need, and how will this be provided?
Mechanisms to coordinate bottom-up initiatives with national policies:
1. What will be the opportunities for the sub-national planning leaders to meet personally with the national planning team and the agency director?
2. What will be the process of bottom-up submission and top-down review of the sub-national plans?
Worksheet 30. Issues in Working With Other Agencies.
Inter-agency support is needed in order to establish credibility, win political support, and connect with other planning efforts by the government. Use the following questions to guide discussions about how to invite participation from other agencies.
1. In view of the issues that are likely to arise in the strategic planning, which other agencies, institutes, directorates, and commissions need to be your partners? (for each agency, state the reasons for including it)
2. Exactly what does an agency need from each of the agency representatives that they will work with it? (be specific by agency and by name of the official, if possible)
3. What is the agency's strategy to involve these agency representatives in the planning? (Who will participate in design of the planning? In technical advisory committees? In period planning reviews? In inter-agency task forces? In other ways?)
4. What is the agency's record of successes and failures in working with other agencies? What are the reasons for this? (try to be specific in each case)
5. If its efforts to collaborate with other agencies have not worked well in the past, does the agency have new approaches that may help it overcome old obstacles? (if yes, what are they?)
6. Are there new government groups with whom it has not worked previously that the agency should be contacting how? Who are these new groups, and why does the agency want them to participate with it in the planning?
7. In what ways, if at all, will the agency have to adjust its procedures or share its authority if other agencies participate with it?
8. What will the agency do to get participation from the highest administrative levels (where appropriate) rather than from officials of lesser authority?
9. Does the agency anticipate a confrontation with any of the agencies it intends to invite? What will the agency do to avoid or mitigate this? (link this with conflict negotiation, CH 4)
When an agency concludes with these questions, it lists the officials of other agencies that it wants to invite as partners in the planning, specify their roles, and indicate how and when they will be contacted. Assign responsibilities for this.
Source: Adapted from J.L. Creighton, 1981, The Public Involvement Manual, Abt Books, Cambridge, MA, pp. 159-164
Worksheet 31. Attitudes and Behaviors of People Who Are Good Negotiators
When there are conflicts in front of the agency, uses this worksheet to assess the attitudes and behaviors for negotiation to succeed. Check the boxes for attitudes that are observed: and for attitudes that are not observed, what can be improved?
Helpful Attitudes and Behaviors
Explanation
The people in the conflict try to preserve a positive relationship with the other side.
In most cases, your long-term relationship is worth more than your immediate issue.
The people in the conflict are good listeners. They force themselves to seek and understand the other side's viewpoint, even when that viewpoint is contrary to their own.
The agency improves your arguments by paying careful attention to the challenges of your opponents. This promotes discipline and organization so that you will not miss key points.
The people in the conflict are constantly looking for opportunities to cooperate.
People who want to continue conflicts can always find ways to do so. It is far more challenging to create opportunities for agreement.
The people in the conflict seek the most favorable times and places to communicate.
The agency cannot settle conflicts in an uncomfortable setting, or where one side has a clear advantage.
The people in the conflict show a large amount of respect for their opponents.
The "other side" is a valued resource, and you use it to increase your information and to refine your arguments.
The people in the conflict encourage a free flow of diverse ideas, especially during their preparations.
This increases the number and diversity of available options.
The people in the conflict are not afraid to consider that their ideas and positions may be wrong.
This helps you stay realistic, flexible, and ready to redefine arguments in revised terms.
What Can Be Improved About Attitudes and Behaviors So That Negotiations Can Succeed?
Worksheet 32. Goals, Compromises, and Alternatives in a Negotiation Framework
Use this framework to carefully frame the negotiation problem before an agency sits down with the individuals in the conflict.
Goals and Expectations:
1. What is the agency's understanding of the negotiation goals of the other persons(s), especially those whose interests are most different from its?
2. What is the agency's ideal goal in this negotiation? (the best result it can get from it)
3. Complete the following statement: "At the end of this negotiation, the agency will be very pleased if...................
4. When and how will the agency modify these expectations as the negotiation moves forward?
Compromises and Tradeoffs:
1. What does the agency need from the other person(s), and what is it prepared to trade for it?
2. What is the value of each compromise to the other person(s), and what is its cost to the agency?
3. Can the agency rank the possible compromises by priority? (i.e., from most to least acceptable)
Alternatives and Options:
1. Has the agency invested sufficient time and effort to develop as many negotiating options as it needs?
2. What does the agency know about the options of the person(s) on the opposite side of the argument? (i.e., few or many, weak or strong, etc.)
3. Does the agency have a clear and workable "walk away" position in case the negotiation should go badly for it?
Worksheet 33. The Physical and Emotional Climate for Negotiation
Has the planning team answer these questions about the negotiating climate. Does it create comfort and confidence? Or anxiety and frustration?
1. The Physical Climate: With respect to the negotiation in front of it.....
· How can the agency use the physical environment so that participants feel comfortable and confident? (Consider: place, time, room size, seating arrangement, dress, food and drink, special guests, etc.)
· Should the agency negotiate at an alternative site that offers a more productive setting for the discussions? (What is its alternative, and why does it recommend it?)
· If the agency has no choice but to meet in a place that is not fully satisfactory, what specific things can it change so that the environment will be more comfortable?
2. The Emotional Climate: Answer "yes" or "no" to the following questions about the negotiation leader. Does the leader contribute to a positive emotional climate by:
Yes
No
· Allowing for a free flow of discussion points?
· Making the participants feel equal rather than inferior?
· Expressing interest in all viewpoints without judging them?
· Showing interest in what people say and feel (empathy)?
· Avoiding early conclusions and generalizations?
· Admitting "I don't know" (when appropriate)?
3. Needed Improvements: If the agency frequently marked "No" above: What can it change about the negotiation leader, or about the way the discussions take place?
Source: Adapted from R.A. Johnson, 1993, Negotiation Basics: Sage Publications, London, pp. 144-147.
Worksheet 34. Successful Behavior in Conflict Conciliation and Mediation.
This checklist shows qualities that usually work well in conflict mediation. If the agency is asking someone to help it mediate a conflict, use this worksheet to evaluate whether that person shows the desired characteristics.
A good mediator:
Separates the people from the problem (i.e., does not personalize the argument)
Focuses on satisfying the interests behind the positions
Precisely states the areas of agreement and disagreement
Interprets the immediate conflict in terms of its long-term implications and its connection to other issues
Gets all the issues into the open (i.e., leaves no secrets that can destroy an agreement at a later time)
Quickly learns the motives and desires of each person in the dispute, and learns what each of them has to trade
Separates complex issues into their component parts so that each part can be discussed individually
Develops many alternative options (courses of action) for each disputed issue
Finds an alternative to the destructive method of attack and counter-attack
Assists each side of an argument to expand and clarify its ideas
Speeds up or slows down the discussion in order to achieve an appropriate pace
Asks questions in a neutral manner that does not offend or insult
Disagrees constructively and politely
Helps everyone advance their thinking towards logical conclusions
Asks for criticism and advice, and gratefully accepts that which is offered
Source: Adapted from P. Casse, 1992, The One-Hour Negotiator, Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd. Oxford, pp. 102-106
Worksheet 35. Rewards and Threats for the Agency's Top Executives.
Focus on how to make strategic planning a rewarding activity for the agency's director and other top executives. What can the agency do to maximize the rewards and minimize the threats?
What can the agency do to encourage the agency's director to take a lead role in the design of the strategic planning, and to be positively recognized for this?
What can the agency do to learn exactly what the director wants from the planning? How can it set up the planning so that these needs will be met?
How will the agency keep the director informed of progress and problems during all stages of the planning process?
How will the agency give the director positive recognition for the successes that come out of the planning process?
What else should the agency do to create a positive administrative and psychological setting so that the agency's leaders will gladly claim "ownership" of the planning?
Worksheet 36. Evaluation of Team Skills for Strategic Planning.
How does the agency rate its planning team in terms of the skills it needs for strategic planning in forest use and conservation? Where skills are weak, what can be done to improve them? (Answers may need to be kept confidential if they will cause people to be jealous or defensive.)
Skills
Who Will Supply These Skills in the Planning Team? (names of those persons)
What Should Be Done to Upgrade These Skills? (training, practice, etc.)
Leadership
(to promote respect, commitment, cooperation, enthusiasm, efficiency)
Forest protection and management
(technical and professional competence)
Communications
(in meetings and written reports)
Participation methods
(in different settings and for different purposes)
Conflict negotiation
(to create options and compromises)
Worksheet 37. Action Teams for Plan Implementation.
The agency relies on action teams to observe progress and problems for each of its improvement goals. The composition and responsibilities of the action teams should be determined before the main planning effort comes to an end. Normally an agency will have several action teams, each of which should complete this worksheet.
People in the action team (usually 3-5, including people not in the forestry agency):
1 Team Leader..................................................................................................................
Purpose of the action team (this statement should be developed by the team itself, not by the agency's administration):
This team has the following responsibilities:
Meeting schedule (and topics for the first meetings, if possible):
This team will meet, as follows:
Source: Adapted from I. Mayo-Smith and K Rather, 1986, Achieving Improved Performance in Public Organizations, Kumarian Press: West Hartford, CT, pp.: 96-97.
Worksheet 38. Questions to Guide a Management Review.
This worksheet will help an agency evaluate successes and weaknesses in its planning framework and process. It can lead to practical improvements for the rest of its current planning cycle, or for the design of the next one.
1. Which skills (i.e., knowledge and capacities) have been strongest and weakest in the planning? (Consider leadership, technical knowledge in forestry, communications, participation, and conflict negotiation.) What are the agency's recommendations to build up the weakest areas while not compromising its strengths?
2. If the planning has been carried out in different groups or teams, which groups have realized the most success? What factors separate the successful planning groups from the others? What lessons can be learned from this?
3. Is the agency satisfied with the contributions of the technical and citizens advisory committees? If not, what should it do to make them more effective?
4. Which participants have been most central in the planning, and which have been less involved or overlooked? (Consider subordinate offices of the agency, other government agencies, private enterprises, NGOs, community and indigenous groups, and interested citizens.) What factors explain this pattern of participation? What improvements does the agency suggest, and what is the best way to work towards them?
5. To what extent have the views of the participants shaped the procedures and content of the planning? Conversely, what is still lacking in this interaction? How can the agency improve next time?
6. How well has the agency been able to negotiate conflicts over "Trees and forests for whom and for what?" What negotiating approaches has it relied on? What can be improved, and how?
7. How good or bad were the estimates of budget and time requirements to complete the planning tasks? What were the greatest sources of error? What adjustments should the agency make for the future?
8. Regarding the planning tools (see CH 2), which have been the most useful? Least useful? How can the agency use these tools more effectively?
9. What has the agency done to recognize and reward good performance in planning? Should it continue with this type of recognition, or is there an alternative that it should try?
10. In view of the agency's responses to the preceding questions, what actions will help the agency build up its institutional strength to carry on strategic planning in the future? (Consider agency organization, personnel mix and responsibilities, training possibilities, and the like.)
