<title>A new framework for: Conservation-effective land management and desertification control in Latin America and the Caribbean</title>
<section>1</section>
Summary
NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMMES ON CONSERVATION, REHABILITATION AND DESERTIFICATION CONTROL CAN BRING ABOUT MANY SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC BENEFITS, SUCH AS GREATER FOOD SECURITY, LESS MIGRATION TO URBAN AND MORE MARGINAL AREAS, HIGHER INCOMES AND A GENERAL IMPROVEMENT OF LIVING STANDARDS.
Serious problems of land degradation and rapidly declining production occur in large parts of Latin America and the Caribbean. They are caused by inappropriate land use or land management practices, which are themselves the consequences of the ever growing pressures on land and water resources and rural poverty.
Efforts at land conservation during the last 30-40 years have met with little success and there is now an unprecedented awareness of the urgent need to develop and implement sustainable land use and management practices that will effectively control land degradation and desertification. Recent experience has shown that sustainable practices will be much more readily adopted once land users perceive the direct economic and social benefits of these practices. Thus conservation practices must not only control soil degradation and desertification, but must also give economic and social benefits, such as higher incomes, a more secure food supply and overall improvements in living standards.
This document incorporates new concepts and mechanisms related to technology development and transfer, some of which emerged from the UN Conference on the Environment and Development (UNCED). Biological and agronomic conservation practices are emphasized, as well as the farming systems concept and use of micro-catchments, since they have come to assume much greater importance in soil conservation than formerly. The adoption of participatory approaches, in which public and private sectors, local communities and land users are all involved in decision making, is stimulated at all stages and levels of the development process. The importance of the role and participation of women is also emphasized.
FAO, together with countries of the region, is proposing the preparation and implementation of National Action Programmes (NAP) on conservation-effective land management and desertification control. For dryland areas, the NAP will also include drought mitigation actions and should comply with the proposals of the UN Convention to Combat Desertification.
Guidelines on the phased development of NAP for conservation-effective land management and desertification control arc presented together with modifications that may be required in political, institutional and legislative frameworks to facilitate the successful execution of NAP. Capacity-building, education and awareness issues, the creation of NAP coordination commissions and regional and international cooperation are also considered. Financing strategies are discussed with particular reference to the financial mechanisms of the UN Convention to Combat Desertification. The formulation of NAP must take into account other ongoing national action programmes oriented to the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources. The implementation of an initial pilot phase of a NAP, formulated through a participatory workshop, is recommended before developing a larger scale NAP.
The adoption of this framework for formulating and implementing NAP will give all participants in the development process a clearer vision of how best to achieve an optimal planning for the sustainable utilization and improvement of their land and water resources. It will also facilitate governments' requests for external funding.
<section>2</section>
Introduction
The natural resources of Latin America and the Caribbean are being subjected to increasing pressure and progressively more intense exploitation as a result of high population growth rates. This is manifested by constant increases in the demands for food, fuel and construction materials, by increased poverty in rural areas, by migration into urban areas and ever more marginal zones of fragile soils, and by increasingly strained institutional support.
In the last 30 years the population of the region has doubled to 480 million and it will again double in the next 50 years if the present growth rate continues. A stabilized population of 1100 million is expected by the year 2100; however, to achieve an appreciable increase in living standards, food production will have to more than double.
These events have caused serious degradation of the natural resources and loss of productivity in more than 306 million hectares in the region due to soil erosion, acidification, loss of organic matter, compaction, nutrient impoverishment and salinization. In the drylands some 79 million hectares are threatened by desertification, caused mainly by human actions through overgrazing, overexploitation of vegetation for domestic use, deforestation and inappropriate irrigation methods. Thus the lives of millions of people are affected and the future development of large parts of the region is at stake.
It is estimated that the region's cultivable land could expand from the present 171 million hectares to 736 million hectares. However, the greater part of the potentially cultivable land is of marginal quality and its utilization would entail high social, economic and environmental risks.
Landscape typical of desertification problems
Other lands that are not being used for arable cultivation are covered by tropical forests, but their conservation is of vital importance in order to maintain the global ecological stability and reduce the problems of global warming and loss of biodiversity.
Degraded landscape due to overgrazing
Scarcely 4 percent of cultivable lands are under irrigation, yet they produce approximately a third of the region's food supplies. This illustrates the tremendous potential of irrigation, but there are only limited possibilities for expanding the irrigated areas. Furthermore, the competition for water among agriculture, domestic consumption and industry is becoming ever stronger.
The rate of urbanization in the region has reached unprecedented proportions. Urban areas not only suffer from pollution but also compete with agriculture for land and water supplies. Thus, land-use planning at a national scale is urgently required, so that land can be assigned to different uses according to users' needs and the suitability of the land.
With the growing concern about environmental degradation, desertification and loss of biodiversity, the term 'sustainable land use' has become a common phrase enthusiastically welcomed by governments, scientists and planners. However, sustainable land use can only be achieved once the problems of land degradation and desertification are overcome and the land is used and managed in a way that is socially and economically acceptable to all sectors of society and does not cause environmental deterioration.
<section>3</section>
Part I: The present situation
Land and water resources
Traditional approaches to land conservation and the consequences
Land and water resources
Present potential
In order to develop sustainable systems of agriculture that satisfy the present and future needs of the region, there must be reliable information on the potential of the region's land and water resources.
The potential of some 96 percent of cultivable lands is limited by rainfall or soil factors and 29 percent of drylands are threatened by desertification. The areas with favourable soil and climatic conditions are mainly found in the southern cone of South America in temperate or subtropical climates.
The region as a whole is subject to much less agricultural exploitation than other parts of the world, such as the Near East or the Asian continent. This is due to a lower population pressure which results in a greater proportion of the land, including potentially cultivable areas, remaining under forest.
The region also possesses considerable freshwater reserves. Available data show that, for most countries, the average freshwater supply is satisfactory and exceeds 5000 m³ per person per year. However, the value varies from as little as 195 m³ per person per year in Barbados to 73416 m³ per person per year in Paraguay. In large areas of coastal Peru and northern Chile the freshwater supplies are less than 1 m³ per person per year.
The region possesses one of the largest freshwater reserves in the world, where water availability in the Amazon basin exceeds 300000 m³ per person per year. In this region the abundance of water gives rise to seasonal flooding which restricts the utilization of the most fertile soils located in the alluvial plains.
Of all water available for agriculture, livestock and industry, agriculture is the main consumer of water, using 60-70 percent to irrigate 13 million hectares. In areas where water is scarce, conflicts arise among agriculture, domestic consumption and industry; the serious problems of competition for water in Mexico City and Lima are well known. Although the expansion of irrigated areas has been limited in the last decade, many projects have been initiated to improve and rehabilitate existing irrigation schemes.
Water quality has been affected by discharge of sewage and industrial waste into rivers and the limited available data present a rapidly deteriorating trend. A symptom of this was the outbreak of cholera at the beginning of the 1990s which, in addition to the loss of human life, resulted in estimated costs of the order of US$ 200 million. Less dramatic, but of equal importance from an economic viewpoint, is the alarming increase in suspended sediment concentrations in many rivers, which causes additional costs for the maintenance of irrigation canals and the dredging of navigable rivers.
Limitations
In 1992, the Latin American and Caribbean Commission on the Environment emphasized that inappropriate land use is the most serious environmental issue. This results in soil erosion, desertification, loss of soil fertility, the deterioration of pastures and forests, salinization of irrigated lands and the under-utilization of good agricultural land.
The region can be subdivided into several clearly differentiated agro-environments with specific potentials and limitations, briefly described as follows:
Steeplands
Insidious processes of soil erosion in densely populated steeplands are causing a crisis that is progressively diminishing local people's capacity to produce even their subsistence food requirements. Average daily food intake in these zones is below the regional average of 2673 kcal/person. Soil erosion is also forcing large numbers of small-scale farmers to migrate to cities, or to forested areas in the lowland tropics, which constitute the agricultural frontier in many Andean countries. As in many other mountainous environments in the world, soil erosion with implied loss of production is becoming the most pressing environmental problem in these areas.
Drylands
Dryland areas constitute approximately 15 percent of Latin America and are found in a great variety of landscapes, ranging from the Pacific coastal zone, to the Chaco plains, to the semi-arid Pampa grasslands; one-third of these areas is threatened by desertification. Drylands are classified on the basis of aridity indices into hyperarid, arid, semiarid and dry sub-humid zones. In none of these zones does the annual precipitation exceed 65 percent of the annual potential evapotranspiration.
Desertification
Desertification has affected nearly 30 percent of the dryland areas which occupy some 516 million hectares in Latin America. Irrigated lands, which are very important in terms of their significant contributions to food production in many countries, also occur mainly in these areas. The causes of desertification are climatic combined with human activities, such as deforestation, overgrazing, the expansion of crop production into fragile areas and the overexploitation of vegetation for domestic use.
Within the dryland zones are irrigated areas that contribute significantly to food production; in Mexico irrigation provides more than 50 percent of the total food production. Irrigated areas also contribute a significant proportion of the agricultural exports of Chile, Brazil and other countries.
Dryland areas are very susceptible to desertification caused by climatic variations and human activities, such as overgrazing, overirrigation and inadequate drainage, expansion of cultivation into fragile soils, deforestation and overexploitation of vegetation for domestic use. The productivity of irrigated areas is also in danger because of poor quality water and diminishing water supplies. An estimated 10-15 percent of the irrigated areas in arid zones are degraded by waterlogging and salinity and once degraded their rehabilitation becomes very expensive.
Humid tropics
In the humid tropics the conversion of forested land to cropland and pastures is most rapid. It has been caused by migration from other, densely populated regions and by present economic development trends. The creation of croplands has led to loss of soil organic matter, accelerated erosion and increased sediment loads in rivers and lakes. It has also given rise to losses of important plant and animal species due to direct destruction and to changes in their habitats. In the Amazonian region in particular, new settlers have been granted permission and encouraged to extract timber and to establish crops or pastures. However, the nature of the soils, vegetation and climate and restricted land use suitability have seldom been taken into account. In some regions, especially those with high rainfall, transformation of the natural ecosystem has caused pronounced land degradation and loss of productive capacity. To date it is estimated that more than 800000 km² of forest in the
Amazonian region have been felled due to the combined effects of population pressure, poverty and the commercial exploitation of cattle, timber and minerals.
Grazing lands
The grazing lands include subtropical and temperate grasslands in the south of the continent, seasonal pastures of the high altitude Andean regions and tropical savannahs and pastures of the Amazon basin. Due to socioeconomic reasons the number of cattle frequently increases as the area of pastures decreases. Overgrazing is the main cause of degradation of natural pastures, resulting in a rapid decline in productivity. In large watersheds this can result in damage such as gully erosion and contaminated water supplies in the lower-lying areas of the catchment that will entail high rehabilitation costs.
Many of the soils under cultivated pastures are of low fertility and pasture productivity generally diminishes with time due to poor management. The risks of deterioration are accentuated by the steep topography and short length of growing periods in the Andean highlands.
Under these conditions water and wind erosion can severely deteriorate the soils, cause sediment accumulation in river channels and reservoirs and lead to flooding, waterlogging and salinization.
Wetlands
Wetlands occupy 11 percent of the region and are most common in Central America, the southern cone, in the Orinoco valley, in the north of Bolivia, southeast Brazil and Mexico. Smaller areas of wetlands are also frequently found in a wide variety of topographic and edaphic situations. The principal limitations are the lack of drainage and the high risk of flooding. Although the soils are very varied in terms of texture and acidity, the majority are well supplied with nutrients and can be very productive if adequately drained and protected from flooding. The potential effects of drainage on the hydrology of the surrounding land and on the environment, including plant and animal (bird) diversity need to be considered before such conversion.
Acid savannahs
The acid savannahs, consisting predominantly of low shrubs and tough grasses, occur mainly in the vast Cerrado region of Brazil where they occupy 112 million hectares of rolling landscape. They correspond mainly to a sub-humid environment with a 4-6 month dry season and an annual rainfall of 1200-2000 mm. The soils are physically good, deep, well drained and easy to plough, but suffer from a very low chemical fertility due to high acidity, low nutrient content and-very high aluminium saturation. However, with good management that includes the application of considerable quantities of fertilizers and lime, the land can become very productive. Nevertheless, the application of fertilizers and lime is very costly and is not sufficient on its own to sustain yields. The soils are very susceptible to erosion and if the management practices do not ensure an adequate soil cover and provide effective conservation, erosion can rapidly degrade the soils so that they are soon abandoned.
Small island environments
The Caribbean, which consists predominantly of island environments, deserves special attention. The small proportion of agriculturally suitable land provides few opportunities for production and leads to an enforced, intensive use of the limited lands available. These limitations become even more serious due to the ever-growing population pressure. This situation exists on almost all of the islands, both large and small, with the possible exception of the Dominican Republic and Cuba, where the agro-ecological conditions are more similar to those of continental environments.
The formulation of National Action Programmes for sustainable natural resource use and management will need to take account of the great variety of island environments, the physiography, climate and cultural aspects, as well as tourism with its ever-increasing impact.
Traditional approaches to land conservation and the consequences
AFTER MANY YEARS OF IMPLEMENTING CROSS-SLOPE PHYSICAL BARRIERS FOR SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION, MANY FARMERS ARE STILL NOT CONVINCED OF THEIR BENEFITS AND RIGHTLY REGARD THEM AS ADDITIONAL COSTS.
In the traditional approach to land conservation emphasis was placed on three factors: physical conservation structures, the need for soil conservation specialists and the requirement that farmers comply with the recommended conservation measures.
Even nowadays, many farmers do not associate these practices with increased productivity or higher profits and most farmers consider physical conservation structures merely as additional costs. Most soil conservation structures were implemented as part of aid programmes with subsidies and many of the structures were abandoned as soon as the subsidies ceased.
Government bodies created to combat the problems of soil erosion and runoff emphasized physical aspects related to soil type, hydrology and engineering. These physical aspects contrast with the more socioeconomic concerns of extension agencies and farmers, which have tended to accentuate the lack of coordination between the work of extensionists and soil conservation specialists.
Traditional approaches only achieved limited success, even when recommended soil conservation structures were implemented. As a result, soil erosion has in general not been controlled and productivity continues to decline in extensive areas affected by erosion.
The guidelines in this document introduce new concepts and methods for the implementation of soil conservation measures and the development of sustainable agriculture.
Traditional soil tillage practice using animal traction
<section>4</section>
Part II: A new framework
Concepts
Procedures
Technical approaches
Concepts
SUCCESSFUL ACTION AGAINST SOIL EROSION ON A LARGE SCALE WILL ONLY BE POSSIBLE BY IMPLEMENTING LAND MANAGEMENT PRACTICES WHICH CONVINCINGLY INCREASE PRODUCTION OR DECREASE COSTS OR LABOUR TO THE BENEFIT OF THE LAND USER, WHILST SIMULTANEOUSLY CONTROLLING SOIL EROSION. THIS IS SOMETIMES REFERRED TO AS ACHIEVING SOIL CONSERVATION BY STEALTH.
Land conservation approaches
A broad-scale assault on land degradation and desertification will only be successful if the actual land users are able to perceive direct benefits from the recommended conservation and management practices. Therefore, a new concept is the promotion of management practices capable of providing not only erosion control but also greater productivity, lower costs and higher profits. This is sometimes referred to as 'conservation by stealth'.
Another change of concept is the trend away from applying solely physical conservation structures and placing more reliance on the use of biological and agronomic conservation practices that provide a protective vegetative cover to the soils for as much of the year as possible. Typical examples of the biological and agronomic practices are denser plant populations, leaving crop residues on the soil surface, minimum tillage, sequential cropping, intercropping and agroforestry. The use of physical conservation structures then becomes complementary to biological and agronomic practices.
Example of the combination of traditional earth banks combined with an agronomic conservation practice of zero tillage (Chapecó, Brazil).
A further change of approach is to take advantage of traditional farming practices, many of which are conservation-oriented, but which have fallen into disuse because of growing population pressures on the land and changing economic and social life styles. Some of these traditional systems can be modified and adapted to make them more appropriate to current economic realities. Building on existing traditional practices to achieve soil conservation is much more likely to lead to successful adoption than attempting to introduce completely new techniques.
Focus on participation
Numerous experiences confirm that a change in farming practice can be relatively easily achieved when a community of farmers, with some trusted technical advisers, design, prepare and implement their own plans and action programmes. Changes have been slow, difficult and at times impossible when plans have been made without farmer participation.
Thus an obvious change of approach is required from 'top-down' to 'bottom-up', whereby all land users are involved in the whole process of development from the identification of their problems to the selection and implementation of solutions.
Governments must promote and support land conservation and desertification control programmes, but only farmers can implement and maintain land conservation practices. It is the farmers who make decisions on how best to use and manage their lands, according to the needs of their families and considering soil, climatic, economic and market factors.
Participation and training
Most of the FAO technical assistance projects engaged in land and water conservation in Latin America and the Caribbean are promoting active participation of the beneficiaries, whether they be families, communities or farmers' associations.
In projects as diverse as 'the management and conservation of lands' (Costa Rica), 'sustainable agriculture on hillsides' (El Salvador), 'the management of waters, public irrigation plans and irrigation districts' (Brazil and Mexico) and 'the management of plant nutrition' (Bolivia and Nicaragua), training courses on the participatory approach are being funded that will enable farmers' organizations to manage crop or irrigation technologies in a truly participatory and independent manner. Farmer participation in meetings where results of surveys or field data are presented and visits to see successful land management, conservation and rehabilitation practices form part of the training courses.
The provision of collective credit has a very positive effect as an incentive and catalyst in promoting the participatory approach.
Participatory panning; an FAO expert in a fertilizer programme, Ecuador, listens to members of a farmers' club in m, Andean village
Participatory discussions on fertilizer problems between extensionists and farmers (Chuquisaca, Bolivia).
Thus NAP need to be participatory, not imposed; this can be greatly facilitated when farmers, farmer associations and other land users in the community are included as members of all decision-making groups that deal with land use and management. Decisions on the parties responsible for carrying out specific activities must be made according to the capabilities, resources, interests and willingness of the different members and sectors of the community.
Example of women farmers maintaining; Inca terraces in Peru. The participation of women is essential in all aspects of the participatory process.
Focus on gender
It is essential that not only the men but also women and the whole family participate in decision making about the management and conservation of natural resources. The participation of women has been recognized as essential for the successful implementation of land and water conservation programmes.
In recent years the role of women in agriculture has become increasingly recognized, not only in the execution but also in the planning and management of specific tasks. It is extremely important that women are urged to participate more effectively and fully in developing and implementing land conservation and desertification control programmes. To achieve this, mere incentives are not sufficient; definite opportunities must be systematically created for women to be involved in all livestock, crop and land management activities. An inventory and analysis of those activities assigned to women and to which the man's contribution is very limited would greatly facilitate the correction of these imbalances. A flagrant example is women's total involvement in domestic duties and field work and their almost complete exclusion from the predominantly male role of decision making, e.g., about which crops to grow or activities to initiate, what management practices to apply and when or
where to sell the produce.
Recognition of the equitable role of women in the new strategies must be viewed as an integral part of the participatory approach and is essential for the success of the proposed actions in the longer term.
Sustainability
The aim of conservation-effective land management and desertification control is to achieve a sustainable system of agricultural production which is socially and economically acceptable to farmers and has a favourable cost/benefit ratio. Sustainability implies that land is used according to its suitability without causing land deterioration or environmental degradation, so that its productivity can be guaranteed for present and future generations.
Systems approach
To facilitate the formulation of appropriate conservation and rehabilitation programmes it is necessary to identify agro-ecologically and socio-economically similar areas, within which the conservation or rehabilitation programmes will be applied. These areas are often referred to as recommendation domains or resource management domains, having similar crop, livestock or forestry production systems, to which the same land use or management recommendation will be equally relevant and applicable.
The basic agricultural unit is the farming system which has at its centre the farmer and her or his family. This is a holistic concept that embraces the agro-ecological and environmental conditions of the farm, the farmer's enterprises, the systems of management for each of the production systems, the marketing and economic conditions in the community or region where the farmer lives; the socioeconomic circumstances and needs of the farm family.
Within a farming system there are invariably interactions between the production systems or management practices. These interactions may give rise to positive or negative effects on the productivity or sustainability of one or more of the production systems. An example is given in the box below, from El Salvador, where frequently there is a conflict between the use of crop residues as protection against soil erosion and as fodder for livestock. This conflict can best be solved by a farming systems approach in which alternative sources of fodder are produced to satisfy livestock requirements, thereby leaving more crop residues on the surface for better soil conservation.
The systems approach to soil conservation
For farmers cultivating basic grains on steep hillsides in El Salvador, crop residues are very important, being used as livestock fodder and also for soil conservation when left on the soil surface as a protective cover. In areas with more livestock or lower crop residue production due to a drier climate or less fertile soils, there are often insufficient residues to satisfy the requirements for both soil conservation and livestock fodder. When a conflict arises, the priority use of residues is as fodder at the expense of soil conservation. To improve soil conservation a farming systems approach is required, and in this situation the production of additional fodder in the form of silage or hay from improved pastures, silage crops or forage trees, should be promoted. This would allow more crop residues to be left on the soil surface for soil conservation.
Soil cover from previous grass and shrub residues within which maize has been planted (Cabañas, El Salvador).
The sustainability of land conservation and rehabilitation will be the end result of an efficient system of agricultural production, which in turn will depend on the adaptability and resilience of the conservation technologies employed.
Soil cover from a prior cover crop of rye into which beans have been sown (Chapecó, Brazil)
Example of conservation-effective land management in hilly terrain on slopes up to 45% by leaving maize and sorghum crop residues on the soil surface (Guaymango, El Salvador)
Flexibility of recommended practices
Land conservation and rehabilitation practices thus become an integral part of farming systems. Therefore, the technologies should be adapted to the specific agro-ecological, socio-economic and cultural conditions where they are to be applied, to ensure that they are sufficiently flexible to accommodate future changes in economic, marketing, technological and political pressures.
Contrast between conservation-effective land management due to an adequate cover of crop residues and controlled grazing in the foreground and eroded lands on tile opposite hillside caused by a lack of vegetative cover due to overgrazing of crop residues (Guaymango, El Salvador)
Procedures
General approach
Conservation-effective land management and desertification control programmes must become a part of national agricultural development plans, so that the proposed activities are truly integrated towards solving the main problems facing farmers. The variations in farming systems and the different socioeconomic and cultural circumstances of farmers need to be taken into account when planning activities in the different countries and regions of Latin America and the Caribbean. All aspects of the planning process must include the participation of land users, as well as other public and private sectors of the community.
Levels of planning
Land conservation, rehabilitation and desertification control programmes must be planned at the level of farms, communities and political-administrative regions. The socio-economic development plan must be preceded by a physical planning at the level of a clearly defined watershed or other physiographic unit in order to avoid situations where local solutions produce adverse impacts on the natural resources or inhabitants in other parts of the watershed.
For physical planning to be fully effective, all available information on natural resources, climate and socioeconomic conditions must be compiled using geographic information systems. The acquisition of additional, or more detailed, data may be necessary for some areas. Those who will be using the data may need to be trained and motivated, and the same people must also be involved in the planning of the work.
Monitoring of activities is very important so that adjustments in procedures can be carried out when necessary. Monitoring should be carried out using environmental, economic and social indicators based on both quantitative and qualitative indices identified by both technicians and land users.
Geographic Information Systems
Geographic information systems are of great assistance in the classification of natural resource inventories and in the diagnosis of land potential and limitations. They permit the geographical integration of many different thematic variables and afford opportunities of diagnosis and prediction that would be very difficult to carry out manually.
Inventories of natural resources are used to identify agro-ecological zones at both regional and national levels. In Latin America and the Caribbean agro-ecological zoning has been carried out on a very small scale. By agreements between FAO and member countries, i.e., Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela, more detailed agro-ecological zoning has been accomplished using soil, terrain and climatic maps elaborated at larger scales.
The identification of areas that are homogenous in terms of their biophysical characteristics and the transfer of production systems that are compatible with the land and climatic conditions will contribute to the sustainable use of natural resources. At the same time it will permit the identification of those areas that are particularly sensitive to human intervention and those which require protection, conservation or rehabilitation to maintain biodiversity and a stable ecology.
The agro-ecological zoning projects have generated various related initiatives. Among these is a regional project executed by FAO funded by the Netherlands Government for 'Assistance to the Pro-Tempore Secretariat of the Amazonian Cooperation Treaty' covering Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Peru, Surinam and Venezuela. The aim of this project is to formulate projects on the establishment of ecological economic zones within the programme of the Special Commission of the Environment Treaty and a programme of land planning of the Commission for Science and Technology.
Training courses on agro-ecological zoning and assistance to countries in the region have helped to develop land resource information systems with computerized databases that are used in land evaluation and land planning activities.
Methods
The successful implementation of land conservation, rehabilitation and desertification control programmes depends to a large extent on having carried out a previous satisfactory diagnostic study. The study should be based on national or local information on land, water and climate, with the creation of inventories and data classification according to existing schemes. The diagnostic phase also permits land-use potentials and limitations to be identified which, in turn, serve as the basis for determining alternative systems of land use and land management. A complementary diagnosis of socio-economic factors is very important for assessing priority areas and problems and also for determining the most suitable land use and management solutions.
Proposed land use and management practices will need to consider both production and environmental aspects and be tailored to address the solution of problems in the short, medium or long term, depending on the particular local requirements.
The micro-catchment as a planning unit
Much emphasis has been placed on the micro-catchment as the most 'logical' and 'rational' unit for planning the utilization of natural resources. Working within a whole micro-catchment will avoid problems which can occur in a development programme when upstream areas are neglected. For example, upstream problems of water contamination and erosion can result in serious downstream problems of contaminated water supplies, sediment deposition and gully erosion.
When working in a micro-catchment, it is easier to plan and implement physical structures which extend across the properties of several or many farmers.
Representative portions of well managed micro-catchments can serve as useful demonstration areas for farmers in other catchments with similar biophysical and social conditions.
The micro-catchment concept can foster group identity and encourage group activities related to credit access, inputs, marketing and obtaining technical advice.
The advantages of micro-catchments as planning units
The use of micro-catchments as physical and social planning units has various advantages:
o homogenous physiographic and socio-cultural conditions which facilitate the planning, implementation and maintenance of physical structures that extend over several properties or fields;
o beneficial interactions and impacts between improvements in the headwaters of a micro-catchment and perceived benefits in water supplies downstream; and
o valuable opportunities to use representative portions of the micro-catchment as demonstration areas of improved management practices, for the benefit of inhabitants from neighbouring catchments with similar agro-ecological and socioeconomic conditions.
The advantages of working in groups reinforce the argument for implementation at a micro-catchment scale:
o group development on the basis of common insights, aims and interests, which encourages mutual help in implementing agreed plans of action and which facilitates the funding of activities by groups of members through the use of collective guarantees for loans that could not be obtained individually;
o reductions in the cost of technical advice because of the proximity in which members of the group are living; and
o easier access to and sharing of scarce resources, e.g., access to machinery that would be too expensive for individual farmers to rent.
Technical approaches
WATER EROSION CAN BE EFFECTIVELY REDUCED BY INCREASING SURFACE COVER AND POROSITY IN THE SURFACE SOIL. IN THIS WAY SOIL RAINDROP IMPACT AND SURFACE RUNOFF, THE MAIN FACTORS RESPONSIBLE FOR EROSION, ARE GREATLY REDUCED.
Vegetative cover
Recent experience has shown that in order to combat erosion, attention should be focused on increasing the quantity and continuity of soil cover and on improving the structure and porosity of the surface soil. In this way soil-raindrop impact and runoff, the two factors most responsible for soil erosion, are greatly reduced. Moreover, covering the soil with annual perennial crops and crop residues is the most economic and convenient approach for small-scale farmers to soil and water conservation.
A vegetative cover not only protects the soil but also supplies nutrients and organic matter; it encourages the biological activity that helps to maintain the all-important porosity in the surface soil layer. In some cases the vegetative cover must be reinforced by physical soil conservation structures. In such cases, a vegetative cover of planted shrubs or grasses is also required to protect and stabilize the terrace banks.
Improving the retention and use of rainfall
Until recently very little attention has been paid to increasing soil cover and soil porosity to retain the rainfall where it falls, thereby increasing soil moisture availability and its subsequent use by crops. The neglect of these practices has often resulted in unnecessary and expensive irrigation schemes to supply additional water.
However. in many parts of Latin America and the Caribbean, the steep slopes and shallow, stony nature of soils limit their capacity to accept and retain water during the rainy season, resulting in runoff and the loss of water to crops.
In these situations, in addition to using agronomic and biological methods to control runoff, other complementary physical structures should be contemplated, e.g., ditches to control and discharge excess runoff, or modifications of slope length and gradient by means of terracing to reduce the accumulation of runoff. Terracing is usually only appropriate for the intensive production of high value crops.
In regions where the annual rainfall varies between 100 and 700 mm, low-cost practices of water harvesting represent a feasible option for sustainable development. The efficient collection of rainfall permits increased yields in irrigable areas, a reduction in the effects of drought, the halting of desertification through tree planting, increased supply of water to domestic animals, maintenance of pastures and the provision of drinking water for domestic use.
A large number of water harvesting practices are in existence, but their applicability depends on the annual rainfall and its distribution, the characteristics of the zone and the ultimate use of the water. Some of these practices are ancient and have formed the basis for settlements of past civilizations.
The harvesting of water continues to be an economic and worthwhile technology for dryland zones but, for it to be successful, a high degree of farmer participation is necessary, not only for the installation of the technology but, more importantly, for its maintenance.
It is essential that water harvesting programmes are supported by farmer training and by the selection of the most appropriate technologies.
Increasing soil cover and porosity not only reduces runoff but also increases the supply of plant - available water.
Surface drainage
Rainfall raises the level of the water table downstream and carries away soil nutrients, which may reduce the productive capacity of the land. Surface drainage is an important practice but is seldom included within the typical range of land productivity improvement practices.
Rainfall and runoff in dryland zones with cropping potential
When soil moisture limits crop growth, knowledge of the pattern of rainfall distribution and the frequency and duration of drought periods becomes important. Higher or more reliable yields can often be obtained by adjusting the sowing date, or by selecting varieties with a more compatible growing period.
Additional information on topography, land use and soil characteristics in conjunction with rainfall probability data can be very useful in the selection of appropriate water storage techniques.
An inventory of surface and subterranean water supplies is required to assess irrigation possibilities, but this information is lacking in many areas.
The main problem for the introduction of drainage systems is payment for the maintenance costs once the drainage canals have been constructed by the public sector. A solution could be the establishment of farmers' associations that jointly share the responsibility for maintenance.
Integrated plant nutrition
FAO is promoting the establishment of integrated plant nutrition systems (IPNS) in Latin America and the Caribbean. The concept of IPNS is the rationalization of plant nutrient management, with the aims of increasing the efficiency of nutrient supplies to plants and increasing farmers' income through the supply of local and external nutrient sources.
IPNS promotes the use of all sources of plant nutrients (mineral, organic and biological); organic waste products, rock phosphates and guano can all be important sources of crop nutrients.
The integrated systems of plant nutrition have an evolutionary character, because profits from better plant nutrient management are reinvested into the nutrient cycle. The objective is to increase the quantity of available plant nutrient reserves gradually, then to use the increased profits for the purchase of additional plant nutrients.
Integrated systems of plant nutrition comprise an initial diagnosis of how plant nutrients are being managed, the formulation of a plan to improve nutrient management efficiency and decisions on the need to purchase external nutrient supplies.
Biomass, organic residues and fertilizers
In 1990, the total biomass production of crops in the region contained 17 million tons of plant nutrients. Of this quantity, 9.8 million tons of nutrients were exported in the form of agricultural produce. The exported nutrients constituted 69 percent of the nitrogen, 73 percent of the phosphorus and 40 percent of the potassium that was present in the total biomass. The crop residues that remained contained more than 7.2 million tons of plant nutrients which, if they were recycled, would be an important source of plant nutrients.
The regional annual consumption of plant nutrients derived from mineral fertilizers was approximately 7.7 million tons, of which 3.6 were N. 2.2 P[2]O[5] and 1.9 K[2]O. Considering only the average values for the region, the fertilizer application rates in Latin America and the Caribbean exceed the amounts of N and P[2]O[5] needed to compensate for nutrient losses caused, for example, by leaching and denitrification.
Nevertheless, the distribution of fertilizer application in the cultivated areas is very variable and in 1990 varied from 3 kg/ha to more than 200 kg/ha. Also, in 16 of the 33 countries, soil nutrient reserves are being exhausted.
Reducing plant nutrient losses is a fundamental issue, but the lower labour costs and improved productivity due to better nutrient management are also of great interest and are highly appreciated by farmers.
Farmer participation in the identification of suitable plant nutrient management technologies and in the formation of effective farmers' associations can facilitate the provision of nutrients at greatly reduced prices. Moreover, farmer participation ensures that the IPNS practices are adapted to their own social and economic conditions and to their particular production objectives.
<section>5</section>
Part III: Plan implementation
Features of national action programmes
Implementation: phases and procedures
Features of national action programmes
IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT NATIONAL ACTION PROGRAMMES CONTAIN MEASURES TO REDUCE POVERTY, DISCOURAGE MIGRATION INTO MARGINAL LANDS, IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF DIET AND CREATE A DEMAND FOR PRODUCTS OTHER THAN THOSE NEEDED SOLELY FOR SUBSISTENCE.
National Action Programmes (NAP) may be elaborated for the implementation of conservation-effective land management and desertification control. Although the scope of desertification control programmes is broader than that of conservation-effective land management, in that they also deal with drought mitigation, the guidelines produced by the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification also serve as an excellent basis for elaborating NAP on conservation -effective land management.
The overall purpose of NAP is to identify factors contributing to degradation problems and practical measures to overcome them. They should place emphasis on local action programmes based on the participation of land users, the community, local authorities, government, non-government and private sectors. The roles of each category of participants and the resources needed to implement the actions should be specified. The NAP must be integrated with other national policies for sustainable development and should be sufficiently flexible to be responsive to changing socio-economic and environmental conditions.
In the establishment of action priorities, it is important to recognize the multi-dimensional character of the problems and the need for increased production combined with sustainable development, yet to take into account the human limitations due to lack of education, training and resources.
To facilitate the successful implementation of NAP the following aspects must be addressed: political, institutional and legal frameworks; the creation of a NAP coordinating commission; capacity building; education and awareness; strengthening research and extension; promotion of more profitable conservation technologies; financial aspects; regional support and international cooperation.
NAP may also include the establishment and strengthening of food security systems through storage and marketing facilities, economic development to alleviate rural poverty, promotion of alternative livelihoods and the development and use of alternative energy sources.
Legal framework
It will be necessary to carry out modifications to the existing legislation if it does not provide an acceptable framework for the use, management and conservation of lands and for desertification control in the context of sustainable agricultural development. A system of incentives and penalties may need to be incorporated to facilitate the adoption of conservation-effective land management and desertification control practices that are in accordance with the government's policy on natural resource use and conservation.
The proposed NAP must be consistent with the legislation governing the use and management of land and water, land tenure and the rights and responsibilities of local government and community organizations.
Political and institutional frameworks
Various political actions and decisions need to be taken to facilitate and accelerate the development process, as well as to make agriculture more profitable and rural life more attractive. For example, changes in subsidies, prices and market structures can greatly influence the income of a small-scale farmer. Improvements to roads and health services can markedly improve the quality of rural life, thereby stemming the migration of farmers from rural to urban areas.
Legislation and information
Present legislation related to agriculture and the environment is frequently obsolete or inadequate and needs to be revised for consistency with the new concepts, strategies and policies of conservation, as well as adapted to create effective and appropriate conditions for the management, planning and sustained use of natural resources.
Communities must assume a collective responsibility for their natural resources and need to develop a holistic strategy for the rational management of land and water that considers all the interactions among the various users of natural resources.
The implementation and continual updating of land-use databases are prerequisites to the preparation of any type of effective strategy; the database should consist of an inventory of lands and other natural resources, using technical and scientific criteria that combine to provide an overall view of the country's land and water resources.
These data will serve as a base-line for reformulating agricultural policies and programmes. They are also useful for identifying and guiding the introduction of new cropping systems and technologies that will promote the use of agricultural inputs for increased production and investment. In extreme cases they will facilitate the relocation of farmers to less degraded areas.
Institutions be strengthened and decentralized where appropriate. For example land-use planning should be decentralized to the level of municipal governments, local authorities and possibly farmers' associations. Central government should cease to be the exclusive implementing body, but should instead adopt the role of a catalyzing and coordinating entity.
Institutions must also act in a much more participatory manner; they should aim to promote coordination and cooperation in a spirit of partnership between government institutions and non-government organizations (NGOs), the private sector, local communities and land users.
Establishment of a NAP coordinating commission
Government may wish to create a NAP coordinating commission that will be responsible for the disbursement of funds and for promoting, coordinating, monitoring and reviewing the planning and implementation of activities proposed in, then subsequently developed in accordance with, the NAP. The commission will be responsible for ensuring the appropriate and timely disbursement of funds so that activities are not delayed, also avoiding incompatibility between actions and duplication of effort. The commission should be created at different levels, with appropriate responsibilities and decision-making authorities, with the participation of all stakeholders, the various public and private entities, communities and farmers' associations, that are engaged in using land and water resources.
Capacity building, education and awareness
The need to strengthen the planning, administrative and executive capacities of national and local institutions in research, technology transfer, data collection, supporting services and local authorities must be considered. This may be accomplished through institutional restructuring, changes in the mandates of institutions, staff training and the acquisition of improved facilities.
Attention may need to be given to organizing training courses on how to conduct participatory planning for conservation-effective land management and desertification control programmes. The training courses should be directed to farmers, community and local government leaders and decision-makers, government and NGO extensionists, technicians from key institutions and stakeholders from the private sector.
Improvements in school curricula are also important, with more emphasis on natural resource issues so that children grow up with the responsible attitude of 'producing whilst conserving'.
More attention may need to be given to promoting awareness campaigns to convince farmers and the public that natural resources, especially land and water, are the heritage of their own and future generations, as well as being essential to the development of life in all its expressions.
Attention should also be given to the acquisition of indigenous knowledge on agricultural and land management practices and how they might be adapted to make them more appropriate to existing conditions.
Steps must be taken to ensure that improved conservation-effective land management and desertification control practices are incorporated and promoted in any national, district or local development programme.
Strengthening research and extension
It may be necessary to modify agricultural research programmes and the attitudes of researchers to ensure that research activities truly respond to priority problems identified jointly by farmers, extensionists and researchers, so that the research outputs will be validated by farmers and useful to them. More emphasis should be given to farmer - participatory investigations; there must be adequate contact between researchers and farmers and extensionists.
In those research programmes that are dominated by attempts to increase crop productivity to a maximum, the importance of conservation-effective land management must be stressed.
Researchers should be encouraged to investigate production systems that correspond to the reality of farmers' situations. In many cases these will include low inputs, low capital, low cash flow, low risk acceptance and limited labour availability.
Farmers can benefit from technical advice provided not only by government institutions, but also by NGOs and private companies. Therefore, when considering the strengthening of extension services, all of the actors involved should be considered.
Extensionists may also need to change their approach by adopting a much more participatory role, so that they become facilitators and advisers rather than instructors imparting information to farmers in a top-down approach. Such a facilitating approach will greatly assist farmers in making their own decisions about the integrated management of their land, water, crops, pastures, animals and forests.
It may be necessary to implement suitable extension and sensitizing techniques in order to promote the participation of farmers and of their families in the planning and implementation of NAP, recognizing that they are the principal actors in the implementation process.
The long-term aim of extension services should be to foster the empowerment of farmers so that they can assume greater responsibilities for identifying their own problems and possible solutions, for testing alternative solutions, developing appropriate technologies to meet their requirements and for promoting the transfer of sustainable land management technologies, making use of farmers' associations to accelerate the process.
Introduction of new, more profitable technologies
Farmers will make optimum use of natural resources when they obtain short-term benefits, which may be monetary or in some other form. However, to gain such benefits implies the existence of an enabling environment such as the presence of supporting services and acceptable incentives.
Technologies and profit
Wheat and soybean research centres in Paraná state, Brazil, have found much evidence that the loss of soil structure due to excessive use of disc ploughs and other inappropriate practices leads to yield reductions.
As a result many farmers have adopted conservationist practices such as contour sowing, leaving crop residues on the soil surface, using chisel ploughs and zero tillage instead of disc ploughs, which enable them to carry out field operations more rapidly and to obtain higher yields. The adoption of these practices has led to a better use of water and less frequent flooding, with little evidence of erosion.
Many farmers from the hilly zones of Santa Caterina state in Brazil used to complain that the residues from summer crops could not be guaranteed to supply sufficient feed in winter for their livestock. By sowing cover crops such as oats or winter legumes, in fields that would otherwise have remained fallow during the winter period, they now obtain additional quantities of feed, which also avoids problems of erosion and runoff.
In this way, not only do the livestock gain from a better nutrition, which helps to stabilize agricultural production levels, but soil conditions are improved as well.
To convince farmers to abandon their traditional practices that may be damaging the land or the environment, the potential benefits of new practices must be immediately apparent. For example, farmers from the south of Brazil have enthusiastically adopted minimum tillage systems because the cost per ton of grain is much lower; at the same time erosion and runoff are controlled.
Financial aspects
Governments should make every effort to ensure that adequate finances are available to implement the NAP by rationalizing and using their existing resources more efficiently and effectively.
Conservation-effective land management practices are relatively simple, but the costs of introducing these practices may exceed the financial resources of some farmers. In such cases credit facilities may be necessary which require only modest sums of money compared to other types of investment. Credit supplies must be on easy terms for farmers living in marginal areas, given their limited capacity to repay loans.
National Action Programmes to combat desertification
The Paris Convention to Combat Desertification has produced detailed guidelines on the formulation of national action programmes. Many features are identical to those required for land conservation and land rehabilitation action programmes; however, some guidelines are distinct, such as those related to actions to mitigate the effects of drought:
'formulation and application of emergency plans to mitigate the effects of drought';
'strengthening and/or establishing information, evaluation and follow-up and early warning systems in areas prone to desertification and drought, taking account of climatological, meteorological, hydrological, biological, soil, economic and social factors'.
An additional feature of NAP to combat desertification in Latin America and the Caribbean derives from the region having the 'largest resources of biological diversity in the world', which makes the negative environmental effects of desertification all the more serious. Thus the following guideline is included:
'conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in accordance with the provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity'.
Regional support
Regional cooperation among countries should be pursued to promote exchange and mutual assistance in research, training and technology transfer activities.
At a regional level, FAO offers countries the benefits of research programmes through networks such as RELACO (Latin American Network for Conservation Tillage). Nevertheless, more research is still necessary on methods and indicators for evaluating sustainability, the processes and factors responsible for land degradation and desertification, and the development of predictive models for extrapolating results to similar agro-ecological zones. In addition, a system is needed to evaluate and monitor the economic and environmental impacts of land management and conservation, plus the impacts of participatory planning.
FAO also promotes a system of visits of professionals between countries, referred to as "Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries" (TCDC), which facilitates the exchange and transfer of knowledge and experience among countries, thereby achieving the maximum benefit from the expertise that exists within a region.
Networks as instruments for cooperation
Teams of researchers from 17 countries form part of the Latin American Network for Conservation Tillage (RELACO), which is concerned with tillage research and technology transfer. The aims of the network are to exchange technical experience and knowledge, to collaborate in research and training and to strengthen national capabilities in combating soil degradation and desertification due to inappropriate land management.
FAO is preparing a regional network entitled 'Network of advice, development and information on fertilizers for Latin America and the Caribbean (FADINLAC)'. The aim of this network is to promote the adoption of integrated systems of plant nutrition by assisting countries to formulate an official policy on the use of plant nutrients in agriculture, including aspects of fertilizers manufacture, importation, distribution, pricing and financing through incentives and subsidies. All countries in the region are invited to participate in this network through the 'Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries' programme.
The FAO Regional Office, besides giving direct technical assistance, promotes and facilitates technical cooperation among countries through the activities of more than twenty networks. Three of these are concerned with land-use issues, i.e., 'Management of watersheds', 'Arid and semi-arid lands' end 'irrigation and drainage'.
Besides national institutions, there are several international organizations that generate or promote technologies at a regional level, which contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources:
o CATIE (Tropical Agronomy Centre for Investigation and Teaching).
o CEPAL (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean).
o CIAT (International Centre for Tropical Agriculture).
o CIMMYT (International Centre for Maize and Wheat Improvement).
o CIP (International Centre for Potatoes).
o FAO/RLC (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations - Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean).
o IICA (Inter-American Institute of Cooperation for Agriculture).
o TCA (Amazon Cooperation Treaty).
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
The TCDC programme facilitates the efficient utilization of regional expertise, whereby visits of professionals between countries are financed by FAO to enable knowledge and experience from one country to be used to benefit and complement that of another country. This programme has been used to transfer soil conservation technologies, to strengthen the capacity of national organizations in the development of sustainable land-use systems, to prepare projects on the formulation of policies to control land degradation, to produce technical manuals and to achieve the standardization of methodologies and criteria.
International cooperation
The principal objectives of international cooperation are to promote scientific research, technology transfer and the exchange of information, avoid duplication, foster the development of regional institutions, optimize the efficient use of financial resources and facilitate the provision of financial and technical assistance. These activities should be carried out in close collaboration with national institutions, non-governmental organizations, the World Bank, the (International Fund for Agricultural Development, the Conference of the Parties of the Convention to Combat Desertification and with specialist agencies of the United Nations. FAO is disposed to collaborate with countries on the elaboration of policies and NAP on conservation-effective land management and desertification control.
Implementation: phases and procedures
The first step is for a country's government to request representatives of FAO and other international agencies to participate in a multidisciplinary NAP advisory mission. The task of the advisory mission is to identify the need for a NAP, its nature and approximate magnitude, and the approximate location where priority activities are to be implemented.
The need for a NAP as well as its nature will probably depend inter alia on the incidence of poverty, the severity of land and water degradation and the nature of the main degradation processes occurring. The magnitude will depend on the expected level of funding, likely costs and the availability of trained personnel. The location(s) of the NAP should be determined according to priority issues selected according to appropriate social, economic and environmental criteria.
Although the term used in this document is 'National Action Programme,' it should not be inferred that the programme will be nationwide in extent from the start. Indeed, it is probably advisable that the programme is initially of limited extent.
For countries where little information exists on technologies to combat degradation, raise productivity and improve rural living standards, or on methods to promote their adoption, it would be advisable to initiate the NAP in only one or two pilot areas. This would then permit the technologies and the most appropriate implementation and adoption procedures to be ascertained before embarking on a NAP of larger magnitude. This phased approach will also strengthen the country's case for requesting higher levels of funding from external sources for subsequent phases of the NAP.
Implementation: phases and procedures
Pilot area(s) will need to be identified for the initial phase of the NAP on the basis of selected criteria that ensure an adequate degree of biophysical and socioeconomic representativity.
The first phase should be conceived as a test case in which the effectiveness of the selected technologies, the procedures used to promote adoption and the monitoring mechanisms are evaluated to assess their technical, social, economic and environmental success.
For this first phase and subsequent phases of the NAP it is imperative that problems and solutions should be identified and the NAP formulated with the full participation of representatives of all interested parties and of both genders, i.e., land users, local communities, local authorities, government institutions, non-government organizations and the private sector, who are engaged in, or affected by, the use and management of land and water resources in the wider context. The best mechanism for arriving at acceptable decisions on the problems, solutions and planning of the NAP may be a fully participatory workshop.
When the first phase of the NAP has been concluded, clear indications should have emerged of the most suitable and acceptable technologies for solving the problems, but also good evidence on the most appropriate methodologies for implementing the technologies. These results can then be used for replicating the NAP in other and larger areas.
On the basis of the results of the first phase, another NAP advisory commission should be convened to consider an expansion of the NAP at a larger scale into other areas using the experience and knowledge of the successful procedures and technologies that were gained during the first phase.
The planning of all phases of the NAP must take account of other development plans such as national economic development plans, environmental action plans, national land and water conservation strategies and forestry action programmes, as well as ongoing land use, management and conservation projects, to avoid incompatibilities and duplication of effort.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Information Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
(c) FAO 1998
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
For technical advice on land management and conservation problems and programmes, write to:
Land and Water Development Division
Agriculture Department
Food and Agriculture Organization
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
