<title>ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND ROAD COSTRUCTION IN MOUNTAINOUS TERRAIN. Environmentally sound forest road construction in mountainous terrain</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Case studies on environmentally sound harvesting operations form part of a series of initiatives undertaken by the Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch of FAO to promote environmentally sound forest harvesting and engineering practices to serve the unquestionable continuing need to refine harvesting systems and techniques so that they become fully compatible with the objectives of sustainable forest management contributing to the economic, ecological and social aims of sustainable development.
This study, initiated by FAO, meets the need to document and establish data on environmentally friendly forest engineering practices. The marked superiority of sophisticated construction equipment and advanced techniques in forest road construction should encourage the adoption of such practices to provide access to the forests by roads in mountainous and difficult terrain.
The results of this study give the opportunity to compare the efficiency and the environmental impacts of "environmentally sound road construction" in semi-natural forests of the Alps as an alternative to the "traditional road construction methods" generally used in Austria in the past. Although a case study is just a snapshot of reality, it is hoped that this will contribute to raise interest in introducing environmentally friendly forest engineering practices not only in mountainous terrain but also in areas where sensitive forest ecosystems are to be accessed.
The Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch wishes to express its gratitude to the Federal Forest Service of Salzburg, Austria, for their kind support.
This case study was made possible through a special contribution by the Austrian Government for the FAO programme on environmentally sound forest harvesting.
Rudolf Heinrich
Chief
Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department, FAO
<section>2</section>
SUMMARY
The study was carried out in semi-natural forests of the Alps in the province of Salzburg, Austria. Although the concept of opening up forests by a permanent road network as a precondition for forest management and utilization of forests in a sustainable manner is widely accepted both to specialists and to the public at large, it is a difficult concept to put into effect particularly in sensitive forest ecosystems.
The road projects were selected to demonstrate that "Environmentally Friendly Forest Engineering" considerably reduces the effect of damaging elements of forest road construction. The study documents each phase of environmentally sound road construction by excavator and advanced blasting technique as applied in the road projects under review and compares its environmental impacts with those of the traditional road construction by bulldozers.
Data on road construction was collected under different terrain and formation conditions. Work and time studies on construction operations by excavator were carried out at all construction sites and blasting operations where observed in one road project where substantial rock blasting was specified.
The productive work time required per running metre of road constructed by excavator ranged from 8.75 min and 9.75 min at study sites 1 and 2 to 16.93 min at study site 3. These figures on productivity can be considered indicative for favourable, medium and extreme difficult construction conditions in mountainous terrain of the Alps.
The productivity per hour of workplace time varies even more due to the need for rock breaking by hydraulic hammer at study site 2 and the interference of blasting operations at study site 3. A productivity of 5.69 m/h workplace time was found under favourable conditions of study site 1 and of 5.24 m/h workplace time under medium conditions of study site 2. In the extreme difficult terrain of study site 3 the productivity dropped to 2.42 m/h workplace time.
All figures stated above on efficiency and performance rates of excavators under different conditions refer to the establishment of the cross section including the hillside ditch but do not cover any further activities usually carried out by excavators such as installation culverts or construction of retaining structures.
The productive work time required per blasting operation with an average rock volume of 76 m³ to be shattered was 115.22 min per blasting operation. The performance rate of rock blasting was 28.18 m³/h work time at the study site.
The cost per running metre of road constructed by excavator is based on the performance rates established by the work and time studies at each construction site and amounts to US$10.12/m for study site 1, US$17.64/m for study site 2 and US$95.83/m for study site 3. The stated figures on cost per running metre refer only to the particular road sections under review. At study site 3 where conditions for road construction varied between adjacent road sections of the project, the average cost per running metre of road dropped to about US$70.00/m considering the entire road project.
The overall cost per running metre of road completed is estimated to amount to US$27.62/m, US$28.93/m and US$75.62/m for the road sections under review. The overall cost per running metre differs less in degree between the study sites since the required activities for finishing the road vary considerably between the three observed construction sites.
The marked superiority of road construction by excavator, including the use of advanced blasting technique, over the traditional road construction techniques by bulldozers is underscored by the results of the qualitative assessment of environmental impacts in the environmentally sound road construction practice under review. This practice encourages a reduced area dedicated to permanent forest infrastructure, reduced disturbance of the landscape, satisfactory water drainage and effective erosion control as well as negligible damage to forest stands alongside road.
The implementation of environmentally sound road construction technique, characterized by use of excavator and advanced blasting technique as applied in the road projects is believed to provide a satisfactory solution to the unquestionable impact of timber harvesting operations on the environment. This technique developed initially for the Alpine mountain range of Austria is deemed to be the most suitable option for areas where sensitive forest ecosystems are to be opened up.
<section>3</section>
SYMBOLS, ABBREVIATIONS AND EXCHANGE RATE
Symbols
cm = centimetre
h = hour
ha = hectare
kg = kilogram
km = kilometre
kN = kilonewton
kPa = kilopascal
kW = kilowatt
l = litre
m = metre
m² = square metre
m³ = cubic metre
min = minute
rm = running metre
sec = second
t = metric ton
Abbreviations
AFI = Austrian Forest Inventory
Exchange rate applied (as of July 1997)
US$1 = ATS12 (Austrian Schilling)
<section>4</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
The objective of this study was to thoroughly document and establish data on "environmentally sound road construction applying advanced operating methods and tools as currently used in mountainous terrain in Austria" as an alternative to the "traditional road construction methods" in sensitive forest ecosystems.
Since the opening up of forests by forest roads and a permanent forest road network is a prerequisite to introduce sustainable forest practices, another aim of the case study was to demonstrate that forest engineering can serve as a tool for Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) if proper road design, construction and maintenance techniques are used. The introduction of these advanced techniques will meet the overall objective of preventing environmental problems associated with forest harvesting operations in mountainous terrain and elsewhere.
The case study on "Environmentally Sound Road Construction in Mountainous Terrain. Applying Advanced Operating Methods and Tools" was initiated by Rudolf Heinrich, Chief, Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch, and Joachim Lorbach, Forest Officer, Forest Engineering, both FAO - Rome.
In order to meet the objective of the case study, three construction sites in semi-natural forests in the Alps of Austria with different terrain and formation conditions for road construction were chosen to serve as study objects. All study sites were under continuous supervision of the local forest authorities and the forest engineering department of the Federal Forest Service of Salzburg.
The efficiency of the environmentally sound road construction methods was investigated by work and time studies analysing the work performance of the road construction operations carried out by means of hydraulic excavators and by applying advanced rock drilling and blasting techniques.
The field studies and preparation of this report have been carried out by Norbert Winkler for FAO. The support and information provided by Josef Egger of the Federal Forest Service of Salzburg are highly appreciated. Photographs used in this publication were taken by Norbert Winkler.
<section>5</section>
2. DESCRIPTION OF STUDY AREA
2.1. General information
The case study was done in Salzburg, one of the nine provinces of Austria. The orographic features of Salzburg are characterised by the Alpine mountain range with its great variety of geological strata and parent rocks and by the pre-alpine region in the northern part of the province with moderate to hilly terrain conditions. Three road projects in the Alpine mountain range, different in respect to bedrock material and side slopes, were chosen to serve as study objects to cover favourable, intermediate as well as difficult terrain conditions for road construction by excavator.
Table 1. General information on forest area in Austria and in the province of Salzburg
Austria
Salzburg
Forest categories
[ha]
[ha]
Commercial forest
Protection forest with yield
Forest without timber yield
Protection forest without yield
Total forest area
Note: Forest without timber yield are areas dedicated to forest road, skid trail, landing, nursery, game management, route of mains, skiing ground, springwater catchment, avalanche path, virgin forest, nature reserve or wildlife preserve. These areas remain forest by law although they often do not have any tree cover.
Geological, morphological and hydrological terrain features are not only responsible for different construction conditions but also widely determine the type of forest cover in interaction with climate conditions. Within the framework of the Austrian Forest Inventory (AFI) two main forest types are distinguished, namely, "production forest" and "protection forest without yield". The production forest comprises the categories commercial forest, protection forest with yield and forest areas which remain forest by force of the forest act although they are currently without timber yield. The areas of protection forest without yield, which also covers dwarf pine vegetation, are areas mainly located in the timberline zone. Soil protection and erosion control is the exclusive objective in management of those areas. General information on these forest categories is provided in Table 1.
In the province of Salzburg the precipitation varies considerably, not only with respect to mean rainfall year and rainfall intensities, but also with its distribution over the year which is of significant importance to understand watersheds' response in distinct geological regions and therefore to properly design and dimension road drainage facilities (Winkler, 1992).
Another important fact to be considered in road planning activities is the land ownership and land use pattern in the province of Salzburg. It is characterized by small private property (see Table 2), mainly held by farmers who often rely on alpine agriculture and forest harvesting activities to earn their living. In many cases forest roads do not just serve timber harvesting purposes but also provide access to alpine pasture areas above the timber-line. In some cases, forest roads form part of the planned network of public roads and become an essential component of the local level development infrastructure.
Table 2. Forest ownership in Austria and in the province of Salzburg
Austria
Salzburg
Forest type
Production forest
Protection forest without yield
Production forest
Protection forest without yield
Ownership
[ha]
[ha]
[ha]
[ha]
Smallholders
Forest properties
Federal forest
Total forest area
Note: Private property comprises the category of smallholders (owners of less than 200 ha forest area) and the category of forest properties (owners of more than 200 ha forest area). Federal forest refers to state owned forest area.
Private property, which comprises ownership by smallholders and forest properties, provides about 59 % of the province's production forest area which is low compared to Austria's average of 87 % for this type of ownership. The remaining part of the production forest area, about 41 %, and a major part of the protection forest without yield, about 36 %, are federal forest in the province of Salzburg. These state-owned forest areas in Salzburg are often characterized by having been exploited in the Middle Ages in order to provide fuelwood and charcoal for the salt-mining industry.
The growing demand for fuelwood and charcoal in the early salt-mining and iron industries in the Middle Ages resulted in the first forestry regulations (Sedlak, 1996) in order to avoid further forest exploitation and to guarantee continued wood supply to the industry. As a result of these early efforts in forest management Austria has gained a long tradition in forest harvesting on a sustainable basis. The Forest Act 1976, adopted in 1996, and several environmental regulations are a response to the growing importance of environmental issues and provide the legislative tool to keep the impact of forest harvesting operations, in particular permanent forest infrastructure, to the absolute minimum (Photo 1).
Sustainable Alpine Land Management, which meets the needs of the agriculture and forestry sector while serving the growing demand of multiple use of resources, requires careful planning and co-operation between different small landowners and other interest groups, to favour appropriate road alignment and design required from the economical, environmental and social point of view. An integrated approach in road planning activities will most likely contribute to a well-planned rural road network.
Photo 1. Well-planned alignment and proper design of forest roads provide acceptance of forest harvesting operations. - Perfect road alignment prevents scars inflicted on the landscape
Photo 2. Critics of forest roads often point to excessive road building, evident on many hillsides, due to lack of co-operation between landowners - failures in the past
Almost 80 percent of the Austrian road network of about 200 000 km, may be classified as low-volume rural roads (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995). The low-volume rural road network comprising all roads providing access to rural areas, that are neither federal nor provincial, may be divided into the following categories (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995) based on ownership and function:
· Community-owned roads outside villages and towns;
· Farm-to-market roads connecting farm areas, single farm houses, or small villages with the higher road network; and
· Forest roads.
In general, road construction and maintenance are the road owners' responsibility. Associations formed by potential road users, mainly found in small ownership, are an appropriate means for financing of construction and maintenance of farm-to-market and forest roads while serving the need for co-operation between adjacent landowners to shorten the total length of road (Photo 1) at the same time.
The Road Inventory, as a sub-programme of the Austrian Forest Inventory, has provided the information on forest access, by different types of low-volume rural roads (Winkler, 1998; FBVA, 1997), stated in Table 3.
The figures in Table 3 show that low-volume roads located at the forest edge, about 12 % on average for Austria and 8 % for Salzburg contribute significantly to forest access although mainly serving agricultural requirements. These edge roads reduce the need for roads located inside forests or at least help to reduce the forest road densities required.
Table 3. Accessibility of production forest by low-volume rural roads
Austria
Salzburg
Road location and ownership
[km]
[km]
located inside forests
private-owned
community-owned
located at forest edge
private-owned
community-owned
Total of rural roads
Note: private road: access usually controlled by the owner
community roads: either with or without limited access
If all roads within the forest, either private or community owned, are assumed to be forest roads and then compared to the corresponding figures on commercial forest, road densities of about 27 metres per hectare for Austria and 24 metres per hectare for Salzburg (Table 4) result. These figures give an indication of road densities required for the management of forests on a sustainable basis in mountainous regions of Austria.
Table 4. Road densities in commercial forest
Commercial forest
Roads inside forest
Road density
Political unit
[ha]
[km]
[m/ha]
Austria
Salzburg
In the province of Salzburg with its mountainous terrain and the need to open up protection forest areas, which are mostly located in steep terrain, for stand improvement purposes, well-planned road alignment and keeping slope disturbances to the absolute minimum are of highest priority. There is also a legal requirement, since every project of forest road has to be planned and supervised by a professional forest engineer and needs the approval of the Forest Authority, which will be guided by the aspects of road construction stated below:
· shortening the total length of roads and skid trails;
· avoidance of areas of wet soils and high erosion risk;
· reducing the size of cut- and fill slopes by use of excavators in steep terrain;
· use of dozers is to be restricted to easy to moderate terrain conditions;
· applying advanced drilling and blasting techniques;
· observance of minimum road standards (road gradients etc.);
· adequate compaction of road surfaces;
· adequate drainage system from road surfaces;
· erosion control by measures of slope stabilisation.
Even following these considerations, serpentine alignments are often unavoidable in mountainous terrain due to slope features, but the number of switchbacks in the route for a road must be restricted to the absolute minimum. Poor road alignment, due to a lack of co-operation among small landowners which leads to zigzag roads with too short distances between switchbacks, are hopefully all in the past (see Photos 2 and 3). They not only inflict scars on the landscape and are difficult to travel but they are also potential sources for erosion and of landslides (Sedlak, 1996).
Growing concerns on environmental issues and the fact that forest roads are unquestionably the most damaging feature of timber harvesting operations (Dykstra and Heinrich, 1996) have forced and encouraged the development of new road construction methods and blasting technologies which now are exclusively used in forest road construction in the province of Salzburg.
Photo 3. Zigzag roads with too short distances between switchbacks due to lack of co-operation between landowners unnecessarily increase the area dedicated to roads
2.2. Description of particular study areas
The main features of the three selected road projects where work and time studies on environmentally sound road construction practice by excavator had been carried out, are stated in Table 5. The area opened up by each road project and the annual timber supply to the market are the key-figures on which justification of financial assistance by federal and provincial government is based.
Table 5. General description of road projects under review
Filzmoos
Untertauern
Golling
Project feature
study site 1
study site 2
study site 3
unit
Forest area
[ha]
Farmland
[ha]
Total area opened up
[ha]
Total road length
[m]
Road density
[m/ha]
Timber volume / year
[m³]
Duration
years
All three road projects were handed in by road associations for approval by the authorities. The road association of each road project under review has been established by smallholders exclusively and ranged from 3 members in the political community of Untertauern, 4 members in Filzmoos to 10 members in Golling. Detailed information on the projects is given in Table 6.
Table 6. Main features of the particular road projects
Project features
Project - Filzmoos
Project - Untertauern
Project - Golling
Commercial forest
35 ha
85 ha
10 ha
Protection forest
with yield
20 ha
85 ha
Area opened up
55 ha
85 ha
95 ha
Range in altitude
1050 - 1350 m
1420 - 1600 m
700 - 1000 m
Road length
main road
3100 m
2300 m
2100 m
side road(s)
700 m + 500 m
1500 m
Bedrock material
phyllite
limestone formation changing with phyllite layers
stratified layers of compact limestone
Morphological and hydrological features
moderate steep to steep terrain with wet areas
moderate steep to steep terrain with wet areas and rock outcrops
steep to very steep terrain with rock outcrops
Streams to be crossed
1 intermittent stream 1 perennial stream
1 intermittent stream
Fords / bridges
2 fords with culvert
1 ford
Construction equipment
1) excavator 2) --- 3) dump truck 4) motor grader 5) vibration roller
1) excavator 2) --- 3) dump truck 4) motor grader 5) vibration roller
1) excavator 2) drilling equipment 3) dump truck 4) --- 5) vibration roller
Max. road gradient
Switchbacks/turning (outside radius)
3 switchbacks (22 m)
2 switchbacks (20 m)
2 switchbacks (17 m) 1 turning (17 m)
Other specifications
local improvement of subgrade by gravel
local improvement of subgrade by gravel
Drainage from the road surface will be provided by a crowned road, a hillside ditch and culverts (40 cm Ø) spaced at 50 m distances. In road sections where streams, either intermittent or perennial, are to be crossed, the dimension and spacing of culverts should be adjusted to the actual need for adequate water drainage. For the road project - Golling, additional drain dips at 70 m intervals have been specified.
As an important erosion control practice, seeding of grass is considered obligatory for all three road projects. Fill slope protection will be provided by a debris cover wherever possible. Retaining structures will be built up with boulders by the excavator wherever needed for slope stabilisation alongside the road (for details see Chapters 3.2 and 3.7).
Photo 4. Fords with integrated culverts are sometime specified as they meet the requirements of normal run-off as well as of high floods (Winkler, 1992)
Table 7 provides information on alterations, adaptations and additional prescribed measures made by the approving authorities and stated in the road building licence on which the beginning of road construction work depends. All measures must be inspected by the supervising forest engineer. Disregard of prescriptions may lead to loss of governmental financial support.
Table 7. Specifications in the road building licences
Project feature
Project - Filzmoos
Project - Untertauern
Project - Golling
Mass transport
on side slope > 70 %
on side slope > 70 %
on side slope > 80 %
Fords
with retaining structure
with retaining structure
Culverts
inlet - outlet protection
inlet - outlet protection
outlet protection
Alteration of road alignment
slight alteration to circumvent wet areas
slight alteration to avoid rock formation
Other measures
ephemeral area is to be crossed by ford
protection of trees used by woodpecker
Figure 1. Regular cross-section for earth and rock
The cross-section both for earth and rock recommended in the road projects is shown in Figure 1. In the road project - Filzmoos a subgrade width of 4.0 m and a running surface of 3.0 m has been specified for the two side roads. Figure 2 shows the actual cross sections found at the study sites which are derived from several measurements spaced at 30 m distances along the road centreline of the road sections where construction operations have been observed.
Figure 2. Actual cross-sections at study sites
At study site 1 and 3, the average subgrade width was considered to be in compliance with the subgrade width of the approved road projects, whereas at study site 2 the subgrade width had obviously been increased. The latter was caused by the need to store logs alongside road, not only felled during clearing of construction area but also for logs of future timber harvest. Due to terrain conditions no landing could be established for several hundred metres (Photo 5).
Photo 5. The need of log storage alongside road has led to an increase in subgrade width at study site 2 as no landing could be established for several hundred metres
<section>6</section>
3. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND ROAD CONSTRUCTION TECHNIQUE IN STEEP TERRAIN
Environmentally sound forest road construction techniques as holistic, interdisciplinary approaches that take into account the need for landscape and wildlife considerations should replace purely technology-oriented solutions (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995) and are to be guided by the following principal considerations:
· any disturbance to the landscape is to be kept to the absolute minimum;
· environmentally sound correction of poorly located and designed roads at a later stage is virtually impossible;
· reckless and incompetent construction work may destroy the beneficial effects of even the most carefully selected road location;
· undesired effects and scars inflicted on the landscape can seldom be remedied at a later stage and only at much higher costs.
Equal attention is to be paid to the three phases in road construction projects (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995), namely, planning and design, construction operation, and integration which comprises bioengineering as well as landscaping measures. All operations undertaken are guided by the consideration that unless the forest is left in a condition that will permit the attainment of a desired future condition, sustainability cannot be assured (Dykstra and Heinrich, 1996).
The detailed information given in the following chapters focus on construction activities. Some details also refer to integration measures as they are accomplished by means of excavator.
3.1. Clearing of the construction area
Prior to clearing of the construction area, the design information is to be moved from the plan to the ground by staking. There are a variety of staking methods which can be employed, however, for the mechanized construction of forest roads in the mountainous terrain of Austria, where the gradient rather than the horizontal alignment is the controlling factor, simpler methods of location have been developed (Sedlak, 1985).
At the study sites the gradeline method was employed, referred to as "zero-line method" in Austria, which has proved to be the ideal tool for fitting the road to the natural terrain as closely as possible. It can be described as a step-by-step method for fixing the location line with a given longitudinal gradient directly in the terrain (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995) by means of a hand-held clinometer. The gradeline itself represents the intersection between subgrade of the road and the slope, and serves as the guideline for mechanized road construction (Sedlak, 1985).
In using this simple method there are no real limits to project accuracy (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995) as exact costing of earthworks is not necessary due to the high performance of the construction equipment employed. Such simple methods must not be confused with inadequate planning as skill and experience are required to find the most feasible road alignment, both from the environmental and economic point of view (Sedlak, 1985).
Figure 3. Road template
Once the gradeline is staked, clearing of the construction area by felling the trees within the clearing limits (see Figure 3) should be carried out. In difficult terrain the clearing limits are marked by tying coloured plastic tapes to trees or branches.
The felling itself, as the landowners responsibility, has to take account of the anticipated method of extraction by the excavator operator with regard to felling direction and harvesting method to be used. A modified full-length method is normally applied as it facilitates log removal from the construction area by excavator most efficiently. This method requires that trees are delimbed and topped at the felling site, except where the trees are too large to be handled by the excavator, when some cross cutting will be necessary.
Photo 6. Modified full-length method should preferably be used in felling at construction site
3.2. Road construction by excavator
The introduction of hydraulic excavators in forest road construction has been the major step towards environmentally sound road construction practices. In hilly terrain in Austria the use of excavators not only replaced bulldozers in forest road construction but also improved the quality of roads while reducing environmental impacts of these complex engineering structures, whereas in steep terrain their use is the only option to make road construction even feasible.
Road construction technique by hydraulic excavator comprises the following five distinct phases stated below:
i) log removal from construction area
ii) topsoil removal from construction area
iii) excavating base for fill foundation
iv) fill slope construction
v) subgrade and cut shaping
This order is not necessarily followed in the actual construction sequence on the construction site. Some operators will arrange single activities in sequence, whereas others will chop and change between tasks. The latter are at risk burying organic materials in the fill and failing to separate excavated local materials taking account of their anticipated use in building up the fill in layers.
However, even if a well-trained and experienced professional operator follows his personal optimum sequence of construction activities, log removal from the construction area will always be the first phase in road construction and close supervision has to ensure best construction practices to be followed and compliance with the project plan approved by the authorities. The road gradient should frequently be checked to ensure that the gradeline is followed since stakes marking the gradeline will be obliterated during topsoil removal.
Figure 4. Road construction technique by excavator
Close supervision is important when road construction works are carried out by contractors who are paid per running metre of road completed rather than on an hourly rate. Past experience has shown that contractors paid by the running metre tend to decrease their own costs by poor construction practices (see also Chapter 5.1.1) where proper establishment of the fill foundation is often neglected. Road failures and even landslides triggered by construction flaws have been the consequence, in particular due to the inadequate fill foundation provided by the excavator in the third phase.
On slopes where substantial rock blasting is specified the topsoil removal from the construction area will be followed by rock drilling and blasting to facilitate a solid foundation.
Photo 7. Log removal by means of chain attached to the bucket's hook
i) Log removal from construction area
Once the trees have been felled within the clearing limits, road construction activities will start by log removal from the construction area. As already mentioned in Chapter 3.1, trees should preferably remain in full length in order to minimize the delays to the work of the excavator and ensure maximum performance.
After several trees have been attached by means of chain to the excavator's bucket or sometimes just by balancing stems put on the bucket, the excavator pulls or carries logs out of the construction area by moving backwards to roadside storage. Logs should be stored at roadside in several places rather than transported over long distances to landings due to the low driving speed of excavators. Such frequent storage will reduce extraction cost and facilitate any further processing.
Photo 8. Log removal at the construction site by means of the excavator's bucket
ii) Topsoil removal from construction area
The log removal phase will be followed by clearing the construction area from wood residues and organic topsoil. Bigger branches are piled up by pulling them with the bucket's shanks to be removed later and to be spread out on the fill slope. Deposition of branches on the fill slope helps to keep exposure of unprotected surfaces as short as possible, provides immediate erosion control from fill slope and facilitates an earlier natural or man-made revegetation.
Stumps, tree tops and other vegetative debris are removed by the excavator's bucket from the construction area in front of the excavator and placed by the operator with accuracy and care along the base of the fill slope in order to form a filter windrow. The additional width between the construction limit and forest edge ensures that space is available to deposit debris outside the construction area and prevent organic material being mixed into the base of the fill.
In contrast to stump removal by bulldozers, where it is recommended to leave stumps 0.8 to 1.2 m high to provide added leverage (FAO, 1989), there is no need to do so in using excavators as stumps are being dug out. This ensures the highest wood recovery rate and therefore contributes to the economic feasibility of a road project.
The established filter windrow will drastically reduce damage to forest stands alongside the road by excavated materials, namely stones, escaping downhill and also prevents sediment from entering into stream channels.
After stump removal has taken place, the organic topsoil will be stripped and material unsuitable to be used in the fill will be removed from the construction area and placed in the additional width between the construction limit and the forest edge above the already established filter windrow. If working in grassland or where grass covers the forest floor the operator should be advised to separate and to lift turfs carefully as they can be used to establish vegetation on the fills rather quickly.
Photo 9. Wood residues and organic top soil will removed in front of the machine and spread on the rear fill slope
iii) Excavating base for fill foundation
At the toe of the anticipated fill slope a base, about 1 m wide and 0.5-1.5 m high, is excavated to establish the foundation for the fill on solid ground. The steeper the slope the deeper under subgrade level the base will be established limited by the excavator's maximum digging depth. Excavated materials should be separated by the operator taking account of their anticipated use in building up the fill.
Earth will then be deposited parallel to the toe of the fill slope, immediately above the established filter windrow to provide the downhill raised borderline of the foundation base and forming the lower part of the fill widening (see Figure 3). Excavated mineral soil suitable for use in fill construction is temporarily heaped uphill on the construction area next to the excavator. Big boulders suitable for retaining structures are piled separately, either alongside the road or next to planned culverts.
In steep terrain where slopes with rock formation near or above ground level are to be crossed, the base for the fill foundation should be provided by breaking out rock either by rock hammering or rock blasting.
Upon this solid base, boulders are placed by the excavator with accuracy and care, as well as compacted by means of the excavator's bucket in order to build up a solid foundation for the fill. The establishment of a fill foundation reduces the length of fill slopes considerably and makes road construction in steep terrain feasible. This feature is of great importance when side slopes exceed 40 percent as balanced road sections can be achieved with considerably less excavation (FAO, 1989).
In contrast, applying traditional side cast techniques by bulldozer the length of the fill slope would amount to about 3.5 m, 12 m and 22 m for slope gradients of 45 %, 60 % and 70 %, assuming an angle of repose for side cast material of about 37º, and on slopes of over 75 % a fill cannot be established at all (Gorton, 1985). It is suggested that a balanced road design provided by excavator construction results in approximately 25 to 35 percent less excavated material compared to the traditional side cast technique by bulldozer where most of the road width is cut into the stable hill side (FAO, 1989).
Photo 10. Excavating a solid base for the fill foundation
iv) Fill construction
The main feature of road construction technique by hydraulic excavator is balanced road sections where cut excavation is incorporated into the layered fill. Suitable coarse material is placed against the fill foundation to establish the base fill layer. In general, the fill needs to be built up in well compacted layers to develop strength since it must support traffic. The excavated materials are spread by the excavator's bucket to form a 30 to 50 cm layer which is to be compacted by several excavator passes before being covered by the next layer of less coarse material.
The obvious advantage of balanced road design is that loose, unconsolidated wasted material is minimised compared to traditional road construction techniques by bulldozer. To build up the fill foundation and the fill itself, requires highly skilled and experienced operators, since fill failures, due to improper construction techniques, may not only destroy parts of the roads but may also trigger landslides in steep terrain making large areas unproductive and inflicting scars on the landscape.
Photo 11. Fill construction is one of the most responsible duties in proper road construction - one can see the separated materials piled hillside
Only mineral soil, free of organic debris such as stumps, tree tops and humus should be used in fill construction as organic material will decompose and result in uneven settlement and increase the potential for failure. Excess material will, depending on its size, either be incorporated in the road subgrade of already established road sections or temporarily laid aside for use in the next work cycle. If excess material cannot be used, it can be removed with a dump truck.
v) Subgrade and cut shaping
The last exercise to be accomplished using the hydraulic excavator will be finishing the subgrade, establishment of the hillside ditch and final shaping of the cut slope.
Smaller holes in the uppermost fill layer will be filled up while the layer gets continuously compacted through excavator passes in order to achieve a firm subgrade. Finally smoothing and compacting of the subgrade surface by means of the excavator's bucket will provide the coarse subgrade.
Photo 12. Smoothing and compacting the coarse subgrade by means of the excavator's bucket
Depending on the parent material at the construction site and the availability of material suitable for gravelling, a sealing layer of gravel or similar material should be applied to the coarse subgrade (Photo 13), compacted and finally shaped and smoothed in order to provide a crowned road (Photo 15) or sloped roads if specified by the supervising forest engineer. All of these activities can be carried out by the excavator.
While the final finishing work is being done to the road surface, the hillside ditch can be formed. This allows for immediate draining of the road structure preventing damage to road structure and erosion from exposed surfaces during the construction phase as favourable weather conditions for road construction work often rapidly deteriorate in mountainous regions of Austria and heavy thunderstorms force to close road construction work.
As excavating the ditch interferes with the cut, final shaping of the cut slope to provide the desired slope gradient will depend on completion of coarse subgrade and ditch. The edge at the top of the cut is to be rounded in order to avoid overhanging floor vegetation and the cut slope to be smoothed in by the excavator's bucket in order to prevent downhill drifting of loose cut slope material after completion of the road (Photo 14). Material eroded and escaped into the ditch not only increases maintenance costs as it has to be removed, but also obstructs water drainage.
After the road construction work by excavator has been finished, the forest road is left in a condition that will allow hauling trucks and off-road vehicles to pass (Photo 15). Although immediate access is provided, hauling should be restricted to trees harvested during road construction in order to avoid deterioration in timber quality. Otherwise, roads which have usually been constructed during the summer season, should be allowed to go through an entire winter and the subsequent melt-season before permitting their use by heavy machinery.
Photo 13. Suitable local material will be spread on the coarse subgrade by the excavator to provide a sealing layer
During the following construction season the road will finally surfaced. Settlement will be corrected and gravel will be applied to the running surface. The final smoothing and shaping of the road surface will either be accomplished by means of a grader or occasionally by excavator equipped with a slope finishing bucket. Following up the grader is a vibration roller providing a smoothed, compacted surface to ensure an effective drainage from the road surface (for details see Chapter 3.6).
Where rock surfaces are to be crossed, final shaping of the cut slope and establishment of the ditch will be provided by means of hydraulic hammer attached to the excavator. In such road sections the longitudinal water drainage facility can best be described as a deepened road edge rather than as a real ditch where on the roadside part can be driven upon so that road width and rock disintegration can be kept to the absolute minimum.
Photo 14. Final shaping of the cutslope by means of the excavator's bucket
Photo 15. A sealing layer of gravel or similar material will be applied on the coarse subgrade and finally shaped to provide a crowned road
3.3. Rock disintegration
The steeper the slopes the more rock disintegration will be involved in road construction activities since rock outcrops cannot be bypassed or rock surfaces avoided. The excavator production rate approaches the bulldozer production rate as side slope increases due to the fact that the excavator's bucket is much more effective at ripping than the dozer blade (FAO, 1989). The excavator production rate may even be higher on slopes steeper than 60 % as indicated by performance studies carried out under similar terrain conditions (Gorton, 1985).
Photo 16. As long as rock can be ripped, the excavator solely equipped with a suitable type of bucket will be employed in rock disintegration
Whether or not a rock can be ripped, rock excavation can be accomplished by means of excavator solely equipped with the a suitable type of bucket or other excavator attachments like hydraulic hammers or hydraulic drilling units. Pneumatic equipment is now widely replaced by hydraulic equipment which is not only quieter than pneumatic hammers, but also operates at lower cost as the excavator's hydraulic pumps do the work and an air compressor is not needed.
However, as long as the rock can be ripped, the excavator equipped with a suitable type of bucket can be employed. Since ripability of rock depends on the type of rock and on the degree of fracturing and/or weathering, the experienced planning engineer will arrange equipment needed in rock disintegration to be available at times which minimise down time for the excavator.
Photo 17. The use of hydraulic hammer close the gap in rock disintegration by rock buckets on the one hand and by blasting on the other hand
3.3.1. Hydraulic hammers
The use of hydraulic hammers attached to excavators is considered the ideal solution for rock disintegration in order to avoid rock blasting where the parent rock is no longer rippable by the excavator's bucket but still has enough planes of weakness for economical operation with hydraulic hammer. Although tremendous progress has been made in drilling and blasting techniques in the past, rock disintegration by hydraulic hammer meets the demand in reducing environmental impacts.
Since a hammer need not to be a full time attachment and coupler systems provided by manufacturers ensure that there is no loss of bucket breakout force by their use, the bucket can be taken off and replaced by a hammer within a few minutes. Hydraulic hammers therefore make an excavator even more versatile and cost effective as drilling equipment and explosives are not needed to break out pockets of rocks and alterations in road location can be avoided.
The main features of hydraulic hammers and advantages inherent to their use can be described as follows:
· rock hammers are enlarging the application range of excavators;
· less non-work time of the excavator operator as interference of blasting operation does not occur;
· desired cut slope gradient and shaping can easily be performed by the skilled excavator operator;
· size of disintegrated rock material can be controlled by a skilled and experienced operator in order to facilitate incorporation of rock material;
· accurate construction of hillside ditch for water drainage;
· less excess material to be removed through accurate rock disintegration;
· the hydraulic hammer is the only equipment needed in addition to the excavator already employed at construction site;
· blasting danger can be avoided.
3.3.2. Rock blasting
In difficult terrain the decision on road location is based on the principles of best road construction practice, limitations due to forest ownership, and on terrain constraints. Therefore rock surfaces cannot always be avoided and substantial rock blasting may be specified by the planning engineer.
Although more sophisticated blasting techniques have been developed, rock blasting is best avoided as the use of rock drilling equipment and explosives increases road construction costs and there are substantial risks in using explosives. However, if blasting is specified, sophisticated drilling equipment attached to the hydraulic excavator, which facilitate vertical as well as horizontal drilling, should be used (for details see Chapter 4).
Since there is no real limit to the drilling position, the blasting technique can be adjusted to rock condition and the use of an excavator as carrier vehicle ensures that the road width can be kept to the absolute minimum as excavators do not require additional road width for manoeuvre.
Photo 18. Sophisticated hydraulic drilling units for excavators enable vertical as well as horizontal rock drilling
The blasting technique used at study site 3 where the road had to be cut into stratified layers of compact limestone, can be described as follows:
· use of several vertical drilling holes instead of one long horizontal drilling hole as used in dolomite rock for example;
· vertical holes were placed in a rectangular pattern 1.5 m square;
· hole length ranged from 3 to 4 m depending on the distance between rock surface and planned subgrade;
· amount of explosives loaded per drilling hole varied according to the hole length and ranged from 1.5 to 1.75 kg;
· use of sophisticated primers which facilitate loads to be exploded with delay in millisecond range;
· loads separated by the holes connected so that the explosion is caused by the same ignition.
This blasting technique using minor loads separated in several drilling holes with less disruptive effect on the bedrock can be described as "soft" blasting. On the one hand, it only loosens the rock to be removed by excavating but avoids disturbing the stratified bedrock as well as other blast-related damage. On the other hand, due to its less destructive effect, the size of rock material can be controlled which is important for subsequent use of disintegrated rock material in the road structure.
Photo 19. Proper blasting technique provides material suitable in size to be incorporated into the road structure while avoiding damage to the forest stands alongside road
The use of primers with delays allows the direction of movement of rock material caused by the explosion to be controlled. In general, the primers will be set in the holes following the staked road course so that the explosives loaded in the front holes will go off first and blasted rock material will be directed by the subsequent exploding loads towards the already established road section.
In road sections where substantial rock blasting is needed, full bench construction of road with longitudinal transport of excess material is usually specified and rock blasting along the base of the fill will be required in order to establish the base for proper fill foundation.
Damage to adjacent stands at construction site by material escaping downhill during the explosion can be reduced significantly due to the "soft" character of this blasting technique. Its use is also highly recommended in the vicinity of springs as they might be affected by the disruptive effect on stratified bedrock of less sophisticated blasting. If buildings or infrastructure are at risk even by applying soft blasting techniques, hydraulic hammers are the only solution but their use has to be restricted to short road sections for cost reasons.
3.4. Mass transport
One main advantage of road construction by hydraulic excavator, among others, is that balanced road construction with excavated material incorporated into the road structure can still be carried out on steep slopes whereas in road construction by bulldozers full bench construction technique with end hauling of excess material would have to be applied.
However, where rock surfaces are to be crossed and the base for fill foundation cannot be provided by the excavator, full bench road construction is unavoidable. The longitudinal mass transport will then either be provided by means of the excavator or by dump trucks depending on the amount of excess material to be removed.
In contrast to the statement that operating distance for materials movement by excavator is limited to its swing distance (FAO, 1989), longitudinal mass transport with distances of up to 70 metres was found at the study sites. Long distances for mass movement by excavator cannot be recommended in general, but are acceptable in road projects with only few short road sections where mass movement is needed and therefore the costly use of a dump truck can be avoided.
Another advantage of longitudinal mass transport by excavator is that the moved material will be incorporated in the road structure of already established road sections rather than wasted. Consequently, there is no need to find stable disposal areas which have to be integrated into the landscape. Furthermore, the incorporated and compacted material is unavailable for erosion. The experienced supervising engineer will decide whether excavator or dump truck should be employed.
3.5. Road drainage
The most effective way to prevent watershed disturbance and increased soil erosion rates is to minimise the total length of roads. It has to be kept in mind that even the best developed drainage system established during the road construction process will only reduce rather than avoid impacts on natural watersheds.
Nevertheless, forest roads are essential for industrial timber extraction, for providing convenient access to the forest for applying sustainable forest management practices and for monitoring purposes while often benefiting local communities at the same time (see also Chapter 2).
Some of the most common drainage-related problems are:
· inadequately sized stream crossings, in particular culverts;
· inadequate road surface drainage;
· poor drainage of skid trails joining roads;
· lack of road maintenance after logging operations, hauling activities or erosion caused by thunderstorms so that ditches and culverts do not work.
Photo 20. Water drainage is to be ensured from the start - intermittent springs often appear after heavy thunderstorms and transfer water from planes in the bedrock onto the newly established cut slope and might trigger slides
Photo 21. Slope material escaped into the ditch requires immediate action to avoid obstruction of water drainage and to prevent costly repair work of slips
Following environmentally sound construction practices, the measures stated below are considered obligatory to provide satisfactory water drainage and consequently to prevent erosion:
· the road fitted as closely as possible to the terrain and to be restricted in width to the absolute minimum for safety and anticipated use;
· soil disturbance and surfaces exposed to erosion are to be minimized by balance of cuts and fills;
· road gradients should be varied to reduce concentrated flow on road surfaces, in ditches, in culverts and on fill slopes;
· gravel should be applied on the running surface not only for more convenient use by vehicles but also to provide a more weather resistant sealing surface;
· surface water from joining skid trails should be prevented from flowing on to the road and becoming man-made streams with the potential for erosion as they flow downstream;
· ditch gradients should be adjusted to the specific soil condition at the construction site to keep collected waters moving to culverts and preventing sediment deposition and ditch erosion;
· road drainage features are to be designed and spaced so that peak drainage flow from surfaces will not exceed the capacity of the individual drainage facilities;
· culvert location are to be spaced not only at certain distances but are to be installed where actually needed when crossing streams either perennial or intermittent, and in ephemeral areas;
· prefabricated steel culverts pipes are to be installed in preference to articulated concrete pipes as the latter are at risk of collapse under the load of heavy hauling during periods of weakened road strength and consequently to obstruct or to block water drainage;
· culverts are to be protected from plugging by using sediment catch basins and debris racks where needed and water is to be prevented from eroding and undercutting the culvert by rock armoured inlets;
· outlets of culverts are to be armoured with rock boulders to prevent emerging water from eroding the fill slope where water will not be released onto a stable area;
· fords should be considered as alternative to culverts in crossing perennial streams carrying high loads of sediments or the combined use of culvert and ford, in particular where torrents are to be crossed, with a culvert for the normal run-off and a ford for high floods;
· individual drainage facilities are to be inspected periodically for need of maintenance and following after heavy thunderstorms and after logging and hauling activities in order to start immediately repair work if needed;
· damage to road features should be avoided by effective road-use management which includes access control in general as well as road closure during wet seasons.
One significant feature in road construction by excavator is the fact that drainage facilities and erosion control features will either be provided in each single work cycle of the ongoing road construction process or can easily be established by means of excavators at any time required without need for additional machinery. In general, culverts will be installed when the road cross section is established either for the entire road or for those parts finished during the construction season.
In general, minimum gradients of 2-3 % and maximum gradients of 9-12 %, in exceptional cases up to 16 % are considered appropriate for forest roads (Sedlak, 1996). Nevertheless, other maximum road gradients might be specified by the authorities according to specific site conditions of individual road projects. Gradients for the road crown will range from 2 to 5 % and from 3 to 6 % for insloped roads (Winkler, 1992) to ensure an effective drainage from the road surface.
Ditch gradients should range from 2 to 8 % (Almas et al., 1993), just steep enough to keep collected waters moving without carrying excessive sediments. Gradients steeper than 8 % might result in too much momentum of collected water and the carrying of sediment and debris for long distances, whereas gradients which are too shallow lead to silting up of ditches. Culverts should be maintained in order to avoid failure due to plugging by debris and sediment.
As one can see from the specifications made by the authorities (Table 6) for the individual road projects, fords are often specified in crossing perennial streams. This reflects the environmentalists' general preference of fords against culverts (Sedlak, 1996) as the latter are considered to interfere with the stream ecosystem.
3.6. Surfacing and shaping
Once the road subgrade has been constructed and culverts have been established, the road is allowed to go through an entire winter and the subsequent melt season, before surfacing takes place during the construction season in the following year.
Settlement in the road subgrade are filled with coarse gravel and well-graded gravel is applied to the running surface. Only the use of well-graded material, where smaller particles tend to fill the empty spaces between the larger particles during compacting performed by rollers, will ensure that a smooth sealing surface can be achieved.
Once the gravel has been applied on the running surface the final shaping and smoothing will usually be provided by means of a grader. Depending on the material applied the final shaping will occasionally be done by an excavator equipped with a slope finishing bucket as at study site 3 where limestone material from local quarries was used for surfacing.
Finally, following up the grader is a vibration roller for proper compaction. Compaction is the process of increasing the density and the strength of the soil. The effectiveness of the compacting process will be affected by gradation of gravel material applied, its moisture content and the compactive effort. Proper compaction of fill material is not only the key to a stable, balanced road design (FAO, 1989) but also results in a significant reduction of maintenance cost and helps to prevent washing away of very loose silts and fine gravels when there is heavy rain.
Photo 22. Shaping of the gravel material applied on the running surface will occasionally be carried out by an excavator solely equipped with a slope finishing bucket
The costs of using well graded material for the road pavement can be substantial (Almas et al., 1993) and could cost as much as 70 % of the total cost of the road on weak clay subgrades (Sedlak, 1996). The use of substitute poorly graded material is not recommended. The initial financial savings are soon overtaken by the higher maintenance costs.
Options for saving on the costs of gravel material are given below (Sedlak, 1996)
· road construction during frost periods to prevent subgrade deformation and the need to fill up settlements with costly gravel;
· recycling or processing local material wherever feasible;
· use of polypropylene fabric layers between subgrade and gravel layers to prevent clay intrusions;
· subgrade stabilization using lime or other suitable substances as recommended in the road engineering literature.
At the study sites the costs of surfacing which cover the cost for gravel material itself and its transport, for grader as well as roller operations, ranged from about 4 to 47 percent of the overall road costs (see Chapter 5.3) at the three construction sites and are less than the costs mentioned above due to the availability of suitable gravel material from local quarries.
Photo 23. Topsoil removal will be spread on the rear fill slope in each work cycle
3.7. Slope protection and stabilisation
Some of the measures which are usually undertaken to stabilise slopes and to prevent erosion from exposed surfaces, will already be performed in each single work cycle as they are inherent features of proper road construction technique by excavator. In particular these measures are the following:
· a fill slope cover which provides immediate erosion control will be continuously performed during the phase of topsoil removal from the construction area in each single work cycle of the road construction process;
· finally shaped, smoothed and compacted cuts performed in each single work cycle ensure that loose material is removed from slope surfaces which would otherwise be exposed to erosion;
· inlet and outlet protection structures of culverts as well as retaining walls for slope stabilization will be built up by the excavator using the boulders which have been separated from other excavated materials during construction operations;
· the fill slope will be revegetated by turfs where a grass layer covered the soil at construction site.
Photo 24. Erosion control of fill slope by debris cover provided immediately after fill construction
Beside the measures already performed by applying the excavator construction technique, vegetative treatment of slopes for early revegetation and prevention of erosion has become a standard procedure in Austria (Sedlak, 1996). Out of the wide spectrum of bioengineering measures which range from simple seeding procedures, mulching etc. to combined use of retaining structures and living plants, the most inexpensive way of grass seeding either by hand or by hydro-seeding technique has been approved by the authorities for all 3 road projects.
Employing bioengineering methods not only prevent erosion but also ensure a better blending into the landscape and sometimes perform an additional benefit due to the draining effect of structures incorporating living plants. These bioengineering methods are generally preferable to purely technology-oriented methods such as concrete supporting walls (Litzka and Haslehner, 1995).
Photo 25. Immediate erosion control of cut slope by stumps which had been removed during the phase of topsoil removal from the construction area
Photo 26. Retaining walls built up from boulders by means of excavator are quite costly but cannot always be avoided in crossing wet and unstable areas due to terrain constraints in road location in mountainous regions
<section>7</section>
4. DESCRIPTION OF THE ROAD CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT
Regardless of the type of construction equipment used in a particular project, road construction itself remains a difficult, often hazardous operation in mountainous terrain that can inflict scars on the landscape as well as substantial damage on the forest ecosystem. In order to carry out construction operations efficiently and safely, as well as in an environmentally sound way the following should be considered:
· appropriate size and power configuration of construction equipment, adjusted to the actual needs of the construction technique applied and with respect to terrain conditions;
· appropriate equipment with respect to technical and safety standards, as well as ergonomic principles and requirements;
· only adequate trained, skilled and experienced machine operators should be employed for road construction in sensitive forest ecosystems and difficult terrain;
· well planned road design followed by fitting the road to the natural terrain as closely as possible to facilitate road construction without major problems for operators and machines;
· clear instruction to and close supervision of machine operators by the forest engineer responsible for road planning and construction.
Following these principles, the road construction equipment stated below was used for the environmentally sound forest road construction technique as described in the previous chapter at the study sites.
Table 8. Hydraulic excavators used at study sites
Study site 1
Study site 2
Study site 3
Kobelco
Komatsu
Caterpillar
Type of tracked excavator
Mark IV SK210
PC300LC
320L
unit
Flywheel power
[kW]
Operating weight
Overall width
[m]
Overall track length
[m]
Ground pressure
[kPa]
Fuel tank refill capacity
[l]
Max. travel speed
[km/h]
Gradability
Pryout force
[kN]
Penetration force
[kN]
Bucket capacity (heaped)
[m³]
Max. reach at ground level
[m]
Max. digging depth
[m]
At study site 2 a more powerful type of excavator had been used in order to avoid the need of rock blasting. Special attention should be paid to the fact that the use of more powerful excavators might easily mislead the operator to increase subgrade width and close and more frequent supervision may be required.
Table 9. Hydraulic hammers adjusted to type of excavator
Study site 1
Study site 2
Study site 3
Type of hydraulic hammer
W-550
W-770
W-660
unit
Operating weight *
Oil flow
[l/min]
Working pressure
[bar]
Carrier unit
[t]
*) without adaption
The appropriate type of hammer can be selected out of a hammer series with operating weights ranging from 150 to 3500 kg for all types of carrier units ranging from 1.5 to 80 tonnes (WIMMER, 1996). The type of hydraulic hammers used are distinguished by a newly designed impact technique which guarantees high impact energy with low back thrust.
The design of the hammer enables it to be exactly positioned by the operator as the housing does not have any protruding parts (see Photo 17). This new generation of hydraulic hammers provides a better working environment for the operator because of the sound proofing and vibration damper systems, the latter also reduces the impact to the excavator's boom.
Table 10. Hydraulic drilling equipment used at the study site
Study site 3
Type of hydraulic equipment
AB 3000T
unit
Drill hammer
HL 300
Operating weight *
Drill steel
[mm]
Drill diameter
[mm]
Net drilling depth - standard
[m]
long hole drilling
[m]
Oil flow - drilling
[l/min / bar]
Scavenging oil demand
[_m/min]
Oil flow - suction
[l/min / bar]
*) without adaption
The hydraulic drilling unit AB3000T used at the study sites enables vertical as well as horizontal drilling by the operator as the drilling unit has 360° unlimited rotation and a swivel axis turnable by 95° (WIMMER, 1996). A no load stroke as well as an automatic antibloc system facilitates drilling in geological difficult terrain. Furthermore, the drilling unit is equipped with a radio remote control system to ensure the operator always has the optimal view to control the drilling unit. The drilling unit has its own generator so that no additional electrical installations at the excavator are necessary.
It should be noted that although road construction is machine-intensive, labour remains the most critical element for achieving the goals of environmentally sound road construction practices. Only if workers are competent in their skills, and motivated to work properly and efficiently can they be expected to contribute effectively to these goals (Dykstra and Heinrich, 1996).
<section>8</section>
5. STUDY METHODOLOGY AND ANALYSIS OF DATA
The efficiency of the environmentally sound road construction technique using hydraulic excavator as applied in the road projects under review has been investigated with work and time studies analysing the work performance of the operations.
Work and time studies were done in accordance with the forest work study nomenclature (IUFRO, 1995). The study methodology used for all time studies conducted during construction operations and rock disintegration activities was cumulative timing exclusively, with the time for each work element subsequently obtained by subtraction.
The excavator operator and the blasting operator were observed by work and time studies. Additional information on workers assisting, by carrying out supportive construction activities, was collected to support the analysis of time consumption and the interpretation of time distribution of work elements.
5.1. Work and time study on forest road construction
Road construction by excavator comprises a set of activities (see Table 11) undertaken to provide the desired road design. Depending on terrain conditions, type of excavator used and the operators' way of arranging the distinct phases of road construction, these activities vary with respect to their frequency of occurrence.
Nevertheless, at each construction site a sequence of regular work elements can be found for the construction operation that constitutes the work cycle. Work cycle is defined as a sequence of work repeatedly applied to every work object (IUFRO, 1995). A work element is considered a sub-division of a given work task and is limited by break points. Depending on the occurrence in every work cycle, a work element can be considered as a repetitive or an occasional element.
Only workplace time, which is defined as the portion of the total time that a production system or part of a production system is engaged in a specific work task (IUFRO, 1995), has been considered in estimating production rates and costs at the study sites.
Figure 5 shows the structure of work time elements that occurred during time studies.
Figure 5. Structure of Workplace Time (WP) concepts
5.1.1. Work and time study on excavator operations
The classification and the percentage of workplace time consumption observed for each work element in construction operations at the study sites can be found in Appendix 1. General information on construction operations where time studies had been carried out are stated below for all three study sites under review.
On average the workplace time per metre of road constructed by excavator was 10.54 minutes at study site 1, the corresponding figure for study site 2 was 11.46 minutes and 24.75 minutes for study site 3. The time required per metre of road either of workplace time or of work time serves as the basis for estimating production rates, treated in Chapter 5.2.
Study site 1
Study site 2
Study site 3
Subject of
Kobelco
Komatsu
Caterpillar
observation
Mark IV SK210
PC300LC
320L
Work time
29 h 00 min
16 h 48 min
16 h 42 min
Non-work time
2 h 52 min
1 h 43 min
4 h 20 min
Workplace time
31 h 52 min
18 h 31 min
21 h 02 min
Subgrade width
4.5 m
6.5 m
4.2 m
Length of section
181.5 m
97.0 m
51.0 m
At study site 1, the excavator operator was found to accomplish construction work by following the stated order of the five distinct phases in Chapter 3.2, whereas at study site 2 and 3 the operators chopped and changed between activities of distinct phases. At study site 3, the way single activities had been arranged was mainly determined by the interference of the necessary drilling and blasting operations rather than by a personal preference of the excavator operator.
However, in order to compare construction work at the three study sites, the average productive work time required per metre of road constructed by excavator and time distribution of work elements assigned to the productive work time are stated in Table 11.
Table 11. Distribution of productive work time elements
Study site 1
Study site 2
Study site 3
Work elements (classification)
[min]
[min]
[min]
Log removal
(MW)
Topsoil removal
(MW)
Excavating base
(MW)
Fill slope construction
(MW)
Subgrade and cut shaping
(MW)
Use of hammer
(MW)
Loading truck
(MW)
Complementary work
(CW)
Productive work time
(PW)
On average the productive work time required per metre of road constructed by excavator was 8.75 minutes at study site 1 and 9.52 minutes at study site 2 where rock disintegration by hydraulic hammer got involved. At study site 3 the corresponding figure amounted even to 16.93 minutes due to the high share of complementary work caused by the interference of blasting operations. The complementary work covers the time for movement from and to the construction area within the road sections under review. At study site 1 and 3 it also includes a negligible time share for checking the road gradient of constructed road sections by the operator.
As already mentioned in Chapter 3.2, road construction by operators who chop and change between activities and/or running metre based payment of contractors might lead to inadequate construction practice.
The figures on time distribution stated in Table 11 clearly indicate that a distinct work element "excavating base for fill foundation" did not occur at study site 2. This does not necessarily mean that a fill failure will take place in the future as the terrain condition of the particular road section under review was quite favourable but if this poor practice had been followed in other parts of the road project there is potential for road failure.
The low time share of the work element "excavating base for fill foundation" at study site 3 was not as a result of poor construction technique but was caused by the difficulty to clearly separate this work element from other activities due to the interference of truck loading and blasting operations.
5.1.2. Work and time study on blasting operations
The classification and the percentage of workplace time consumption observed for each work element in blasting operations at study site 3 can be found in Appendix 2. General information for study site 3 on blasting operations and on supportive construction work carried out by the blasting operator is stated below:
Subject of
Study site 3
observation
Blasting operation
Supportive work
Work time
12 h 57 min
3 h 44 min
Non-work time
3 h 42 min
20 min
Workplace time
16 h 39 min
4 h 04 min
On average the workplace time used per blasting operation for rock disintegration of an average volume of 76 m³ rock by means of explosives was 166.5 minutes at the study site where six blasting operations had been observed. Due to the excellent planning and timing at study site 3, the non-work time of the blasting operator was dramatically reduced as he operated a small excavator hired only for a few days to carry out supportive construction work. This was to incorporate excess material in the subgrade which had been moved by a dump truck from the construction area to adjacent road sections already established in previous work cycles.
Table 12. Distribution of productive work time elements
Study site 3
Work elements (classification)
[min]
Rock drilling
(MW)
Loading of explosives
(MW)
Connecting loads
(MW)
Control and preparation
(MW)
Blasting
(MW)
Ignition cable removal
(CW)
Productive work time
(PW)
On average the productive work time required per blasting operation for rock disintegration of an average volume of 76 m³ rock by explosives amounted to 115.22 minutes (Table 12). For blasting of this rock volume about 11 vertical holes of 3-4 m length were drilled and about 16.5 kg explosives used.
5.2. Estimating production and performance rates
Since productivity is defined as the rate of product output per time unit for a given production system, the production rates of a studied system can easily be estimated if time studies combined with measurements of the output of production have been completed.
5.2.1. Excavator
The estimated production rates for excavator operations stated in Table 13 are based either on the total workplace time or total work time used to perform a certain length of road by the excavator operator at all study sites, regardless of whether a hydraulic hammer has been used or not.
All other construction activities where an excavator will be employed (culvert, retaining structures), might be employed (shaping after surfacing) or might serve as carrier unit (rock drilling) are not included in the estimates of production rates stated in Table 13, neither for workplace time-based nor for work time-based estimates.
Table 13. Estimated production rates in road construction by excavator
side slope
subgrade width
Production rate
Production rate
Study site
[m]
[m/h WP]
[m/h WT]
Study site 1
Study site 2
Study site 3
Note: WP ... workplace time WT ... work time
Based on the hourly productivity found in the studies and on an assumed workplace time of 8 hours per day, the productivity rates range from 16 metres to 48 metres of road per day, where the first figure can be considered indicative for extreme difficult terrain and the latter for favourable conditions in mountainous terrain. It is noteworthy that the actual workplace time observed during the studies often exceeded the regular workplace time for employees of 8 hours per day as the operators tended to make use of favourable weather conditions for construction work.
The figures found in the literature on production rates for hydraulic excavators as in Gorton (1985) and in FAO (1989) are difficult to compare with those stated in Table 13. One main reason is that the activities performed by the excavator are not defined in mentioned papers. If the figures do not cover the first phase of excavator construction, namely, log removal from construction area, this would explain to a high degree the difference between the higher figures found in both papers and the lower rates derived from the data collected in the time studies at the three construction sites. Another reason is the lack of information on the time basis of the production rates stated in the literature mentioned above.
5.2.2. Rock blasting
The estimated performance rate for blasting operations at study site 3 is based on the workplace time used for rock disintegration of a certain volume of rock by means of explosives. Since the vertical drilling holes were placed in a rectangular pattern 1.5 m square in each single blasting operation at the study site, the volume of disintegrated rock has been estimated separately for each blasting operation by multiplying the squared distance between holes by the length of holes and the number of holes.
Time calculations to estimate performance rates of blasting operations based on the total workplace time are considered to be not indicative as the non-work time of the blasting operator can dramatically be decreased by flexible and proper timing of construction and blasting operations as done at the study site.
Therefore, the performance rate stated below is based on the work time only. The efficiency level found at the study site, as the rate of time input per a certain volume of rock to be disintegrated, was about 2.13 min/m³ reflecting an average volume of load of about 76 m³ per blasting operation. The performance rate based on all blasting operations observed amounts to 28.18 m³/h of work time.
5.3. Estimating costs
The estimation of production costs is based on the production and performance rates stated in previous chapters for construction and blasting operations and the hourly costs for construction workforce and equipment involved in both road construction and blasting operations. The hourly costs for workforce and equipment are based upon information obtained from the supervising forest engineer of the Federal Forest Service of Salzburg.
Refinement work stated in Table 14 refers to final shaping and compaction work of the fill slope at study site 1 for part of the road section under review. At study site 3 it refers to incorporating excess material into the road structure after transport by a dump truck. In this particular case incorporation work was carried out by means of a small excavator hired for a few days of anticipated need and which was operated by the blasting operator.
The use of the small excavator provided an effective means of arranging the work in a way that dramatically reduced the non-work time of the blasting operator. It should be noted that in hiring additional equipment, proper timing becomes very important in order to achieve the desired objective of overall cost reduction in road construction.
Table 14 shows the costs for equipment and standby workforce as well as costs for each activity carried out and observed by the work and time studies at the study sites in road construction. As conditions for construction work may considerably vary along the road course, the construction costs stated in Table 14 refer to the particular road section under review of each road project only. This fact has particularly been proven to be true in the road project - Golling where study site 3 was located. For details compare corresponding figures on cost of construction work by excavator stated in Table 14 and Table 15.
Table 14. Estimated costs of road construction work by excavator
Study site 1
Study site 2
Study site 3
cost/unit
cost
cost/unit
cost
cost/unit
cost
Production costs factor
unit
[US$]
[US$/m]
[US$]
[US$/m]
[US$]
[US$/m]
Construction work
hydraulic excavator
[h]
hydraulic hammer
[h]
Refinement work
hydraulic excavator
[h]
Rock blasting
hydraulic drilling unit
[h]
explosives
primer
piece
operator (standby)
[h]
Mass transport
dump truck
[h]
Total construction cost
The cost estimates stated in Table 14 refer to the road in the stage of finished subgrade and subsequent establishment of hillside ditch as described in Chapter 3.2 and do not include any further construction activity which will be or might be performed by excavator at a later stage such as to install culverts, to build up retaining structures or to final shape the road after surfacing.
Table 15. Estimated overall construction costs of road projects
Study site 1
Study site 2
Study site 3
cost/unit
cost
cost/unit
cost
cost/unit
cost
Production costs factor
unit
[US$]
[US$/m]
[US$]
[US$/m]
[US$]
[US$/m]
Excavator operations*
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Culvert (incl. in-/outlet
protection) culvert pipe
piece
hydraulic excavator
[h]
Surfacing material
[rm]
gravel transport
[rm]
Grading / shaping
motor grader
[h]
hydraulic excavator
[h]
Rolling
[h]
Seeding
[m²]
Overall road cost
*) corresponding with the total construction cost estimate in Table 14
n.a. not applicable
The estimated overall construction costs of the three road projects under review stated in Table 15 are based on the actual costs spent on excavator operations including rock disintegration during the construction season of 1997 in the road projects under review and the assumed costs of construction activities required to finalize the road.
The cost assumptions made for installing culverts including retaining structures, for surfacing, grading and rolling of the road as well as for seeding of slope surfaces are based on the personal experience of the supervising forest engineer. Since these activities had not been observed by work and time studies estimated costs have been used.
5.4. Qualitative assessments of environmental impacts
In mountainous terrain where forest stands not only sustain site productivity by preventing soil developed over centuries to be eroded but often protect human settlements, infrastructure and other land uses from torrents and avalanches, avoidance of site disturbance is imperative. On the other hand, active management of overmature stands on steep slopes which are at risk of loosing their protective function, requires a minimum of forest access provided by forest roads.
Enhancing forest road construction practices, the use of hydraulic excavators and employment of advanced drilling and blasting technology have been proven to be the best solution both environmentally sound and economically feasible, for road construction in difficult terrain.
In general, the features and advantages of the hydraulic excavator itself and it's use in road construction can be described as follows:
· the excavator basically operates by digging, swinging and either dumping or controlled placement of excavation depending on the task to be provided;
· all tasks to be accomplished in road construction by excavator can be provided by operating from a fixed position or movement parallel to the road centreline so that no additional road width for manoeuvring is required;
· different types of buckets available and several attachments easily to be changed by quick coupling systems even increase the excavators' versatility to do a wider variety of work e.g. ripping, trenching, loading, compacting, hydraulic hammering or rock drilling;
· less need for blasting due to high ripping and breakout force of the excavator and, alternatively, the use of hydraulic hammer for rock disintegration.
The features and advantages of advanced drilling and blasting technique are:
· the type of hydraulic drilling units used, attached to the excavator, facilitates vertical as well as horizontal drilling and therefore to optimise and adjust blasting technique with regard to rock condition;
· "soft" blasting with less disruptive effect on the bedrock avoids loosening of stratified and/or fractured rock as well as other blast-related damage;
· "soft" blasting techniques with less destructive effect enable to control the size of rock material provided;
· "soft" blasting techniques only loosen the rock for being excavated rather than blowing rock fragments away;
In making use of the advantages of construction equipment and techniques mentioned above, the skilled and experienced operator is provided with an effective tool to minimize environmental impacts of road construction activities. This environmentally sound practice of road construction is characterized by:
1) reduced area dedicated to forest roads as:
· additional road width for manoeuvre of construction machinery is not needed; the subgrade width is kept to the absolute minimum determined by safety and anticipated use;
· the length of fill slope can be reduced due to a solid fill foundation established by means of the excavator and the overall construction width is reduced;
2) reduced disturbance of the landscape as:
· clearing width is reduced as a result of minimized overall construction width and disturbance of canopy and related impacts are reduced;
· cut heights are reduced because of minimized overall construction width;
· roads are designed to balance cuts and fills wherever possible, less rock disintegration is needed and less material is to be excavated;
· the use of hydraulic hammers facilitates accurate rock excavation; over excavation of rock can be avoided;
· rock disintegration by hydraulic hammer and "soft" blasting provides material suitable in size to be incorporated in the road structure, the need for borrow pits is reduced;
· measures are undertaken to stabilize and revegetate cut and fill slopes immediately after completion of road construction work, scars inflicted on the landscape are quickly remedied;
3) satisfactory water drainage and effective erosion control as:
· drainage facilities can already be installed by the excavator during the ongoing road construction process at any time if required;
· most of the excavated material is incorporated in the road structure and properly compacted, it is very likely unavailable for erosion;
· cut and fill slopes are final shaped and compacted by means of the excavator's bucket to prevent erosion;
· branches removed from the construction area are spread on the fill slopes the exposure to erosion of unprotected soil is minimized;
· retaining walls for slope stabilization can be established during road construction at any time if required;
4) negligible damages to stands alongside road by rock materials escaping downhill as:
· the excavation is incorporated into the road structure instead of being side cast and excess material from full bench road sections is end-hauled to stable disposal areas;
· the placement of excavated materials can excellently be controlled by the skilled excavator operator and loose material which might escape during construction activities will be trapped by a slash filter windrow established at the base of the fill;
· the use of rock buckets and hydraulic hammers widely replaces the need for blasting where hurled stones or escaping rocks might cause some damage even if advanced blasting techniques are applied;
· "soft" blasting techniques with less destructive and bursting effect are employed if substantial rock blasting is specified;
<section>9</section>
6. DISCUSSION OF RESULTS AND COMPARISON WITH "TRADITIONAL" ROAD CONSTRUCTION TECHNIQUES AS PREVIOUSLY USED
The results of this case study show that environmentally sound road construction, as applied in the three road projects under review, is superior to road construction in the traditional way by bulldozers on steep slopes. The short-term economic benefits from use of bulldozers in forest road construction in mountainous terrain are likely in the longer run to create environmental damage on a considerable scale as side slopes increase.
Focusing on environmental impacts of road construction practices, the advantages of the environmentally sound construction technique by means of hydraulic excavator and advanced drilling and blasting techniques are obvious:
environmentally sound road
construction by excavator
traditional road construction
by bulldozer
subgrade width can be kept to the absolute minimum determined by safety and anticipated use as the excavator operates from a fixed position or by movement parallel to the road centreline
bulldozers can hardly be used at construction sites where minimum subgrade width is requested due to their need to manoeuvre
a balanced road design where suitable excavated material is incorporated in the road structure result in significantly less excavation when compared to full bench construction of road; in road construction by excavator the bench construction will only be applied on slopes where rock faces are to be crossed
full bench construction will be applied as the side slope increases where the entire subgrade is cut into the hill and material will be side cast or wasted rather than incorporated
excellent control in the placement of excavated material as the excavator basically operates by digging, swinging and depositing material with accuracy and care
inadequate control in placement of material as the bulldozer operates by pushing or drifting material in front of the blade to areas where fill is needed and/or side casting excess material
excavated material can be separated and temporarily piled by the excavator taking account of its anticipated use in building up the fill
material from cuts cannot be separated to build up the fill in layers of suitably sized material
length of fill slope can be reduced due to the fill foundation established by the excavator; a solid fill foundation facilitates building a road in steep terrain
length of fill slope will increase exponentially in steep terrain; on slopes over 75 % a fill cannot be established at all due to the angle of repose of side cast material
environmentally sound road
construction by excavator
traditional road construction
by bulldozer
construction width is minimized as subgrade width and length of fill slope is reduced
area dedicated to forest roads and disturbance of the landscape are higher when compared to road construction by excavator
as excavated material is incorporated in the road it is exposed less to erosion
full bench construction provides a uniform subgrade but also a high potential for erosion by loose, unconsolidated side cast material
different types of buckets available enable the excavator to carry out specific construction work and ensure highest performance; the use of a rock bucket substitutes for other equipment as long as the rock can be ripped
adequate road construction performed solely by bulldozer is considered to be restricted to construction sites where the road can be full benched and excavated material can be side cast and wasted
the use of hydraulic hammer which can easily be attached to the excavator result in less need for blasting and, consequently, in avoidance of blast-related damage
if rock outcrops cannot be bypassed, rock blasting will be specified
as excavators enable the operator to efficiently dig, swing and place material with accuracy and care, damage to stands alongside road can result to be negligible
material escaping during construction operation or excess material wasted downhill might cause considerable damage to forest stand alongside road
satisfactory water drainage and erosion control can be ensured from the start of work as culverts can be installed and retaining walls built up at any time
culverts and retaining structures will be established after completion of bulldozer work
Apart from the above mentioned environmental advantages, economic components are important aspects of consideration in the environmentally sound road construction practice as side slope increases and rock disintegration is involved. As indicated in the literature by FAO (1989) and Gorton (1985), the economic advantage of road construction by bulldozer is most likely to disappear on slopes of about 50-60 percent and above.
Examination of the economic short-term advantage of bulldozer construction and the potential for medium and long-term damage and impact on the environment as well as on the landscape inherent in traditional construction techniques by bulldozer, should encourage the use of excavators in road construction even in less steep terrain.
The implementation of environmentally sound road construction technique is deemed highly necessary as forest roads are unquestionably the most problematic features of timber harvesting operations from the environmental point of view. The environmentally sound construction practice characterized by use of excavator and advanced blasting technique as applied in the road projects is considered a solution for mountainous terrain in general where areas of sensitive forest ecosystems are to be opened up, although it has been developed in particular for road construction in steep terrain in the Alpine mountain range of Austria.
<title>ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND ROAD COSTRUCTION IN MOUNTAINOUS TERRAIN. Environmentally sound forest road construction in mountainous terrain</title>
REFERENCES
Almas, D.; Colla. J.; David., K. & Schnepf, C. 1993. Forestry in Idaho - Best Management Practices. Forest Stewardship Guidelines for Water Quality. Ag Publications, University of Idaho, Moscow, 33 pp.
Dykstra, D.P. & Heinrich, R. 1996. FAO Model Code of Forest Harvesting Practice. Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, 85 pp.
FAO. 1989. Watershed management field manual. Road design and construction in sensitive watersheds. FAO Conservation guide 13/5, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, 196 pp.
FBVA. 1997. Österreichische Waldinventur 1992/96. On CD-ROM, printed report under preparation, FBVA, Wien.
Gorton, F. 1985. Praxis und Kosten einer landschaftsschonenden Bauausführung von Forst- strassen. Allgemeine Forstzeitung, Wien, 96 (9), 241-244.
IUFRO. 1995. Forest work study. Nomenclature. Test Edition valid 1995-2000. International Union of Forestry Research Organisations WP 3.04.02. Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Department of Operational Efficiency, Garpenberg, 16 pp.
Litzka, J. & Haslehner, W. 1995. Appropriate environmental design and construction of low-volume rural roads in Austria. Proceedings of the sixth international conference on low-volume roads held in Minneapolis, Minnesota 1995. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., Vol. 1: 67-73.
Sedlak, O. 1985. Forest road planning, location and construction techniques on steep terrain. In Logging and transport in steep terrain. FAO Forestry paper 14/1, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, 333 pp.
Sedlak, O. 1996. Forest harvesting and environment in Austria. In Forest codes of practice. Contributing to environmentally sound forest operations. FAO Forestry paper 133, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, 134 pp.
WIMMER. 1996. Wimmer News. Wimmer Hartstahl GesmbH&CoKG, Thalgau/Salzburg, 16 pp.
Winkler, N. 1992. Spezielle hydrologische Probleme im Forststrassenbau. Boku, Wien, 220 pp.
Winkler, N. 1998. Stand der Walderschließung in Österreich - Ergebnisse der Waldinventur 1992/96. Der Förderungsdienst, BMLF, Wien, accepted for publishing.
Appendix 1. Time tables on excavator operations
Environmentally Sound Road Construction by Excavator Study site 1
work elements
classification
Log removal (MW)
Main work Time (MW)
Work
Topsoil removal (MW)
Time
Excavating base (MW)
(WT)
Fill slope construction (MW)
Subgrade / cut shaping (MW)
Use of hammer (MW)
Move at construction site (CW)
Complementary Work Time (CW)
Grade checking (CW)
Productive Work Time (PW)
Considerations (PL)
Preparatory Time (PT)
Repair time (RT)
Service Time (ST)
Maintenance time (MT)
Refuel time (RF)
Supportive Work Time (SW)
Disturbance Time (DT)
Disturbance Time (DT)
Non-
Meal time (ME)
Work-Related Delay Time (WD)
Work
Rest/personal time (RP)
Time
Interference time (IT)
(NT)
Workplace Time (WP)
The total workplace time observed amounted to 31 h 52 min 48 sec.
Environmentally Sound Road Construction by Excavator Study site 2
work elements
classification
Log removal (MW)
Main work Time (MW)
Work
Topsoil removal (MW)
Time
Excavating base (MW)
(WT)
Fill slope construction (MW)
Subgrade / cut shaping (MW)
Use of hammer (MW)
Move at construction site (CW)
Complementary Work Time (CW)
Terrain reconnaissance (CW)
Productive Work Time (PW)
Considerations (PL)
Preparatory Time (PT)
Operational time (OP)
Repair time (RT)
Service Time (ST)
Refuel time (RF)
Assisting other worker (AW)
Ancillary Work Time (AW)
Supportive Work Time (SW)
Disturbance Time (DT)
Disturbance Time (DT)
Non-
Meal time (ME)
Work-Related Delay Time (WD)
Work
Rest/personal time (RP)
Time
Interference time (IT)
(NT)
Workplace Time (WP)
The total workplace time observed amounted to 18 h 31 min 42 sec.
Environmentally Sound Road Construction by Excavator Study site 3
work elements
classification
Log removal (MW)
Main work Time (MW)
Work
Topsoil removal (MW)
Time
Excavating base (MW)
(WT)
Fill slope construction (MW)
Subgrade / cut shaping (MW)
Use of hammer (MW)
Loading truck (MW)
Move at construction site (CW)
Complementary Work Time (CW)
Terrain reconnaissance (CW)
Productive Work Time (PW)
Considerations (PL)
Preparatory Time (PT)
Operational time (OP)
Maintenance time (MT)
Service Time (ST)
Refuel time (RF)
Assisting other worker (AW)
Ancillary Work Time (AW)
Supportive Work Time (SW)
Disturbance Time (DT)
Disturbance Time (DT)
Non-
Meal time (ME)
Work-Related Delay Time (WD)
Work
Rest/personal time (RP)
Time
Interference time (IT)
(NT)
Re-shaping of old road (IT)
Workplace Time (WP)
The total workplace time observed amounted to 21 h 02 min 01 sec.
Appendix 2. Time table on blasting operations
Environmentally Sound Rock Blasting Study site 3
work elements
classification
Rock drilling (MW)
Main work Time (MW)
Work
Loading explosives (MW)
Time
Connecting loads (MW)
(WT)
Preparation of ignition (MW)
Blasting (MW)
Removal of cables (CW)
Complementary Work Time (CW)
Move at construction site (CW)
Terrain reconnaissance (CW)
Productive Work Time (PW)
Considerations (PL)
Preparatory Time (PT)
Operational time (OP)
Maintenance time (MT)
Service Time (ST)
Refuel time (RF)
Supportive Work Time (SW)
Disturbance Time (DT)
Disturbance Time (DT)
Non-
Meal time (ME)
Work-Related Delay Time (WD)
Work
Rest/personal time (RP)
Time
Interference time (IT)
(NT)
Workplace Time (WP)
The total workplace time observed (excluding meal time) amounted to 16 h 39 min 01 sec.
FOREST HARVESTING CASE STUDIES
These publications are available from the FAO Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Intermediate Technology in Forest Harvesting: Agricultural Tractor with Winch. By P. Alhojärvi. FOPH Publication 1988. 45 pp. Country: Tanzania. Language: English.
Intermediate Technology in Forest Harvesting: Agricultural Tractor and Forest Trailer with Mechanical Crane. By R. Jakobsson. FOPH Publication 1988. 40 pp. Country: Ethiopia. Language: English.
Plastic Log Chute in Steep Terrain Thinning Operations. By K. Leppänen. FOPH Publication 1989. 30 pp. Country: Republic of Korea. Language: English.
Integrated Small-Scale Forest Harvesting and Wood Processing Operations. By O. Eeronheimo. FOPH Publication 1990. 27 pp. Country: Zimbabwe. Language: English.
Forest Harvesting with Small-Scale Mobile Cable System. By O. Eeronheimo. FOPH Publication 1991. 16 pp. Country: Republic of Korea. Language: English.
1. Reduction of Wood Waste by Small-Scale Log Production and Conversion in Tropical High Forest. By Risto Kilkki. FOPH Publication 1992. 33 pp. Country: Papua New Guinea. Language: English.
2. Cosecha de Hongos en la VII Región de Chile. By Juan E. Donoso y Risto Kilkki. FOPH Publication 1992. 37 pp. Country: Chile. Language: Spanish.
3. Uso de Bueyes en Operaciones de Aprovechamiento Forestal en Areas Rurales de Costa Rica. By William Cordero. FOPH Publication 1994. 44 pp. Country: Costa Rica. Language: Spanish.
4. Use of the Construction Crane for Wood Extraction on Mountainous Terrain. By Norbert Winkler. FOPH Publication 1995. 38 pp. Country: Austria. Language: English.
5. Elephants in Logging Operations in Sri Lanka. By Palitha Jayasekera and Shelton Atapattu. FOPH Publication 1995. 36 pp. Country: Sri Lanka. Language: English.
6. Impacto ambiental de las prácticas de cosecha forestal y construcción de caminos en bosques nativos siempreverdes de la X Region de Chile. By Jorge Gayoso Aguilar. FOPH Publication 1995. 169 pp. Country: Chile. Language: Spanish.
7. Forest Harvesting in Natural Forests of the Republic of the Congo. By Robert Scharpenberg. FAO; Albert Essereke and Pierre Ekiama, Ministry of Water and Forests, Congo. FOPH Publication 1997. 66 pp. Country: Congo. Language: English. French version will be available in 1998.
8. Environmentally Sound Forest Harvesting, Testing the Applicability of the FAO Model Code in the Amazon in Brazil. By Norbert Winkler. FOPH Publication 1997. 84 pp. Country: Brazil. Language: English.
9. Labor-intensive harvesting of tree plantations in the southern Philippines. By Mike Jurvélius. RAP Publication 1997. 34 pp. Country: Philippines. Language: English.
10. Environmentally Sound Road Construction in Mountainous Terrain, Applying Advanced Operating Methods and Tools. By Norbert Winkler. FOPH Publication 1998. 66 pp. Country: Austria. Language: English.
