<title>Asia-Pacific Forestry Towards 2010: Report of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study</title>
<section>1</section>
Abbreviations used in the report
AAC
Annual Allowable Cut
AIEs
Advanced Industrialised Economies
ANZCERTA
Australia and New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement
APAFRI
Asia Pacific Association of Forest Research
APAN
Asia Pacific Agroforestry Network
APEC
Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation forum
APFC
Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission
APFSOS
Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study
AsDB
Asian Development Bank
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CDM
Clean Development Mechanism
CDP
Integrated Conservation and Development Project
CDS
Commission on Sustainable Development
CFM
Collaborative Forest Management
CIFOR
Center for International Forestry Research
CITES
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
DPR
Democratic People's Republic (of Korea)
EAA
Ecotourism Association of Australia
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FECOFUN
Federation of Community Forestry Users (Nepal)
FIDC
Forest Industries Development Corporation
FMAFMA
Forestry Management Agreement
FMAs
Industrial Forest Management Agreements
FORSPA
Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia and Pacific
FORTIP
Forest Tree Improvement Project
FRA
Forest Resources Assessment
FRIM
Forest Research Institute of Malaysia
FUGs
Forest-User Groups
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GFSS
Global Fibre Supply Study
GSP
Generalised System of Preferences
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank)
ICIMOD
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
IFF
Intergovernmental Forum on Forests
INBAR
International Network for Bamboo and Rattan
IPF
Intergovernmental Panel on Forests
ITTO
International Tropical Timber Organization
IUCN
International Union for Nature Conservation
MSS
Myanmar Selection System
NA
North Asia
NEAP
Ecotourism Accreditation Programme
NFAP
National Forestry Action Plan
NGO
Non-Governmental Organisation
NIEs
Newly Industrialising Economies
NWFP
Non-wood forest product
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PI
Pacific Islands
PR
People's Republic (of China)
RECOFTC
Regional Community Forestry Training Center
RWEDP
Regional Wood Energy Development
SA
South Asia
SAARC
South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation
SAP
Structural Adjustment Programme
SEA
Southeast Asia
SFM
Sustainable Forest Management
SIFMP
Socialized Industrial Forest Management Programme
SPC
South Pacific Commission
SPF
South Pacific Forum
SR
Socialist Republic (of Viet Nam)
TPTI
Indonesian selective cutting and replanting system
TRIFED
Tribal Co-operation Marketing Development Federation of India LTD.
UN
United Nations
UNCED
United Nations Commission on Environment and Development
UNFCCC
Framework Convention on Climate Change
WCARRD
World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
WCMC
World Conservation and Monitoring Centre
WHO
World Health Organization
WTO
World Trade Organisation
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
FAO expresses sincere appreciation and gratitude to all who contributed to the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study (APFSOS). In doing so, FAO recognises that contributions have been far wider than the list provided here. Hundreds of unidentified contributors provided information, advice and opinions during the preparation of working papers and the final study report. Grateful thanks are rendered to all these people and agencies.
The strong support given by member countries toward the completion of the APFSOS is reflected by the nearly universal preparation of country outlook studies by member countries of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission. Many countries also provided comprehensive reports and recent documentation on national policies, strategies and actions. Governments in the region nominated national focal points who met early in the process to discuss their roles and to agree upon a common national report structure. The national focal points were instrumental in collecting country-level data and information, clarifying issues and verifying statistics.
Valuable support for the APFSOS was also provided by partner agencies within and outside the region. These include the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA); Canadian Forest Service; Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR); Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia and Pacific (FORSPA); International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO); Regional Wood Energy Development Programme for Asia and the Pacific (RWEDP); USDA Forest Service (International Programs and Northwest Forest Experiment Station); Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forests of Japan (through Japan International Co-operation Agency (JICA)) which seconded an expert to the FAO Regional Office in Bangkok; and Ministry of Forestry of the People's Republic of China and Ministry of Forestry, New Zealand, both of which released officers for FAO assignments.
The Study was initiated at the Sixteenth Session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, which was chaired by Dr. Kyaw Tint (Ministry of Forestry, Myanmar); and reviewed at the Seventeenth Session chaired by Dr. Toga Silitonga (Ministry of Forestry, Indonesia).
Implementation of the study was co-ordinated by Mafa Chipeta and Patrick Durst, and assisted by Desk Officers Chris Brown, Hidehiko Ishihara and Zheng Rui, under the supervision of Hosny El-Lakany, Soetatwo Hadiwigeno, David Harcharik, A.Z.M. Obaidullah Khan, Prem Nath, Lennart Ljungman, Marc Rene de Montalembert and Michael Martin. Implementation was overseen by an FAO Steering Group comprised of Nikos Alexandratos, Jacques Antoine, Jim Ball, Jim Bourke, Mafa Chipeta, Jean Clement, Yves Dube, Klaus Janz, Lennart Ljungman, Michael Martin, Marc Rene de Montalembert, Saravannamuttu Muttiah, Richard Owen, Paul Reichert, Olman Serrano and Miguel Trossero.
National reports were submitted by government forestry agencies from nearly all countries in the region. Additional thematic working papers were contributed by: Mohammed Ahmed; Romulo Arancon (Asian and Pacific Coconut Community); Joerg Balsiger; Ajit Bannerjee; Jean Louis Blanchez; David Brooks, Mafa Chipeta and Adrian Whiteman; Chris Brown; Neil Byron (CIFOR); Dali Zhang, Joseph Buongiorno and Shushuai Zhu (University of Wisconsin); Anthony DiNicola, Don Justin Jones and Gerald Gray (American Forests and COPEC); Lamjavyn Djortseden (Ministry of Nature and Environment, Mongolia); Thomas Enters (FORSPA); Hong-Narith (Department of Forestry and Wildlife, Cambodia); Robert Fisher, Somjai Srimongkontip and Cor Veer (RECOFTC); P.M. Ganapathy; Don Hammond; Kampheuane Kingsada; Guido Kuchelmeister (Tree City); Thierry Lefevre, Jessie Todoc and Govinda R. Timilsina (Asian Institute of Technology); Kreg Lindberg, Brian Furze, Marilyn Staff and Rosemary Black; Michael Lyons and Lu
Wenming; Ma Qiang; Andrew Mittelman, Chun Lai, Neil Byron, Genevieve Michon and Esther Katz; Mok Sian Tuan; Saravannamuttu Muttiah; Aung Kyaw Myint and Thomas Hofer (International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development); James Paine (World Conservation and Monitoring Centre); Tara Bhattarai, Conrado Heruela, Willem Hulscher, Auke Koopmans, Jaap Koppejan, Joost Siteur and Arjan Kraijo (Regional Wood Energy Development Programme for Asia and the Pacific); David Seabright; Shi Kunshan, Li Zhiyong, Lin Fenming and Zheng Rui (Ministry of Forestry, People's Republic of China); K.M. Siddiqui (Pakistan Forest Institute); Nguyen Tuong Van (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Viet Nam); Napoleon Vergara; Thomas Waggener and Christine Lane; Douglas Williams (International Tropical Timber Organization); Byoung Il Yoo (Forestry Research Institute, Republic of Korea); Zhu Zhaohua, Jiang Chunqian, Zhong Maogong and Wang Huafu (Chinese Academy of Forestry); and Mohamed
Zuhair.
The following individuals served as National Focal Points or participants in the National Focal Points' meetings: David Alien (New Zealand); Lamjavyn Djortseden (Mongolia); Saw Eh Dah (Myanmar); Allan Hansard and Peter Thomas (Australia); Shaharuddin Ismail (Malaysia); Jeon Jin-Pyo (Republic of Korea); Sa-nguan Kakhong and Sirada Phongsoeksawat (Thailand); Indra Singh Karki (Nepal); Jose Malvas (Philippines); Adriu Nabora (Fiji); Hong Narith and Uk Soknonn (Cambodia); M.P.A.U. Sarath Fernando (Sri Lanka); Shi Kunshan (People's Republic of China); Shingo Shibata and Takashi Sekiguchi (Japan); K.M. Siddiqui (Pakistan); Toga Silitonga and D. Mulyadhi (Indonesia); Rajiv Srivastava (India); Nguyen Tuong Van (Viet Nam); Bounthong Xaisida (Laos); and Mohamed Zuhair (Maldives).
The core drafting team for the main report was comprised of: Tara Bhattarai, Darcie Booth, Jim Bourke, Susan Braatz, David Brooks, Chris Brown, Neil Byron, Cherukat Chandrasekharan, Mafa Chipeta, Patrick Durst, Thosapala Hewage, Miguel Trossero and Adrian Whiteman.
Other contributions to the main report were made by: Jim Ball, Jean-Louis Blanchez, Gary Bull, Anthony DiNicola, Patrick Dugan, Hidehiko Ishihara, Dougal Morrison, CTS Nair and Salleh Mohd Nor.
An Expert Advisory Group (EAG) composed of eminent experts on Asia-Pacific forestry, met twice to review drafts of the report - once in Kathmandu (hosted by the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD)), and once in Kuala Lumpur (hosted by TROPBIO Sdn Bhd). The EAG was comprised of: Masahiro Amano, Tara Bhattarai, Patrick Dugan, Barin Ganguli, Larry Hamilton, Thosapala Hewage, Salleh Mohd Nor, Narayan Kaji Shresta and Napoleon Vergara.
Thanks are due to the entire Forestry Department, FAO, Rome and Forestry Staff of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, all of whom contributed to the study.
Finally, special thanks go to those who worked long and late to provide essential secretarial support: Linda Ransom (FAO, Rome), Amy Tanachiva and Helene Gunatilaka (FAO, Bangkok) and to Iraê Sassi for preparation of the final manuscript for printing.
<section>3</section>
Preface
At the Sixteenth Session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC), held in Yangon, Myanmar, in January 1996, the Commission decided to launch a regional forestry sector outlook study. This major initiative was to consider status, trends and prospects for the sector to the year 2010. In making the decision to implement the study, the Commission felt that it was necessary to analyse developments and factors both within and outside forestry. It called for presentation of possible paths for future changes and of the implications for policy and action. In endorsing the regional study, the Commission recognised that many developments are beyond the scope of any one country; it also recognised the value of a collaborative exercise involving all members of the APFC as a means of strengthening its own role in forestry development.
As Chairmen of the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Sessions of the APFC, we are pleased to present the report of the study to member countries and to the broader international community. We believe it can serve the interests of policy-makers in both the public and private arenas. The study has been a major undertaking and, if it has taught us anything, it is that the region and the sector are highly dynamic. We, therefore, consider this report as the beginning of an ongoing process that will hopefully be repeated and updated in the future. We believe it should also serve as the basis for even greater attention to the main issues and opportunities that it exposes, both within and outside the forestry sector itself. We encourage all interested policy-makers dealing with forestry in the region to make use, not only of this summary report, but also of the vast amount of valuable information contained in the supporting working papers.
The success of this study must be attributed to the excellent contributions and spirit of partnership demonstrated by member governments, regional and international organisations, donor agencies and individual contributors. On behalf of all members of the Commission, we also express our appreciation to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), which co-ordinated the study and provided secretariat support through its regional office in Bangkok and headquarters in Rome. The study also benefited substantially from inputs provided by nongovernmental organisations and the private sector, although we would have preferred more involvement from these partners and we appeal to them to become more actively engaged in future APFC initiatives.
Conducting a study of this nature in a region as diverse as Asia and the Pacific is not easy; the challenges of drawing together the vast range of information, experiences, policies, prospects and perspectives are daunting. Nonetheless, when the Seventeenth Session of the Commission convened in February 1998, in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, to review the results of the study, the wealth of information that had been compiled was clearly evident. Participants were particularly struck by the large number of common themes and problems running throughout the countries of the region. Clearly, many countries in the region have faced, or are facing, similar challenges in forestry. Perhaps for the first time some of these linkages have been clearly specified, providing countries in the region with an excellent opportunity to more fully understand how others are dealing with similar problems - and setting the stage for greater co-operation in the coming decades.
It has been our privilege and pleasure to serve as Chairmen of the APFC during the course of this study and to oversee its completion. It is difficult for us to imagine a better catalyst for advancing one of the key objectives of the APFC - that is, to promote regional dialogue and co-operation on forestry issues.
U Kyaw Tint
Chairman of the Sixteenth Session Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (Director-General, Forest Department, Myanmar)
Toga Silitonga
Chairman of the Seventeenth Session Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (Director General, Forestry Research and Development Agency, Ministry of Forestry and Estate Crops, Indonesia)
<section>4</section>
Foreword
FAO welcomed the decision by the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, in 1996, to undertake a comprehensive regional forestry sector outlook study. For some time, FAO had been concerned that, while the forestry situations in selected countries were well documented and global analyses regularly assessed the forestry situation at macro levels, many of the complex relationships at regional levels were being overlooked and under-appreciated. Consequently, understanding of many of the more subtle - though no less important - dynamics of the sector was being affected.
It is evident that countries can no longer develop forestry policies in isolation. Policies often have major repercussions not only in the country in which they are promulgated, but also in other countries, sometimes far away. Thus, an understanding of regional and sub-regional dynamics is crucial to understanding particular country situations, but also in building a more accurate global picture. At a time when increasing attention is being paid to global forest issues and decisions are being made that will affect the forest legacy of several generations, better information is vital. Therefore, we are pleased that the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study (APFSOS) has made substantial and critical contributions toward improving the understanding of the forestry sector in Asia and the Pacific and the rest of the world.
Perhaps the most significant outcome of this regional outlook study, however, has been the spirit of collaboration and sharing it has engendered. Not only have the countries of the region shown enormous commitment to the study, but so too have the region's forestry institutions and organisations in related sectors. Numerous organisations and individuals have given freely of their time and resources in contributing to the success of this study. Through their partnership and commitment, they have demonstrated the power and value of regional and international co-operation in achieving common objectives.
The APFSOS is the first in what we hope will be an ongoing series of outlook studies carried out under the auspices of the various regional forestry commissions. In providing the link between national and global analyses, these studies will provide the basis for better decision-making at all levels. The obvious success of this study provides both a benchmark and a model for furthering this process. We trust, therefore, that in addition to fulfilling its primary role of informing and generating discussion in Asia and the Pacific, the APFSOS will serve as an inspiration and a challenge to people in other regions.
M. Hosny El-Lakany
Assistant Director-General Forestry Department Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
Prem Nath
Assistant Director-General and Regional Representative for Asia and the Pacific Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
<section>5</section>
Executive summary
A region of rapid change... a time of transition
During the past several years, the Asia-Pacific region has experienced rapid and often tumultuous political and socio-economic change. The Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study, conducted under the auspices of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC), has been carried out against this backdrop of diversity, dynamism and contrast.
Economic growth in a number of the region's countries has been among the fastest in the world; since 1945, the region's economy has grown seven times faster than the world average. Since mid-1997, however, the region has undergone a significant economic downturn, with negative growth in many economies - the impacts of which have yet to be clearly determined. Nonetheless, from this dislocation, the region is expected to resume rapid economic growth, with associated strong demand for a wide range of forest products and services.
Economic growth in the region has been accompanied by enormous social and political transformation. Dramatic changes are occurring in the way people work, where they live, what they spend their money on, and countless other aspects of life. The perspectives of the people living in Asia and the Pacific toward forests and forestry are evolving in concert with socio-economic changes, and emerging environmental perceptions and institutional attitudes.
The future of forestry is shaped by current choices
The policies, choices and decisions that will determine the future of forests and forestry in the region lie in the hands of the member countries of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission. The key challenges are to achieve balance among the multiple roles of forests to deliver the greatest overall benefits, and to adopt measures that keep the sector responsive to changing needs without compromising the sustainability of forest resources.
Countries rich in resources have more options for meeting diverse demands placed on forests. The capacity to choose also derives from general economic and institutional strengths. It is, however, unrealistic to expect immediate and dramatic shifts in the way forests are managed and used in the region.
Many actions can be taken unilaterally by individual countries, but others require multilateral co-operation -matters of trade, responsible stewardship standards, management of international waterways and watersheds, and research and education are some of the areas where co-operation can yield considerable benefits.
Economic and social background
The most important drivers of demand for forest products are population and economic growth. The Asia-Pacific region accounts for 55 percent of world population (more than 3 billion people) and annual population growth is currently averaging 1.4 percent. This is expected to continue through 2010. The region accounts for 25 percent of world GDP and annual growth has averaged 2.6 percent since 1980. The recent economic downturn will significantly affect this growth rate for the next several years.
Notwithstanding the economic downturn in the region, a sizeable share of the population is achieving rapidly rising prosperity and purchasing power. A large middle class is emerging in many countries of the region.
Economic growth has been heavily skewed, however - the greatest growth has been in Japan (which accounts for more than 50 percent of Asia-Pacific's GDP). Substantial growth has also occurred in the People's Republic of China, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia and the Republic of Korea. The rest of the growth has been in a handful of relatively small countries or territories. The Asia-Pacific region remains generally poor, although demands for modern products and services are growing.
The overall importance of forestry in national economies is generally limited. The countries with the largest forest and forest products sectors (Japan, People's Republic of China, Indonesia and Malaysia) all have large economies. In these countries, forestry's large gross value contribution comprises a smaller proportion of exports and GDP than many of the smaller countries. Nonetheless, in both Indonesia and Malaysia forestry still accounts for around 10 percent of the economy. In several countries, forestry contributes very significantly to the economy:
· 10 percent or more to GDP in six countries (highest in Bhutan);
· 10 percent or more to merchandise trade in eight countries (highest in Cambodia); and
· 10 percent or more to both GDP and merchandise trade in four countries (highest in Solomon Islands).
Overall, demands for the full range of goods and services of forests are increasing throughout the Asia-Pacific region.
Demands for services of forests
Services of forests are important, whether they have a formal market (such as for grazing, ecotourism, and recreation) or are largely intangible (such as cultural and spiritual values or biological diversity conservation). Achieving sustainable financing to manage forests for non-marketed services is a major challenge.
Among the range of services, the most significant include:
· ecotourism: the market for ecotourism (not all forest-based) is estimated at around US$6 billion annually and is growing at 10 to 25 percent annually. Ecotourism and forest-based recreation clearly have the potential to become increasingly important for forestry in the region;
· watershed protection: demands for water are increasing dramatically in the region. The contribution of forests to water quality and flow are extremely important in this respect. As several major river basins cross international boundaries, the potential for actions in upstream countries to have major impacts on downstream countries must be carefully considered;
· protective and habitat functions of mangroves: mangroves help protect coastal areas and provide critical habitat for wildlife and fish. Despite these values, mangrove areas are shrinking and being degraded at a rapid pace. These changes are putting at risk the livelihoods of millions of people and the integrity of coastal environments;
· carbon sequestration: there are promising emerging opportunities for developing countries to capture investment funds in forestry for carbon sequestration (through major afforestation of under-utilised lands and areas of low productivity); and
· biodiversity conservation: the region harbours a large proportion of global biological resources, many of which are increasingly threatened by spontaneous and inappropriate development.
Demand for non-wood forest products (NWFPs)
NWFPs comprise an important, though generally poorly monitored, aspect of forest production. They are of particular significance to forest-dependent people. The Asia-Pacific region is estimated to account for up to 40 percent of the world's NWFP exports. At local levels, key NWFPs include food, fodder, medicines and building materials such as thatch, bamboo and rattan.
There are a number of diverse challenges related to mainstreaming NWFPs. Only a few NWFPs have proven economically dynamic and a number of problems arise from the small scale and economic weakness associated with most NWFP production and processing. A major constraint to date may well have been a failure to identify and focus upon the few NWFPs that have the greatest importance now or that demonstrate the greatest promise for the future.
Demand for wood energy
Woodfuels are a basic need for 2 billion people in the Asia-Pacific region; they account for 70 to 80 percent of the total roundwood harvest. While woodfuels' share of total energy use is declining, the absolute volume of woodfuels used continues to increase. Despite this, in many countries wood energy is still largely considered a traditional "poor people's fuel." A major challenge is to bring wood energy use more into the mainstream, including policy agendas.
Salient issues relating to woodfuel utilisation include:
· the primary supply problem for fuelwood is uneven distribution and accessibility. Consequently surpluses exist simultaneously with pockets of shortage. At the regional and national levels, potential woodfuel supplies almost invariably exceed current demand - shortages are largely localised;
· on average, two-thirds of woodfuel supplies come from non-forest land rather than from forests; and
· in economically fast-growing countries, woodfuel demand is slowing down and may soon decline. In most countries, however, woodfuel will remain of central importance well beyond 2010.
Demand for and trade in industrial forest products
The Asia-Pacific region produces nearly 280 million cubic metres of industrial roundwood annually. Increasingly, industrial roundwood is being processed domestically. Manufacturing into secondary and finished products for export is also increasing. Considerable attention is being devoted to developing processing capacity for new products. A notable trend is toward rapid expansion of processing capacity for medium-density fibreboard and pulp and paper. Some countries are undergoing major restructuring of the industrial processing sector to adapt to the realities of reduced raw material supplies, smaller logs, and increased dependency on plantation-grown wood and non-traditional raw material sources (rubber, oil palm).
There has been rapid growth in the consumption of forest products - even faster than income and population growth. The Asia-Pacific region's output and consumption of many commodities are of similar orders of magnitude as for Europe and are approaching those of North America.
The Asia-Pacific region is the world's largest net importing region of industrial forest products. Japan will continue to be the region's largest importer of forest products. Therefore, changes in Japan's consumer preferences, economic growth or the extent of harvesting of Japan's forest resources, could significantly re-orient trading patterns. Two major areas of uncertainty concerning trade will be future supply developments in the Russian Far East and in the two largest developing countries - the People's Republic of China and India.
The most important features of the industrial wood sphere in the Asia-Pacific region are that:
· recent years have brought a greater emphasis on fibre processing as opposed to manufacturing of solid-wood products. Particularly, there has been a relative stagnation in the production and consumption of sawn timber in comparison with panel products. The increasing scarcity of large-diameter logs suitable for sawing is accelerating the transition to engineered wood products and non-wood alternatives;
· the growth in roundwood consumption has slowed relative to the growth in the output of products derived from it (i.e. sawnwood, panels, pulp and paper). This trend is due to gains in efficiency and greater reliance on recycled material, alternative raw materials and residues;
· only a few countries dominate the production and consumption of most industrial wood products;
· a high proportion of recycled and non-wood fibre is used in the production of paper and paperboard in the region relative to the rest of the world;
· several non-traditional timber producers, particularly among the Mekong countries and Melanesia, are emerging as potential sources of supplementary wood supplies;
· there is increasing substitution of coniferous timber for hardwood resources. Several countries have rapidly maturing plantations that will provide increased volumes of timber in the next decade.
Forest and tree resources
The Asia-Pacific region covers one-quarter of the world's land area and has 15 percent of the world's forest and wooded land. This represents about 28 percent of the region's land area but is equivalent to only a quarter of a hectare of forest or wooded land per person - the lowest ratio for any region. In practice, in countries such as Bangladesh, the average person has hardly any forest, while in countries such as Papua New Guinea there is a relative abundance of forest. Of a total of some 550 million hectares of forest in 1995, the five leading countries account for two-thirds of the area. An even greater concentration of forest plantations exists.
Forest cover in the developed countries of the region has essentially remained constant in recent years. In contrast, forest cover has declined substantially in developing countries in the region, particularly in tropical regions. In the tropical countries of Asia, deforestation amounted to 3.9 million hectares per year between 1981 and 1990. The major direct cause of deforestation and forest degradation in Asia and the Pacific is clearing for agriculture (including shifting cultivation). Land-use changes have varied considerably among the sub-regions.
In addition to forest loss, there have been substantial changes in quality. Over the last decade, extensive areas have been converted to "other wooded land." Excessive cutting of timber causes forest degradation, although often more important contributors to forest clearing are logging roads, which facilitate migration and new settlements. Fires, open grazing, fuelwood harvesting, mining, irrigation and hydroelectric projects, and urban expansion are other important local causes of deforestation and forest degradation. Rates of deforestation in the region are expected to generally decrease as fewer easily accessible forest areas remain to be cleared and agricultural intensification takes root in a number of countries.
The Asia-Pacific region leads the world in tropical forest plantation development. More than 22 million hectares have been planted, representing three-quarters of the world's total. In the temperate areas of the region even larger areas of forest plantations have been established. Additionally, the Asia-Pacific region possesses most of the world's 14 million hectares of rubber and coconut plantations. Oil palm is another tree crop that has potential to supplement forest fibre in the region.
Until recently the important wood supply roles played by trees outside forests was little understood. It is now evident that non-forest trees, treecrops and non-wood cellulose provide very significant volumes of both fuelwood and industrial fibre.
Efforts to bring timber harvests within sustainable levels include: improving forest management practices, increasing forest conservation, accelerating plantation development, providing forest-derived benefits to a broader range of people, and offering incentives to individuals and corporations to encourage development of forest resources on community and private lands.
Forest management objectives have evolved considerably in Asia and the Pacific in recent years. There is notable reorientation in many countries toward social and environmental objectives. Many countries are reducing their reliance on natural forests as a source of industrial roundwood and are shifting to other sources. Most countries of the region have accelerated reforestation efforts in recent years.
Many countries are giving increased attention to forest conservation, exemplified by the creation or expansion of protected areas. The region has just under 3,000 protected areas in total, covering nearly 9 percent of the land area. Protection does not cover all representative ecosystems, however, and many "parks" exist only on paper. A protection-related practise of regional significance has been the tendency to restrict timber harvests or to withdraw large areas of natural forests from wood production.
People and forests
The region has four main types of people/forest relationships:
· generally socially marginalised people who live inside forests;
· people who live outside - but near - forests;
· people engaged (often as employees) in forest-based commercial activities; and
· urban dwellers who require forests and trees for aesthetic and recreational reasons and for material goods.
The region has a population of forest-dependent people estimated at between 430 and 450 million people - or about 15 percent of total population. This includes a large number of people living outside forests, but who use forests and can participate in managing them. In international policy considerations, actual forest dwellers attract particular attention because they have few options other than those the forest offers.
For people living outside forests but who need forests (mostly farming populations), collaborative management of nearby forests is increasingly practised. Principally, this is achieved through agreements between state forest departments and local communities, mostly to manage degraded state forests.
Regarding urban forestry, a key attribute of cities is the diversity of needs among various income strata, ranging from amenity planting (parks, roadside trees, etc.), to production forests for food, woodfuels and other needs. Forestry is, however, at a relative disadvantage due to high land values and alternative lucrative options for land use, including real estate development.
Policies and institutions
The forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific region is undergoing substantial policy change in response to broader developments such as economic growth, globalisation of economies, privatisation, trade liberalisation and UNCED-related attention on sustainable development (particularly sustainable forest management).
Two main areas of institutional adaptation that are emerging relate to: (a) creating a supportive environment for the private sector in an age of economic liberalisation; and (b) enhancing the effectiveness of participation by local communities and individuals in forest management.
Throughout the Asia-Pacific region, most forests are officially under the control of central or state governments. Despite this responsibility, central government resources are insufficient, leading to a history of government forest management failures. A desire to correct this, to reform economies toward a stronger market orientation, and a commitment to more socially oriented forest management have all been factors in a recent trend toward decentralisation and devolution of forest management responsibilities.
Many government forestry agencies in poorer developing countries remain weak. A key problem in many other countries is the low hierarchical profile of government forestry agencies. Budget allocations and staff resources for forestry are often inadequate to effectively monitor forestry resources and ensure sustainable management. An obvious weakness in a number of countries is poor enforcement of laws and regulations - in the weaker countries, even the supervision of concessions leaves much room for illegal activities and irresponsible harvest practices.
A setting for the future
Analysis of the current status and trends in Asia-Pacific forestry has led to identification of eight broad themes that are likely to be most important in determining the future of forestry in the region.
1. Demand for the broad range of products and services presently supplied by forests will continue to increase.
2. Physical and regulatory constraints on forest resource use will continue to increase.
3. Pressures for sustainable management (and other environmentally oriented policies) will continue to gather force.
4. Increased attention will be paid to the multiple roles performed by forests and to efforts for forest ecosystem management.
5. Forest products trade will continue to be an important element in the forestry sector.
6. Globalisation and regionalisation in the forestry sector will increase.
7. Demands for social equity will continue and increase.
8. New roles and opportunities will emerge for all forest sector stakeholders.
Driving forces for change
In broad terms, the central driving forces for change in the Asia-Pacific region are socio-economic. Population pressures and increasing prosperity are the key factors. During the past 20 years a number of environmental and social factors have received much greater prominence and have resulted in a changed forestry paradigm for the Asia-Pacific region. Concerns over deforestation and forest degradation, pollution, climate change, indigenous people's rights, empowerment of local communities and urban environments have become - in many instances - paramount over commercial wood production.
A central theme of the APFSOS study is that the future will be determined by how various tensions and conflicts among economic, social and environmental dimensions of forests are resolved. The most important driving forces for change are those that arise from inappropriate balances among these core dimensions.
The outlook for Asia-Pacific forestry
In the future, less tangible roles of forests will likely become more appreciated and valued (e.g. protective functions, cultural and aesthetic values). The implicit costs of physical uses (e.g. for energy and industrial timber purposes) are likely to receive greater attention. Clearly, demands on the region's forests and conflicts over use will increase.
Outlook for services of forests
· Despite its very rich biological resources, the region is not capturing the full commercial potential for forest-based opportunities from bio-prospecting and product development; greater efforts are needed if the region hopes to benefit commercially from these resources.
· The potential to conserve more biological resources in the future is constrained by high population pressure. There is little room in many countries to expand strictly protected areas and any new protected areas may need to be in more loosely defined conservation categories.
· Competition for fresh water will escalate in the coming years. There will be increasing opportunities for pricing of water and compensating communities located in and near watersheds for protecting and maintaining viable sources of water for downstream use.
· With rising prosperity, the desire for nature experiences among middle class people will offer many opportunities for ecotourism development, but tapping this market will require sound preparation and competitive strategies.
Outlook for NWFPs
· There will likely be increasing commercialisation of some NWFPs, resulting in larger-scale exploitation. Many high potential NWFPs may be domesticated and so enter the agricultural arena.
· The importance of subsistence use of some NWFPs will likely decline as alternative products and alternative sources of income emerge. Growing prosperity may reduce the number of people whose livelihoods depend on NWFPs.
· A variety of factors may cause the disintegration of traditional systems for using NWFPs, including the settlement of migrants in forest areas and increasing competition with incompatible forest uses.
· Commercialisation of NWFPs with high potential for economic exploitation will increasingly be controlled by powerful interests - often at the expense of forest-dwelling people - unless specific policy measures are taken to favour local people.
Outlook for wood energy
· Demand for woodfuels will continue to grow; it will likely increase by 25 percent by 2010.
· In 2010, there will still be far more wood available for fuel than is needed; sustainable production from farmlands alone is expected to meet some four-fifths of total needs. Unequal distribution of woodfuel resources, however, will be an increasing problem.
· Wood energy has the potential to partially enter the economic mainstream but this is unlikely to occur within the period to 2010. Strategic policy support and action will be required if wood energy programmes are to become a central element of overall energy and economic development planning.
· Uplifting the non-industrial uses of wood energy will be a difficult task due, among other things, to the low socio-economic status of most woodfuel users, poor financial feasibility of large-scale wood-energy plantations, unclear government policies for bio-energy development and incomplete information on wood energy.
· Industrial use of residues at processing plants is more likely to prove profitable than establishing wood-energy plantations for power generation or processing of liquid-fuels from wood.
Outlook for industrial wood products
· Demand for all industrial forest products in the region will increase significantly with growing populations and resumed strong economic growth.
· Asia and the Pacific will continue to have more fibre potentially available - in gross fibre volume terms -than the quantity of wood products it consumes.
· Certain commodities, such as large-size logs and products made from them, will become increasingly scarce.
· Change in consumption patterns, particularly reduced use of sawnwood and plywood and greater reliance on reconstituted panels, will make it easier for the region to supply much of its own needs.
· Wastepaper use is expected to more than double, and in 2010 will account for more than half of the fibre used in paper and paperboard production.
· Asia and the Pacific will increase its net imports of all forest commodities except fuelwood.
The APFSOS has undertaken a major modelling effort to develop quantitative scenarios for future supply and demand of wood products. A baseline scenario quantifies expectations for consumption, production and trade in forest products, using assumptions that discount the current economic turmoil. A downturn scenario provides indicative forecasts applying lower growth assumptions relating to the ongoing economic disturbance.
Outlook for tree and forest resources
· Natural forests are likely to continue to be converted to other land uses, although perhaps at a declining rate. Only limited additional areas of natural forest are likely to be reserved in new protected areas unless buffer-zone development and other utilisation are permitted. Strict protection of areas will become increasingly difficult.
· Plantations will continue to receive considerable management attention and research support. To ensure continued attractiveness of plantation activities, greater policy support may be needed.
· Trees outside forests will be increasingly recognised as an important element in the wood supply equation.
Outlook for people and institutions
· If attention is focused on protecting traditional forest-based livelihoods including shifting cultivation, hunting and gathering of NWFPs, then forest dwellers and forest-dependent people will likely face a hostile and unstable future. The principal avenue for development appears to be building human capacities among forest dwellers so they can continue with forest livelihoods but also have the capacity to capture emerging economic opportunities.
· The future will bring numerous institutional challenges - the most significant ones are likely to relate to overall capacity building, including education and research.
· In the future, interest groups will undoubtedly more forcefully demand an active role in forestry decision making. This will not necessarily ensure that marginalised groups in many countries are adequately represented. This aspect may require specific attention by policy-makers. Building consensus and cooperation will be an important part of future decision processes.
Implications and choices
Within the forestry sector per se, very few effective policy measures can be taken to address deforestation, as most of its direct causes are driven largely by policies outside the forestry sector. Managers of the sector can, however, more actively enforce the law, promote corrective actions through afforestation and reforestation, encourage responsible stewardship for the forests that remain and demonstrate the relative importance of forests compared with alternative land uses. The policy choices that will most effectively control deforestation are related to increasing agricultural productivity, creating employment and alternative income-generating opportunities and raising prosperity in general so that direct dependency on natural resources is reduced.
Questions and issues that confront decision-makers include:
· how to keep forestry socially relevant, especially maintaining adequate attention to the needs of the poor;
· how to address the forest-related needs of a fast-growing urban population;
· whether to focus on maintaining forest dwellers in forest dependency or provide them with the capacity and tools with which to choose alternative livelihoods;
· how to secure appreciation of the value of non-commercial services of forests so that these are better provided for in budgets and national accounts;
· whether and how to mainstream NWFPs in forest management;
· how the development of tree resources outside forests can best be supported, including through appropriate policy and institutional measures; and
· whether wood energy should remain subsistence-oriented, or how best to encourage and enable it to enter the economic mainstream.
For industrial forest products, the most pressing policy choices will relate to:
· the nature of the industrial capacity in the region, particularly in Southeast Asia where the industry is currently oriented toward the use of large-diameter logs that will soon be in short supply;
· the tightening of raw material supplies, and related options for encouraging greater use of forest and mill residues;
· the relative emphasis between encouraging greater recovery of paper for recycling as opposed to developing additional pulpwood resources; and
· the extent to which policy measures should be used to mobilise additional resources in support of industrial forestry activities.
It is clear that commitment to research and development will be essential if forestry is to meet the emerging challenges and opportunities. An indicative guide to investment requirements estimates average annual investment needs for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector to be between US$15.5 billion and US$23.2 billion per year.
There are significant opportunities for greater regional co-operation in areas such as trade liberalisation, watershed management, sustainable forest management, education and research and in developing a regional perspective in global forest dialogue.
<section>6</section>
1. Introduction
Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission Mandate
Objectives of the study
Scope of the study
Study methods and approaches
Evolving perspectives on the value and use of forests
Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission Mandate
During the Sixteenth Session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC), held in Myanmar, in January 1996, the Commission endorsed the implementation of a comprehensive Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study (APFSOS). The Commission recognised that the impressive recent growth of the forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific region, together with the importance assigned to forestry on the international scene, made execution of the study a potentially important aid for decision-making on national, regional, and global issues. The Commission also considered the study to be an appropriate initiative in the context of current efforts to strengthen its own work between sessions and to see greater focus on regional issues.
The Commission underlined the importance of analysing the forestry sector in the context of the broader macro-economic and social environment, with due attention to relationships with closely-linked sectors such as agriculture and energy, and taking into account such parameters as substitution and price developments. The Commission further directed that the study should reflect a proper balance between environment and development issues, and that special emphasis should be given to the future perspectives of the forestry sector. It called for the incorporation of member country experiences, particularly with regard to successes in sustainable forest management, and careful consideration of non-wood forest products, recent developments in research and technology, and inter-linkages between regional and global developments.
The Commission encouraged FAO to actively involve member countries in conducting the study and to maximise the use of local expertise. It also recommended that the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific be fully and actively involved in carrying out the study. The Commission further urged FAO to seek support from the private sector, given the importance of the study for industry. The Commission directed that a comprehensive report and recommendations for follow-up be presented at its Seventeenth Session in early 1998.
Objectives of the study
The objectives of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study have been: a) to collect, review and interpret existing and specially-commissioned information on the status and trends of key aspects of the forestry sector (and developments that affect it) from a regional perspective; and b) to present possible paths for future development of the forestry sector through the year 2010.
In pursuing these objectives, the study has sought to:
· place both the internal and external driving forces influencing the development of the sector in context;
· pay particular attention to the roles of forests in supporting livelihoods, principally through modem industry and trade, but also through small-scale enterprises and subsistence-level activities of forest-dependent communities;
· provide complete thematic coverage of the forestry sector, with the exception of wildlife management which is only referred to in terms of protected areas habitat;
· fully consider protective, productive (or economic) and social functions of forests within the context of sustainability; and
· address the implications of possible policy decisions and directions, including requirements for institutional development and investment.
An important element of the study has been to draw attention to the implications of expected future development and variations of the future for policy and action, including for regional co-operation and for investment. The approach has been not so much to recommend specific policy or action initiatives but to provide decision-makers with insight into the likely implications of important developments within and outside the sector.
Scope of the study
Core elements of the study include reports on the status, trends and future prospects of the following items:
· services of forests including aspects of environment, protected areas, and conservation;
· production, consumption and trade of industrial wood products, wood energy, non-wood forest products and services;
· extent and management of forest resources and trees outside forests;
· growing global concerns for environmental, social, and sustainability dimensions of forestry development, and possible implications for future industrial raw material supplies and for trade;
· interactions between people and forests and various social issues arising from these interactions;
· evolution of policies and institutions and future directions and priorities; and
· implications of policy choices on the future of forestry in the region.
The development of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study has been closely co-ordinated and linked with other FAO studies, including the Forest Resources Assessment 2000 (FRA2000), the Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS), and the Global Outlook for Forests and Forest Products. FRA2000 has provided foundation data on forest area, key characteristics of the forest resource base, and forest cover changes. The GFSS has been the source of estimates on supply potential for industrial fibre. Likely developments in the consumption, production, and trade of forest products have been projected using a general equilibrium Global Forest Products Model initially used by FAO for global projections. These components provide the analytical foundation necessary to provide the historical base and the projections used in this study.
Countries and collaborating organisations have provided vast amounts of information, in the form of country and thematic reports, in support of the APFSOS. These country and thematic studies have provided the basis for interpreting and explaining what drives change in individual countries. They have also helped to illustrate the rich variety of situations throughout the region.
For purposes of the APFSOS, the "Asia-Pacific region" is defined to encompass all countries and territories from Pakistan in the west to the International Dateline in the east; and from Mongolia, the People's Republic of China and Japan in the north to the Pacific Islands, Australia and New Zealand in the south (Figure 1.1 and Box 1.1). The study did not specifically include the Russian Far East or any of the Americas. However, considering the close relationships between Asia and these areas, various study components (particularly those dealing with trade issues) paid careful attention to developments in these regions. Out of a total of 33 countries and territories in the Oceania sub-region, 10 were included in the study, based on relative size and the availability of data. A full listing of the countries and territories included in the study is given in Box 1.1, along with the economic and geographical sub-regional groupings used. Taiwan Province of China and the Special
Administrative Region (SAR) of Hong Kong have been analysed separately from the People's Republic of China due to the significant differences in levels of economic development and individual significance in forest products trade.
Figure 1.1: Countries and territories included in the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study
Study methods and approaches
Although FAO co-ordinated the implementation of the ASFSOS, the principle of broad participation and involvement guided the study throughout. Shortly after the study was endorsed by the APFC, member countries nominated national focal points for the study. The focal points were instrumental in collecting and providing national-level information for the study, and in overseeing the preparation of country profile reports.^1
^1 The study made maximum use of existing reports and information, but numerous topics required in-depth studies or updated information. In all, more than 45 working papers were prepared, including 20 country profile reports provided by member governments (a joint profile was prepared by FAO for the Pacific Islands and some in-depth country studies were sponsored by FAO). More than 25 thematic studies were carried out by consultants, co-operating organisations and ongoing projects and programmes.
Box 1.1: GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION OF COUNTRIES AND TERRITORIES INCLUDED IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC FOREST SECTOR OUTLOOK STUDY
North Asia (NA)
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Japan (AIE)
Mongolia
The People's Republic of China
- Hong Kong SAR, China (NIE)
- Taiwan Province of China (NIE)
The Republic of Korea (NIE)
Southeast Asia (SEA)
Brunei
Cambodia
Indonesia
Malaysia
Myanmar
People's Democratic Republic of Lao (Laos)
Philippines
Singapore (NIE)
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
Thailand
South Asia (SA)
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Pacific Islands (PI)
Australia (AIE)
Cook Islands
Fiji
Kiribati
New Caledonia
New Zealand (AIE)
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Vanuatu
Note: Recognising commonalities between countries and territories at different stages of industrialisation, those labelled AIE (Advanced Industrial Economies) and NIE (Newly Industrialising Economies) have been grouped together in the analysis.
Evolving perspectives on the value and use of forests
The people of Asia and the Pacific have traditionally had a very close and highly dependent relationship with the region's forests. For centuries, forests have supplied a multitude of food, fibre, medicines, fodder, construction materials and environmental services. The rejuvenative powers of the moist tropical forests have helped sustain large numbers of shifting cultivators, while temperate, swamp, alpine and other types of forests have all provided sources of food, fuel and other necessities to indigenous peoples and more recently to migrants. Societies throughout the region developed well-defined customary laws governing the protection, allocation, and use of forests and forest products.
The twentieth century, particularly after the Second World War, brought rapid economic expansion and large population increases to many countries in the region. These forces greatly hastened the exploitation of forest resources and conversion of forestlands to other uses, particularly agriculture. The forests increasingly were viewed largely as sources of timber and quickly convertible capital and as "land banks" for further agricultural expansion.
Forest resources have helped to fuel surging economic development in some countries of the region. In particular, countries such as Thailand, the Philippines, Solomon Islands, Malaysia, New Zealand and Indonesia have utilised forest resources as catalysts for development. Several other forest-rich countries in the region which are moving toward market economies (e.g. Cambodia, the People's Republic of China, Laos, Myanmar, Mongolia and Viet Nam) are striving to attain a fast-growth trajectory and may well use forest resources to fuel growth. In these countries, the transition to more open and flexible economies may, bringing greater prosperity, increase demand for forest products. This could bring new risks and threats to forest resources, and may call for new management approaches.
Recent years have brought considerable rediscovery of the broader range of values and uses of forests in Asia and the Pacific as elsewhere. These emerging perspectives include recognition of a much wider range of forest values. There has been a renaissance of appreciation for traditional and customary forest use, especially that by forest-dwelling and forest-dependent people and a distinct shift away from the custodial approaches of the previous colonial powers. Values for which appreciation has grown stronger include environmental stability, conservation of diverse biological resources, quality water supplies, food security, recreation, and manifold livelihood opportunities. An issue raised from a variety of perspectives has been how to ensure sustainable flows of these benefits. Various global, regional and local dimensions of this issue have been examined.
These broadened perspectives on forest roles are reflected in a proliferation of international initiatives designed to enhance both the management of forests and the benefits derived from them. From the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) has come a variety of conventions, fora, and initiatives that have direct implications for forest management; UNCED has also led to more assiduous application of older conventions such as the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands and the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). Increased appreciation of the complex ecological roles played by forests is also contributing to greater understanding of critical limits to development. For example, demands for quality water supplies could well prove the determining factor leading to decisions to conserve forests and to arrest deforestation in populous countries of mainland Asia, and the smaller countries of the Pacific.
<section>7</section>
2. Social and economic background to the study
Population
Economic development
The economic importance of forestry in the region
Economic and social changes are key determinants of the demand for, and often the supply of, forest goods and services. Among the most important developmental parameters are population and income. Obviously, even if the per capita level of income remains constant, gross consumption capacity will increase as the number of people increases. Similarly, total consumption capacity will expand dramatically as per capita income increases. In fact, the high levels of consumption observed in wealthy nations bear witness to the frequently stronger effect of incomes compared with population in conferring capacity to consume. Both population and income are expected to rise substantially in Asia and the Pacific and will thus be key determinants of the future overall "forestry situation" in the region.
Population
Trends and current status
Pressures on the land
Future population projections
Trends and current status
The Asia-Pacific region is home to more than 3 billion people and has, on a population basis alone, the greatest potential for consumption of forest products of any region in the world. As Figure 2.1 shows, the region included more than 55 percent of the world's total population in 1994. The region's proportionate share of the world's population has remained roughly the same over the last 35 years, although the distribution of population within the region has changed due to differences in population growth rates among the countries. Consequently, while the People's Republic of China alone accounts for nearly 39 percent of the region's population, the countries of South Asia, particularly India, Pakistan and Bangladesh have grown more quickly in the past 35 years; collectively, the population of these three countries is estimated to have overtaken that of the People's Republic of China in 1997. Relative sub-regional growth rates and other population statistics are shown in
Table 2.1.
The rate of population growth has slowed in the overall region during the past 35 years from 2.5 percent per annum to 1.4 percent per annum. The Advanced Industrial Economies (AIEs) have the lowest population growth rate and this has levelled-off in recent years. Population growth in the Newly Industrialising Economies (NIEs) and North Asia (dominated by the People's Republic of China) has fallen dramatically and is now at the level experienced in AIEs about 20 years ago. Population growth has declined only slightly in the rest of the region, and in recent years has begun to increase again in the Pacific Islands.
An important demographic dimension is the impact on the age structure of the population. Large Asian countries including Indonesia, India, Malaysia, the Philippines and Viet Nam have populations with more than 50 percent of the people 25 years old or younger. More than 60 percent of the population of Bangladesh and Pakistan are 25 or under. During the next 15 years these people will likely form an increasingly heavy consumption base for forest products and services. In many countries, they will be increasingly literate, urban and sophisticated and will have different needs and tastes.
Figure 2.1: The Asia-Pacific region's share of world population, 1994
Source: FAO (1997a)
Table 2.1: Selected population statistics for the Asia-Pacific region
Country group
Annual population growth rate (%)
Land resources in 1994 (ha/capita)
Rural population (% of total)
Agricultural population (% of total)
Trend 1962-1996
All land
Agricultural land
Trend 1961-1996
Trend 1961-1996
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
Asia-Pacific
World
Source: FAO(1997a).
Pressures on the land
An important social dimension for forestry is the location of people and the availability of land. Large rural populations, especially if associated with low incomes, low agricultural productivity and limited land availability, are likely to put pressures on the land that will result in a persistent loss of forests. The Asia-Pacific region has several countries and areas that fit such a profile (most notably in South Asia). Conversely, high-income countries with low populations are able to reforest significant areas of agricultural and pastoral land (e.g. Australia, New Zealand). Figure 2.2 shows how agricultural land area has grown in relation to population in Asia and the Pacific since 1961. It would require further analysis to determine the relative contributions that agricultural productivity gains and food imports might have made in slowing agricultural expansion relative to population growth.
Figure 2.2: Changes in population and agricultural land area in the Asia-Pacific region
Source: FAO 1995.
In 1994 the average density of population across the region was 1.1 people per hectare. This was more than double the world average. In terms of agricultural land, the region has about 0.5 hectares per capita, slightly more than half the world average. Among those that vary markedly from the regional average: Australia, New Zealand, Mongolia, Papua New Guinea and New Caledonia are sparsely populated; Japan, Maldives and the NIEs have very high population densities.
A major proportion (68 percent) of the population in the region lives in rural areas and is largely dependent on agriculture as its main source of income. This is particularly the case in the countries of North Asia, South Asia and the Pacific Islands. The AIEs and NIEs are much more urbanised and less dependent on agriculture. There has been a marked shift from rural to urban-based societies in the NIEs during the past 35 years. The same trend is, to a lesser extent, observable in the countries of Southeast Asia. In contrast, there is very little evidence of any proportionate increase in urbanisation in the countries of South Asia or in the Pacific Islands. Among the most populous countries, the People's Republic of China, Indonesia and Japan will by 2010 have fewer rural people than now; India, Pakistan and Bangladesh will have more.
Future population projections
United Nations population projections (1996 revision) have been used in this study (Table 2.2). The medium fertility scenario projections (the UN's "most likely" scenario) suggest that population growth in the Asia-Pacific region will decline to just over 1 percent per annum by 2005-2010. The region's population is expected to grow by about 21 percent by 2010 to around 3.8 billion people.
The UN projections also suggest that the rural population in the region will decline in absolute numbers between 1994 and 2025. Adjusting these projections to the period of the outlook study, it is estimated that the rural population in the region will decline by 22 million by 2010, a reduction of just over 1 percent of the 1994 rural population. This small overall reduction in rural population, however, will be accompanied by the rapid growth of many urban areas in the region.
Table 2.2: United Nations population projections for the Asia-Pacific region (medium fertility)
Country group
Actual and projected population(in million)
Total increase (%)
Rural population in 1994
Rural population in 2010
(in millions)
% of total
(in millions)
% of total
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
Asia-Pacific
Source: UN (1996).
Economic development
Trends and current status
The foundations for economic growth
Future economic projections
Resilience of economies
Trends and current status
Despite having more than half the world's population, the Asia-Pacific region currently accounts for only about a quarter of the world's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (Figure 2.3). However, the situation is a vast improvement over 40 years ago, when the region's share was less than 5 percent. This increase has been achieved as a result of an economic growth rate in the region about seven times the world average.
This dramatic growth has not been experienced everywhere in the region (Table 2.3), however, and can be attributed mainly to a handful of countries and territories (most notably, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the People's Republic of China). By contrast, in eight other countries of the region, half of the rural population lives below the poverty line. Across the region, however, even in less rapidly developing countries, a significant proportion of the population enjoys some prosperity. Thus, due to the size of the overall population, this translates into a major purchasing capacity in absolute terms.
Japan's economy accounted for 58 percent of the total Asia-Pacific GDP in 1995 and dominates the 64 percent share held by the AIEs. In total, the five largest economies (i.e. Japan, the People's Republic of China, India, Australia and the Republic of Korea) account for 84 percent of regional GDP.
Figure 2.3: The Asia-Pacific region's share of world GDP, 1995
Source: FAO (1997b). Note: All figures are in terms of US$ at 1987 prices and exchange rates.
Table 2.3: Trends in GDP in the Asia-Pacific region
Country group
Real GDP at factor cost (in billion US$ at 1994 prices)
GDP per capita (US$ at 1994 prices)
Real GDP growth (average annual % growth)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
Asia-Pacific
Source: AsDB (1997a) and IBRD (1997).
The foundations for economic growth
There are a number of common threads that link the performances of the most successful economies in the Asia-Pacific region. In general, rapid growth has been the result of hard work, a high level of social discipline and targeted government policies. The principal engines for growth have been high levels of exports, private domestic investment and rapid development of quality (i.e. skilled) human capital. In part, growth has also resulted from exploitation of natural resources, effective use of cheap labour and high levels of economic protectionism.
A major factor contributing to development, particularly in East Asia, has been that governments have established a climate conducive for rapid macroeconomic growth. Other attributes of the fast-growing economies are high savings rates, low budget deficits, low rates of inflation and low levels of external debt. In absolute terms, external borrowing has been high but it was generally investment-oriented and was quickly serviced by earnings from fast-growing exports. A major contributory factor to the recent economic crisis was a slowdown in export performance which made it difficult to service debt immediately. A key driver of economic growth in the region has been the strength of the Japanese economy. In the past 30 years, Japan has provided a major intra-regional market for exports of goods produced elsewhere in Asia-Pacific. More recently, Japan has also provided a ready source of capital for investment in the region.
Other factors that have contributed to rapid economic growth in the region include sound population policies, a focus on export growth, high rates of investment in human and physical capital and pursuit of greater efficiency through improvements in factor productivity. Asia-Pacific countries have been open to foreign ideas and technology and have invested locally in technological development. Governments have also systematically intervened to ensure the development of specific high-potential industries.
The best performers have also tended (either purposefully, or as a side effect of other policies) to promote equity in income distribution. Indeed, the major social change currently influencing many of the economies of the region is the emergence of a large middle class. In addition to the roughly 80 million people in the region who can be considered extremely wealthy, a middle "class" of between 375 and 500 million people is developing. A further 750 million people are also leaving their poverty behind and beginning to have significant spending power.
Several key features have strongly influenced the rates of development in the region (Table 2.4). The clear linkages between savings and GDP growth are particularly evident. The fastest growing economies in the region in 1994 all had savings rates in excess of 34 percent. A very similar pattern (reflecting domestic capital formation) can be observed with regard to rates of investment.
The Current Account Balances of Asia-Pacific countries (Table 2.4) illustrate one of the most significant differences between the economic structures of developed Western countries and Asia. Most Asian countries have limited social welfare structures and consequently government spending comprises a smaller and less burdensome proportion of GDP. Consequently, other than the AIEs, only Hong Kong SAR, China and India ran significant current account deficits in 1994.
Table 2.4 also provides evidence of the region's dependence on trade as a vehicle for growth, particularly in the NIEs. With the exception of Japan (10 percent) and Indonesia (23 percent), exports from all of the fastest growing economies in the region exceeded 30 percent of GDP in 1994. In Hong Kong SAR, China and Singapore, the volume of trade exceeded GDP (hence the very high average value reported for the NIEs in Table 2.4). Notably, however, 70 percent of the countries in the region (for which statistics were available^2) ran Balance of Trade deficits in 1994.
^2 Statistics not available for Bhutan, Brunei, Korea DPR and New Caledonia.
Table 2.4: Selected macro-economic statistics for the Asia-Pacific region, 1994^3
Country group
Savings rate
Govt. Current Acct. Surplus
Investment (GFCF)^4
Exports
Trade balance
(% of GDP)
(% of GDP)
(% of GDP)
(% of GDP)
(% of GDP)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
Asia-Pacific
^3 The statistics presented are calculated as a "per country percentage" average for the countries in each region for which individual statistics are available. As a consequence, small countries' statistics are given disproportionate weight in sub-regional totals and, where these achieve large values, have significantly biased the statistics.
^4 Gross Fixed Capital Formation.
Source: AsDB (1997a), IMF (1997), and IBRD (1997).
Future economic projections
Projections of future GDP are usually based on past trends, which are then adjusted for factors that are likely to alter the future. The estimation process can be very difficult in periods of rapid change or for countries undergoing major structural shifts. This is certainly the case in the Asia-Pacific region at the current time. Uncertainty has been starkly demonstrated by the economic turmoil that has disrupted the fastest-growing economies of the region. Box 2.1 addresses aspects of this development and its implications and a scenario examining the possible magnitudes of the impacts of this downturn is modelled in Chapter 10.
Two sets of GDP growth rates are presented in Table 2.5. The first is extrapolated from Compendium of Demographic and Macro-economic Assumptions^5 produced for a forthcoming FAO study. The second set has been assumed as a broad basis for modelling a wood-products scenario in Asia-Pacific in view of the recent economic downturn.
^5 FAO (1997b).
Resilience of economies
The growth rates presented in Table 2.5 for many of the developing countries in the region are relatively high and it remains questionable whether these rates are sustainable. Until recently, the best evidence suggested that the Asia-Pacific region would continue to record the very high growth rates of the past two decades, as a result of continuing aggressive investment strategies and the apparent resilience of many of the economies in the region. For example, rates of economic growth of 5 to 10 percent were maintained in many of the developing countries in the region during the entire downward cycle of the Japanese economy.
Table 2.5: GDP projections for the Asia-Pacific region
GDP forecasts (in billion US$ at 1994 prices)
GDP Growth rate forecasts (annual percentage growth)
Base year
FAO (1997b)
FAO (1997b)
APFSOS downturn scenario (1998)
North Asia
Japan
Korea DPR
Mongolia
The People's Republic of China
- Hong Kong SAR, China
- Taiwan Province of China
The Republic of Korea
Southeast Asia
Brunei
Cambodia
Indonesia
Malaysia
Myanmar
Laos
Philippines
Viet Nam
Singapore
Thailand
South Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
India
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Oceania
Australia
Cook Islands
Fiji
Kiribati
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tonga
Vanuatu
More recently, however, the region has undergone a major economic correction. hi the past year, the major Asian stock indices have declined by 10 to 50 percent. The currencies of several NIEs and Southeast Asian countries have been battered, leaving East Asian economies with little liquidity. Consequently, very few new investments are being made and demand for consumer goods, including forest products, is muted. In the short run, growth in the worst-affected economies (i.e. the Republic of Korea, Thailand and Indonesia) is likely to stagnate or even reverse slightly while awaiting a recovery that is likely to be led by more competitive export prices and investment from offshore.
Box 2.1: POSSIBLE IMPACTS OF THE RECENT ASIAN ECONOMIC DECLINE
The recent Asian economic crisis is already having impacts on the industrial forestry sectors in most countries of the region. The most important but difficult challenge is to predict the speed at which the region will bounce back from this upset. At the January 1998 World Economic Forum in Davos, there was talk of a five-year period being required for full recovery but, significantly, there was also conviction that Asia can regain its dynamism.
The immediate prospects for the forestry sectors in the region are gloomy. The enormous destruction of financial capital tied up in Asian sharemarkets and associated rapid depreciation in currency exchange rates has left many commercial and financial institutions in Asia with severe liquidity problems while personal consumers' finances and confidence have also suffered markedly. In the worst affected economies (i.e. the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Japan), demand for all forest products will undoubtedly be curtailed. Commercial and housing construction projects are being deferred, and production of consumer goods (and hence demand for packaging materials) has declined. Currency devaluations so far have largely failed to stimulate exports because the main markets within Asia-Pacific have also devalued and there are lingering difficulties in financing export contracts. As a consequence, countries less directly involved in the crisis,
including Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Fiji, Solomon Islands, Cambodia, Myanmar, and Laos, will be adversely affected through their trade balances. Some anecdotal evidence on impacts follows:
· According to the Indonesian Plywood Association (APKINDO), 1997 exports of Indonesian wood panels are expected to have totalled about 8 million cubic metres, a decline of about half a million cubic metres from 1996 levels; further declines are expected in 1998.
· In Papua New Guinea, the Forest Industry Association estimates that 30 percent of the industry's capacity is shut down and 1997 log exports are likely to have been at least 12 percent below 1996 levels. It is estimated that there are currently 350,000 cubic metres of unsold logs in stock in Papua New Guinea; several logging operators have suspended all felling operations.
· In the Solomon Islands, log markets have been stagnant, even at substantially reduced prices; several logging companies have suspended felling operations.
While previously more than 50 percent of Sarawak's lumber exports went to Thailand and the Philippines, most Thai importers have stopped buying lumber from Sarawak; exports from Sarawak to the Philippines have also fallen by half. Some dramatic changes in the policies and conditions affecting the region's forests are already being initiated. For example, the Indonesian Government has agreed to conditions with the IMF that include: reducing export taxes on logs and rattan to a maximum of 10 percent by March 1998; previously, very high export taxes made it almost impossible to legally export unprocessed logs or rattan;
· eliminating APKINDO's monopoly over plywood exports;
· transferring control over all government-owned commercial forestry companies from the Ministry of Forestry to the Ministry of Finance;
· reducing land conversion targets to environmentally sustainable levels and implementing a system of performance bonds for forest concessions by the end of 1998; and
· establishing new resource rent taxes on timber resources, including increased timber stumpage fees and a new auction system to allocate concessions.
In the long run these measures should contribute to the Indonesian forestry sector being both more economically efficient and environmentally friendly. In the near term, however, rapid implementation of such a major structural adjustment package seems likely to further disrupt operating conditions for an already burdened sector. On the regional plane, the longer term effects on forestry are less clear and are largely dependent on how long the downturn persists and how widespread its effects eventually become. Partly this will depend on how long the dislocation will continue and how deep it will remain. One viewpoint regarding long-term effects on forestry suggests the crisis will probably have a greater impact on the region's forest than any other event during the last 15 years. The exodus of jobless urban workers could, if they returned in a major tide to the rural areas, have an impact on forest loss and degradation but it is too early to speculate on the magnitude of the
exodus itself or on its impacts.
Sources: Various; anecdotes excerpted from issues of the ITTO Tropical Timber Market Information Bulletin and reprinted in Forest News, Vol. XI, No. 4, FAO, Bangkok.
In the longer run, there seems little reason to doubt the region will return to rapid growth trajectories although the very high historical rates may no longer be achievable. Notwithstanding the current slowdown, the region's economic prospects in the medium term are optimistic in view of expected healthy expansion of global and inter-regional trade in an environment of increasing post-Uruguay Round liberalisation and commitment to regional and Pacific Basin economic agreements. World Bank simulations of "boom-bust" cycles suggest that Asia is very resilient to adversity. Southeast Asia and South Asia demonstrate the most resilience, due to their relatively low reliance on primary commodities, the competitiveness of their manufactured exports, growing intra-regional trade, low debt and likely continued access to external financing (due to a good borrowing record). Consequently, provided the Asian recession does not spread substantively to the rest of the world and that it
does not destroy significant production potential, the major Asian economies should resume their previously impressive growth paths around the turn of the century.
A major factor relevant to the resilience of the fast-growing economies is their particular dependence on exports. Exports have been the engine for growth but also leave these economies highly exposed to the vagaries of external demand for products.
The economic importance of forestry in the region
The economic importance of a country's forests is reflected in the contribution of the forest sector to GDP and the volume of production and trade in forest products. Rough estimates suggest that the average contribution to GDP of the forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific region (as well as its share in international merchandise trade) is about 2 percent. There are, however, a few countries in the region where the share is 10 percent or higher. Table 2.6 lists the countries for which forestry is a major economic sector. Box 2.2 provides information on the importance of forest products among the exports of Laos.
Within the region, Indonesia and Malaysia are the largest exporters of forest products. Together these countries account for 6.4 percent (in value terms) of total world exports. The value of forest product exports from the region increased from about US$1.4 billion in 1970 to US$19.7 billion in 1995, with wood-based panels the largest contributing product. The region as a whole, however, is a net importer of forest products, the value of imports in 1995 being US$44.1 billion. Japan, the Republic of Korea and the People's Republic of China are the largest importers, accounting for 23.5 percent (in value terms) of total world imports of forest products.
Table 2.6: The share of forestry in GDP and trade in selected Asia-Pacific countries
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
Merchandise trade
Country
Forestry share(%)
Country
Forestry share(%)
Bhutan
Cambodia
Solomon Islands
Solomon Islands
Laos
Myanmar
Papua New Guinea
Laos
Indonesia
Fiji
Malaysia
Indonesia
Bhutan
New Zealand
Source: FAO (19970.
Box 2.2: FOREST PRODUCTS EXPORTS OF LAOS
The forestry sector is one of the main sources of export revenue for the government of Laos. Forest product exports, as a share of total exports, have progressively increased from about 10 percent in 1985 to between 30 and 45 percent during the 1990s. In 1996, the share grew to about 40 percent. The most important export product is sawnwood, followed by logs, stumps and knobs, parquet and plywood. In principle, there is a ban on the export of logs, but due to technical "loopholes" some logs (mainly Pinus merkusii) are still being exported.
An interesting feature from the viewpoint of sustainable forest management is that the main source for log exports is "salvage" of material from infrastructure clearance sites such as dam construction areas. Due to the opportunistic nature of such "harvest", the volume and value of annual log exports varies greatly.
Source: Summary of the Country Outlook - Laos: Document APFSOS/WP/38.
<section>8</section>
3. The demands placed upon forests
Introduction and overview
Services of forests
Non-wood forest products
Woodfuels and energy
Industrial wood products
Introduction and overview
The demands placed on the forests of Asia and the Pacific are intense, and are steadily increasing in complexity and scope. No longer can the forests be viewed simply as a source of material goods for local people or perhaps as a supplier of industrial wood. The forests have become focal points for local, national, regional and global interests -interests that often compete with each other and are often incompatible.
As populations have increased and people have become wealthier, perceptions of the forests have changed considerably. People are demanding more and more from the region's forests. Seldom are old demands relaxed; rather, new demands are simply added to the list of needs and expectations people have of the forests.
Services provided by forests, which include many vital life-supporting roles, have gained particular attention in recent years. Foremost among these is the maintenance and enhancement of quality water supplies, which has long been recognised as a key contribution of forests. Of more recent recognition are demands for forests to serve as repositories of biological diversity, to store carbon and to provide recreational and educational opportunities for tourists. Services of forests tend to be intangible, or in any case difficult to quantify. They are important, but in the absence of easy measures of their worth, they tend to be publicised less than they deserve.
For centuries, rural people in Asia and the Pacific depended on forests for a wide array of non-wood forest products (NWFPs). Increasing attention is now being focused on the potential of NWFPs and services to provide alternative or complementary sources of income to timber harvesting. A major constraint on development, however, is the lack of knowledge relating to the effective utilisation, management and marketing of these products and services. Nonetheless, Asia-Pacific countries already lead the world in the production and trade of a number of NWFPs including bamboo, rattan, pine oleoresins, lac, natural silk, medicinal plants, bidi leaves, forest-derived spices and chestnuts. NWFPs comprise a significant proportion of total forest exports from some countries. In India, for example, more than 70 percent of all forest-based exports are NWFPs.
Demands for fuelwood are exceedingly high in Asia and the Pacific. Although it is now known that much of the woodfuel consumed in the region comes from non-forest sources, forests remain a major source of energy in rural areas. Considerable investment is also made by rural people to grow and collect woodfuels outside forests. India, the People's Republic of China and Indonesia account for 70 percent of the region's total consumption of woodfuels, with India alone consuming 30 percent of production. However, on a per capita basis, resource-rich Indonesia consumes an average of 0.76 cubic metres of fuelwood per person per year, compared with India's 0.29 cubic metres per capita and the People's Republic of China's 0.17 cubic metres. By contrast, Japan, as a developed nation, consumes a negligible 0.005 cubic metres per capita per year.
The Asia-Pacific region produced almost 1.2 billion cubic metres of roundwood in 1995, constituting about one-third of global wood production. The bulk of this production, slightly more than 75 percent, was utilised as fuelwood. The industrial wood harvest totalled 275 million cubic metres, or slightly less than 19 percent of global industrial wood production.
In a global context, the Asia-Pacific region has made a number of impressive changes in consumption. The growth of consumption of forest products in Asia-Pacific has transformed the global balance. For example, the Asia-Pacific region has moved from consuming 15 percent of world industrial roundwood in 1970 to 21 percent now (equal to consumption of Europe). Similar shifts have occurred for other commodities. For example, the region presently consumes 32 percent of world paper and paperboard production.
With more than half of the world's population, it is not surprising that the Asia-Pacific is a significant wood-deficit region. Net imports of wood products to the region were valued at US$24 billion in 1994. It is worth noting, however, that it is the level of "developedness," rather than population, that contributes to Asia-Pacific being a net-importing region. Japan alone, for instance, runs a forest products trade deficit of US$18 billion, while Singapore, the Republic of Korea, Thailand, the People's Republic of China and Hong Kong SAR, China are the other major importers.
In assessing generalised statistics of the Asia-Pacific region as a whole, the overwhelming dominance of a few countries in production, consumption and trade is readily apparent. The region contains six of the world's ten most populous countries (the People's Republic of China, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Japan and Bangladesh) and three of the world's six largest wood producers (the People's Republic of China, India and Indonesia). These latter three countries account for 68 percent of wood production in the region. However, among these largest countries there is an enormous amount of heterogeneity in wood utilisation.
In the production of industrial wood, the People's Republic of China dominates the Asia-Pacific region, producing 32 percent of the total. Six other countries (Indonesia, Malaysia, Japan, India, Australia and New Zealand) produce more than 15 million cubic metres annually. Together, these seven countries account for 91 percent of industrial roundwood production in the region.
In terms of trade, the same seven countries play major roles in the region. Total trade in the region, both intra-regional and inter-regional, amounted to US$63 billion in 1995. The seven major wood producing countries, along with Singapore, Thailand and Hong Kong SAR, China accounted for 95 percent of all trade. On the importing side, Japan alone accounted for 44 percent of all imports in the region. Japan, the People's Republic of China and its territories, and the Republic of Korea together accounted for 78 percent of all imports. On the exporting side, Indonesia and Malaysia are responsible for 46 percent of forestry exports. These two countries, along with Japan, New Zealand and the Republic of Korea account for 70 percent of all exports.
Services of forests
Types of services of forests
Socio-cultural roles and nature-based ecotourism
Agricultural services of forests and trees
Watershed services of forests
Carbon sequestration
Conservation of wildlife habitats and biological diversity values
Services of mangrove ecosystems
A setting for the future
Types of services of forests
Forests provide a vast range of beneficial non-extractive services alongside wood and non-wood forest products. What distinguishes services is that their value comes from performing particular roles rather than producing physical goods. Services cover a wide range of ecological, economic, social and cultural considerations and processes. This diversity means management solutions are necessarily more complex when service considerations are incorporated in decision-making.
Services of forests can be categorised into two broad types: (a) those for which a formal market exists or could be developed (e.g. clean water, grazing, ecotourism, recreation, hunting and gathering); and (b) those functions that are largely intangible and not sold through markets (e.g. cultural and spiritual values, influences on climate, erosion control and biological diversity conservation). This second type of services might be better classified as forest externalities; that is, services of forests that deliver a welfare benefit but are not fully accounted for in price and market systems. Recently, progress has been made to price and sell several forest services that were largely non-marketed in the past. For example, the carbon sequestration and storage functions of forests are becoming more "marketable" under new international agreements.^6 Similarly, forest genetic resources, and the associated functions of biological diversity conservation, are increasingly being
valued and marketed.
^6 Under Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, trading in carbon functions among countries may soon be formalized and a significant market could thus develop, thus making this ecological function also an economic/financial one.
Services of forests can also be categorised according to whether they primarily serve an economic, ecological, socio-cultural or aesthetic function. These categories are not exhaustive, nor are they mutually exclusive or discrete.
Most forests have the potential to provide many of the vast range of services of forests. Particular forest types will, however, provide enhanced levels of specific services over others. For example, a virgin stand of dipterocarp forest in Malaysia may have greater ecotourism potential than a mangrove forest in Australia. Conversely, the mangrove forest is likely to provide better coastal protection service. It is consequently very difficult to generalise about the value of services of forests.
Studies around the world have estimated the value of nutrient cycling, climate regulation, erosion control and other services at more than 60 percent of the total "average" value of forests. However, such very high valuations of services of forests largely lack credibility in practice since it is not currently possible to capitalise the value of most ecological functions (i.e. since they are mostly non-transacted externalities, there are no market indicators of "reasonable" values for them).
For forest-dependent communities in the Asia-Pacific, the more urgent interest is in developing financially viable services that can provide alternative sources of revenue to excessive harvesting or clearing of forests. While the intrinsic economic value of these more viable services may be less (on average) than for ecological services, their marketability gives potential for immediate financial gain and this can be a powerful incentive for promoting conservation. In wealthier countries, the inability to capture forest values in financial terms may not necessarily deter governments from subsidising forestry for the purpose of generating intangible benefits. Japan, for example, provides a wide range of subsidies^7 for silviculture aimed at protecting land and conserving water resources, creating a "healthy living environment," establishing recreational opportunities, forming "natural environments," and promoting the economies of mountain communities. Subsidies range from 30
to 50 percent of costs, are long-term and cover all activities that contribute to the public good rather than private gain.
^7 Japan Forestry Agency, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) & Japan Overseas Forestry Consultants Association (JOFCA) (1996): Silvicultural subsidy and loan system in Japan. Doc TIH-JR-96-232 (8).
Socio-cultural roles and nature-based ecotourism
Forests often play important cultural roles in Asia and the Pacific. Maintaining forests or trees in traditional burial grounds is common in most countries in the region, for example. In a few countries, specific provision is made in government-protected forests for cultural functions. For example, Nepal has designated religious forests and Sri Lanka has protected forest areas around temples. In these cases, the cultural functions of the forest are a major factor favouring conservation.
A more modern, and rapidly growing, social function of forests is serving as destinations for ecotourism and recreation. Ecotourism is still a relatively small component of the world's huge travel and tourism industry, but it already generates significant incomes for many countries. Ecotourism can create and capitalise on a symbiotic relationship between tourism and the environment. It provides an economic incentive to protect natural resources such as forests, wildlife, scenery and waterways. It also offers jobs and the potential for economic advancement to residents of impoverished rural communities.
A few key trends highlight the prospects for ecotourism to contribute to forest conservation in the Asia-Pacific region. They are notably:
· tourism in general already makes a substantial contribution to the region's economy;^8
^8 N. Byron (CIFOR, Personal communication, December 1997) reports, however, that the net benefits of tourism in general and ecotourism in particular may not necessarily be positive. Research in the South Pacific on the differential contributions of say "Back-packer" through to "5-star resort" tourism suggests that the net returns to the country from backpackers was actually higher - even though they spent less. This is because very little of what they consumed was imported, and me differential between gross expenditures and the cost of supplying/servicing them, was actually higher (i.e. more value added). The "five-star" tourism had virtually zero, sometimes negative value added.
· tourism has grown rapidly in the region (especially in Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Islands), and this growth is expected to continue;
· ecotourism in the region and globally has grown faster than tourism generally, and this probably will continue over the next several years;
· domestic and intra-regional visitors are an important component of the region's ecotourism, and this importance is expected to increase in the future; and
· ecotourism demand will evolve over time, and the region's ecotourism sites will need to adapt to these changes.
There has been much discussion and debate regarding the size and growth of the Asia-Pacific ecotourism market. Estimates of market size depend on the definition used to describe ecotourism (Box 3.1). Assuming, however, that the Asia-Pacific region follows the global pattern, then around 7 percent^9 of the region's international tourism might be viewed as ecotourism with several countries exhibiting a higher proportion (Box 3.2); an equivalent estimate is not yet possible for domestic tourism. The current value of the Asia-Pacific ecotourism market could, therefore, be estimated at around US$6 billion annually, of which only a limited proportion would accrue to forest owners.
^9 Lindberg et al. (1997).
Box 3.1: DEFINING ECOTOURISM
The Ecotourism Association of Australia defines "Ecotourism" as being "... ecologically sustainable tourism that fosters environmental and cultural understanding, appreciation and conservation." The same country's Office of National Tourism defines it as".... nature-based tourism that involves interpretation of the natural and cultural environment and ecologically sustainable management of natural areas."
Box 3.2: ECOTOURISM PRESSURES ON FORESTS
Tourists tend to flock to the same destinations, so that only a few countries receive most visitors and, within countries, a few sites are crowded or have their carrying capacity exceeded. Information is scarce on whether this is a significant problem yet in the region but it is something to monitor closely in ecotourism as it can undermine the very "nature appeal" which provides the initial attraction.
Some of the pressures can arise from demand for basic natural resource needs such as fuelwood. For example, in the Khumbu region of Nepal, tourists trekking to Mount Everest have placed excessive pressure on the forest resources. As a consequence, the rhododendron alpine forests around Namche Bazar are heavily degraded, having been overcut by villagers for cooking, heating and warming water for tourists' showers and baths.
The best estimates of the growth of ecotourism in the Asia-Pacific region suggest recent growth is about 10 to 25 percent annually, with potential for even higher growth in coming years. Despite these projections, it is far from clear that the market is sufficiently large, or that it is linked closely enough to forests, to ensure the conservation of more than a few areas with exceptional tourism values. The best prospects appear to be those forest areas that are set aside in national parks or other protected areas, thereby creating a highly visible ecotourism destination.
Experiences in Australia (Box 3.3) and Indonesia (Box 3.4) illustrate some contrasts and similarities in the evolution of ecotourism development in the region. A common concern is the degree to which revenues from ecotourism accrue to local communities. In Indonesia and elsewhere, there is concern that the local benefits from ecotourism may be minimal after the costs of imported inputs and services are taken into account.
Box 3.3: CASE STUDY - FOREST-BASED ECOTOURISM IN AUSTRALIA
The Australian Office of National Tourism (1997) reports foreign exchange earnings for all tourism of A$ 13.1 billion (US$10 billion) in 1995. This figure is projected to increase to A$21 billion by the year 2000. The industry accounts for some 500,000 jobs, or around 6.6 percent of Australia's workforce. Ecotourism alone (not all of which is forest-based) employed some 6,500 people (equivalent to 4,500 full-time jobs) and had a turnover of about A$250 million in 1995; there were then estimated to be approximately 600 ecotourism operators. Domestic interest in ecotourism is strong. In a 1995 survey, 53.2 percent of those interviewed about holiday plans intended to visit a natural attraction or national park to enjoy nature during their next holiday. Visits to national parks have generally increased since the early 1990s - in some parks the number of visits has increased substantially, at over 10 percent per annum.
Australia's appeal gains much from images of nature, including its forests and bushland. Australia has established a National Ecotourism Strategy and funding has been allocated for ecotourism infrastructure development, environmental management, and other projects through the Forest Ecotourism Programme and the National Ecotourism Programme. In addition, various tourism and land management agencies within state governments have undertaken ecotourism evaluations and/or have developed ecotourism strategies. The Ecotourism Association of Australia (EAA) has members from the industry, government, universities and other groups. To promote standards, an industry-based National Ecotourism Accreditation Programme (NEAP) has been created. The Association also has a Code of Practice for Ecotourism Operators to foster best practices.
Since government now only partially funds natural area management and funding may well decrease rather than increase, there is a trend toward "user pays" systems. There is also a greater role for the private sector. For example, the state of Victoria recently corporatised its service delivery functions, while the state of Queensland is pursuing private sector management of park visitation. There is some concern that the private sector will be less attentive than public agencies to conservation objectives.
Source: Adapted from Lindberg et al. (1997). Ecotourism And Other Services Derived From Forests In The Asia-Pacific Region: Outlook To 201 a Document APFSOS/WP/24. Country Report - Australia: Document APFSOS/WP/13. Leaflets of the Ecotourism Association of Australia.
Box 3.4: CASE STUDY - STATE OF ECOTOURISM IN INDONESIA
International visitor arrivals in Indonesia have increased by more than 400 percent over the decade 1985 to 1994, with arrivals in 1994 totalling over 4 million people. Tourism receipts in 1995 totalled US$5.2 billion, of which ecotourism receipts can be estimated at more than US$350 million. Continued growth in both arrivals and receipts is expected. The primary beneficiaries of these earnings are, however, airlines, tour companies and hoteliers. Little money is paid directly to local communities and even less is collected by forest managers.
Tourism policies in Indonesia's current 5-year plan include: tourism to support quality of life improvements; encouraging development in remote areas; and promoting the preservation of natural resources and culture. Goals for nature tourism are:
· to encourage conservation efforts at nature-oriented tourist sites and the surrounding environment to ensure the sustainability of site attractions;
· to optimally use the typical and unique potential of each site as tourist attractions;
· to promote employment in addition to business opportunities; and
· to advance national cultural values in the international community and to counter current negative impressions about tropical forest management in Indonesia.
The 1990s have seen increased development of Indonesia's national parks for tourism, with almost all parks now providing at least basic tourist facilities, and with substantial investment in some parks. Thirty percent of park revenues go to the province where the park is located, but none of the revenue is retained by the parks to support management or facility development.
Some businesses and other groups within the country have embraced ecotourism principles but despite recent development of Indonesian natural areas, attention appears focused on traditional concepts of tourism, rather than ecotourism. The first national community-based ecotourism workshop was held in 1995 and a second workshop, held in Bali in July 1996, resulted in the "Bali Declaration for Ecotourism" and an agreement to form the Indonesian Ecotourism Society in order to:
· increase awareness to conserve the natural tourism resources in Indonesia;
· develop environmental education materials for tourists that visit ecotourism destinations; and
· stress the need for local community benefits.
Source: Lindberg et al. (1997). Ecotourism and Other Services Derived From Forests In The Asia-Pacific Region: Outlook To 2010: Document APFSOS/WP/24. FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
Agricultural services of forests and trees
The positive interactions between forests and agriculture mark a major non-marketed benefit that trees and forests make to human welfare. At the most basic level, forests provide a restorative service for agriculture, most clearly evident in shifting cultivation. Both within and outside swidden-cultivation systems, forests' support of agriculture is well known: replenishing degraded land, recycling nutrients, maintaining and rehabilitating soil structure, contributing to the water cycle and regulation of water, protecting watersheds, providing shade and shelter. Windbreaks are another important service in specific situations (Box 3.5).
One of the most prominent agriculture-related forest services is grazing (Box 3.6). In many developing countries, 30 to 40 percent of domestic animals rely on forests for some or all of their grazing and fodder. The value of this fodder is estimated to be US$40 to US$50 billion annually, hi India alone, the value is estimated at US$12 billion annually. Forest grazing is generally carried out under traditional access rights and fees are rarely levied. Consequently overgrazing is common, particularly in heavily populated rural areas. Integrating grazing and other agricultural support functions of forests into market systems could be possible in some areas, but it would impose significant hardship on many traditional grazing communities.
Box 3.5: TREES FOR PROTECTION OF FARMLANDS
The Chinese government gives high priority to land protection by trees and forests. The aim is to maintain or regain productivity of threatened agricultural lands or to prevent degradation of threatened lands. By 1994, over 13 million hectares of land had been afforested under the Three-North Shelterbelt Development Programme, some 5 million hectares under the Shelterbelt Development Programme along the Upper and Middle reaches of the Yangtze River, 15,000 kilometres of framework shelterbelts under the Coastal Shelterbelt Development Programme, and pilot areas under the Taihang Mountains Afforestation Programme. Under a major Plains Farmland Shelterbelt Development Programme, over 80 percent of the plain farmland suitable for shelterbelts has been protected; some 10 percent of the desertified land is under control; large areas of degraded grassland were rehabilitated and protected; and sand and/or wind-prone, low-yielding farmland was protected. Well over a million hectares
of desert have already been reclaimed for fanning. It is estimated that of the 63 million hectares of plantable wasteland existing in the People's Republic of China, much can be used to produce food and oils from woody plants if adequate protective plant cover is established.
Source: Adapted from Shi Kunshan et al. (1977): Document APFSOS/WP/14.
Box 3.6: INDIA - WHICH WAY FOREST FODDER?
India is often cited for the deliberate attention forestry authorities have given to fodder as an important contribution of trees and forests. As of 1995, forest grazing occurred in 78 percent of India's inventoried forests; high- and medium-intensity grazing occurred in half of these forests. Currently, the numbers of all types of livestock are increasing in India, especially the numbers of small ruminants. As the consumption of meat accelerates with increased prosperity, this trend will likely continue, further raising the demand for fodder. Yet the production of crop residues, which used to be a mainstay complement to natural pasture, is growing more slowly, particularly since the introduction of hybrid crops which produce less straw and other residues. Consequently, shortages of fodder for farm animals have become more serious and pressures on forests for grazing are likely to increase. It is estimated that currently 40 percent of cattle have access to forests for
grazing and the grazing intensity is estimated at 4.1 cattle per hectare. This density is expected to rise to 5.6 cattle per hectare by 2010.
Source: Ahmed, M. F. (1997). In-depth country study - India: Document APFSOS/WP/26. FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
Watershed services of forests
Forests contribute to watershed quality by stabilising on-site soil, reducing off-site sedimentation, reducing flood peaks on streams in small watersheds and replenishing groundwater and watercourses. These ecological stabilisation functions of forests also contribute to orderly management of hydropower and irrigation schemes (including delaying silting up of the costly infrastructure). Although large, the values of watershed protection do not enjoy a high profile and are mainly evident in retrospect, after a watershed forest becomes degraded.
A serious obstacle in valuing watershed protection arises because most of the benefits are realised by downstream communities while the costs of protection are incurred by watershed residents or owners. In Japan, the Republic of Korea and New Zealand, pilot programmes are pioneering mechanisms by which upland watershed communities and private landowners are compensated for watershed protection by downstream beneficiaries (Box 3.7).
Box 3.7: JAPAN - BENEFICIARY COMPENSATION FOR UPSTREAM WATER PROTECTION
Japan's landscape is dominated by mountains, which occupy some 70 percent of the land. It has twice as much rainfall as the world average and often faces disasters such as floods and landslides. Forests play an indispensable role in safeguarding human life and property against those natural disasters as well as in conserving soil and water resources.
· There are, however, many forests in Japan that are not well enough maintained to effectively perform such roles. In order to improve this situation some unique schemes have been developed by municipal governments that attempt to promote forest management not only through the efforts of forest owners but also by a wide spectrum of people, especially those in urban areas. Some examples of funding contributions (beneficiary compensation) from urban people are:
· In 1994, a "City Headwater Conservation Fund" was set up in Toyota city with the aim of supporting forest management in upstream villages in the river basin to secure the quality of water resources. One yen per cubic metre of water used is being set aside from city water revenues for this purpose.
In 1997, Kanagawa prefectural government, in the vicinity of Tokyo, decided that one percent of annual revenue (around 50 billion yen) from the prefectural water supply will be used to cover part of the project budget that assists private forest owners in the prefecture.
Several other similar programmes have been implemented elsewhere.
Source: H. Ishihara (Personal communication, 1987).
Compensating upstream dwellers for the costs of watershed protection is difficult enough within a country. It becomes even more difficult when a watershed straddles international borders. For example, upstream management of the Brahmaputra, Ganges, Indus and Mekong rivers, all of which have their headwaters in the People's Republic of China, significantly affects life in Pakistan, India, Bangladesh and Viet Nam (Box 3.8). Such sharing of water resources has become a significant source of political tension, particularly in South Asia.
Box 3.8: FORESTRY AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF KEY HIMALAYA WATERSHEDS
Importance: Six of the world's leading rivers, the Indus, Ganges, Brahmaputra, Mekong, Yangtze, and Yellow Rivers, originate in the Himalayas. These rivers are essential for some of the world's largest irrigation schemes and hydroelectric works. For example, in an area of very high rainfall variability, the Indus provides 120 billion cubic metres of water per year for one of the world's biggest areas of irrigated agriculture. The Ganges also supports agriculture but its considerable potential for hydropower is undermined by danger of seismic activities. The Brahmaputra is the lifeline of Bangladeshi agriculture and has potential for hydropower. The Yangtze, with more than 40,000 small and some large reservoirs, supports irrigation and power generation including the Three Gorges Project, one of the world's largest infrastructure projects.
Main attributes: The six watersheds differ in steepness, population densities, and rainfall. For example, the Ganges, Yangtze and Mekong are dominated by elevations below 1,000 metres, while more than 50 percent of the Brahmaputra watershed is above 3,300 metres; the Indus has significant areas of both upland and lowland. Population densities range from 6 people per square kilometre in Tibet Autonomous Region of China to over 3,000 people in parts of northeast India. The monsoon-based rainfall tends to be intense and highly erosive so that forests or other good ground coverage are critical. All six rivers, but particularly the Yellow, carry very high sediment loads (all six rank within the 12 highest in the world); although a large portion of the sediment results from natural rather than man-made processes. Sediments may provide fertile lowland soils but raising of riverbeds increases flooding and damage to infrastructure and affects lives and livelihoods of millions of
people. Erosion also adversely affects hydropower and irrigation by quickly silting up dams and canals.
Forests: In the six watersheds, half the land is used for agriculture, a third for range and only an average of 12 percent is under forest. Forest cover is particularly low in the Indus where only 0.5 percent of the land is forested. Elsewhere forest cover is 2.9 percent (Yellow); 8.2 percent (Ganges); 8.5 percent (Yangtze); 14.5 percent (Brahmaputra); and 44.0 percent (Mekong). In general, most forest is at altitudes between 1,000 and 2,100 metres. The treeline generally ends below 2,100 metres and below 1,000 metres agriculture takes precedence and land pressures allow only trees in farming systems. The potential to increase forest area thus appears relatively small.
Observations suggest that the condition of forests, rather than merely forest area, determines how successful they are in controlling erosion and other watershed degradation. A broad-leaved forest without litter can in fact cause more surface erosion than bare land due to size and intensity of raindrops. However, the presence of trees, through their root systems, can give a margin of safety in shallow landslips. It also appears that, on a large scale, the role of forests in reducing downstream flooding has usually been overestimated. Data show no discernible correlation between overall extent of forest cover in a watershed and a river's sediment load due to the overwhelming influence of natural stream-bank erosion and landslides. Future forest interventions might then seek to enhance forest effectiveness in combating flooding and watershed degradation through appropriate quality of forests and their proper location, as well as pursuing complementary non-forest interventions.
Challenges and priorities for action: There are a number of important natural and man-induced challenges relating to forest roles in watersheds:
· Co-operation in managing international watersheds and rivers: of the six rivers, all originating in the People's Republic of China, the Indus, Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Mekong are international. Water sharing is often the source of political tensions. New methods have to be devised to ensure that adequate quality water remains available in perpetuity for both upstream and downstream societies and economies. This might include the payment by downstream economies for upstream conservation measures so that irrigation and hydroelectric infrastructure development downstream can proceed and no unnecessary level of sacrifice is required of those upstream. Where large rivers cross international boundaries this will call for co-operation in sharing benefits and costs.
· Environmentally most fragile altitudes: except for the Yellow River area, the zone between 1,000 and 3,000 metres is most fragile due to high intensity rainfall and steep slopes with slip-prone soils. Forest cover is also highest at this elevation and this provides a base on which to build forest-centred erosion strategies.
· Conservation of riverine forests: given that gross forest area may not be critical for water quality and other protection, focus could be on riverine forests. This strategy could lead to conflict with residents as riversides are popular for gardening wherever steepness is not excessive.
· Conservation of rich and varied or unique bio-resources and natural habitats: this challenge is best illustrated by the situation on the Brahmaputra. This watershed has unique biological diversity caused by the distinct vertical profile of forest in the Himalayan part of the watershed.^10
^10 The vertical steepness has led to a tremendous variety of ecosystems and high rates of species endemism within a very limited geographical expanse of territory: tropical evergreen forests in the foothills till 800 metres; sub-tropical forests between 900 metres and 1,800 metres; temperate forests between 1,800 metres and 3,500 metres; sub-alpine vegetation between 3,500 metres and 4,500 metres and alpine forests thereafter till 5,500 metres followed by a non-tree environment. The eastern Himalayan region, already identified as one of the 16 most threatened "biological diversity hotspots" in the world, requires focused attention.
Success in implementing future forestry interventions will require that forest management be carried out for, and by, local communities. Efforts will have to focus on implementing integrated area plans, and no undue emphasis can be placed on commercial exploitation of forestry products (particularly timber) that the ecosystems cannot sustain. Assistance will have to be extended from the global community for the maintenance of biological diversity and to achieve other objectives that do not yield direct benefits to local people.
Source: Myint, A.K. and T. Hofer (1997). Forestry And Key Asian Watersheds. Paper prepared for the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study by the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Kathmandu. Published as ICIMOD Document ISBN 92 9115 760 0. APFSOS Document series number APFSOS/WP/39.
Carbon sequestration
One of the important ecological roles of forests, and one that currently provides possibly the greatest potential to realise an economic return, is the provision of carbon sinks. Growing trees absorb carbon dioxide and fix it in the wood. Faster growth means more carbon is captured. Conversely, when forests are cleared or degraded and vegetation is burned or decays, carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere. When forests are in a steady state then emissions and absorption will offset one another. At present, on a global scale, forests are estimated to be net emitters of carbon dioxide, primarily due to deforestation and degradation in tropical regions, including the Asia-Pacific.
Currently, a variety of schemes are being mooted to mitigate the effects of climate change. International negotiations through the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) are showing increasing interest in developing a trading system for greenhouse gas emissions, including carbon dioxide (Box 3.9).
Box 3.9: JOINT IMPLEMENTATION OPTIONS
The driving force behind possible investment in developing countries is that it would cost less to take actions there than to invest in solutions within the industrialised countries. One source^11 suggests that the estimated cost of meeting UNFCCC greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals through action within the borders of developed countries is US$250 billion while reducing the same amounts of emissions in developing countries would cost only an estimated US$80 billion.
^11 Comparative cost estimate from R. Castro and F. Tattenbach et al. (1997) (quoting A. Steer). The Costa Rican Experience with Market Instruments to Mitigate Climate Change and Conserve Biodiversity. Global Conference on Knowledge for Development in the Information Age, Toronto, Canada. Workshop on Global Climate Change and Biodiversity. June 24, 1997.
Various estimates,^12 admittedly speculative at this stage, suggest that poorer nations could receive more money from trading "emission reduction units" than they now get from official development assistance. Such potential opportunities deserve serious attention by the forestry sector, although a note of caution is also warranted (Box 3.10).
^12 Anonymous. (1997). Money to bum. Controlling global warming will be expensive. Emissions trading is an intelligent way to lower the cost. In The Economist, Vol. 345, No. 8046, 6 December 1997, London.
Box 3.10: CARBON TRADING-CAN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES BENEFIT?
Even while detailed negotiations proceed on post-Kyoto arrangements for tradable carbon rights, it is clear that third-party countries such as developing countries are admissible as beneficiaries and participants in carbon trading. Thus, for example, the United States could earn credits for paying Indonesia to plant carbon-sequestering trees. It may even be possible that activities begun now will receive formal credit after 2000. Thus, for example, companies that are undertaking pilot carbon offset work in the South Pacific or in Malaysia can earn their credit informally now but formalise it after 2000. Some limited funds will also be available to help particularly vulnerable developing countries, such as island states, to adapt to the consequences of climate change.
The signatory countries (developed and transition) can not only trade credits among themselves but also benefit by paying for projects implemented in developing countries through what is called the "Clean Development Mechanism" (CDM). The CDM will allow developing countries to submit projects even where a developed country partner is not immediately available. European, Japanese and American companies are reportedly looking to commit substantial resources for activities in developing countries.
Source: Adapted from A. DiNicola (Personal communication, January 1998).
Forestry offers several opportunities to sequester carbon or avoid emissions, thereby earning "emission reduction units." These basically fall into three categories:
· Management for conservation (prevention of emissions): The goal of conservation management is mainly to conserve existing carbon pools in forests that might otherwise be released by controlling deforestation, protecting forests in reserves, changing harvesting regimes, and controlling other anthropogenic disturbances such as fire and pest outbreaks.
· Management for storage (short-term measures over the next 50 years or so): The goal of storage management is to expand the storage of carbon in forest ecosystems by increasing the area and/or carbon density of natural and plantation forests, and to increase storage in durable wood products.
· Management for substitution (long-term measures): The goal of substitution management is to increase the transfer of forest biomass carbon into products (e.g. construction materials and biofuels) rather than using fossil-fuel-based energy products, cement-based products, and other building materials.
All of the forestry opportunities identified above have possible applications in Asia and the Pacific. However, there are currently only a few examples of forestry sector carbon-offset projects under implementation or being developed in the region. These include: reduced impact logging projects in Indonesia and Malaysia; a proposal for a plantation offset project in Fiji; proposals for integrated forest management systems including carbon sequestration in the Solomon Islands, and Papua New Guinea; and a forest rehabilitation project in Sabah, Malaysia.^13 The prospects of the forestry section capturing carbon offset are commented on Box 3.11.
^13 Serrill, M. S. (1997). Ghosts of the forests. Special issue on environment "Our precious planet - why saving the environment will be the next century's biggest challenge." In Time, November 1997.
Box 3.11: HOW ASSURED IS CARBON-OFFSET INVESTMENT IN FORESTRY?
Notwithstanding the promise that the Kyoto accords bring, a word of caution is warranted with regard to the prospects of the forestry sector capturing very large investments from the carbon-offset opportunity. The point needs to be made that, polluting industries in developed countries (the source of expected funding) will carefully consider all options for addressing their pollution problem, of which compensation through sponsoring forestry would be only one. Selection of options will depend on which are cheapest, most easily managed, or do the most for the image of the company. It will therefore be essential for the forestry sector to show that it offers a better package than other options.
Among such options, perhaps the most serious challenge to the forestry-offset solution is policy or technological breakthroughs within the industrialised countries themselves that could reduce the cost of scrubbing pollutants out of emissions. At the moment, technologies are costly because they are practically tailor-made for each task and so face high unit costs. If governments in industrialised countries were to offer tax breaks, accelerated depreciation, or other policy incentives, new technologies could soon be mainstreamed and costs of adoption could become competitive with overseas solutions such as tree plantations. Governments could also simply tax carbon-releasing fossil fuels more and, for the price of a few cents more per litre, capture the funding needed to finance pollution-reducing technologies while also giving a price incentive for less wasteful use of fossil fuels.
Conservation of wildlife habitats and biological diversity values
Two prominent objectives for maintaining protected areas are to provide habitat for wildlife and to conserve biological resources. To meet these objectives, a wide range of ecosystems, from wetlands to woodlands and closed forests, needs to be protected.
Information from the WCMC^14 shows that Asia-Pacific has a strong justification for maintaining protected areas. The People's Republic of China ranks third (after Brazil and Colombia) in terms of variety of flowering plants, with Indonesia not far behind. Indonesia also ranks second in the world in terms of species of mammals and fifth for birds. Another five countries in the region feature among the 20 "mega-biodiversity" countries.
^14 Document APFSOS/WP/04, 1997.
Currently, protected areas of all IUCN categories cover some 250 million hectares (nearly 9 percent of the land area) in the Asia-Pacific region. This is considerably higher than the global average of 6 percent. Of the regional total, however, about 86 percent is accounted for by only five countries. Australia alone has 38 percent and the People's Republic of China has 27 percent; the other three countries are Indonesia, Mongolia and India (in descending order). An encouraging fact is that in all sub-regions, the area under protection continues to increase.
With its high population and rapid increase in absolute numbers, the Asia-Pacific region will have difficulty maintaining the high proportion of protected areas falling under strict and near-strict protection (IUCN categories I and II) in the future. In a few rapidly growing economies, the release of land for protection may become easier as livelihoods are transferred from agriculture to manufacturing and services. But in most countries, the only feasible alternative may be to shift toward more loose conservation with some development permitted, such as IUCN categories V (conservation with traditional uses and recreation) and VI (sustainable use of natural ecosystems), and integration of conservation goals with other land uses.
Box 3.12: CONVENTION ON BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
Article 1 of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity establishes as an objective"... the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilisation of genetic resources...." The Convention recognises that developing countries will need assistance to fulfil the requirements of the Convention and to be able to adequately benefit from it. Article 20 refers to financial resources for implementing the Convention, including new and additional funding. Article 21 sets out the financial mechanism to channel funds to developing country parties of the Convention.
The Asia-Pacific region has impressive biological resources. Calculations of Biodiversity Indices,^15 which measure the relative importance of a country for biological diversity conservation per unit area, place Indonesia particularly high with a score of 26.8. Following are the Philippines (14.0), Malaysia (13.7), Papua New Guinea (13.3) and Viet Nam (12.7).^16 All of these and others need to further expand their conservation areas if they are to preserve fully representative biodiversity potential. The overall biodiversity resource base, however, potentially positions the region well to benefit from the recent global upsurge in biodiversity prospecting. This has so far generated significant revenues for only a few countries (such as Costa Rica) but has potential to grow rapidly.
^15 WCMC in Document APFSOS/WP/04, 1997.
^16 Many other indices of importance of biological resources can be used. For example, China is one of the three major centres of origin for cultivated plants in the world, with numerous wild relatives of cultivated plants.
Private sector opportunities to capture revenues from biological diversity, while respecting the principles of sustainability and all measures of the Convention on Biological Diversity (Box 3.12), are among the ways which Asia-Pacific countries can actively capitalise on their rich resources. Sales of seed are a well-established source of revenue, increasingly important in countries like Australia. Sales of prospecting rights in forests that may yield valuable drugs to pharmaceutical companies are now another opportunity. Discovery of flora and fauna with pharmaceutical value generally conform to the laws of probability; therefore areas containing greater biodiversity are likely to command higher fees for prospecting rights. Once again, however, questions arise as to whether the benefits of biodiversity conservation will accrue to the people who bear the conservation costs.
A primary question is how the region can capture more effectively the potential commercial opportunities from bio-prospecting in forests while ensuring sustainability of the resource. To move from bio-prospecting to a usable commercialised drug is an expensive undertaking and requires technological capacity, which many biologically-rich countries do not currently possess. Before developing countries are able to develop such capacity, some risk exists that patents will be taken out on key genetic resources or the procedures for their manipulation - a development that could restrict their future options for commercialising their own resources.
Arguments can also be made that biological diversity conservation has both option and existence values. Option values reflect the potential benefits of forests in the future as opposed to their value for present consumption. Existence values reflect the satisfaction that people derive from knowing that a resource exists, even though they may never make use of the resource. For example, the conservation of panda bears in the People's Republic of China provides existence value to people around the world.
Services of mangrove ecosystems
Mangroves provide a wide range of services and functions that is vital to many countries in the region. These can be grouped as follows:
· production functions: ranging from timber (including pulp chips), fuelwood and charcoal, medicinal and chemical products; wildlife products such as honey; and fishery products - the production of fish, prawns etc. in the Sundarbans, for example, is an important part of the national fishery catch of Bangladesh.
· habitat functions: many fish species breed in mangroves as do molluscs and shrimps; mangroves are also ideal for some aquaculture. Many have rich biological diversity and some are a habitat for sometimes endemic or threatened wildlife (e.g. the Bengal tiger). Mangroves are important also for both resident and migratory bird populations.
· sink and other ecological functions: important sink functions include suspected holding of excess nutrients and pollutants that could otherwise be discharged directly into coastal lagoons, coral reefs and other near-shore areas.
· physical coastal protection: storm-protection functions for shorelines are critical in many cases. For this reason, Indonesia even requires establishment or maintenance of a mangrove "greenbelt."
The area of mangroves in the Asia-Pacific region is not well known and monitoring efforts are only partial. Two estimates are given in Box 3.13; noteworthy is the dominance of Indonesia and a few other countries. In terms of significance for the social and economic fabric of any one country, mangroves are probably most important in Bangladesh where the Sundarbans ecosystem at the joint mouth of the Ganges and Brahmaputra serves ecological, economic and cultural functions of inestimable worth for the country.
Mangroves face many threats. Most widespread and serious are over-harvesting of wood and non-wood resources without adequate regeneration, conversion of mangrove areas to intensive shrimp and fish ponds, and excessive hunting and fishing of wildlife. Many mangrove areas are also threatened by pollution from neighbouring or resident populations and by upstream agricultural fertilisers and pesticides. In many Pacific Islands, construction of roads has altered drainage patterns causing severe damage to mangroves. In some areas, new settlements are leading to the drainage of mangrove areas, with consequent loss of wetland functions.
Box 3.13: THE STATUS OF MANGROVES IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION
A useful, albeit dated, reference on mangroves in Asia and the Pacific is an FAO report issued in 1984.^17 The approximate total mangrove area reported at that time was about 5.8 million hectares, of which some 43 percent (2.5 million hectares) was in Indonesia alone, the second largest area being in Myanmar (0.8 million hectares or 14 percent) and the third in Malaysia (0.6 million hectares or 11 percent). The five countries with the largest areas together accounted for 84 percent of the regional total. Some of the most important mangrove sites are in the deltas of principal rivers such as the Ganges/Brahmaputra, Indus, Irrawady, Mekong, etc.
^17 FAO (1984). Mangrove forests in Asia-Pacific region - a summary of available information. Project GCP/RAS/106/JPN Field Document No. 1, Special Study on forest management, afforestation and utilisation of forest resources in the developing regions. FAO, Bangkok.
A 1993 ITTO report^18 presented updated information on mangroves, but only for selected countries. For Indonesia, it reports over 4.25 million hectares of mangroves of which three-quarters are in Irian Jaya. There are clear differences in measurement and definition between the ITTO and FAO reports, since the area reported in the 1993 ITTO document is nearly twice that reported by FAO in the early 1980s. In any case, only 14 percent of Indonesia's mangroves were reported as being under official conservation while 17 percent were designated for log production. The bulk of Indonesia's mangrove resource is subject to a "no-clear" policy. Malaysia was reported to have 0.64 million hectares, of which some 70 percent had been gazetted into reserves. Nevertheless, between 1980 and 1990 there was a 12 percent loss of mangroves in Malaysia, mostly due to chipping of wood for the pulp industry. In Thailand early loss rates were even higher, with a 9 percent loss in only 4 years between
1975 and 1979, and a near 50 percent reduction between 1980 and 1990. In Bangladesh, available information indicates more degradation of mangroves than actual loss in area. Myanmar reports alarming degradation due to over-exploitation for fish, food, small timber, fuelwood, charcoal and other forest products, as well as agricultural encroachment.
^18 ITTO (1993). The economic and environment value of mangrove forests and their present state of conservation. Document PCF(XII)/14. Prepared for 12th Session, Permanent Committee on Reforestation and Forest Management, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 11-19 May 1993, by the Japan International Association for Mangroves and the International Society for Mangrove Ecosystems.
Source: FAO (1984); ITTO (1993); Document APFSOS/WP/08.
A setting for the future
Among the key challenges that are likely to shape the future with regard to forest-based services are:
· altering public and political perceptions to bring about recognition that: (a) forest values, other than those solely related to timber, can be financially realised and are important; and (b) ignoring values of ecological services of forests is likely to incur substantial downstream costs;
· securing reliable and effective inter-country co-operation for responsible management of major transboundary watersheds in order to protect water supply functions;
· developing more acceptable valuation methods for pricing externalities and for identifying beneficiaries: this will include designing innovative approaches for measuring externalities and incorporating benefits and costs of forest-provided services in both policy decisions and investment analyses;^19
^19 Costanza, R. et al. The Value Of The World's Ecosystem Services And Natural Capital. In Nature, 387:253, 15 May 1997. A recent attempt to value the ecosystem services supplied by wildlands suggested an average annual value of US$33 trillion, a sum that is double the annual Gross Global Product. Even if this estimate is substantially wide of the mark, it nonetheless indicates a huge equivalent monetary value for these difficult-to-value services.
· developing mechanisms to maintain the diversity of services from forests while continuing to derive economic benefits from them: such an approach will need to recognise the socio-cultural basis for these services, including how they relate to indigenous and local people's rights;
· mobilising investment for developing forest-provided services: the challenge is to create self-sustaining "markets" for services, by developing methods whereby beneficiaries share the costs of sustaining service functions (e.g. through taxes, charges, or voluntary contributions); and
· ensuring integrated and sustainable management of forest-provided services: that is, ensuring that continued provision of forest services is an integral component of the objectives and actions of forest resource management.
At international levels, there is urgent need for countries to agree on:
· the value of upstream conservation for river systems where upper catchment forests protect and preserve water quantity and quality for use in countries downstream;
· mechanisms for acknowledging and compensating the carbon sequestration benefits of forests, including the possibilities of trading and selling "emission reduction units;" and
· valuing and compensating the commercial applications of genetic resources, which can be used far from their native habitats.
The outlook for forest-provided services will likely range between two extremes. One scenario is for a continuing disregard for the value of forest services and subsequent widespread deforestation and forest degradation. This will result in increasing social costs such as falling agricultural productivity, environmental hazards, erosion of biological diversity, deterioration of wildlife habitats, impairment of water quality and alteration of streamflow regimes. A more positive future would be marked by enhanced awareness of the benefits and values of forest-provided services and clear mechanisms for compensating the people who provide and protect them.
Non-wood forest products^20
^20 Much information and a full analysis of NWFP issues in the region are in the working paper by Mittelman et al.. Document APFSOS/WP/28.
Types of non-wood forest products
Trends in consumption, production and trade of NWFPs
Issues and possible responses
A setting for the future
Types of non-wood forest products
Over time, people have discovered innumerable uses for non-wood forest products (NWFPs). As a consequence, millions of people living in the vicinity of forests, particularly in developing countries, have become heavily dependent on NWFPs for food, shelter, and increasingly for cash incomes. A universally agreed definition of NWFPs is yet to be adopted. For purposes of this outlook study, however, NWFPs are defined as all goods of biological origin, other than wood, that are derived from forests and associated land uses.
Across the Asia-Pacific region, NWFPs come from diverse sources, ranging from large plants (palms, grasses, herbs, shrubs, trees) and animals (insects, birds, reptiles, large animals) to micro-flora and micro-fauna. While some NWFPs are found only among the biological richness and ecological diversity of natural forests, others have been domesticated and are grown as pure crops or as mixed crops under agro-forestry systems. Thus, some NWFPs have become intensively managed agricultural and horticultural crops, while others remain grouped as "minor" products of forests, an appellation used in spite of their often high real or potential value. Table 3.1 provides a broad categorisation of NWFPs based on key end-uses.
Trends in consumption, production and trade of NWFPs
The number of NWFPs produced and traded in Asia-Pacific far surpasses those of most other regions. From the medicinal plants of Mongolia and Nepal to the butterfly farms of Papua New Guinea and bush krucker enterprises in Australia, the scope and nature of NWFPs vary considerably.
For purposes of economic analysis, NWFPs are perhaps best classified according to their level of use and marketing:
· At the subsistence level, most NWFPs are consumed immediately after harvesting, with minimal processing (e.g. fruits, wild meat) or after primary processing (e.g. edible nuts, bamboo products). At this level, NWFPs are occasionally bartered, but are more generally used directly by the families collecting them.
· At the local-use level, processing generally takes place in small, dispersed, family-owned units that are often financially weak and technologically unsophisticated. At this level, NWFPs are sometimes bartered, but more often they are sold for cash in local markets. Generally, however, these operations generate limited financial returns since local markets are usually small and local spending power is weak.
· At the commercial level, NWFPs often go through several levels of processing and pass through several transactions on their way to final use. Some products are sold to meet bulk demands (e.g. rattan, resins) and others reach specific international niches (special types of honey, aromatic chemicals).
Table 3.1: Categorisation of NWFPs by end-use
End-use
NWFP examples
Food products and additives
wild meat, edible nuts, fruits, honey, bamboo shoots, birds nests, oil seeds, mushrooms, palm sugar and starch, spices, culinary herbs, food colourants, gums, caterpillars and insects, fungi
Ornamental plants and parts of plants
wild orchids, bulbs, cycads, palms, tree ferns, succulent plants, carnivorous plants
Animals and animal products
plumes, pelts, cage birds, butterflies, lac, cochineal dye, cocoons, beeswax, snake venom
Non-wood construction materials
bamboo, rattan, grass, palm, leaves, bark fibres
Bio/organic chemicals
phytopharmaceuticals, aromatic chemicals and flavours, fragrances, agrochemicals/insecticides, bio-diesel, tans, colours, dyes
In individual countries, the importance of NWFPs is particularly impressive (Box 3.14). For example, in India, about 7.5 million people are engaged as part-time collectors of tendu (Diospyros melanoxylon) leaves, and another 3 million process the leaves into bidi cheroots. Estimated revenues from tendu leaves are US$200 million per year. In Manipur State, 90 percent of the population depends on forest products as a major source of income, including a quarter of a million women.
Particularly prominent at international levels are bamboo and rattan. The total estimated area of forest used for commercial bamboo production in Asia is just less than 11 million hectares, predominantly in the People's Republic of China, India and Myanmar. For rattan, Indonesia is the world's largest producer; the People's Republic of China is second.
A recent study^21 suggests that at least 150 NWFPs are significant in international trade. The total value of world trade in NWFPs and the contribution of individual products, however, vary considerably from year to year. During the 1990s, the annual value of NWFPs trade ranged from US$5 billion to US$11 billion. The Asia-Pacific region's share of exports is estimated to be between US$2 and US$4 billion. Most NWFPs are traded in small quantities, although for some (e.g. rattan, gum arable and edible nuts) trade has reached substantial levels.
^21 Mohammad Iqbal (1993). International trade in non-wood forest products: an overview. FO: Misc/93/11 Working Paper. FAO, Rome.
Until recently, the international markets for NWFPs were generally in decline, largely due to the development of cheaper synthetic substitutes. Prices for NWFPs correspondingly declined. Unstable supplies, inconsistent quality and unreliability in the sourcing of NWFPs also contributed to this trend. The recent resurgence of interest in natural products, however, has generated renewed interest in NWFPs in the international markets.
The future outlook for NWFPs is variable, depending on the product involved and the circumstances of utilisation. Key trends include increasing commercialisation of NWFPs (sustainable only if resource management and/or domestication accompanies the demand growth), declining importance of NWFPs for subsistence use, disintegration of traditional systems depending on NWFPS, including resource management systems, and devolution to community-based management.
Of the features that emerge about the future, two should be highlighted:
· The overall trend is toward depletion of many NWFP resources. This is due to inadequately regulated harvesting and increasing market demand for commercially popular species. These products include rattan, damar resin, gaharu trees (Aquilaria malaccensis), various barks, roots, stems and leaves used as medicines, and a large number of rare and endangered fauna.
· There is likely to be increased domestication and cultivation of selected NWFPs (e.g. rattan cultivation in Indonesia and Malaysia). This trend will apply only for products with strong demand in the marketplace. For inferior products, demand is likely to decline with growing economic prosperity. Domestication and cultivation of these products are unlikely.
Box 3.14: NON-WOOD FOREST PRODUCTS - INDIA, THAILAND AND SRI LANKA
India: Nearly 400 million people living in and around forests in India depend on NWFPs for sustenance and/or supplemental income. NWFPs contribute significantly to the incomes of about 30 percent of rural people. More than 80 percent of forest dwellers depend on NWFPs for basic necessities. Collection of NWFPs comprises the main source of wage labour for 17 percent of landless people, and 39 percent are involved in NWFP collection as a subsidiary occupation.
The annual value of direct contributions of NWFPs in India is estimated to be about US$27 billion, compared to about US$17 billion for wood products. NWFPs account for about 50 percent of total forest revenue to the Indian Government. Because India has only limited wood products exports, NWFPs are proportionately very important in that country and account for around 70 percent of forest-based export earnings (US$500 million). NWFPs provide 55 percent of total employment in the primary forest sector, with considerable multiplier effects in downstream processing and trade of some products.
The major NWFPs of India include bamboo, rattan, beedi leaf, gums and resins, oil seeds, essential oils, fibres, flosses, lac and medicinal plants. In terms of industrial capacity, annual production of bamboo is currently estimated at around 4.5 million tonnes. Around 25 percent of fibre-furnish used in India's paper industry is bamboo pulp. Another of the largest NWFP contributors, the beedi leaf (Diospyros melanoxylon), is used in cheroot manufacturing in India. Cheroots are mainly produced as a cottage industry - one that provides employment for some 10 million people and has a production valued at about US$200 million.
Thailand: About 30 to 40 percent of the Thai population rely on traditional remedies rather than modern health services. These traditional remedies include the use of more than 1,000 species of medicinal plants. In 1980, about 400 million baht (US$16 million) worth of medicinal plants were consumed domestically. Of this amount, about 126.6 million baht (US$5 million) worth were imported, but imports have declined in recent years. Medicinal plant collection is estimated to employ the equivalent of 15,000 to 20,000 full-time workers, although actual collection is normally a part-time or seasonal endeavour for most collectors. Trading and processing employ the equivalent of 30,000 to 40,000 full-time workers. An important boost to commercial utilisation of medicinal plants has come from institutional improvements: establishment of the Medicinal Plants Information Centre at Mahidol University in 1997, and greater interest by the Government Pharmaceutical Organization. Hundreds
of private companies are also licensed for drug production apart from small unlicensed home workshops.
The medical sector has problems in promoting traditional medicine because knowledge is lacking or inadequately documented, there is inadequate research, medical practitioners rely heavily on modern medicine and industrial products, and there is a shortage of medicinal plant supplies, especially those from the forest. Support from the forestry sector is needed in conserving the resource base for medicinal plants.
Sri Lanka: Medicinal plants are commonly found in natural forests, non-forest lands and herbal gardens. More than 50 percent of the plants used in Ayurveda, however, are found in the natural forests. Assessments reveal heavy dependence on these plants. In one forest area, medicinal plants collected were worth as much as Rp2,500 (US$57) per family per year.
Source: For India, adapted from C. Chandrasekharan (Personal communication, 1997); for Thailand, Document APFSOS/WP/46; for Sri Lanka, Document APFSOS/WP/16.
Current trends indicate that the natural stocks of many commercially important NWFPs may be totally or nearly totally decimated in the coming years.^22 An alternative scenario would require the emergence of viable NWFP policies and strategies that successfully incorporate elements of community-based management, niche market development, domestication and cultivation of NWFPs, and promotion of fair trade in world markets. It is likely that both trends will evolve simultaneously within any given country - for different types of products and markets. In this regard, the fate of NWFPs is very dependent on an enabling policy environment designed to promote and support favourable scenarios.
^22 A.J. Mittelman, C. K. Lai, N. Byron, G. Michon and E. Katz (1997). Non-Wood Forest Products Outlook Study For Asia And The Pacific: Towards 2010. Document APFSOS/WP/28. FAO Rome/Bangkok.
Issues and possible responses
The fundamental issues and challenges for most NWFPs are closely related to the small scale of their production, their limited significance in markets, and their lack of development in an industrial sense. These attributes tend to keep NWFPs unnoticed by national policy-makers. A number of key themes can, however, be distilled from the overarching issues outlined below. These issues and constraints will need to be addressed effectively if NWFPs are to play significant roles in Asia-Pacific forestry in the future.
Lack of focus in NWFP support programmes: A key constraint to the sustainable development of NWFPs is the tendency to treat all NWFPs as being "good" without selecting those with the best commercial prospects for development support. This tendency stems from a lack of consensus on development objectives related to NWFPs. Social objectives oriented toward helping the poor often lead to the promotion of subsistence NWFPs as if they had commercial potential. Moreover, where commercial potential does exist, there is sometimes a reluctance by governments to promote development that might further marginalise subsistence users. Separating objectives, or at least clarifying them, would help direct resources to where they can be most effective.
In most countries, NWFPs have not been screened to identify those with the most potential for mainstream development. Promotional efforts are thus dispersed over too many NWFPs, many of which have no real future in modern economies. In the future, it may be necessary to ruthlessly select for priority attention only those products with great potential (according to location and socially sensitive criteria) and focus development efforts on them. This can be done while simultaneously supporting subsistence products; efforts should reflect and complement clearly defined development objectives.
Lack of investment in research and development: The potential for research-based improvements in techniques, systems, and technologies supporting the production of NWFPs in the region is enormous. However, because most collection of NWFPs is done on a very small scale, often without clearly identified downstream marketing opportunities, there is little attraction for commercial research and development. The challenge for NWFP producers is to demonstrate sufficient long-term development potential as economies grow so as to attract funding and appropriate scientific skills.
Institutional and policy neglect: One of the major problems afflicting the NWFP sector is institutional neglect. Unlike wood-based industries, which often benefit from a host of policy, strategic and legislative support mechanisms, NWFPs are generally given minimal attention. As a consequence, NWFP issues are not appropriately addressed in plans, programmes and projects.
A number of organisations in the Asia-Pacific region are working to remedy this institutional neglect. These include the International Neem Network; International Society of Ethnobotany; International Society of Ethopharmacology; International Network on Bamboo and Rattan; Under-utilised Forest Trees Network for Asia; World Federation of Proprietary Medicine Manufacturers; International Federation of Essential Oil and Aroma Traders; Asia-Pacific Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Network; and various bee-keepers associations. Integrated conservation and development project (ICDP) approaches offer prospects for mainstreaming NWFP activities among other livelihood and prosperity initiatives. Development of local NWFP enterprises is one of the principal components of such programmes.
Small scale of industry: Most NWFPs are of primary importance at local levels and are often associated with traditional uses that are not widespread. Transactions take place between households and other small-scale units, mostly outside mainstream commercial marketing systems and channels. As a consequence these NWFPs tend to be overlooked or discounted in national-level statistics and resource planning.
Economic weakness of NWFP-dependent communities: NWFPs are usually collected by individuals with limited marketing options or negotiating power. Typically, collectors are faced with only a single buyer. Networks of local collectors and intermediaries are often bound by long-term, often debt-based, relationships. Individuals who hold collection licenses or concessions often hire casual or contract labourers, who are usually paid on piece rates. This practise encourages aggressive, often-unsustainable, harvesting. Institutions such as the Tribal Co-operative Marketing Development Federation of India Ltd. (TRIFED) are helping to redress such issues and improve the marketing of NWFPs.
One of the key social aspects of production and trade in NWFPs is the extent to which local people benefit from the development of the industry. Generally, the higher the level of processing carried out at or near the source of raw materials, the more local people benefit. NWFPs are particularly well suited for enterprise development in situations of capital scarcity. For example, capital investment requirements in rattan processing are estimated at US$1,750 per job created. By comparison, the petrochemical industry requires US$26,250 per job created.
Absence of inventory information: The absence of proper inventory information for NWFPs is a major impediment to effective planning for integrated forest management systems. Nonetheless, developing inventories of the multitude of NWFPs in the Asia-Pacific region is also a mammoth task. An initial step would be to develop a means of identifying the broad range of NWFPs produced in a management area and to determine those that can usefully be inventoried at more detailed levels.
Dominance of timber-oriented forest management: Foresters have been developing and refining silvicultural systems for managing tropical forests for over 100 years. These systems, however, have generally been designed to maximise the production of commercial timber. Silvicultural systems that promote the management of non-wood resources in forests, in combination with timber, have received much less attention. This omission has been a source of conflict in resource management, particularly between concerned user groups. The success of NWFP development in many places will depend on the ability to implement management systems which recognise and promote the production of both timber and non-timber resources.
Domestication of NWFPs: An important consideration to complement natural forest management, is the potential for NWFP production through domestication and intensive cultivation. Historically, once products achieve mainstream commercial importance, their supply from wild sources tends to be replaced by cultivated sources with a view to bringing production, quality and cost under control. Oil palm, rubber, cashew, coffee, cocoa and pepper are but a few of the many wild forest products that have been largely replaced by production from cultivated sources. Domestication and plantation cultivation can only be justified, however, if there are good long-term commercial prospects for the product.
Unsustainable and wasteful harvesting: Presently, there are numerous incentives to over-exploit many NWFPs, and generally few regulatory checks on their harvesting. Extensive extraction and inadequate or inappropriate management regulations have often caused resource depletion in the region. Many NWFPs are highly sensitive to exploitation and to disruption of ecosystems. The high species diversity of tropical forests means that unregulated harvest of parts of plants for NWFPs can disrupt bio-chemical cycles and affect the entire ecosystem. Moreover, current extraction methods are often particularly wasteful due to a lack of appropriate tools and techniques, and a lack of concern for sustaining the resource. For example, studies in Indonesia indicate that wastage in conventional harvesting of rattan is of the magnitude of 14 to 28 percent, with further wastage during transportation and storage in the vicinity of 4 to 12 percent. By using improved harvesting methods, total
wastage can be reduced to about 4 to 6 percent.
Inefficiency in processing: sophisticated downstream processing of NWFPs is rarely done in developing countries. This is partly attributable to inadequate technology, a shortage of skilled workers, weak management expertise, and inadequate investment and marketing arrangements.
Challenges from synthetics: particularly in the post-war years, synthetic products have provided increasing competition to NWFPs, with this challenge only somewhat mitigated in recent years by the rise of "green consumerism." Aggressive marketing of the "environment-friendly" attributes of NWFPs could go a long way to maintaining consumer loyalty but may succeed only in capturing niche markets rather than mainstream success in the market.
For broader success, extensive research and development will be crucial to maintain competitiveness and marketability. For example, the survival of essential oil and flavour industries is largely due to intensive research on breeding new and better oil-yielding varieties, improvements in agrotechnology and post-harvest technology, value added product development and new formulations. These measures resulted in improved competitiveness vis-a-vis synthetic substitutes.
A setting for the future
Developing a perspective on the future for NWFPs is complicated by a variety of factors. The information base for NWFPs is very weak and the products are heterogeneous; hence their aggregate outlook requires separate studies of component groups and specific products within the groups. With increasing human population and wealth, however, along with an emerging preference for natural products, an appreciable increase in industrial demand and global use and trade of selected NWFPs is likely. This demand should promote increased quality and efficiency in NWFPs operations.
More broadly, it is evident that the future of NWFPs cannot be assured on the basis of pious hopes or claims by advocates that they have vast scope and potential. Policies and actions need to be put in place to ensure the integrity and stability of non-wood forest resources as well as efficient processing and marketing. None of this can succeed if the intention is to promote all of the thousands of NWFPs simultaneously. The NWFP agenda has been fragmented for too long; consequently progress has been limited. Agriculture has succeeded by selecting a few crops and animal types that now supply most of mankind's needs. The same can be done for NWFPs without destroying the many others that would receive less specific attention but would not be neglected in conservation efforts or subsistence management.
Pursuing aggressive development of selected products carries a risk that those who depend on collection in the wild may lose their livelihoods. Therefore, ways must be found to involve them in the domestication process or alternative livelihood opportunities must be provided.
With regard to resources, management systems need to recognise that ecosystem relationships tend to be symbiotic. Therefore, development of integrated systems of management that include NWFPs is likely to enhance the health of forests. Symbiosis can also be economic in the sense that NWFPs can generate income during the prolonged periods between timber harvests in natural forests or in the early years of plantations before they are mature.
Research and technological development will be a key. Forests constitute an enormous reservoir of chemical and pharmaceutical compounds, many of which remain untapped or may have, as yet, undiscovered properties. Box 3.15 outlines several research breakthroughs in the Republic of Korea using forest-based chemicals.
Box 3.15: PRODUCTION OF CHEMICAL COMPOUNDS FROM FOREST SPECIES IN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA THROUGH THE USE OF BIOTECHNOLOGICAL TOOLS
The Korean Forestry Administration has long realised the importance of non-wood forest products and has tried to find new materials from native trees and herbs. Recently researchers successfully found several new materials for medicinal and industrial purposes, and have conducted research toward the commercial mass production of the species possessing such characteristics. Three examples are given below:
· Extraction and purification of natural preservatives: Components of tree species in the family Theaceae have long been used both in folk medicine and as vegetables for human consumption. The trees contain antimicrobial substances effective in protecting against tooth decay. Recently, it was discovered that some of the antimicrobial compounds can also be used to prolong the shelf life of foods. In experiments in which compounds from five plant species belonging to the family Theaceae were extracted and chemically purified, Shima liukiuensis showed the most promise for this latter purpose.
· Degradable plastic (PHB) production from transgenic poplars: PHB (Polyhydroxy butyrate) is a biopolymer with several physical and chemical properties similar to polypropylene. However, unlike synthetic plastic, once discarded it is readily degraded by soil micro-organisms. The production of PHB using microbial fermentation is too costly and therefore research was undertaken to use plants as an alternative way to produce precursors of PHB through photosynthesis. Attempts were made earlier to produce PHB from some herbaceous plants but poplars were recently tried because they are fast growing trees and thus might produce PHB at low cost, over relatively short periods of time. The Korean Forestry Administration used a hybrid poplar (Populus alba x P. glandulosa) for the production of PHB. The poplar clones were genetically transformed to incorporate genes involved in PHB biosynthesis, using as a vector Agrobacterium tumefaciens. It was demonstrated through standard
methodologies that these genes could be inserted into the genome, that they manifested themselves and that they were stable. The resulting tissues synthesised PHB.
· Hepatitis B vaccine production from transgenic poplars: The hepatitis B type virus (HBV) is a small, enveloped virus with a double-stranded DNA genome that causes acute and chronic hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Conventional vaccines use attenuated infectious agents that are incapable of causing disease, but which trigger an immune response in the recipient. While earlier there have been a number of such prophylactic vaccines against HBV on the market, no therapeutic vaccines have been available until recently. The new system developed in the Republic of Korea utilises a small synthetic peptide (called epitopes) which restricts the spread of the disease or cures the infected cells. As synthesis of epitopes seemed too costly, genetic transformation of plants to produce these was considered a potential low-cost alternative. A system was developed for the production of the vaccine using a transformed hybrid poplar clone (Populus alba x P. glandulosa), into which the
synthetic epitope producing gene was introduced. Through this method, poplar plants that carry and produce HBTV (hepatitis B type therapeutic vaccine) in the cell have been produced. An application has been made for the patent rights, and efforts are underway to introduce systems that would allow forest owners to apply the results of this successful research for added income from the forest.
Source: Dr Byoung II Yoo, Forestry Research Institute, the Republic of Korea, March 1998.
The continuing utilisation of NWFPs is largely bound up in the traditional dilemma of balancing operational efficiency with conservation concerns. Aside from technological improvements, this suggests the need for new arrangements of access, ownership, control and management. It also points toward the need for clear understanding of the respective roles of local people, management agencies, industry and government.
Woodfuels and energy^23
^23 hi this section, unless specifically mentioned, basic information has been derived from two sources that should be consulted for greater detail. The first is the Regional Study on Wood Energy Today and Tomorrow in Asia, prepared specifically for the outlook study by the FAO Regional Wood Energy Development Program in Asia (RWEDP) in Bangkok. The second is Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow - a Study for Asia by Lefevre et al. at the Asian Institute of Technology, also in Bangkok.
Trends in production and consumption
Demands on resources and possible responses
Status and trends
Woodfuels supply the basic energy needs for over 2 billion people in Asia and the Pacific (Box 3.16). In the 16 Regional Wood Energy Development Programme (RWEDP)^24 countries, about 18 percent of total energy needs are obtained from woodfuels, estimated to be worth approximately US$29 billion annually. Approximately three-quarters of all roundwood production in Asia and the Pacific is used as woodfuel (Figure 3.1). And although per capita use of woodfuels is declining in some countries, increasing populations mean that consumption is increasing in absolute terms. According to RWEDP studies, by 2010 woodfuel consumption is expected to be about 25 percent higher than at present.
^24 RWEDP is a Netherlands-funded, FAO-executed project. Member countries are Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, PR China, India, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Maldives, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam. Given that RWEDP membership includes all the region's most populous countries, RWEDP references practically apply to the whole region as far as developing countries are concerned.
Box 3.16: ENERGY TERMINOLOGY
Conventional energy refers to mainstream commercial energy inducting electricity from all sources and fossil fuels in gas, liquid or solid forms; woodfuels means fuelwood plus charcoal; biomass energy means woodfuels plus non-wood renewable organic fuels (such as crop residues and dung).
Figure 3.1: Share of woodfuel in total roundwood production in RWEDP countries, 1995
Box 3.17: SUMMARY OBSERVATIONS WOOD - ENERGY IN ASIA-PACIFIC
Wood energy is and will remain an important sub-sector in all RWEDP member countries but less so in the newly industrialised developing countries and definitely a minor concern in industrialised ones. The consumption of wood and other biomass fuels will increase in the foreseeable future.
Aggregated for all the RWEDP member countries, potential woodfuel supply exceeds current demand. The primary concern is not the availability of woodfuels per se, but their distribution or accessibility to people in need. Non-forest land, mostly agricultural, already is and will continue to be the main source of woodfuels, accounting in the RWEDP countries for an average of two-thirds of supplies. Where woodfuel scarcity is locally significant, other biomass fuels (also mostly from agricultural lands) are important. Salient points of the current situation follow:
· In heavily forested countries such as Malaysia and Indonesia, at national level there is much more wood than can be used as fuel given current technologies.
· In the People's Republic of China, India, Sri Lanka, Thailand and Viet Nam, aggregate national consumption is not presently limited by aggregate potential supply.
· In Bangladesh and Pakistan, as well as Nepal to some extent, present woodfuel demand is under strain, with net deficit or near deficit even in aggregate terms at national levels. Use of crop residues and other biomass may exceed that of woodfuels in some cases.
· In practically all RWEDP countries, localised woodfuel scarcities may occur in particular areas.
· Wood energy constitutes a low share in total energy use in AIEs, except for wood and biomass residues used as energy sources by industries.
· In those countries where economies are growing fast, growth of woodfuels demand is either slowing down or may soon even decline (as happened in the Republic of Korea following rapid industrialisation). The People's Republic of China is beginning to show signs of this trend. At the same time Chinese consumption of crop residues for energy purposes is increasing which suggests local shortages of fuelwood.
· Households are the biggest energy consuming sector in many countries and especially so for woodfuels.
· The contribution of fuelwood to total energy consumption may vary over a wide range but its share in household energy consumption has remained well above 50 percent in most Asia-Pacific countries. The exceptions are generally the AIEs and the NIEs.
· Non-household fuelwood consumption, such as for rural industries or for food establishments in urban areas, is significant in some countries.
Source: Adapted from RWEDP (1997) and Lefevre et al. (1997).
Both production and consumption of woodfuels occur largely in informal sectors where records are poorly kept. Consequently, available data are limited. Nevertheless, enough studies relating to woodfuel have been conducted in recent years to make a confident assessment of the important role of wood energy. Box 3.17 summarises the current wood energy scene in the region, based on observations for the RWEDP countries.
The use of biomass fuels (wood and non-wood) is prominent in most RWEDP member countries, with the share of woodfuel in total energy consumption ranging from 9 percent in Malaysia to over 80 percent in Bhutan, Cambodia and Laos (Table 3.2).
Woodfuel supply and use generate substantial employment throughout the region. In the Philippines, for example, woodfuel activities are reported to be the main source of income for about 10 percent of rural households, accounting for about 40 percent of their cash earnings, and involving many women. Rapid surveys suggest that per unit of energy, woodfuels offer between 11 and 17 times the employment generated by kerosene; per unit woodfuel employment is also higher than for petroleum gas, coal and electricity. Charcoal has particularly high labour requirements per unit of energy (Table 3.3).
Table 3.2: Consumption of energy types in RWEDP countries, 1993-1994
Total energy (petajoules)
Conventional energy (petajoules)
Woodfuels (petajoules)
Biomass energy (petajoules)
Share of woodfuels in total
Share of biomass in total
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
PR of China
India
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Maldives
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Viet Nam
Total RWEDP
RWEDP (without China)
RWEDP (without China and India)
Source: RWEDP (1997).
Table 3.3: Estimated employment by fuel type
Fuel type
Amount of fuel per terajoule
Estimated employment per terajoule energy consumed in person days^1
Kerosene^2
29 Kilolitre
LPG^2
22 Tonnes
Coal^3
43 Tonnes
Electricity^4
228 MWh
Fuelwood^5
62 Tonnes
Charcoal^5
33 Tonnes
Source: World Bank/ESMAP (1991).
Notes:
1. Where applicable, employment covers growing, extraction, production, transmission, maintenance, distribution and sales, including reading metres. It excludes employment generated outside the country for fuels that are imported in semi-finished or finished state.
2. This assumes that crude oil (for refining), kerosene and LPG are imported.
3. This varies according to capital intensity of the mine, seam thickness, energy value of the coal as well as the distance from demand centres.
4. This varies according to production method ranging from hydro to traditional oil/coal fired units and the efficiency of electricity generation, transmission and distribution.
5. This depends on the productivity of the site, efficiency of producers and distance from the market.
Trends indicate an overall increase in the consumption of woodfuels in RWEDP member countries of about 1.6 percent a year, a pace similar to overall population growth. In several countries, per capita consumption is also increasing.^25 A number of demographic, physical, social and economic factors, including population growth, disparity in household size and income, climate and topography are responsible for the continuing growth of woodfuel consumption in the region. However, the growth of conventional fuels has been so fast that woodfuels have lost share progressively and steadily in recent years (Figure 3.2).
^25 In fact, consumption per capita is very site-specific and influenced by factors like climate, household size, availability and reliability of supply of the various fuels and their potential substitutes as well as their costs, the appliances required for utilisation, and culture and tradition.
Figure 3.2: Production of woodfuel and share of woodfuels in total primary energy supply in the Asia-Pacific region
Decades of strong economic growth have increased overall energy consumption tremendously in several countries, particularly consumption of conventional energy. Because many people remain poor even in these rapidly growing economies, however, they have little choice but to continue using the cheapest fuels available - usually woodfuels or other biomass. The "transition" in energy mix has therefore involved not so much substitution of conventional fuels for woodfuels but rather a "complementation." In other words, during development, users consume more of all energy types, including biomass fuels such as wood and residues. Only after incomes pass a certain threshold does household consumption of woodfuels start to decline.
In parallel with the use of woodfuels by households is industrial woodfuel use. With innovations in combustion technologies in recent years, a new trend in energy supply is progressively emerging in favour of bio-energy development. The technology for co-generation of heat and power from biomass for modem applications has received increasing attention in many countries in the region. It has recently captured the attention of planners and policy-makers seeking to promote carbon-neutral renewable energy.
Demand for woodfuels
Households dominate woodfuel use in all RWEDP countries, with cooking as the primary end-use (the dominance of cooking as an end-use makes fuelwood issues particularly important for women). In urban areas, even in households, other end-uses may also be significant. In Nepal, cooking consumes 75 percent of all biomass energy, with agro-processing using only 5 percent. Corresponding figures for Bangladesh are about 66 percent and 17 percent. Within the household sector, income is an important determinant of relative energy end-use. In India, for example, for families with monthly incomes below Rp1,000 (US$25), nearly 80 percent of all energy consumed is used in cooking. For families with incomes above Rp6,000 (US$150), the percentage of energy used for cooking drops to only 37 percent.
If they can afford otherwise, users usually prefer to use fuels other than woodfuels or biomass. The pattern in household preferences and switching among energy types lead to a discernible "fuel ladder" (Box 3.18) that consumers seek to climb, according to their economic capacity.
As countries develop, industries become ever more significant energy users. Numerous industries in Asia, including many that are small-scale and based on traditional technologies, rely on biomass fuels for process heat and drying of products. Fuelwood, charcoal and other biomass fuels are extensively used in enterprises such as brick-making, lime production, pottery and ceramics, metal works, textile processing, tea and tobacco processing, preparation of animal feeds, hotels and restaurants, food stalls, etc. Brick-making and lime production are among the most significant users of woodfuels in the region.
Box 3.18: THE "FUEL LADDER"
The "fuel ladder" concept implies that with socio-economic development, the fuel used by a household will change. Fuel-users consider the top of the ladder more attractive - more convenient, prestigious, efficient, modern or superior in some other way. In South Asia, climbing the fuel ladder generally means changing from dung cakes to crop residues, wood, kerosene, gas, and finally electricity. In Southeast Asia charcoal tends to be very high on the ladder, perhaps even at the top. Climbing up the fuel ladder also implies climbing up a health ladder, given the present stoves and combustion technologies in use in Asia. A variety of factors determine whether or not a household is able to move up the ladder, the main ones being: household income and size, availability and costs of fuel, availability and cost of the required appliances, climate, settlement size and culture and tradition.
In the 1980s, it was believed that energy transitions away from wood and biomass were an option - this may still be true for some, but it is now realised that for the majority of Asia's poor it may not be a realistic goal during the horizon of this study. They can, at best, reach the lower rungs of the fuel ladder, which means continued heavy use of woodfuels.
Source: Adapted from RWEDP (1997).
Increasingly, a number of agricultural and wood-based industries in many rapidly industrialising Asian countries (e.g. India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand) are also adopting technologies that produce co-generated bio-energy from residues and wastes, both for in-factory consumption and for commercial sale. Overall, the industrial sector is estimated to account for 10 to 30 percent of all woodfuel use in the region.
Both household and industrial users of woodfuels are largely located in rural areas. However, in some metropolitan cities (e.g. Bangkok, Colombo, Dhaka, Jakarta, Manila and Mumbai), woodfuels contribute significantly to the energy budgets in both the household and industrial/service sectors.
In most RWEDP countries, a majority of the low-income rural households gather fuelwood "for free." The urban poor, however, have little choice but to buy woodfuel in local markets since there are limited opportunities for free gathering of fuelwood in the cities. Rural and urban users of fuelwood exhibit the following contrasts:
· Responsiveness to income level: urban users have a much higher propensity to change their energy mix. In many cases, this includes substituting away from woodfuels after achieving a certain level of income.
· Alternative energy sources: in rural areas, the major alternative energy source is biomass, although kerosene is widely used, at least for lighting. In urban areas, a wide selection of energy alternatives exists. Choices are made largely on the basis of income but also are influenced by relative prices of fuels and appliances, efficiency, convenience of use, accessibility and availability.
· Reliance on collected and purchased supplies: rural users generally collect rather than purchase woodfuels and the converse occurs in urban areas. A large part of consumption is not monetised. Specific country estimates^26 are for some 60 percent of households (in Pakistan) and 78 percent (in the Philippines) using free fuelwood. In India (1995), about 5 percent of total energy was commercialised in rural areas and over 58 percent in urban areas.^27
^26 World Bank/ESMAP studies (1991).
^27 The India case well illustrates rural/urban contrasts: in rural areas, even at high household incomes of Rp18,000 and above (about US$450 in 1997 equivalent), only 10 percent of energy is commercialised while in urban areas, over 37 percent of energy is commercialised even at incomes below Rp3,000 (about US$75 in 1997 equivalent).
· Concentration of demand:^28 in urban and peri-urban areas, concentrated demand is rarely matched by adequate local supplies. This leads to longer-distance trade for which charcoal is often more suitable or competitive in terms of transportation costs.
^28 Similar shortages can also be observed in rural areas with large concentrations of rural industries (brick and pottery makers, lime burners, sugar palm production, etc.).
These differences suggest that a variety of policy interventions may be necessary to effectively address woodfuel problems in various rural and city situations. In rural areas, local market signals are likely to be weak, at least in the household sector. In urban centres, the income profile is important.
For households, the amount of energy consumed depends on household size and income, types of energy applications being used, efficiencies and costs of devices, and accessibility to fuels. Determinants of accessibility are location, prices of fuels, and physical access to sources and the time needed to collect these fuels (particularly for freely collected wood and other biomass fuels).
The use of wood and other biomass fuels by industries and other enterprises depends on the prices and supply security of these fuels relative to conventional fuels. In Sri Lanka,^29 woodfuels have shown demand sensitivity to general economic conditions and to prices of alternative fuels. After the liberalisation of the economy in 1977, for example, the demand for energy increased substantially. In addition, the sharp increase in the price of petroleum products in the 1970s caused many industries to switch from petroleum to fuelwood. As a result, by 1992, fuelwood provided 49 percent of the country's industrial sector energy.
^29 Country Report - Sri Lanka: Document APFSOS/WP/16.
Factors that will drive continued or increased use of traded woodfuels include relatively low woodfuel prices, large populations too poor to afford conventional fuels, constraints in the supply of conventional fuels, and increased acceptance of modern wood-energy technologies. Consumption by households and traditional small-scale industries and enterprises is affected by the first three factors. Consumption in modern applications is affected by these first and last factors. In the near term, the bulk of the consumption of traded woodfuels will continue to be in households and traditional industries and enterprises.
Woodfuels supply
At the regional level, and often at national levels (but with significant exceptions), potential woodfuel supplies exceed consumption both at present and in future extrapolations to year 2010. As shown in Table 3.4, woodfuels can come from the forest, other wooded land, trees on agricultural land (and around households themselves), and from land clearing for conversion to other land use (i.e. deforestation).^30 For RWEDP countries, deforestation alone (although an unsustainable source) yields almost enough potential woodfuels^31 to meet present needs (Table 3.5). Much of the wood from land clearing, however, is generated far from woodfuel demand centres. Consequently, its use for energy is not presently feasible. The most important practical supply sources are non-forest lands. According to studies for seven RWEDP member countries, non-forest areas supply about two-thirds of all woodfuels consumed (Table 3.5). Non-wood biomass, especially crop residues, is a third important
source of collectable fuels.
^30 Typically, non-commercial sources of woodfuels are located within a 20 km radius of the end-users, and commercial sources within a 100 km radius of the market.
^32The fact that land clearing may constitute a threat to future supplies, is not of immediate importance to users. Much potential woodfuel is therefore wasted even though there may be a likelihood that supplies will be short in years to come.
Wood residues from industrial logging operations and mill processing and recycled materials from manufactured wood products may also be locally significant sources of woodfuels. Data indicate that as much as 80 percent of all woody biomass harvested in tropical forestry operations ends up as logging or processing residues. 50 percent of tree wood volume is left behind on the felling site (after sawlog extraction), and another 30 percent remains as residue after conventional wood processing (Figure 3.3).
The main factors influencing supply are agro-ecological conditions, climate, physical terrain, land use/tenure policies, local resource management practices, and infrastructure. These factors affect the availability, accessibility and affordability of woodfuels, both in absolute and relative terms. For example, in the Philippines, where wood is relatively abundant, about 86 percent of rural households use predominantly fuelwood to meet energy needs. Conversely, in the People's Republic of China, fuelwood accounts for less than 35 percent of rural household energy, with crop residues providing more than 40 percent of household consumption.
Competition for wood supplies between woodfuel users and other wood users can influence woodfuel supply availability. Non-wood biomass fuels also have other competing uses such as animal fodder, soil conditioners, or raw material for paper and pulp.
Table 3.4: Indicative sources of fuelwood used in various RWEDP member countries
Country
Year and sector
Tonnes (in million)
Forest land^1 (% of total)
Other land^2 (% of total)
Public land^3 (% of total)
Unknown(% of total)
Bangladesh^4
1981, HH and Ind.
India^5
1996, HH
Indonesia^6
1989, Urban HH
Nepal^7
1995/96, HH
Pakistan^8
1991, HH
Philippines^9
1989, HH
Sri Lanka^10
1993, HH and Ind.
Thailand^11
1992, Rural HH
HH = Households
Ind. = Industry
^1 Forest land includes forest plantations as well.
^2 Other land is mainly own land, neighbours'land, common land.
^3 Public land may include forest.
^4 Government of Bangladesh (1987).
^5 Ministry of Environment & Forests, 1996.
^6 World Bank/ESMAP (1990).
^7 WECS(1997).
^8 World Bank/ESMAP and UNDP (1991).
^9 World Bank/ESMAP (1991).
^10 Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Forestry (1995).
^11 RFD(1993).
Source: RWEDP (1997), Table 4.2.
In the past, forests were assumed to be the main, sometimes the sole, source of woodfuels, to the point where non-forest trees were often ignored in supply assessments. This lack of recognition of non-forest wood was a key reason for overstating the potential severity of fuelwood shortages and for spawning the so-called "gap-theory" which suggested that fuelwood supplies were inadequate to meet demand. Subsequent studies by RWEDP and others have shown this theory to be unfounded since about two-thirds of woodfuels originate from trees outside forests. In the Philippines, for example, a household energy survey revealed 85 percent of fuelwood coming from trees outside forests. The importance of non-forest trees in supplying fuelwood is amply demonstrated in some countries and territories (e.g. Bangladesh, Pakistan, Java, Sri Lanka, and many parts of India, Thailand and the People's Republic of China) that have less than 10 percent forest cover but still consume large volumes
of locally produced fuelwood (Box 3.19).
Table 3.5: National fuelwood supply (potential/demand balances for selected countries (in kilotons [Kt]), 1994
RWEDP countries
Malaysia
Indonesia
The People's Republic of China
Thailand
India
Bangladesh
Pakistan
Kt
Index*
Kt
Index
Kt
Index
Kt
Index
Kt
Index
Kt
Index
Kt
Index
Kt
Index
CONSUMPTION
POTENTIAL SUPPLY, BY SOURCE:
Wood:
Forest
Agricultural land
Other wooded land
From deforestation
Sub-total woodfuel
Wood only: balance
Crop processing residues (50%):
Total supply
(Wood + available crop residues)
OVERALL BALANCE
(Total supply - consumption)
* Index, where 1994 consumption = 100.
Source: Adapted from RWEDP, Section 8.1 tables (1997).
Figure 3.3: From standing tree to kiln-dried sawnwood
Source: RWEDP, Field Document No. 50, Figure 4 (1997).
Box 3.19: FUELWOOD SOURCES IN INDIA
In recent times India has banned commercial fuelwood collection from natural forests. Even without this formal ban, however, surveys show that, between 1978-1979 and 1992-1993, the proportion of rural households collecting fuelwood from forests has halved from 35 percent to 17 percent, while those collecting fuelwood from their own farms increased to almost half. Stocks of non-industrial tree plantations and social/community and agroforestry development programmes have also been boosted through massive participatory tree planting in recent decades. Increasingly, however, trees (especially plantations) originally planted to provide woodfuels are being utilised as industrial wood. Nonetheless, non-forest sources are increasingly dominating the supply of woodfuels.
Potential demand and supply balance of woodfuels
Potential supply/demand balances for woodfuels are presented in Table 3.5 for countries selected to represent a range of forest endowment levels. The balances are necessarily crude, as they are based on aggregated national data that sometimes mask local shortages. Nonetheless, several salient points emerge:
· in any given country, woodfuels can come from a range of sources, from forest and non-forest areas as well as from inventoried and non-inventoried sources;
· wood "salvaged" from land-clearing (i.e. deforestation) can be enough to cover all present fuelwood needs in some countries, particularly in highly forested countries;
· crop residues, even at a 50 percent recovery rate, are an important potential fuel source; and
· all countries except Pakistan appear to have adequate potential supplies of biomass fuels; distribution and accessibility are the limiting factors.
Selected policy challenges
The main policy challenge for wood-energy development in Asia is to ensure continuous improvement in the technical viability, economic efficiency and environmental sustainability of woodfuel use. The broad policy areas that need to be addressed include:
· improving the information base for wood energy
· improving the functioning of woodfuel markets
· developing wood-energy strategies
· strengthening wood-energy planning capabilities
Improving the information base for wood energy: Basing policies on highly aggregated data and speculation about the driving forces behind the demand and supply of woodfuels and the responses to fuelwood shortages is a prescription for failure. In most cases, the current level of information does not allow for accurate assessment of the economic benefits and costs of various fuelwood policy options. Clearly, the dearth of quality information in nearly all aspects of the household energy front must be addressed if greater woodfuel policy success is to be achieved.
Improving the functioning of woodfuel markets: Past fuelwood policies have all too often focused on symptoms rather than the underlying causes. Market and policy failures often produce situations in which benefits are disassociated from costs, prices from scarcity, rights from responsibilities and actions from consequences. For example, open-access forests encourage wood producers to shift the costs of over-exploitation to future generations. Similarly, policies that distort prices act as disincentives to improved efficiency and conservation, and result in non-optimal fuel mixes. The key market and policy failures are inappropriate property rights, incorrectly priced resources, policy-induced price distortions in capital, labour and commodity markets and over-valued currencies.
Developing wood-energy strategies: Fuelwood policies need to be co-ordinated through fuelwood sector strategies that effectively address specific local fuelwood problems and opportunities. Such strategies will determine the appropriate technical packages for managing existing fuelwood supplies, enhancing supplies through increased production, managing demand through conservation initiatives, guiding fuel-switching policies, and improving the efficiency of fuelwood use. They will also provide a structure for prioritising efforts and co-ordinating the activities of planning agencies and local communities.
Strengthening wood-energy planning capabilities: Clear woodfuel policies and strategies are of limited usefulness if local institutions lack the capacity to implement them. This is clearly the case in many areas, in part reflecting the inherently cross-sectoral nature of fuelwood issues. This problem of co-ordination is exacerbated by a lack of effective channels for the involvement of local people in planning and implementing wood-energy programmes.
Wood-energy development faces several other challenges, as outlined below:
Social challenges are primarily related to the low socio-economic status of the majority of traditional woodfuels users. Since woodfuel users are largely outside formal markets, they attract little attention from policy-makers and investors. Furthermore, few traditional woodfuel users own land that can be allocated for woodfuel production. Chronic hunger for land for agriculture tends to further marginalise users from fuel supplies. Thus opportunities to increase woodfuel supplies are often limited to community and public wastelands, which are frequently saddled with numerous competing interests.
Technological challenges are primarily associated with making improved combustion and conversion systems (e.g. briquettes, gasification, pyrolysis, co-generation, etc.) more affordable and accessible. Research and development in the areas of biomass fuel production and use have not received attention commensurate with their application in the region although progress has been made with regard to improved (fuel-saving) stoves, gasification and co-generation.
Institutional challenges relate to non-existent or ambiguous government policies for bio-energy development and undefined roles for the private sector. Information flows on bio-energy development are inadequate because institutional arrangements are weak at country, regional and global levels. There are no dedicated systems for the collection and analysis of wood-energy data. Extension and support services, and incentive/credit facilities for wood and non-wood energy development are weak or non-existent in most countries.
Legislative and regulatory challenges stem from the fact that existing policies and legislation in forestry, agriculture and energy are often not conducive for developing wood energy. Constraints on land and tree tenure land still prevail in addition to many restrictions on production, flow and utilisation of wood and woodfuel from non-forest sources. Many country policies discourage wide-scale application of woodfuels in industries, under misperceptions that it will lead to deforestation and environmental pollution.
A setting for the future
Technological advances (such as fuel preparation, co-generation, combustion and gasification) have allowed woodfuels to become a modem and accepted fuel for industry and power generation in many industrialised countries. Particularly notable is the indirect use of wood energy in recovery of waste pulping liquors in the pulp industry. However, the applications are still limited in many countries of Asia where further extension effort may be required. There is a predominant perception throughout the Asia-Pacific region that wood is only a subsistence fuel that will eventually be phased out. This expectation is unlikely to materialise within the horizon of this outlook study and long beyond it.
Rural people have been the main users of woodfuel in the past and they will remain so in the future. Irrespective of national energy policies, however, many urban poor will also continue to depend heavily on woodfuels, although there will likely be a greater shift to charcoal use compared with present consumption patterns. With ongoing trends toward strengthening market mechanisms and widening gaps in income distribution, an increasing number of traditional woodfuel consumers (both households and industries) are likely to be further marginalised. Therefore, enhancement of woodfuel supplies in rural areas where fuelwood is not traded, but where people's reliance on it is heavy, is an issue that may require attention by national governments.
The findings of this study do not support the widely held assumption that increases in conventional energy consumption are accompanied by decreases in wood-energy consumption. On the contrary, as economies grow, there is a tendency for all energy types to be consumed in greater quantities, at least initially. Planning should take this into account.
Co-generation technologies are generally mature and ready for application by industries in the region. Considerable promotional effort is needed, however, to encourage their broad acceptance. For more advanced technologies (e.g. wood-based liquid fuels), there is still room for technological development, followed by assessment of their competitiveness with other fuels. If major breakthroughs can be made, they could change the future scenario in favour of wood but this is unlikely within the outlook period to 2010. Technological breakthroughs alone, however, are insufficient - there will also be a need for substantial policy and institutional shifts which would make these new fuels competitive with those that are now in the industrial mainstream.
Finally, in all aspects of wood-energy development, a sustained effort is needed to bring about attitudinal changes that recognise the renewable and carbon-neutral characteristics of woodfuels and place woodfuels on equal footing with conventional fuels. This will be a major task considering the enormous advantages of conventional fuels with regard to convenience, proven and known technologies, modest costs per unit of energy, and well-functioning supply lines.
Industrial wood products^32
^32 Throughout Section 3.5, data for Taiwan Province of China are incorporated in data for China. Consequently, information for Taiwan Province of China is incorporated in the North Asia sub-region, and not in the Newly Industrialising Economies group.
One of the defining trends in world forestry during the past 30 years has been the enormous growth in production and consumption of industrial wood products in the Asia-Pacific region. Particularly impressive has been the speed with which the region has emerged as a dominant consumer of wood products. In 1970, Asia and the Pacific was the third-largest regional consumer of wood-based panels and paper and paperboard (behind North America and Europe, respectively) and the fourth-largest consumer of sawn timber (behind the USSR, North America and Europe). Asia-Pacific consumption of wood products was roughly 70 percent that of North America and 80 percent that of the USSR and Europe. For paper products, the Asia-Pacific region's consumption was 50 percent that of Europe and only 38 percent that of North America.
During the past 25 years the Asia-Pacific region has increased dramatically in importance as a consumer of forest products. The region now surpasses Europe in the consumption of all major wood products, and trails only North America in the consumption of sawn timber and paper and paperboard. 1995, Asia-Pacific's consumption of all wood products was 72 percent of that of North America, while for paper and paper products the proportion had more than doubled to 82 percent.
Trends in production and consumption
The Asia-Pacific industrial forestry sector has expanded considerably in the past two decades, with marked increases in production, consumption and trade in all forest products. This trend is reflected by the fact that production and consumption of industrial roundwood has increased 51 percent and 54 percent, respectively, during the past 25 years. The increase in total wood consumption in the region accounts for half of the global increase in wood consumption over the past two and half decades.
It is apparent that the overall increase in the production of wood products has been demand-driven, with the key influences being increasing population and increasing wealth. Between 1980 and 1995, population in the Asia-Pacific region increased 29 percent. Wealth in the region, measured by real per capita GNP, increased 40 percent during the same period, although growth was not evenly distributed across the region.
Consumption of a number of forest products, notably wood-based panels, fibre-furnish and paper and paperboard, has outpaced both economic and population growth (Figure 3.4). Notably, however, total consumption of industrial roundwood grew slower than per capita GDP or population.
Three key underlying trends are important to note:
· Relative stagnation of sawn timber consumption, especially in comparison to panel products: There are several possible reasons behind this decline. The first reason is the increased substitution of wood-based panels for traditional sawn timber applications (e.g. the use of veneered fibreboard in furniture and joinery). The second reason is that the rapidly developing countries of Southeast Asia appear to have different building preferences than those which drove high consumption rates in more developed countries (e.g. a dominance of concrete apartments over wooden houses). Finally, the increasing scarcity of large diameter logs suitable for cost-competitive sawing may be encouraging a shift toward engineered wood products and other non-wood alternatives.
· Improved roundwood utilisation'. This trend is evident when changes in the consumption of industrial roundwood are compared with the growth in the production of downstream wood products. Even allowing for increased imports into the region, roundwood is clearly being used more efficiently. This is due to higher mill conversion efficiencies, better utilisation of wood residues, increased production of reconstituted wood panels, and increased use of recycled fibre to supplement virgin fibre in paper manufacturing.
· Growth of wood products consumption has been markedly greater in developing countries than in developed countries: The AIEs have increased consumption of all products at a slower rate than all other groups of countries (with the exception of the Pacific Islands' consumption of fibre-furnish and paper and paperboard, which was slower than that of the AIEs). Consumption of industrial roundwood and sawn timber in the AIEs actually declined between 1980 and 1995, due to consumption reductions in Japan.
Figure 3.4: Changes in consumption of wood products in Asia-Pacific, 1980-1995
Sources: FAO Forest Products Yearbook; FRA 1990; FAO Provisional Outlook for Global Forest Products to 2010 (1997).
Apparent per capita consumption is summarised in Table 3.6. The data confirm the marked growth in consumption of panel products, fibre-furnish and paper, but relatively stagnant or declining per capita consumption of industrial roundwood and sawn timber.
Per capita consumption of forest products in AIEs is more than twice that in NIEs. Even greater disparity exists between AIEs and countries in other groups. However, the rate of growth in consumption by the AIEs, particularly for solid wood products, is markedly less than in other countries, especially in NIEs and the North Asia countries (Box 3.20). The gap between industrialised and developing countries is therefore declining and is likely to continue to decline. While wood scarcity and traditional patterns of wood use will constrain most developing countries from achieving consumption rates approaching those of the AIEs within the foreseeable future, AIE consumption rates provide an indication of the potential overall forest products demand in Asia and the Pacific.
Box 3.20: CASE STUDY OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA - INDUSTRIALISATION AND WOOD PRODUCTS CONSUMPTION
Rapid industrialisation and economic growth has been a key trend in several Asia-Pacific countries over the past decade. The Republic of Korea has been at the forefront of this development. Korea therefore provides a good indication of likely developments in other rapidly developing countries, particularly countries such as Thailand and the Philippines, which are similarly dependent on wood imports.
Consumption patterns for solid wood products in the Republic of Korea
The Republic of Korea's per capita GNP has increased by an average of 11 percent annually since 1980. A measure of changing preferences and tastes as the country has become increasingly developed is illustrated by changing consumption patterns for wood products. Only in the consumption of more processed forest products, such as wood-based panels, pulp, paper and paperboard, has growth matched overall economic growth. Industrial roundwood consumption increased by only 50 percent in the period 1980-1994, while sawn timber consumption increased by 60 percent.
Korean consumption of industrial wood has shifted markedly toward coniferous logs over the past decade. Consumption of coniferous logs has doubled, while consumption of hardwood logs has declined by 37 percent. However, consumption of non-coniferous sawn timber has remained largely static as a result of steady substitution of Korean production by sawn timber imports from Southeast Asia. Korean plywood production has similarly declined, offset by an increase in plywood imports. It is notable that the marked growth the consumption of coniferous logs has not been matched by consumption growth in sawn timber. Rather, in keeping with global trends in economic development, Korea's focus has moved toward production of capital-intensive paper and paperboard, which has increased threefold in the past decade.
Graph Source: FAO Forest Products Yearbook, Adaptation, B. I. Yoo (1997). Document APFSOS/WP/06.
Table 3.6: Apparent consumption of wood products (per thousand capita)
Industrial roundwood (m^3)
Sawn timber (m^3)
Panel products (m^3)
Fibre-furnish (MT)
Paper and paperboard (MT)
AIEs
South Asia
Southeast Asia
NIEs
North Asia
Oceania
TOTAL
Source: FAOSTAT; FRA 1990; 1996 Provisional Forest Products Outlook.
Table 3.7 presents overall trends in the production and consumption of major wood products in the region from 1970 to 1995. The data suggest extensive gains in processing efficiency have been achieved throughout the region. Comparing industrial roundwood consumption in each sub-region with production of processed products shows that, in general, more products are now being produced with less raw material (i.e. growth in processed product output has surpassed growth in roundwood consumed). Technology improvements apparently have filtered throughout the region. Nonetheless, an important countervailing trend is toward less-efficient processing carried out in less-developed countries. For example, production of sawn timber in the AIEs declined by 35 percent (largely as a result of declining Japanese production) between 1970 and 1995, while production increased substantially in several less-developed countries, presumably using less efficient technology.
Historically, a small number of countries have dominated the production of wood products in Asia and the Pacific. Raw material supplies have generally been secured from a small number of forest-rich countries, although the list of suppliers has shifted over the years. Processing has similarly been concentrated, although production of certain products tends to be concentrated in developed countries while others are produced primarily by developing countries. For example, paper and paperboard production is mainly carried out in highly developed, capital-rich countries, while sawn timber is generally produced in less developed countries with low labour costs. In 1995, the five largest producer countries for each commodity accounted for:
· 78 percent of industrial roundwood production in the region;
· 83 percent of sawnwood production in the region;
· 87 percent of wood-based panels production in the region;
· 91 percent of total fibre-furnish production in the region; and
· 82 percent of paper and paperboard production in the region.
Industrial roundwood
Industrial roundwood production is highest in North Asia (particularly the People's Republic of China, which produces nearly a third of all industrial roundwood in the region), Southeast Asia (predominantly Indonesia and Malaysia), and the AIEs. A key trend not readily apparent from Table 3.7 is the major increase in roundwood production in Oceania, particularly increased softwood harvests in New Zealand. Most of this increase is being exported to North Asian markets where considerable substitution of softwood logs for hardwood logs (previously imported mostly from Southeast Asia) has occurred.
Consumption of industrial roundwood is greatest in North Asia, the AIEs, and Southeast Asia. Apparent consumption of industrial roundwood in Southeast Asia has increased 15 percent since 1987, mainly as a result of Malaysian and Indonesian logs being processed in-country rather than exported in raw form.
Table 3.7: Trends in production and consumption of wood products in Asia-Pacific
PRODUCTION
Fuelwood and charcoal (1,000m^3)
Industrial roundwood (1,000m^3)
Sawnwood (1,000m^3)
AIEs
NIEs
South Asia
Southeast Asia
North Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
PRODUCTION
Wood-based panels (1,000m^3)
Total fibre-furnish (1,000MT)
Paper and paperboard (1,000MT)
AIEs
NIEs
South Asia
Southeast Asia
North Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
CONSUMPTION
Fuelwood and charcoal (1,000m^3)
Industrial roundwood (1,000m^3)
Sawnwood (1,000m^3)
AIEs
NIEs
South Asia
Southeast Asia
North Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
CONSUMPTION
Wood-based panels (1,000m^3)
Total fibre-furnish (1,000MT)
Paper and paperboard (1,000MT)
AIEs
NIEs
South Asia
Southeast Asia
North Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
Source: FAOSTAT.
Sawnwood
Total production of sawnwood in the region has declined about 6 percent since 1987, while consumption has increased slightly. The People's Republic of China, Japan and India remain the largest producers. Production has declined in the AIEs (though only in Japan), NIEs, North Asia and Southeast Asia since 1987, while consumption in the NIEs and Southeast Asia has increased. Production and consumption in South Asia and the Pacific Islands have remained roughly in balance. The net effect is a deficit of about 13 million cubic metres of sawntimber region-wide. It is quite possible, however, that, rather than major increases in sawn timber being used for domestic end-uses, it is largely being remanufactured into more processed products like joinery, mouldings, and tongue-and-groove sawnwood, which are then exported. In some instances, where additional processing is carried out merely to avoid regulatory curbs, export restrictions may well be promoting inefficiencies.
Box 3.21: CASE STUDY - DEVELOPMENT OF THE PLYWOOD INDUSTRY IN INDONESIA
One of the most interesting policy initiatives in the Asia-Pacific forestry sector has been the push to develop the Indonesian plywood industry. It provides a classical example of an interventionist approach to developing a wood-processing industry, thereby enabling a developing country to capture employment and export values through domestic processing;
In 1973, Indonesia produced only 19,000 cubic metres of plywood from two mills. While the industry grew steadily throughout the 1970s it was not until 1980, when the government implemented a regulation phasing out log exports and instructing forest concession holders to build processing facilities, that the country began actively targeting export markets for plywood. At the same time, the government recognised that a rapid expansion in plywood production could easily see importers pitting Indonesian exporters against one another to depress prices. Consequently, export licences, export quotas and a Joint Marketing Board were established to enable greater leverage and regulation in establishing prices. Up until 1990, special export incentives were also paid to exporters to encourage the development of new markets. The Indonesian approach in developing the plywood industry aligns with the protectionist side of the policy coin. It argues that industries require critical mass to
attract infrastructure and to achieve product acceptance before they can compete in international markets. In the Indonesian case, initial government support enabled the infant plywood industry to achieve a dominant position in global plywood markets. The flip side of the coin argues that protectionism equates with inefficiency. A protected industry is effectively guaranteed profitability by imposing costs on other sectors of the economy. For example, a log-export ban reduces the selling opportunities of forest owners, thereby reducing forest profitability and the incentives for forest management and reafforestation. Furthermore, it encourages the establishment of less efficient mills that are uncompetitive on a level global playing field. Both sides of the policy debate can draw ammunition from the Indonesian example.
In 1995, Indonesia produced 9.5 million cubic metres of plywood, of which more than 8 million cubic metres were exported at a value of US$3.8 billion. The vast majority of Indonesia's wood harvest is now processed onshore. Log exports have declined from 20 million cubic metres in 1978, to a half-million cubic metres in 1994. Conversely, Indonesia has persisted with a log export ban but no known assessment has been made to show whether this suggests that Indonesian processors are currently still unable to compete with complete effectiveness against offshore processing facilities. It may well be that this is the case and, therefore, Indonesia's forests are not realising their true economic worth. Current reform agreements with the IMF may lead to liberalisation of markets and should lead to log prices that better reflect international levels. The Indonesian industry can retain profitability in this new environment by ensuring that it is, or becomes, at least as efficient as
the competition.
Panels
Growth in the consumption and production of panel products has been the most spectacular trend in the Asia-Pacific region over the past decade. North Asia, Southeast Asia and the AIEs dominate production, with the People's Republic of China, Indonesia (Box 3.21) and Japan being the largest individual producers. Rapid growth in Chinese production of plywood accounts for most of the increased production (and consumption) in North Asia since 1990, although caution is needed in interpreting the data for the People's Republic of China (Box 3.22). During the same period, Japanese production declined significantly, replaced largely by imports of plywood from Indonesia. Similarly, production declined in the Republic of Korea, although imports (primarily from Indonesia) allowed the country to increase its consumption of wood-based panels nearly threefold between 1991 and 1995.
Box 3.22: THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND REGIONAL ESTIMATES OF PANEL PRODUCTION
No one disputes that panel production has increased dramatically in Asia and the Pacific over the past 25 years. Future projections of regional production must be made with utmost caution, however, because of the great sensitivity of the data from the People's Republic of China. Because Chinese panel production is so large, misinterpretation of the statistics from China can be very misleading.
Statistics from China account for nearly all of the recently reported panel production increases in the region. However, the apparent rapid expansion of production is more a reflection of changes in reporting than actual production increases. Previously, panel production outside the state-owned enterprises in China was largely unreported in official statistics. In recent years, however, statistics on this outside production have been brought into the system. By suddenly entering into official statistics (particularly between 1994 and 1995), this production can lead to misinterpretation, suggesting much more rapid production increases than is actually occurring. Extrapolating this one-off statistical anomaly could lead to serious overestimation of future production growth.
Panel type
Production (1,000m^3)
Change 1994-1995
Plywood
Particleboard
Medium-density fibreboard
Hardboard
Total
Source: Lu Wenming: Document APFSOS/WP/38(b). * = Change 1995-1994 as a percentage of 1994 production.
The recorded increase from 1994 to 1995 for plywood alone was nearly three-fold. For particleboard, the recorded increase was 250 percent. For all panels combined, the reported 1995 production was more than double that of 1994. It is clear that 1995 must be treated as a new baseline year for production statistics for China. Simple trend extrapolations cannot be used until such time as a new series of production statistics has emerged from the new base. In the meantime, more complex analyses will be required to draw conclusions about Chinese production developments.
Source: Data from Lu Wenming (1997). Study on China's wood based panel market -outlook for the years 2000-2010: Document APFSOS/WP/38(b). FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
Southeast Asia consumes only about a quarter of its own wood-based panel output. The bulk of the remainder is exported to North Asia and Japan (Table 3.8). Indonesian is the dominant Southeast Asian producer, although Malaysia has also developed a large plywood and veneer sector.
Region-wide, the plywood industry is no longer expanding. This reflects the diminishing supply of large hardwood peeler logs and the fact that medium-density fibreboard (MDF) and oriented-strandboard (OSB) are replacing plywood for many uses. In the future, OSB, which has captured a significant proportion of the market share previously held by plywood in North America, can be expected to become more important in Asia and the Pacific as well.
In India and the People's Republic of China, non-wood raw materials are significant inputs into panel manufacturing. Both countries make woven bamboo mat board, which substitutes for plywood in many applications. In India, more than 8 percent of all particleboard is now made from non-wood raw materials, primarily bagasse. Even more interesting, for new particleboard manufacturing capacity under construction, more than 65 percent will use bagasse; another 14 percent will use rice straw. Only 14 percent of new capacity will depend on wood as a raw material. Similarly, for fibreboard, for new capacity under construction, cotton stalks will be the raw material input for 24 percent, with straw supplying another 14 percent.
Table 3.8: Production and trade in wood-based panels relative to apparent consumption for major Asia-Pacific importers and exporters, 1995
Production
Imports
Exports
Apparent net consumption (ANC)
1,000m^3
%ANC
1,000m^3
%ANC
1,000m^3
%ANC
1,000m^3
%ANC
The People's Republic of China
- Hong Kong SAR, China
Japan
Republic of Korea
Australia
Philippines
Singapore
IMPORTERS TOTAL
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
New Zealand
EXPORTERS TOTAL
Source: M.J. Lyons; Adapted from Document APFSOS/WP/40(a), Table A.3. The original table has been re-arranged so that all cases of greater imports than exports in 1995 appear as "importers" even if in other years their position could have been reversed.
Fibre-furnish
North Asia and the AIEs dominate both production and consumption of fibre-furnish in the region, with the People's Republic of China and Japan together accounting for 68 percent of the Asia-Pacific's total furnish production. Significant growth in both production and consumption of fibre-furnish is evident, however, in all regions. An extremely interesting feature of fibre-furnish production in the Asia-Pacific region, relative to the rest of the world, is the comparative importance of non-wood fibre (including recycled paper) in paper-making. Wood pulp accounts for only 34 percent of total fibre-furnish used in Asia and the Pacific (in all other regions of the world, wood pulp comprises more than 55 percent of fibre-furnish). Asia and the Pacific (primarily the People's Republic of China and India) dominates world production of non-wood fibre pulps from straw, bamboo, bagasse, etc. (Box 3.23). Recycled fibre is also important in Asia and the Pacific, contributing 39 percent
of total fibre-furnish used in the region.
Paper and paperboard
The rapid economic expansion in the Asia-Pacific region has been accompanied by major expansions in paper and paperboard production and consumption. All of the sub-regions have installed significant new productive capacity in the past decade, resulting in an increase in the production of paper and paperboard of 83 percent since 1987. The most rapid expansion has occurred in North Asia and Southeast Asia, which increased production by 230 percent and 400 percent, respectively. As with fibre-furnish production, however, North Asia and the AIEs dominate total production and consumption of paper and paperboard products. This is largely a reflection of China's enormous population and the high levels of economic development in Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Box 3.23: NON-WOOD FIBRE CONTRIBUTION AND POTENTIAL IN THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND INDIA
In 1995, the People's Republic of China and India together accounted for about 11 percent of the world's output of fibre-furnish (a combination of wood pulp, non-wood fibre and recovered wastepaper used in making paper and paperboard). Their share of consumption was a little higher at about 13 percent. Although their current significance is modest, as their economies liberalise and expand, they have the potential to be giant consumers of paper and paperboard. Both China and India have only limited forest and wood resources; thus, they have responded by aggressively developing paper industries that use non-wood fibres. In 1995, the two countries jointly accounted for about 90 percent of world production and consumption of such fibre, with China alone accounting for some 85 percent. While at the global level, non-wood pulp accounts for only 7 percent of fibre-furnish, in China and India it represents nearly half. The most common fibre used comes from straw, which is so
abundant that if it became mainstreamed, raw material supply would rarely be a constraint.
The People's Republic of China: In 1995, China consumed about 35.2 million tonnes of fibre-furnish for paper and paperboard. Rice and wheat straw are the main non-wood fibre resources used (about 45 to 50 percent of total pulp). Recovered wastepaper provides another 40 percent of needs, while the share of wood pulp is around 10-13 percent.
It is estimated that in 1994 about 386 million tonnes of agricultural residues were produced, along with 22.3 million tonnes of agricultural processing residues. Assuming a fibre content of about 35 to 55 percent, even a low estimate would mean that nearly 150 million tonnes of residue fibre pulp could potentially be available. To put this volume in perspective, total pulp production in China in 1995 was only about 21 million tonnes.
Current production methods using straw generally result in low-quality paper. At the same time, the small mills that dominate non-wood pulp manufacturing cause serious pollution. The Chinese government has closed more than 4,000 such mills with an annual capacity of less than 5,000 tonnes. Others are being combined to create enterprises large enough to warrant investment in equipment for wastewater treatment. With a view toward the future, China is supporting research on treatment of wastewater from straw-based paper production and improving the quality of paper made from straw.
India: In the 1970s and 1980s, wood and bamboo constituted the chief raw material for paper and board manufacture. As these materials became scarce, the government imported second-hand machines to process agro-residues and imposed licensing and tariff regimes favourable to non-wood fibre resources. The raw material utilisation profile thus changed significantly. Previously non-wood fibre accounted for only 5 percent of output, but by 1995 it had risen to 36 percent. Simultaneously, the use of wastepaper rose from near zero to 26 percent. In another decade, the ratio of non-wood fibre is expected to reach nearly half while the share from wood and bamboo is expected to decline to about 20 percent.
Wheat straw is the most abundant raw material. The estimated production in 1995/1996 was 70 million tonnes. Even allowing for about 50 percent to be used by households for other purposes, surplus straw is plentiful. However, supplies are scattered and transport is costly. Bagasse, because it yields high-quality pulp and is concentrated at sugar mills, is highly attractive for papermaking. One Indian bagasse paper mill is paying 8 sugar mills within a radius of 100 kilometres to return to coal-fired boilers in return making their bagasse available for papermaking. Such initiatives are likely to become more common in the future as paper mills work to secure reliable sources of quality raw material.
Sources: (a) Ganapathy, P.M. (1997): Sources of non-wood fibre for paper, board and panels production: status, trends and prospects for India: Document APFSOS/WP/10. FAO, Rome/Bangkok, (b) Zhaohua, Zhu et al. (1997). Status, trends and prospects for non-wood and recycled fibre in China: Document APFSOS/WP/35, FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
Recovered paper has become an important product in its own right and has obvious potential for reducing pressure on forests. Table 3.9 charts the evolution of the recovered paper industry in Asia-Pacific during the past 25 years. A notable feature is the enormous growth in utilisation of recovered paper in North Asia and the AIEs, largely as a result of a concerted effort in Japan to develop its paper-recycling industry. Paper recovery and utilisation in Japan now exceeds 50 percent, which may be close to maximum practical capacity. Recycling recovered paper is optimal where collection and transportation costs are kept to a minimum. Recovery for recycling is, consequently, most efficient in densely populated areas where paper can be re-used by mills near where it is collected. This suggests significant potential for many of the countries in the Asia-Pacific region to markedly expand paper-recycling activities. In poorer communities, however, where paper is already a valuable
commodity, it is already recovered (though not captured in statistics) and reused for a number of different purposes. Consequently, much of it may be unavailable for recycling in paper mills.
Table 3.9: Recent trends in the production and consumption of recovered paper
Production (1,000 MT)
Apparent consumption (1,000 MT)
AIEs
NIEs
South Asia
Southeast Asia
North Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
Source: FAO Forest Products Yearbook.
Demands on resources and possible responses
The demands for industrial wood in Asia and the Pacific, combined with the demands for forest services, woodfuels, and non-wood forest products, are placing severe pressures on the region's forests. The South Asian countries (with the exception of Bhutan), Thailand, the Philippines, Viet Nam, the People's Republic of China, and many of the Pacific Island countries face serious difficulties in meeting their demands for industrial wood, and most have suffered significant deforestation in the past 20 years (Box 3.24). Even several of the major wood producers, such as Indonesia and Malaysia, are reducing harvests of industrial wood to more sustainable levels. As a consequence, considerable pressures are being made to utilise remaining resources more efficiently and to develop alternative sources of industrial wood and fibre.
As wood supplies have become more constrained in the region, increased intention has focused on a number of smaller countries with forest resources that are either relatively intact, or are subject to fewer regulatory constraints. Myanmar, Laos, Cambodia, Viet Nam, Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands have all markedly increased harvesting in the past two decades. For example, Papua New Guinea is now the world's second largest exporter of tropical logs. Nonetheless, of these producers, only Myanmar and Papua New Guinea have extensive forest estates, and the potential to boost supplies over the long run. The other countries can make large contributions only at the expense of significant deforestation and degradation.
A further, and potentially more significant response to shortfalls in industrial wood supplies has been the establishment of significant plantation forests. Of immediate significance are the radiata pine forests of New Zealand and Australia. Many of these forests are reaching maturity, allowing these two countries to increase their harvests. In the future, plantation-grown wood from countries such as the People's Republic of China, Viet Nam, Indonesia and Thailand is likely to significantly supplement natural forest production.
Production of rubberwood, mainly from Malaysia and Thailand, expanded significantly throughout the 1980s, and offers good prospects in the future in Indonesia and Viet Nam as well. Oil palm residues also appear to have enormous potential as a fibre source, especially in Malaysia.
Box 3.24: DECLINE OF FOREST RESOURCES - THE CASE OF THE PHILIPPINES
The experience of the Philippines as a major supplier of hardwood logs in the 1960s and 1970s provides a poignant lesson for other countries, such as Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Viet Nam, Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands.
The Philippines was effectively the first Asia-Pacific country in the post-World War II era to extensively liquidate its forest wealth. Anecdotal evidence suggests that, in its virgin state, Philippine forests were among the most commercially valuable in the world, with outstanding yields of high-quality, easily-accessible timber. The Philippines developed an extensive log-export trade between 1960 and 1970. During that period, total wood production increased from 3.8 million cubic metres to 12 million cubic metres and the area under concession increased from 4.5 to 10.5 million hectares (more than a third of the country's land area). Log exports peaked in the late-1960s at around 10 million cubic metres per annum.
The increase in production was not, however, accompanied by substantive development of wood-processing facilities nor was adequate attention paid to sustainable management of the resource. Consequently, by the early 1980s, annual log exports had dwindled to less than 1 million cubic metres. The country was left with a legacy of problems associated with deforestation and degradation and no direct means of raising revenue to alleviate these problems. Broad statistics suggest that the wealth generated from the country's forests was not effectively invested to develop alternative industries.
Between 1980 and 1990, the Philippines' GNP declined by an average of a 1.2 percent per year. Today, the Philippines is a significant net importer of wood products, with imports costing the country ten times the value of forestry exports.
There are a number of strong central themes that are likely to dictate the near-term future of forestry in the region. The most significant of these are:
· A declining rate of increase in the utilisation of industrial roundwood and sawn timber. This is evidence of the significant improvements in wood utilisation within the region. These improvements include better use of harvest and processing residues, more efficient processing facilities, development of engineered wood products, and greater use of recycled and non-wood fibres.
· Extensive use of recycled and non-wood fibre. The proportion of recycled and non-wood fibre used in Asia and the Pacific, particularly for paper and paperboard, is already high relative to the rest of the world. However, the potential for even greater utilisation of non-wood fibre (especially wastepaper) is evident. This potential is likely to receive increased attention in the near future.
· A need to ensure ongoing commitment to the principles of sustainable forest management and environmental objectives in the context of retaining access to key markets. Consumers in several key markets are increasingly demanding that wood products come from sustainably managed forests. Competitive advantage, and possibly market access, may become increasingly dependent on an ability to demonstrate strong linkages between production and environmental goals.
· The emergence of a number of non-traditional timber producers, particularly among the Mekong countries and Melanesia. Most of these countries have relatively small forest resources compared with traditional hardwood suppliers, however, and are therefore likely to provide only supplementary wood supplies. They are also consequently vulnerable to over-exploitation. For most of these countries, forest resources provide an opportunity to significantly enhance economic development.
· Increasing substitution of coniferous timber for hardwood production. While the supplies of natural hardwood timbers are increasingly constrained, a number of countries including New Zealand, Australia and Fiji, within the region (and Chile outside the region), have rapidly maturing plantation estates that will provide significant volumes of timber in the next decade. These supplies, particularly in engineered forms, will provide considerable scope to substitute for hardwood species.
· A greater emphasis on fibre processing as opposed to solid wood processing. As supplies of high-quality large-dimension logs decline, focus will continue to shift away from plywood and sawnwood toward products such as OSB, MDF, and perhaps veneer-chip composite boards that can be made from lower-quality fibre resources.
· Increased processing in developing producer countries as opposed to developed consumer countries. This pattern is largely driven by the labour-cost advantages of developing countries. It is a positive development in that it allows poorer countries to capture a greater proportion of the value of finished-wood products. It will also likely encourage greater utilisation of harvesting residues that otherwise would be left to waste. On the negative side, less-developed countries are also likely to have less efficient processing facilities and consequently greater waste may occur during processing.
· A continuing, and increasing, dependence of the region on trade to meet demands for forest products. Overall wood production in the region is unlikely to increase markedly from the present. Therefore, increasing consumption demand will ensure a continuing dependence on trade to alleviate shortages.
<section>9</section>
4. Forest resources and land use
Asia-Pacific forest resources in world perspective
Historical patterns of land-use change
Deforestation and changes in forest type and quality
Status and trends in forest resources
Current status of forest management
Potential for supplying forest products and services
Asia-Pacific forest resources in world perspective
Despite covering one-quarter of the world's land area, the Asia-Pacific region contains only 15 percent of the world's forest and other wooded land (FOWL). It consequently has the lowest FOWL cover of all the world's regions, at only 28 percent, and less forest per capita than any other region (Table 4.1).
Table 4.1: Forest area statistics by broad geographical region (million ha)
Region
Natural forest (1995)
Plantations (1995)
Other wooded land (1990)
Total FOWL
FOWL cover(%)
FOWL per capita (ha/person)
Asia-Pacific
Africa and the Near East
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe
North America
Former USSR
World
Source: FRA 1990 (FAO, 1995) updated to 1995 (FAO, 1997).
Note: Separate plantation areas are not available for the three developed regions.
Despite the low relative percentage of FOWL in Asia and the Pacific, FOWL remains the second largest land-use category in the region, after permanent pasture. There remains about twice as much FOWL as arable land in the region (Figure 4.1).
The Asia-Pacific region leads the world in the development of tropical and semi-tropical forest plantations, with over 80 percent of the plantations established in developing countries. Plantations account for a relatively high proportion (11 percent) of the total forest area in the region (8 percent of the FOWL area). As these plantations are potentially very productive, they are likely to play an increasingly important role in supplying the wood needs of the region in the future.
Figure 4.1: Land use in the Asia-Pacific region, 1995 (million ha)
Source: FAOSTAT (1997) updated with the results of FRA 1990 (FAO, 1997).
Historical patterns of land-use change^33
^33 Four data sources have been used in this analysis of land-use change: time-series statistics on land use from FAOSTAT; forest area and change statistics collected in FRA 1990 (FAO, 1995 and 1997); and forest area data collected for the Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS). Due to different measurement conventions, data sources and dates of collection, these statistics do not match in many countries. FAOSTAT figures show trends back to 1961 and have been used in Figure 4.1, but comparison with FRA 1990 suggests that large areas of other wooded land have been misclassified as other land in FAOSTAT. Therefore, current status and projected future trends of FOWL have been based on FAOSTAT trends, adjusted to take into account the results of FRA 1990. Comparison with the GFSS also suggests that some areas of other wooded land reported in FRA 1990 might actually be forest and vice-versa, so forest area data from the GFSS has been used in preference to that from FRA 1990 wherever
these differ, because this information is more recent.
Figure 4.2 shows the broad changes in land use that have taken place in the region since 1961. The area of land used for agriculture has increased about 170 million hectares since 1961 (or just over 13 percent in total). Most of this increase is due to the expansion of permanent pasture, which has expanded about 125 million hectares (15 percent) over the period. The area used for arable crops has increased by 30 million hectares (about 7 percent), and the area of permanent crops has increased by about 15 million hectares.
Although the area of permanent crops has only expanded by 15 million hectares in absolute terms, this represents a remarkable 60 percent increase over 1961 levels. This phenomenon has major implications for forestry because many of the crops being planted are tree crops (e.g. rubber, oil palm, etc.) that could potentially supply fibre to substitute for traditional timber.
Figure 4.2: Trends in land use in the Asia-Pacific region, 1961-1994
Source: FAOSTAT (1997).
About two-thirds of the expansion of agricultural land (or 115 million hectares) has come from the cultivation of previously unused or barren land (i.e. "other land" under the FAO land-use classification system). The remaining 55 million hectares has come from the conversion of FOWL to agricultural use. The average loss of FOWL in the Asia-Pacific region over the entire period 1961 to 1994 can be calculated at about 1.6 million hectares per year. In comparison, the Forest Resources Assessment of 1990 (FRA 1990) estimated an annual loss of about 0.8 million hectares of FOWL during the 1980s, suggesting that the rate of deforestation may have declined since the 1960s and 1970s.
The changes described above have not occurred equally across all countries in the region. Table 4.2 shows the average long-run changes in land use that have taken place in the various Asia-Pacific sub-regions and the long-run trend in FOWL conversion to other uses (from FAOSTAT). It also shows more recent changes (1980-1990) in FOWL area (reported by FRA 1990). The area of FOWL is increasing in North and South Asia, mostly due to large afforestation programmes in India and the People's Republic of China, while most major losses of FOWL are occurring in Southeast Asia.
Table 4.2: Average past land-use changes in the Asia-Pacific region (1,000 ha)
Country group
Long-run average annual changes in land-use areas over the period 1961-1994 from FAOSTAT (1997)
1980-1990 av. annual change in
Arable land
Permanent crops
Permanent pasture
FOWL
Other land
Trend in FOWL change
FOWL area (FRA 1990)
AIEs
Initial loss recent gain
NIEs
No trend
North Asia
Initial loss recent gain
Southeast Asia
Decreasing loss
South Asia
Decreasing gain
Pacific Islands
No trend
Asia-Pacific
Decreasing loss
Source: FAOSTAT (1997) said FAO (1995).
Deforestation and changes in forest type and quality
Causes of deforestation and forest degradation
Effects of deforestation and forest degradation
Between 1980 and 1990, about 4.4 million hectares of natural forest were lost each year in Asia and the Pacific (Table 4.3). Most of these natural forests were converted to non-forest land uses (1.6 million hectares per year) and to other wooded land (2.2 million hectares per year). The establishment of forest plantations (2.7 million hectares per year) partially offset the loss of natural forests, resulting in a net loss of total forests of about 1.6 million hectares (just under 1 percent) per year.^34 Overall loss of FOWL in the region was about 0.8 million hectares per year during the period.
^34 Excluding the AIEs where data separated between natural forests and plantations are not readily available.
Table 4.3: Forest changes in Asia and the Pacific, 1980-1990
Type of change
Amount of change 1980-1990
% of 1980 forest area
(million ha)
Total
Annual equivalent
Deforestation
1. Forest area in 1980
Less losses:
2. Natural forest - Other wooded land
3. Natural forest - Non-forest land
Plus forest gains:
4. Non-forest land - Plantation
Equals:
5. Forest area in 1990
Change in forest type
6. Natural forest - Plantation
Degradation of the natural forest
7. Increase in fragmentation
8. Closed forest - Open forest (net)
Source: FRA 1990 (FAO, 1995).
A meaningful assessment of the extent of change in forest cover requires a clear understanding of terminology and definitions. Key definitions are summarised in Box 4.1.
Box 4.1: DEFINITIONS RELATED TO FOREST COVER
Deforestation: Complete clearing of tree formations (closed or open) and their replacement by non-forest land uses. Deforestation involves alienation of forest land to a state where it has less than 10 percent forest crown cover.
Degradation: Until now, no clear and specific definition for forest degradation has been widely adopted. In general, degradation refers to loss of quality and functions including, for example, reduced stocking, fragmentation, changed species mix, displacement by scrub, lighter or more open crown cover, etc.
Forest. Land with tree crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of more than 10 percent and an area of more than 0.5 hectares (ha). The trees should be able to reach a minimum height of 5 metres at maturity in situ. Forests may be either closed forest formations, where trees of various storeys and undergrowth cover a high proportion of the ground; or open forest formations with a continuous vegetation cover in which tree crown cover exceeds 10 percent. Young natural stands and all plantations established for forestry purposes that have not yet attained a crown density of 10 percent or tree height of 5 metres are included in the definition of forest. Areas normally forming part of the forest area that are temporarily unstocked as a result of human intervention or natural causes, but which are expected to revert to forest, are also considered forest.
Plantation: Forest stands established by planting or/and seeding in the process of afforestation or reforestation. They can be either:
· introduced species (all planted stands), or
· intensively managed stands of indigenous species that meet all the following criteria: one or two species at the time of planting; even age class; regular spacing.
Plantations do not include stands that were established as plantations, but which have been without intensive management for a significant period of time. These are considered semi-natural forests.
Other wooded land: Land either with a crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of 5 to 10 percent of trees able to reach a height of 5 metres at maturity in situ; or a crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of more than 10 percent of trees not able to reach a height of 5 metres at maturity in situ (e.g. dwarf or stunted trees); or with shrub or bush cover of more than 10 percent.
Other land: Land not classified as forest or other wooded land as defined above. Other land includes (a) agricultural land, of which the components are (i) arable land, which refers to land under temporary crops, temporary meadows for mowing or pasture, land under market and kitchen gardens, and land temporarily fallow or lying idle; and (ii) land under permanent crops, which refers to land cultivated with crops that occupy the land for long periods and need not be replanted after each harvest (e.g. cocoa, coffee, rubber, fruit trees, etc.); (b) permanent meadows and pastures, which refers to land used permanently (five years or more) for herbaceous forage crops, either cultivated or growing wild (i.e. wild prairie or grazing land), with woody vegetation covering less than 10 percent of the ground; and (c) other land, which includes unused but potentially productive land, areas with built structures, wasteland, parks, ornamental gardens, roads, lanes and barren land.
Source: FAO Global Forest Resources Assessment (January 1998) and FAO Forestry Paper 124.
Over the 10-year period from 1980 to 1990, a total of about 5 million hectares of natural forest was converted to plantations. Another 22 million hectares of natural forest had so much tree cover removed that it can now be classified only as "other wooded land." Other qualitative changes that took place include an increase in the fragmentation of the forest area and, more subtly, an increase in the proportion of forest that can only be classified as open forest (due to its low tree cover) rather than closed forest.
Causes of deforestation and forest degradation
Deforestation and forest degradation are often caused by a combination of actions and influences. Some causes are natural (e.g. fire, disease and weather-induced stress), but more often they result from human activities (e.g. land clearing for agriculture, overgrazing, over-extraction of timber and harmful logging practices). Natural influences are often exacerbated by human activities (e.g. poor logging practices, atmospheric pollution and the use of fire to clear land).
The direct causes of deforestation and degradation obscure the underlying causes, which include poverty, inequitable resource tenure, population pressures, greed, corruption, misguided policies, and institutional failures. Experience has clearly shown that when these underlying problems are adequately addressed, deforestation and forest degradation decline dramatically.
Within the Asia-Pacific region, the major direct cause of deforestation is the clearing (both planned and unplanned) of forests for permanent cropland (including tree crops) and pasture. Poor forest harvesting practises are the cause of considerable forest degradation and the construction of forest roads for harvesting facilitates the encroachment by immigrants who often subsequently destroy the remaining forest.
In recent years, fires have caused serious damage to forests in the region. Fire problems are widespread in India (where it is reported that fires affect some 53 percent of the forest area, or about 35 million hectares, each year), the People's Republic of China (average of 890,000 hectares burned annually), Mongolia (more than 3 million hectares burned in 1996), and Indonesia (3.2 million hectares burned in 1982-1983; 160,000 in 1994; and large areas in 1997-1998), and several other countries in the region. Fires are often started by people who want to clear forests cheaply in order to use the land for other purposes.
Shifting cultivation and overgrazing cause widespread degradation of forests in the region, and even complete deforestation in extreme instances. Estimates of the number of people involved in shifting cultivation in the region vary, but the number is generally believed to be between 25 million and 40 million. Fuelwood collection is not a major cause of deforestation in the region, but excessive fuelwood collection in some areas causes forest degradation and some localised deforestation where fuelwood demand is particularly high.
Effects of deforestation and forest degradation
The costs and negative effects of deforestation are generally well known. Where deforestation occurs in an unplanned and wasteful manner, the economic losses can be substantial, particularly from the loss of timber and other commercial resources. At more subsistence levels, deforestation causes severe hardships and social disruptions for forest-dwelling and forest-dependent people.
Both forest degradation and deforestation can lead to major reductions in agricultural productivity on neighbouring lands, and the siltation of rivers and reservoirs has significant negative implications for irrigation and hydropower. In highly sensitive areas, deforestation and forest degradation can lead to springs drying up and to desertification.
Another serious negative impact of deforestation and degradation is the loss of wildlife habitat. Many countries in Asia and the Pacific have lost 70 to 90 percent of their original wildlife habitat, and the populations of many species are dwindling.
While the effects of deforestation are relatively simple to identify, the effects of forest degradation are more subtle. Degradation can lead to host of problems including loss of soil fertility and nutrient recycling capability, reduced productivity and growth, a decline in species richness, erosion of genetic diversity, a decline in stock density and crown cover, reduced economic value of timber crops, and decreasing wildlife populations.
Status and trends in forest resources
Distribution of forest resources within the region
Importance of forest resources to individual countries
Current uses of forest resources within the region
Status and trends related to protected areas
The increasing importance of plantations in the region
Status and trends related to trees outside forests
Distribution of forest resources within the region
The distribution of forests within the Asia-Pacific region is shown in Table 4.4. The first three groups are mainly comprised of temperate countries (the exceptions being Singapore and parts of the People's Republic of China and Australia). Thus, roughly 40 to 45 percent of the forest in the region is located in temperate areas. Temperate countries also have at least 60 percent of the plantation resource in the region (probably much more considering that the area of plantations in the AIE countries is not included in these calculations). Plantations account for at least 16 percent of the forest area in the temperate zone (10 percent of FOWL), while they currently account for only 7 percent of the forest area (5 percent of FOWL) in tropical countries.
Southeast Asia is particularly important with respect to natural forests as it has 40 percent of the region's total. Southeast Asia, alone, has as much natural forest as all of the region's temperate countries combined.
Table 4.4: Area of forest and other wooded land in the Asia-Pacific region, 1995
Country group
Area of forest and other wooded land (million ha)
Natural forest
Forest plantations
Other wooded land
Total
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Temperate zone
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
Tropical zone
Asia-Pacific
Source: FRA 1990 (FAO, 1995) updated to 1995 (FAO, 1997).
Importance of forest resources to individual countries
The importance of forest resources in each of the countries of the region is shown in Table 4.5. Six countries (Indonesia, Papua New Guinea, Malaysia, Myanmar, Laos and Cambodia) have substantial forest resources in absolute terms as well as percentage and per capita terms. These countries have already developed or have the potential to develop significant forest industries and will have a particularly important role in the future of forestry in the region.
Table 4.5: Current importance of forest resources in countries and territories of Asia and the Pacific
More than 10m ha of forest in total
Less than 10m ha of forest in total
More than 40% forest cover
Less than 40% forest cover
More than 40% forest cover
Less than 40% forest cover
More than 0.6 hectares of forest per person
Indonesia; Papua New Guinea; Malaysia; Myanmar; Laos; Cambodia
Australia
Solomon Islands; Vanuatu; Bhutan; Brunei; Fiji; Samoa
New Caledonia; Mongolia; New Zealand
Less than 0.6 hectares of forest per person
Japan
PR China; India; Thailand
Korea DPR; the Republic of Korea
All other countries and territories
Another four countries (Japan, the People's Republic of China, India and Thailand) have large areas of forest but also large populations. Australia has a large absolute forest area but a relatively low percentage of forest cover. Interestingly, some countries where forest industries are locally important (e.g. some of the Pacific Islands and New Zealand) have only modest forest resources relative to the rest of the region.
Current uses of forest resources within the region
Approximately 300 million hectares of natural forests and plantations in the region are currently used for timber production purposes (Table 4.6). About 100 million hectares of forest are legally protected and are theoretically off-limits to timber production (i.e. IUCN categories I and II). Another 136 million hectares are inaccessible, given current levels of technology and prices, due to steepness of slope, remoteness or poor stocking of currently commercial species.^35
^35 J-L. Blanchez, (1997). Forest Resources and Roundwood Supply in the Asia Pacific Countries: Situation and Outlook to the Year 2010. Document APFSOS/WP/17. FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
About 72 million hectares of forests in the tropical countries are under protected status. This represents about 20 percent of the total forest area in these countries. In the temperate countries, only 28 million hectares, or 14 percent, of forest area is legally protected.
Just over 70 percent (214 million hectares) of the production forests in the region have already been logged at least once or are in areas designated to be converted to other land uses. Some 43 million hectares of natural production forests, almost entirely in the tropics, have not yet been logged.
Table 4.6: Area of forest by management type and status, 1994
Country group
Area of forest (million ha)
Natural forest used for production
Forest plantation
Forest not currently used for production
Logged areas
Unlogged areas
Conversion areas
(Used for production)
Inaccessible areas
Protected areas
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
Asia-Pacific
Source: GFSS (FAO, 1998).
Note: The above figures do not match those presented earlier because the plantation figures are only for industrial plantations, and some forest areas with particularly low stocking have been reclassified as other wooded land in the GFSS.
In the temperate countries, only 28 million hectares, or 14 percent, of the forest area is in legally protected areas where production is forbidden. The remaining 178 million hectares is potentially available for production.
Status and trends related to protected areas
The Asia-Pacific region has almost 3,000 protected areas in total, covering nearly 9 percent of the land area (Table 4.7).^36 Protected areas are generally divided into six categories according to the objectives of management and the restrictions placed upon economic activities in these areas.
^36 Protected areas include more than just forest, although it is likely that in many Asia-Pacific countries a large proportion of protected areas is forest of some sort.
IUCN has suggested that 10 percent of every country's land area should be protected in some way. Eleven countries in the region do not meet this target and it would require an additional 75 million hectares of protected areas to do so. Protected area coverage is even less adequate if distribution by eco-floristic zones is considered. Only 5 of the 39 eco-floristic zones of South and Continental Southeast Asia have more than 10 percent protected area coverage. Eleven of the 39 are less than 1 percent protected, and 4 zones have no protection whatsoever. In the 17 eco-floristic zones of Insular Southeast Asia, only 8 have more than 10 percent of protected area coverage. Australia has the largest area of protected areas and Bhutan has the largest percentage of land in protected status.
Table 4.7: Protected areas in the Asia-Pacific region^37 (not necessarily all forested)
^37 For further details, see Paine et al. (WCMC) (1997). Status, Trends and Future Scenarios for Forest Conservation including Protected Areas in the Asia-Pacific Region: Document APFSOS/WP/04. FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
IUCN category
Type of protected area
Number
Area
Proportion of total land area
Description
(1,000 ha)
I
Strict Protection (natural reserves, wilderness areas)
II
National Parks (ecosystem, conservation, recreation)
III
National Monuments
IV
Habitat/Species Management
V
Protected Landscape or Seascape
VI
Managed Resource Protected Area
Total
Source: Paine et al. (1997).
Note: As is evident from the breakdown, protected areas are not necessarily forested.
Future opportunities for protection in the classical sense are decreasing. Particularly in South Asia and in the heavily populated lowlands elsewhere, new and innovative ways are needed to combine conservation objectives with people's livelihoods (Box 4.2). Innovative funding arrangements are also needed. Several funding initiatives in the region suggest promising opportunities. Samoa, for example, imposes a tax on tourists to generate conservation revenue; Bhutan has a conservation fund to which donors are encouraged to contribute; New Zealand has an elaborate set of grants, covenants and other ways to finance conservation on private land (Box 4.3).
Box 4.2: INDIA - TOWARD MORE COMPATIBLE COEXISTENCE OF PEOPLE AND CONSERVATION?
India's protected area network represents roughly 4.5 percent of the country's geographical area and about 19 percent of its forest area. The coverage, however, does not fully represent the various biogeographic zones and biomes. Efforts are therefore being made to declare more protected areas. Establishment of conventional protected areas such as national parks and sanctuaries in a densely populated country like India, however, is not an easy proposition. Therefore, proposals are currently being finalised to amend the Wildlife Act to provide for the creation of two additional categories of protected areas. The first category is Conservation Reserve, which would be declared on lands owned by the government, but would not impose the same restrictions on people's activities, resource-use rights and livelihoods as with national parks and sanctuaries. The other category is Community Reserve, which can be declared on community or private lands when the communities or individuals
in the area are in agreement.
Source: M. F. Ahmed (1997). Document APFSOS/WP/26.,
BOX 4.3: CONSERVATION AND PROTECTION OF FORESTS ON PRIVATE LAND -THE NEW ZEALAND APPROACH
In New Zealand, several options are available for providing assistance to landowners in conserving or protecting their natural forest or forest remnants:
· The Queen Elizabeth II National Trust Open Space Covenants sometimes provide financial assistance from the Trust in exchange for agreeing to an open space covenant to be registered on the land title although the land ownership remains with the owner.
· The Forest Heritage Fund, established in 1990, is funded annually by the government. It is serviced by the Department of Conservation and so far has protected over 100,000 hectares of natural forest. It operates by: (a) directly buying forests or contributing to purchases by local authorities and other agencies prepared to manage the forests under the Reserves Act 1977; (b) covenanting, so that owners can still own the land, with some help for survey and legal costs; and (c) providing anti-grazing fencing assistance. The Fund focuses on sites that: (a) are representative of original ecosystems or natural landscapes; (b) have the potential to provide sustainable natural values in the long term; (c) contribute to integrity of the original landscape; and (d) contribute to water and soil protection and a range of recreational values.
· Department of Conservation or Local Authority Covenants are agreements with landowners for specific forest areas.
· Heritage Covenants are concluded between the New Zealand Historic Places Trust and forest owners to protect historic or cultural sites.
· Rates Remission for Covenants are a mechanism by which all local authorities can choose to remit or postpone rates on land that has been voluntarily protected for conservation purposes.
· Nga Whenua Rahui is a government fund serviced by the Department of Conservation under which Maori landowners (indigenous New Zealanders) get help to retain tino rangitiratanga (ownership and control) particularly for traditional uses and cultural views of forest, sometimes with provision for public access. Alternatively, it supports Maori reservations, usually for smaller forests with restricted public access or "management agreements" which set out agreed conservation objectives.
· Protected Private Land provisions allow landowners that prefer not to have a covenant to instead have their land declared protected private land under the Reserves Act 1977.
Source: Abbreviated from D. Morrison (Personal communication, March 1998).
The increasing importance of plantations in the region
While estimates of the actual area of plantations in the Asia-Pacific region range widely (Table 4.8),^38 it is evident that plantations are a major factor in forestry in the region and are increasing in significance. The net area of plantations (i.e. taking into account replanting and plantation failures) appears to be about 80 percent of the gross area planted. This suggests that the total area of plantations in the region (excluding AIEs) is about 60 to 65 million hectares. About 40 million hectares of plantations in the region (all countries) are intended for industrial purposes; the remainder has been planted for environmental purposes in conservation and protection areas.
^38 Part of the problem stems from inconsistent definitions (e.g. some countries include agricultural tree crops in forest plantation statistics). In some countries, the information is simply unreliable because little effort is spent collecting it. A major statistical problem is that countries rarely report separate data for new planting versus replanting of felled or previously failed plantations.
The People's Republic of China and India have the most extensive plantation programmes in the region. Much of China's planting is oriented toward wasteland reclamation and land stabilisation. The country has plans to plant 26 million additional hectares of forests in the Yangtze and Yellow River basins by the year 2030. India plants around 1 million hectares annually, mostly on wastelands and degraded scrub and forest areas.
Table 4.8: Recent estimates of forest plantation area and planting rates (million ha)
Source
Year
Temperate
Tropical
Total
Planting rate
m ha
m ha
m ha
m ha/yr
FRA 90 - excl. AIE countries (FAO, 1995)
FRA 90 - excl. AIE countries (FAO, 1997)
Country reports (Chandrasekharan, 1997)
n.a.
n.a.
Pandey - net (FAO, 1995)^1
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Pandey - net (FAO, 1997)
GFSS - industrial only (FAO, 1998)
Notes:
^1 Tropical countries only.
^2 Includes only subtropical areas of China and Australia.
In addition to reclaiming wastelands, the high rate of plantation establishment in the region reflects policy commitments in several countries to make plantations the principal source of wood and fibre products. This is being done with a view toward relieving pressure on natural forests and developing reliable sources of industrial raw material for the future. Several countries are thus pursuing plantation development in tandem with policies of withdrawing natural forests from production.
A wide array of incentives is used to promote plantation establishment in Asia and the Pacific. The Philippines is one example where both large- and small-scale industrial plantations attract support (Box 4.4). India provides free seedlings and other extension services. Indonesia offers tax concessions and enters into joint ventures between the state forest enterprises and private-sector investors.
Box 4.4: INCENTIVES FOR INDUSTRIAL PLANTATIONS - THE PHILIPPINES
In 1991, the Philippines prohibited all logging within old-growth forests, areas above 1,000 metres and on sites with slopes greater than 50 percent. At the same time, many commercial logging concessions were cancelled and annual allowable cuts were reduced. Emphasis was given to plantation development with the expectation that they would supply the bulk of future wood needs. A variety of incentives were provided to encourage private investors to engage in plantation development.
Industrial Forest Management Agreements (IFMAs) have been established to combine natural forest management objectives with industrial plantation establishment. Qualified investors are given the responsibility to manage and protect remaining residual natural forests, while converting deforested and degraded areas into plantations of timber species, rattan, rubber and bamboo. Under the programme, the following incentives are provided:
· income tax exemption for three years after the start of commercial harvest;
· tax and duty-free importation of capital equipment;
· tax credits on domestic capital;
· deduction for labour expenses after tax holiday;
· exemption from wharfage dues and export taxes and duties; and
· exemption from contractor's tax.
In August 1996, the Socialized Industrial Forest Management Programme (SIFMP) was launched. It provides for Filipino individuals, families, co-operatives or corporations to engage in plantation establishment ranging from 1 to 500 hectares. SIRMP incentives include:
· the right to harvest, sell and utilise plantation crops;
· the right to export logs, lumber and other forest products harvested from the SIFMA in accordance with the government allocation system;
· exemption from payment of forest charges;
· entitlement to appropriate and reasonable compensation for the developments in the area, in case of cancellation of the SIFMA without cause or for public interest; and
· technical assistance should SIFMA holders wish to confederate into a larger organisation.
Source: Country Report- the Philippines: Document APFSOS/WP/33.
Status and trends related to trees outside forests
In many countries, trees outside forests are an important source of wood and other benefits (Box 4.5). Such trees include roadside and canalside plantings, scattered trees in the landscape, trees planted in and around fields, trees in homegardens, windbreaks and agricultural tree crops. These trees play a disproportionately important role in meeting rural people's needs and are becoming increasingly important in supplying commercial needs. Unfortunately, few countries have reliable data on tree resources outside forests.
A number of fruit trees such as jackfruit (Artocarpus integrifolia), tamarind (Tamarindus indica), jamun (Syzygium jambolana) and mango (Mangifera indica) also provide beautiful and valuable timber and are commonly sawn for furniture and other purposes after fruit production declines. Bamboo is also commonly planted on non-forest land.
Box 4.5: IMPORTANCE OF TREES OUTSIDE THE FOREST
In Bangladesh, trees outside the forest, primarily around homesteads, cover an area of about 1 million hectares and supply 5 million cubic metres (about 60 to 65 percent of the country's total wood production). About 80 percent of all bamboo is also produced outside forests. Some of the best household plots in Bangladesh are intensively managed and carry a growing stock of about 200 cubic metres per hectare with potential annual yields of 10 cubic metres. Successive evaluations carried out in 1981 and 1992 indicate that these sources are sustainably managed.
In India, village wood lots, wind belts and shelter belts, agroforestry and farm forestry plots and small block and line plantations currently cover over 6 million hectares. In addition to these, there are also other sources of wood from trees outside the forest, including rubber, coconut, cashew, mango and other estate crops. These sources together produce about 50 percent of India's wood supply and probably an equal or larger share of India's NWFPs. There are also many small private nurseries meeting the local demand for tree seedlings.
In Pakistan, trees on farms account for 23 percent of all timber growing stock in the country. In Punjab, farm trees account for an astounding 86 percent of the province's growing stock. The average growing stock of wood on agricultural land nation wide is estimated at 3.42 cubic metres per hectare.
Even in Indonesia, despite the vastness of the country's forests, some 20 percent of total wood consumed comes from trees outside the forest. This pattern is increasing because of the concentration of people on Java, where forests are limited. In Java alone, some 60 percent of fuelwood consumed in rural areas comes from non-forest sources.
Throughout the region, but especially in Southeast Asia, there has been a dramatic increase in the establishment of agricultural tree crops (i.e. rubber, oil palm and coconut plantations and fruit orchards). Agricultural statistics indicate that the area of agricultural tree crops being harvested in the region has tripled from about 12 million hectares in 1961 to 35 million hectares in 1997 (Figure 4.3). Given that such crops are not productive until several years after planting (e.g. rubber trees are not harvested until they are about 10 years old), the total area of agricultural tree crops is currently estimated to be about 47 million hectares.
For certain countries, tree crops are far more significant than forest plantations. Malaysia is a case in point.^39 At present, Malaysia has only 0.19 million hectares of forest plantations, but 4.82 million hectares of tree crops (rubber, oil palm, coconut, cocoa). Tree crops are particularly important in many of the smaller Pacific Islands, where coconut comprises the most important wood resource available. Even in countries with substantial forest resources, tree crops are increasingly being viewed as an important source of raw material for industrial purposes (e.g. rubberwood and oil palm in Malaysia).
^39 Country Report: Document APFSOS/WP/07.
Figure 4.3: Area of agricultural tree crops harvested in the Asia-Pacific region
Source: FAOSTAT (1997).
Current status of forest management
Forest management objectives
Management of natural forests
Management of plantations
Management of non-wood forest products (NWFPs)
Efforts to achieve sustainable forest management
Forest management objectives
Forest management objectives are dependent on the nature of forest resources with which countries are endowed, development priorities and societal demands. Objectives tend to be more diverse for natural forests, but are also significant for plantations.
In the past, a primary objective of forest management has been the production of wood products. In recent years, partly due to the influence of agreements at the 1992 Rio de Janeiro UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), greater emphasis has been focused on overall sustainable forest management with multiple objectives.
In general, most natural forest in the region is in public ownership.^40 The exception among developing countries is in the Pacific Islands, where indigenous people and local communities own most forests under customary law. Ownership of forest plantations varies. In AIEs and NIEs, plantations are usually privately owned. In the countries previously under central planning systems, most plantations remain in public ownership, although some plantation operations are now being privatised. In other countries, ownership patterns are mixed.
^40 Japan is a major exception. Of its 25.14 million hectares of forests, some 14.6 million hectares (58 percent) are privately owned, the rest are in various categories of public ownership or stewardship. (APFSOS/WP/15, 1998)
Much of the publicly owned forest in the region is de facto managed by the private sector through leases or forest concession agreements. These usually give concessionaires the right to cut specified volumes of timber on condition that levies are paid and that certain management prescriptions are followed (Box 4.6).
Box 4.6: THE APPLICATION OF SUSTAINED YIELD PRINCIPLES IN INDONESIA AND MALAYSIA
Indonesia: Natural forest in Indonesia has been logged since the 1930s but, until relatively recently, was logged very selectively, with relatively little disturbance or destructive impact on the forest. For example, until 1966, annual industrial log production did not exceed 2.6 million cubic metres.
In 1967, large-scale exploitation of Indonesia's forests began as the government commenced issuing forest concessions. Concessionaires were obliged to follow the Indonesian Selective Cutting System, but by the 1980s it was realised that most were only complying with the minimum felling diameter limit and ignoring the other requirements of the system (e.g. residual stand inventory, post-harvest tending and enrichment planting). In 1989, Indonesia introduced the Indonesian Selective Cutting and Planting System or TPTI, placing greater importance on natural regeneration and enrichment planting. This system is supplemented on a limited scale, and wherever appropriate, by a system of clear cutting with natural or artificial regeneration.
Experience indicates that a large number of concessionaires still do not implement the system correctly even though there are provisions to take legal action against delinquents.
Malaysia: The Malaysian Selection System is one of the oldest forest management systems used in the tropics and has served as a model for many other countries. However, with the increasing utilisation of lesser known species and greater mechanisation, harvesting in the natural forest has started to result in forest degradation. This is often due to poor harvesting techniques.
Model codes for forest harvesting and prescriptions for low impact logging have been introduced in several cases. For example, in Sarawak, helicopter logging has been introduced on a pilot scale and has indicated the potential for adoption in similar locations and situations. The environmental benefit of helicopter logging has also been shown in many ways (e.g. less impact on water quality than harvesting using a tractor).
An increasing trend in the region is for greater involvement of NGOs, community organisations, and local people in managing public forests. This is reinforced by the widely held view is that the public sector is not particularly efficient in managing publicly owned forests. Under a range of collaborative forest management mechanisms such as Joint Forest Management in India and management by forest user groups of Nepal, local people are increasingly being given full or partial forest management responsibilities. Local people generally have the right to collect NWFPs for their own use at no cost. When NWFPs are collected for sale, fees and licensing are common.
Management of natural forests
Only a fraction of natural forests and woodlands are actively managed in Asia and the Pacific. Given that many forests are not under formal management, responsibility for protection from fires, diseases and pests is unclear and receives only partial attention.
In the forest-rich countries of the humid tropics, most natural forests are managed at varying degrees of intensity for timber production under selective felling systems. The aim of selection systems is to allow the harvesting of some timber while maintaining forest cover for protection and regeneration. Under these systems, the volume and type of trees harvested are also supposedly regulated so that removals do not exceed growth increments and the yield or productive capacity of the forest is maintained (i.e. the sustained-yield principle).
With respect to wood production, the concept of respecting the annual allowable cut (AAC) remains fundamental (Box 4.7). In many places, however, the principle has not been well respected.
Box 4.7: MYANMAR - FAITH IN WHAT HAS WORKED WELL
In the current dialogue about sustainable forest management, perhaps not enough attention is paid to long-standing practices that applied principles of ecosystem management. Myanmar has one such system. In that country, the systematic management of the natural forests dates back to 1856. The country adopted an exploitation-cum-cultural system first known as the Brandis Selection System and later modified into the Burma Selection System or Myanmar Selection System (MSS). The experience of over a century has manifested the system's sustainability and environmental friendliness.
The system involves felling cycles of 30 years, fixing annual harvest levels based on the Brandis formula, size limits on trees to be felled, girdling to mark exploitable trees and reduce moisture content, enumerating trees left and skidding of logs with elephants. Congested stands are thinned and other species of trees interfering with the growth of teak are removed. Special silvicultural treatments are applied in bamboo-flowering areas. An important attribute is respect for the annual allowable cuts (AAC) based on the principle of sustained yield management in both teak and other hardwood stands.
Source: Abbreviated from Country Report-Union of Myanmar: Document APFSOS/WP/08.
Management of protected areas presents special challenges. Management objectives for protected areas clearly differ from those for other natural forests. In managing protected areas, emphasis is given to maintaining environmental and ecosystem integrity, minimising human impacts, conserving biological diversity and enhancing wildlife habitats. Management of protected areas is of variable levels throughout the region, with generally good management in AIEs and NIEs, and much weaker management in other areas. Many protected areas lack adequate management plans and management resources. Severe conflicts have arisen in many protected areas, as development objectives clash with conservation objectives. A recent phenomenon in some areas is the rapid growth of ecotourism, which has overtaken the ability of many forestry agencies to cope with the influx of tourists.
Management of plantations
The objectives of plantation management are usually focused on intensive production of wood using only a few selected tree species (Box 4.8). This makes plantations relatively easy to manage, although they require large investments at the time of establishment and are sometimes susceptible to pests and diseases, soil degradation and similar environmental problems.
Forest plantations are typically managed using a plant, clearfell and replant cycle except where coppicing species (e.g. eucalyptus) are planted. The growth and yield of plantations in the developing countries of the region generally leaves much to be desired. Apart from poor survival rates, growth rates achieved are often far below potential. Many plantations achieve growth rates of only 4 cubic metres per hectare per year, while so-called "fast-growing" species should be attaining at least 10 cubic metres per hectare per year; There are rare cases (particularly in private plantations) where growth rates of 30 to 50 cubic metres per hectare per annum have been achieved, indicating the potential for high volume increment in the region.
Box 4.8: MANAGEMENT OF FOREST PLANTATIONS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION
Sixty percent of plantations in the region have been established for the production of industrial wood. The trend toward non-industrial plantations, the proportions of which had accounted for 60 percent of planting in 1980 and 64 percent in 1990, appeared to have been reversed and reached only 38 percent in 1995. Hardwood species comprise about 56 percent of the total forest plantation area in the region, with eucalyptus being the leading genera (net area of nearly 4.5 million hectares, or 18 percent of the hardwood area). Over three-quarters of all eucalyptus plantations are in India, followed by Viet Nam (11 percent) and the People's Republic of China (7 percent). The net area of teak plantations is 2.1 million hectares, with most being in India, Indonesia, Myanmar and Thailand. Other important hardwood species include Dalbergia sissoo (620,000 hectares), Acacia mangium mainly planted for pulpwood (450,000 hectares), Gmelina arborea (160,000 hectares) and mahogany,
Swietenia macrophylla (140,000 hectares).^41 The softwood plantation species were mostly pines, of which nearly 2.5 million hectares were fast-growing exotic pines dominated by Pinus radiata mostly in New Zealand and Australia. The People's Republic of China has 6.4 million hectares of the 7.2 million hectares of slower-growing pines; it also has 8.2 million hectares of the 8.9 million hectares total for other softwood species.
^41 Reported areas for species used in plantations in 1990 are approximately as follows: Eucalyptus spp. 16 percent; Acacia spp. 10 percent; teak 6 percent; tropical pines 4 percent; and other species 64 percent.
The "eucalyptus controversy" of the 1980s, during which the Eucalyptus genus was blamed for a wide range of environmental and social ills and which led to its planting being banned or curtailed in a number of countries, appears to have died down. This is partly due to greater involvement of local people in plantation planning and development and the incorporation of small farmers into "outgrower" systems for industry. A "teak controversy" may be developing, partly due to frustration when impossibly high promised returns fail to materialise, but also for environmental reasons where severe soil erosion occurs under dense, pure plantations of tea, particularly on slopes after litter has been burned.
Throughout the region, many fuelwood plantations have been established. Many of these plantations will likely be diverted to other end-uses, however, as fuelwood consumption patterns change and alternative end-uses prove more profitable. In the Republic of Korea, efforts are underway to find social and industrial uses for fuelwood plantations established a few decades ago before rapid economic development made the extensive use of fuelwood obsolete.
Source: Abbreviated from J. Ball (Personal communication, December 1997) and prepared largely on the basis of: D. Pandey (1997):
Tropical forest plantation areas, 1995. (Draft report). FAO, Rome. Estimates for temperate countries in the region have also been included.
There is much scope for improving the yields from plantations. Minimum gains of 15 to 20 percent due to tree improvement should be considered normal. Unfortunately, this aspect of plantation forestry has received little attention and most plantation programmes are still using unimproved planting materials.^42
^42 Traditional tree breeding could probably be accelerated even in forestry: Lange and Biggs (1995) mention that biotechnology may make it possible, for example, to improve forest yields in months or years what before would have required decades of tree improvement.
Plantation management also suffers from a lack of silvicultural tending. For example, in Japan,^43 which has more than 10 million hectares of planted forests, the volume of growing stock is increasing steadily. Most forests, however, are poorly tended and need thinning. Unfortunately, the forest and wood industry faces a difficult situation due to declining profitability of forests (as a result of lower prices for timber). Thus, there is little motivation for forest owners to invest in silvicultural treatments. This may eventually reduce the quality of the wood stock although it may not compromise the usefulness of forests for nature-lovers and recreation that are now given greater priority. Indeed, a desire to improve the "naturalness" of forests is among the motive factors for establishing "multi-storied plantations" (Box 4.9).
^43 Source: Document APFSOS/WP/15
Among silvicultural treatments, fertiliser and irrigation have large potential. Sewage irrigation has great potential in peri-urban forestry where sewage disposal is needed and tree irrigation could offer a profitable outlet (see Section 6).
Box 4.9: ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY PLANTATION MANAGEMENT IN JAPAN
In general, plantations form single storied and even-aged forests. They can, however, be managed to produce multi-storied plantations that more closely resemble natural forests. A multi-storied condition can develop under natural succession, but usually requires human intervention. This usually takes the form of selective harvesting and replanting to produce mixed stands of various heights and tree species. Multi-storied management is now being promoted in Japan as a low-impact harvesting system that reduces the denudation of mountainsides and maintains the production of a wide range of services currently demanded by the public.
The main advantages of multi-storied plantations are: (a) they help to combat or avoid surface soil erosion by reducing runoff; (b) they minimise the loss of soil holding capacity by root networks; (c) they protect the understory from exposure to the elements; and (d) they produce high-quality wood that has narrow annual rings and is knot-free. The main disadvantages are that: (a) they are very expensive and complicated to manage; and (b) they require careful harvesting and intensive tending, pruning and thinning in order to secure sufficient sunlight for understory trees and grasses.
Multi-storied management in Japan builds upon more than 100 years of experience. However, most multi-storied forests have been developed in the last 20 years. There are about 120,000 hectares of multi-storied plantations in Japan and 560,000 hectares of natural forests managed in this way. Given that the public, in general, prefers the appearance of natural forests, the government plans to expand multi-storied management to cover over 5 million hectares of the forest resource. A target is to achieve 2.5 million hectares by 2015.
Current problems with these forests are that many, established about 20 years ago, are now suffering from overstocking and need immediate thinning. Many have also not been tended enough due to lack of funding. Multi-storied forests may be environmentally friendly but they require strict adherence to management plans to be successful. It makes little sense to start multi-storied management if neglect may later occur because a forest in dense condition without treatment becomes potentially unhealthy and unusable. Maintaining a multi-storied condition should not be an aim in itself but should be adopted in a flexible manner.
The most outstanding multi-storied forest in Japan is Imasu Forest in mid-west Japan, established more than 100 years ago. This multi-storied cedar and cypress forest, with trees aged from one year to more than 100 years, yields high-quality logs. To maintain such quality, intensive tending operations, pruning in particular, are carried out. Pruning is done at many stages until trees reach about 15 metres in height to make narrow and even annual rings and knot-free logs. Harvesting girth is prescribed and trees are sold one at a time. In order to minimise the cost of harvest, a high-density forest road network (nearly three times the average) has been developed.
Source: H. Ishihara (Personal communication, December 1997).
Management of non-wood forest products (NWFPs)
Government forestry agencies in Asia and the Pacific have generally paid little attention to the management of NWFPs. In contrast, many local people living in and near forests have developed complex and effective management systems for certain NWFPs (e.g. rattan and damar management in parts of Indonesia). Unfortunately, forestry development officials and planners often overlook these traditional management systems. Moreover, conventional timber production practises are often incompatible with traditional NWFP management systems.
Aside from some long-established management systems for NWFPs, as practised by local people, extraction of NWFPs is generally carried out in a haphazard opportunistic manner, without preliminary inventories of resources or appropriate silvicultural practices. The management of bamboo and rattan is a partial exception to this story of neglect. Extraction of these resources is controlled to some extent by prescribing cutting cycles and felling rules. The tapping of pine resins is also regulated by the use of rotation systems in some countries. In general, however, these regulations are difficult to enforce since there are many dispersed collectors.
Commercial harvesting of most NWFPs is controlled by selling the rights to collect them from large units of forests over a specified period (often one to five years). These rights are usually sold for a fixed rate and there is rarely close supervision of the collection after the rights have been assigned.
There has recently been an increasing awareness of the complementary relationship between wood and non-wood forest products. With careful thought, the management of wood and NWFPs can be integrated and so offer a basis for managing forests in a more balanced and sustainable way.
Efforts to achieve sustainable forest management
Recently, considerable attention has focused on developing sustainable forest management (SFM). SFM embodies the concept of sustained yield of forest products, but is wider in scope and stresses the need to manage forests for the production and protection of all their outputs and ecosystem functions. Several management criteria for sustainable forestry have been developed as part of the UNCED follow-up process for various categories of forests. These criteria cover conservation of biological diversity, maintenance of productivity, maintenance of forest ecosystem health, conservation of soil and water resources, etc. Countries in the region have participated in several global initiatives to develop criteria and indicators for SFM, including the Montreal Process (for temperate forests) and initiatives of ITTO, which has adopted the goal of achieving trade in sustainably-managed timber by the year 2000.
Recent initiatives for timber certification (with regard to its origin being sustainably managed forest) and labelling for international trade are also expected to enhance interest in sustainable forest management. Some governments in the region are investigating options to accredit timber operations based on the level of sustainability of their operations.
A key issue now facing countries is how exactly to go about implementing SFM in practice. Countries are implementing a variety of approaches ranging from differentiation of forests according to function, such as in New Zealand (Box 4.10), to multiple-objective management of forests. Increasingly, countries are placing natural forests off-limits to timber harvesting and shifting timber production to plantations, or increasing imports to meet needs (Box 4.11). As efforts to define SFM practises continue, it is likely that the Asia-Pacific region will develop new and innovative management strategies that accommodate the special needs arising from high population densities.
Box 4.10: THE NEW ZEALAND MODEL OF SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT
In international fora, consensus is yet to be achieved as to an encompassing definition of Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) and especially regarding how it should be implemented. At the broader extremes of forest management perspectives are views that forests should serve almost exclusively environmental roles, and conversely, that forests should be utilised for commercial purposes wherever possible. In the meantime several countries have developed forestry systems that might usefully be adapted in a wider context. The structure of the New Zealand forest estate, for example, with a large exotic plantation resource in addition to indigenous forests has enabled the country to take a pragmatic decision to implement a distinctive approach to SFM.
The system of SFM adopted by New Zealand involves a significant separation of functions and specialisation in roles of indigenous versus plantation forests. Management of the indigenous forests is oriented toward conservation functions and management of the plantation is focused on economic roles. The policy objective is that, taken as a system, the two main groups of forests can deliver all the environmental, social and economic roles of forests but on the basis of specialisation. Accordingly, New Zealand's forest resource is divided into two distinct estates: the first, a natural forest estate, is comprised of species indigenous to New Zealand arid consists of either virgin or regenerated forest. It currently covers about a quarter of the country's land area. The second is the "man-made" plantation forests comprised of exotic species growing on some 5 percent of the land area. Although each type of forest can contribute in some measure to all forest roles, management of
the plantations is definitely focused on industrial raw material production, while the indigenous forests (which occupy a much larger area) are managed to conserve biological diversity and watersheds, provide habitat for wildlife, and provide destinations for wilderness-based tourism and similar services. Proponents of this dual system argue that specialisation allows a very small area of land to meet all industrial needs and to bear the pressure of harvest rather than having the entire extensive indigenous forest exposed to industrial utilisation and potentially risking the undermining of the other values society cherishes. In this sense, it is argued, that | by taking all the harvest pressure off natural forests, industrial plantations are effectively contributing to environmental conservation.
To put this complementary system into effect, New Zealand has separated the biological characteristics and functional dimensions of the resource itself, and has also separated its legal and institutional management. Thus, in 1987, the New Zealand Forest Service was restructured so as to isolate the commercial from non-commercial functions. A New Zealand Forestry Corporation took charge of the commercial aspects of the government's forestry operations, with a clear mandate to operate as a business (this has since been privatised). The conservation, social and other public service functions of the Forest Service were transferred to two new government departments: a Ministry of Forestry (handling policy, research, training, advisory and regulatory functions); and a Department of Conservation (focused on protection of natural forests).
The forest plantations that were previously owned by the government have now almost entirely been privatised and plantation forestry is truly focused on commercial ends. Conversely, the bulk of the indigenous forests that remain in government hands, have enhanced protected-area status. Since the separation, legal changes have been made to provide an underpinning to the policy. For example, privately owned natural forests are allowed to be managed for production, but in a way that maintains their natural values. New Zealand now has one of the world's most liberalised trade and investment regimes in the forestry sector and policy-makers expect this to enable the country to achieve world competitiveness.
Source: Adapted from Brown (1997). New Zealand In-depth Country Study. Document APFSOS/WP/05.
Box 4.11: CONSERVATION THROUGH WITHDRAWAL OF FORESTS FROM PRODUCTION?
Growing pressures arising from environmental concerns and from realisation of the repercussions of past "mismanagement" of natural forests have led some countries to impose logging bans or severe harvesting restrictions in natural forests. The principle behind such policy decisions is that significant or total withdrawal of forests from production will lead to conservation and sustainability of forests. Various countries in the region (e.g. India, Bangladesh, Thailand, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and New Zealand) have pursued such policies. Viet Nam has drastically reduced its harvesting from natural forests and plans a complete ban.^44 The People's Republic of China has indicated that it is seriously considering adopting a similar position in the near future.
^44 For details, see Nguyen Tuong Van (1997). Country Report - Viet Nam: Document APFSOS/WP/31. FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
The case of Viet Nam illustrates some of the motivations for withdrawing or reducing access to forests, while pursuing collateral efforts to maintain the economic contribution of the forestry sector. Facing the current shrinkage of forested area, the Government of Viet Nam has decided to limit timber extraction from natural forests (and is contemplating a full ban) and to ban the export of round and semi-processed timber. At the same time, it has encouraged the manufacturing of high-valued products. Raw materials for wood-based industries will come entirely from man-made forests by 2010.
Where bans have been adopted, there has been no systematic assessment as to whether they have been an effective way to achieve sustainability. On the contrary, claims have frequently been made, for example, that bans on logging in Thailand have simply led to higher levels of exploitation - much of it illegal - in neighbouring countries. Thailand's reported imports of wood products rose significantly following imposition of its logging ban, from 1990 when the country imported 1.491 million cubic metres of hardwood sawnwood, to 1995 when it imported 1.779 million cubic metres (the leading importer in the world for hardwood sawnwood). Logging restrictions in Viet Nam appear to also be leading to illegal exports from Cambodia.^45 One source^46 estimates Cambodian illegal exports of logs and sawn timber (in cubic metres) to Thailand and Viet Nam (1992-1996) as follows:
^45 As an example, stockpiles of logs worth an estimated US$130 million were reported despite a December log-export ban by Cambodia in December 1997. Cambodian and Vietnamese behind Cambodian timber liquidation. Phnom Penh. 26 February 1998. Worldwide Forest/Biodiversity Campaign News. http://forests.org/
^46 Table 3 in An outline of the causes of deforestation in Cambodia. N. Kim Phat (Faculty of Agriculture, Shinshu University), S. Ouk (Department of Forestry and Wildlife, Cambodia), Y. Uozumi and T. Ueki (Faculty of Agriculture, Shinshu University). March 1998.
Destination Country
1992(M^3)
1995(m^3)
1996(m^3)
Thailand
Viet Nam
No data
Source: Country Report - Viet Nam: Document APFSOS/WP/31.
Potential for supplying forest products and services
Current potential wood and fibre supplies from natural forests
Current potential wood and fibre supplies from industrial forest plantations
Current potential wood and fibre supplies from trees outside forests
Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand
Current potential for supplying non-wood forest products and services
A key element of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study has been to estimate the potential supply of forest products and services in the region. Estimation of the potential supplies of roundwood, including sawlogs, could be made with much greater degrees of confidence than for NWFPs and forest services due to the availability of more complete and accurate statistics on timber resources and management practises related to roundwood production.
Current potential wood and fibre supplies from natural forests
The current maximum wood and fibre supply that could be harvested sustainably from natural forests was calculated on the basis of forest lands available and accessible for harvest, sustainable harvesting intensities, existing volumes of timber in forests, national management policies and other factors. Potential production from "conversion forests" was only calculated for countries that have explicit policies and lands legally designated for conversion.
The total potential sustainable production of roundwood from natural forests in the region at the present time is about 340 million cubic metres per year (Figure 4.4). Southeast Asia and North Asia have the greatest potential for wood production from the natural forest, at 170 million cubic metres and 130 million cubic metres per year, respectively. The other sub-regions combined could produce about 30 million cubic metres per year.
Almost all natural forests in the region are subject to diameter cutting limits that preclude the harvest of small-diameter timber. Thus, with the exception of small-diameter logs that could be harvested from "conversion forests" in Indonesia and Malaysia, most potential production from natural forests is in the form of sawlogs. The total potential sawlog production in the region is currently about 220 million cubic metres per year. North Asia holds most of the potential supplies, and could currently harvest as much as 130 million cubic metres per year. Southeast Asia could produce about 60 million cubic metres.
Figure 4.4: Current potential supply of wood from the natural forests in Asia and the Pacific
Current potential wood and fibre supplies from industrial forest plantations
Based on the current species mix and increment of existing plantations in the region, it has been estimated that production potential of plantations presently stands at about 90 million cubic metres of sawlogs and 115 million cubic metres of pulpwood and fuelwood per year (Figure 4.5). North Asia currently has the largest potential production of wood from plantations at about 35 million cubic metres of sawlogs and 70 million cubic metres of pulpwood and fuelwood per year. The plantations of the AIEs currently have the potential to produce about 40 million cubic metres of sawlogs and 15 million cubic metres of pulpwood annually. South Asia has the potential to produce about 25 million cubic metres of pulpwood and fuelwood (much of which is being grown in fuelwood plantations). The older well-established teak plantations of Southeast Asia have the potential to produce about 10 million cubic metres of sawlogs per year, but the younger pulpwood plantations in Southeast Asia have
yet to produce much timber due to their immaturity.
Figure 4.5: Current potential supply of wood from plantations in Asia and the Pacific
Current potential wood and fibre supplies from trees outside forests
There is currently a huge potential for trees outside forests (including those on "other wooded land") to provide wood and fibre supplies in Asia and the Pacific (Figure 4.6). The potential is particularly high in North Asia, where as much as 80 million cubic metres of sawlogs and 360 million cubic metres of pulpwood and fuelwood could be produced annually. Southeast Asia currently has the potential to harvest about 30 million cubic metres of sawlogs and 175 million cubic metres of pulpwood or fuelwood from outside forests, and South Asia could produce about 35 million cubic metres of sawlogs and 165 million cubic metres of pulpwood or fuelwood. For South Asia, the sawlog production potential of trees outside the forest is very important because the production potential of the natural forests in the sub-region is relatively low.
Agricultural tree crops are a particularly important type of trees outside forests with large potential to produce wood and fibre. These crops are found all across the region, but particularly large areas are located in the People's Republic of China, India, Sri Lanka and the countries of Southeast Asia. Although they represent a potentially large source of wood supply, they are not currently utilised to a major extent except in the case of rubberwood (in Thailand and Malaysia) and cocowood (in India, Sri Lanka and the Philippines).
Overall, agricultural tree crops currently have the potential to produce about 20 million cubic metres of sawlogs and 200 million cubic metres of pulpwood and fuelwood annually. They account for about 25 percent of the total production potential of trees outside the forest. However, in some countries (e.g. Malaysia and Thailand) these crops are even more important than these figures would suggest and far exceed the current importance of industrial forest plantations in overall roundwood supply.
Figure 4.6: Current potential supply of wood from trees outside the forest (including other wooded land) in Asia and the Pacific
Current potential wood and fibre supply from residues, non-wood fibres and recycled materials
In addition to supplies of wood fibre from land-based sources, fibre can be obtained from forest industries and from outside the forest sector. These materials can be used to complement or substitute for wood supplies. They fall into three broad categories: residues (both forest residues and wood-processing residues); non-wood fibre sources; and recycled or recovered paper.
It should also be noted that estimates of processing residue potentials have been calculated based on current levels of sawlog production. If currently unutilised sawlog production potential were to be used in the future, wood processing residue supply potential would also increase to levels above those given here.
Non-wood fibres are produced by a variety of agricultural crops and by-products and are used in the production of paper in several countries in the region. Given that there are currently many millions of tonnes of fibre produced (as by-products) but not used in agriculture, production potential from this source was assumed to be only constrained by current processing capacity levels, which were found to be highest in North and South Asia. Data for non-wood fibres, which are usually presented in tonnes, were multiplied by 2.5 to arrive at a "wood raw material equivalent." The use of processing capacity to estimate production potential has undoubtedly led to a vast underestimation of the potential for production from such sources. The actual potential could be several times higher but is not precisely known or easy to estimate.
In calculating the potential volumes of recycled fibre in the region, it was assumed that the maximum amount that could be collected and recycled is 70 percent of the paper currently being consumed. This volume was multiplied by 2.5 to arrive at a "wood raw material equivalent."
The total potential wood and fibre supply that could currently be obtained from these non-forest sources is estimated to be nearly 1,000 million cubic metres (wood equivalent) (Figure 4.7). About 70 percent of this potential lies with harvesting residues, with 10 percent from mill residues and the remaining 20 percent from recycled and non-wood fibre. Most of this fibre could only be used as a substitute for fuelwood or pulpwood (the assumption made in this analysis). However, it is possible that a proportion of the harvesting residues could, if recovered, be used as sawlogs. This is particularly true in Southeast Asia where considerable volumes of large timber are frequently left in the forest during felling operations due to high-grading practises or careless removal operations.
Figure 4.7: Current potential supply of wood and other fibre from secondary sources in Asia and the Pacific
As might be expected, the sub-regions with the greatest potential roundwood supply also have the greatest potential to capture additional forest residues. Southeast Asia currently has the highest potential supply with about 380 million cubic metres equivalent, or just over half of the region's total. This is almost equal to the entire potential roundwood supply in this sub-region and is attributable to the difficulties in achieving high harvesting efficiencies in the forests of this sub-region and the current low level of production from plantations. North Asia and South Asia could each potentially capture about 150 million cubic metres equivalent of forest residues. This figure is relatively low compared with potential roundwood production in these two sub-regions because they tend to achieve higher harvesting efficiencies and harvest relatively more wood from plantations.
Southeast Asia also has the potential to supply about 35 million cubic metres equivalent of wood-processing residues, or 40 percent of the region's total. North Asia could supply about 25 million cubic metres equivalent and the AIEs could supply a further 15 million cubic metres equivalent. The potential supplies of processing residues in AIEs could be considerably higher than these estimates because of the large volume of logs that are imported.
In terms of recycled and non-wood fibre supply, North Asia leads the region with a supply potential of about 85 million cubic metres equivalent (or 40 percent of the region's total). Most of this is accounted for by non-wood fibre production in the People's Republic of China. The only other group of countries with significant potential is the AIEs, with a potential to produce about 55 million cubic metres equivalent of wastepaper. This sub-region records such a high wastepaper production potential because its per capita paper consumption is several times higher than the rest of the region.
Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand
Taken as a whole, the Asia-Pacific region has an apparently abundant supply of wood and fibre resources, far in excess of current use. However, the availability of wood and fibre varies significantly by sub-region and by product requirements. Even within countries, the distribution of potential supplies is highly uneven, resulting in some areas of surplus and other areas of shortage. In some sub-regions, non-forest sources of wood and fibre are already critical components of the overall supply situation and represent the most promising areas for potential supply increases. In most areas, accessing additional wood and fibre may require substantially more efficient methodologies and practices than those presently used. There are, therefore, interesting implications for the development of the sector in the region, which are explored more fully in the policy and institutions, and outlook sections of this report.
Figures 4.8 to 4.14 compare the estimates of maximum potential supply of wood and fibre presented earlier in this section with the current levels of raw material production presented in the previous section for each sub-region and for the region as a whole (Figure 4.8). The figures reflect the potential of the region and each of the sub-regions to supply sawlogs and other fibre products (e.g. pulpwood, residues, recycled fibre and non-wood fibre) from the following seven sources:^47
^47 It should be noted that the sum of the first five sources represents the total wood harvest which can be obtained from forest and other land-based sources at current harvesting intensities and levels of increment. The sixth category reflects fibre supply from outside the forest sector and is thus, largely outwith the control of forestry policy-makers. The seventh source reflects the potential for wood from the first five sources to be used again. It is thus, strictly speaking, a double counting of some of the wood already shown under the first five sources.
· Natural forests (NF)
· Plantations (PL)
· Other wooded land (OWL)
· Trees outside the forest (TOF)
· Harvesting residues (HRE)
· Recycled and non-wood fibre sources (RNW)
· Wood processing residues (WPR)
Each figure also shows the current estimated levels of production of sawlogs, pulpwood, fuelwood and recycled and non-wood fibre (represented by horizontal lines at the level of estimated current production). Three important features of the potential wood and fibre supply and demand balances in the region can be observed from the figures:
Supply sources in the region are highly diverse. The potential supply of wood and fibre from sources outside forests is particularly impressive - greater in fact than the potential supply from forest sources in all sub-regions. In some countries, particularly those in South Asia where supplies are tight, these non-forest sources of supply are already used to a major extent in the wood processing industry. Although total potential supplies of wood and fibre from non-forest sources are great, in terms of sawlogs most supply potential (about 75 percent) remains in the region's natural forests, and plantations.
Current production of logs is already very close to the maximum potential supplies in some sub-regions. Current log production is nearest to the maximum potential supply in the Pacific Islands and Southeast Asia, where more than three-quarters of the current supply potential is already being exploited. Current harvests are particularly close to the maximum current supply potential in several countries with large wood-processing industries (e.g. Malaysia and Indonesia). This situation is expected to become even more strained as demands increase in the future and harvesting in these sub-regions shifts from old-growth forests (as most will soon have been logged) back to forests that were logged earlier (thus sawlog volumes will generally be much lower).
South Asia apparently has the potential to produce more sawlogs than currently being harvested, but current harvests of fuelwood and pulpwood may already be exceeding the maximum sustainable potential supplies. In terms of log supply, this sub-region appears to have the potential to produce more than twice current requirements (mostly from trees outside the forest), partly reflecting the relatively small size of the wood-processing industry in these countries. In terms of pulpwood and fuelwood, current production could be in excess of sustainable production potential. As most of the demand is for fuelwood, however, it is possible that the extensive use of branches and other non-stem biomass is keeping use within potential sustainable limits (production potential figures are estimates of main stem volume and do not include estimates of non-stem or other biomass volumes). Nonetheless, it is evident that the supply situation is already very tight in some parts of South Asia.
Figure 4.8: Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand in Asia and the Pacific
Figure 4.9: Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand in the AIEs
Figure 4.10: Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand in the NIEs
Figure 4.11: Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand in North Asia
Figure 4.12: Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand in Southeast Asia
Figure 4.13: Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand in South Asia
Figure 4.14: Potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with current demand in the Pacific Islands
Current potential supplies and current production levels of wood and fibre are also shown in Table 4.9. Potential availability and production are shown for sawlogs, pulpwood and fuelwood, and recycled and non-wood fibre. The table also shows the percentage of maximum potential production that is currently being produced for each of these categories of products.
Table 4.9: Potential wood and fibre availability and production in the Asia-Pacific region, 1994
Region
Potential sawlog availability (million m^3)
Sawlog production
RNW availability
RNW production
NF
PL
OWL
TOF
Total
(million m^3)
(million m^3 EQ)
(million m^3 EQ)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
N/A
All Asia-Pacific
Region
Potential pulpwood and fuelwood availability (million m^3 EQ)
Pulp/fuel production
NF
PL
OWL
TOF
HRE
WPR
Total
(million m^3 EQ)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Note: Percentage figures are production as a percentage of potential availability.
Current potential for supplying non-wood forest products and services
The heterogeneity of NWFPs and forest services makes it difficult to define and collect data on the current supply potential and to match it with utilisation needs. However, some information about specific resources and services in the region is available and is summarised below.
Bamboo. The total estimated area of forests used for commercial bamboo production and collection in Asia and the Pacific is about 11 million hectares. Most production occurs in the People's Republic of China, India and Myanmar. In addition to bamboo collected from forests, huge volumes are produced outside forests. The Asia-Pacific region accounts for about 80 percent of total world production of bamboo.
Rattan. Indonesia is the world's largest rattan producer and rattan is commercially collected from 9.4 million hectares of natural forest and over 30,000 hectares of rattan plantations each year. Indonesia has plans to expand the area of rattan plantations to over 1 million hectares. The second largest producer in the region is the People's Republic of China, where rattan is collected from 30,000 hectares of natural forest and 4,000 hectares of rattan plantations each year. A few other countries in the region also produce rattan on a commercial scale.
Plant extracts. Trees and other forest plants are used for the production of many different plant extracts throughout the region. Two particularly important extracts are resin (from pine trees) and starch (from sago palm). Pine resin is tapped from both natural forests and plantations. The main resin-producing countries in the region are the People's Republic of China (5.3 million hectares of pine plantations), Indonesia (134,000 hectares of natural pine forest and 250,000 hectares of plantations) and India (25,000 hectares of pine plantations). Sago palm is common across parts of Southeast Asia. It is commercially produced mainly in Indonesia, where there are 700,000 hectares of natural sago palm forests and 90,000 hectares of plantations.
Wildlife products. While some specific uses of wildlife, particularly of primates, are controversial, the importance and values of forest fauna as a commercial resource is generally accepted. Apart from supporting national heritage and nature tourism, wildlife also provides several direct contributions in the form of bushmeat, plumes, pelts and other animal products. Wildlife farming (e.g. crocodile, deer, snakes, butterflies) is undertaken as an economic activity in several countries in the Asia-Pacific region. Several insects such as honey bees, silk worms, lac insects and cochineal insects also support economic activities. However, in most countries, there appears to be no clear comprehensive policies or programmes for their sustainable development. Management and use of faunal resources needs to be undertaken with adequate care to ensure that the balance of nature is not destroyed.
Carbon storage. A major aim of current biomass assessments is to estimate the amount of carbon stored in above-ground vegetation.^48 The biomass estimates for tropical Asia (181 metric tonnes per hectare) and the whole Asia-Pacific region (171 metric tonnes per hectare) indicate the luxuriance of the forests in this region when compared with the average biomass estimate for the whole world (131 metric tonnes per hectare). They also highlight the relatively large amount of carbon that is added to the atmosphere when the region's forests are cleared or burned.
^48 FAO regularly provides an estimate of biomass, the latest being in the State of the World's Forests 1997. Biomass is defined as the total amount of above-ground living organic matter in trees, expressed as oven-dry weight per unit area. Biomass is estimated in this study by multiplying the growing stock volume by wood density and adding to it a 'biomass expansion factor', representing the weight of other above ground components in trees. This estimation of biomass does not cover herbs, smaller plants, and micro-organisms, many of which are important sources of NWFPs.
Biological diversity conservation. Biological diversity is usually considered at three levels: the genetic diversity within species; the diversity of species within an area and the diversity of different types of ecosystems or habitats within a larger area. The Asia-Pacific region has exceptionally high biological diversity at all three levels. It covers four biogeographical realms including two in their entirety (i.e. the Indo-Malaya realm and the Australia realm). Most of East Asia is in the Palaeartic realm and the Pacific Islands are located in the Oceania realm. It is estimated that there are about 40,400 higher plant species in the tropical rain forests of Asia and the Pacific. There are 7,600 higher plant species in tropical moist deciduous forests; 1,600 species in dry-zone forests; and 13,500 in upland formations. Many are found only in primary forests. Four of the world's 12 "mega-biodiversity countries are located in Asia and the Pacific. Four other Asia-Pacific
countries are among the top 20 biodiversity countries.
The range and value of services provided by forests is shown in Section 3 of this report. It is particularly difficult to quantify the "supply potential" for such services; only qualitative statements are generally possible. For certain protective functions, the "supply" of the service is directly dependent on the protection itself being enforced. In practice, governments tend to control access to services such as grazing and hunting on a seasonal or annual basis or according to evidence of overuse. Conversely, management interventions can be made to increase and enhance the ability of forests to provide services. For example, wildlife habitat can be manipulated to increase the numbers of specific species for hunting, or infrastructure can be developed to support additional ecotourism visitors.
<section>a</section>
5. Trade
Introduction
Trade conditions
Important influences on trade
Non-wood forest products (NWFPs)
Introduction
Globally, forest product exports were valued at about US$140 billion in 1995. While several Asia-Pacific countries are major exporters of forest products (exports totalled US$20 billion in 1995), the region's role as an importer is even more significant (US$44 billion). In 1995, the region accounted for 14 percent of world exports, up from 12 percent in 1970 (Figure 5.1). The region's share of imports was around 32 percent, up from 21 percent in 1970 (Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.1: Global forest product imports by region, 1970
Figure 5.1: Global forest product imports by region, 1995
Source: FAO.
Japan is easily the largest forest products importer in Asia-Pacific and is in a class alone with the United States as a "mega-importer" (Table 5.1). The rapid growth of the Republic of Korea - notwithstanding recent economic shocks - has been sufficient to boost it into a second tier of global importers, along with the People's Republic of China.
Japan's imports of industrial roundwood and sawn timber are more than four times greater than those of the next largest importers in the region (the Republic of Korea and Thailand, respectively) (Figure 5.3). Japanese imports of wood-based panels are twice those of the People's Republic of China (the second-largest importer in the region).
Figure 5.2: Global forest product exports by region, 1970
Figure 5.2: Global forest product exports by region, 1995
Source: FAO.
Table 5.1: Major global importers and exporters of forest products, 1995
Imports (US$1,000)
Exports (US$1,000)
United States
Canada
Japan
United States
Germany
Finland
Italy
Sweden
France
Germany
United Kingdom
France
Netherlands
Indonesia
The Republic of Korea
Malaysia
Belgium-Luxembourg
Brazil
Spain
Austria
The People's Republic of China
Russian Federation
- Taiwan Province of China
Netherlands
- Hong Kong SAR, China
Italy
Canada
Bel-Lux
Switzerland
Norway
Source: FAOSTAT.
Figure 5.3: Main importers and exporters of solidwood forest products in Asia-Pacific
Figure a
Figure b
Figure c
Figure d
Figure e
Figure f
Source FAOSTAT
Trade conditions
Significant features of international trade
Changes in the forest resource
As a result of the rapid rate of deforestation in Asia and the Pacific, and global calls for sustainable forest management, many countries in the region are reducing timber harvests, changing management to more environmentally favourable systems, and paying more attention to non-economic factors. Actions such as these are having, and will continue to have, significant impacts on trade.
Expanded consumption of wood
Global consumption of both fuelwood and industrial wood has shown substantial growth in recent decades. Total world consumption of roundwood increased from around 2.4 billion cubic metres in 1970 to 3.4 billion cubic metres in 1995, a 36 percent rise. The level of consumption varies markedly by country and with the products involved. The main consumers in Asia and the Pacific are either the larger countries (i.e. India, the People's Republic of China and Indonesia) or the more developed countries (i.e. Japan and Australia). Total consumption in Asia and the Pacific now exceeds that of Europe in all products except wood-based panels. The implications of expanded consumption for forestry trade are obvious. Since growth in demand is not confined to forest-rich countries, by necessity trade will expand to meet shortfalls.
Non-wood forest products (NWFPs) receiving more attention
In addition to wood, the consumption of various NWFPs has been growing rapidly. It is difficult to place a figure on their significance because of a lack of data and in many cases a lack of formalised markets. Nonetheless, it is evident that they are increasingly being traded both domestically and internationally. Many countries in the Asia-Pacific region trade a wide variety of NWFPs, with the most extensive being rattan, bamboo, ginseng, mushrooms, and various oils and spices.
Expansion of the exports of most products
At a global level, exports of industrial roundwood have increased by 30 percent since 1970 to 121.7 million cubic metres. Sawnwood and wood pulp exports both have almost doubled to 108.5 million cubic metres and 31.4 million metric tonnes, respectively. Wood-based panel exports have increased fourfold to 41.4 million cubic metres. Paper and paperboard exports have trebled to 73.1 million metric tonnes. Similar growth has also occurred in the Asia-Pacific region for many of the products and in most cases the performance of the Asia-Pacific region has been a major factor in the global situation. In Asia-Pacific, since 1970, export volumes of sawnwood expanded strongly (more than doubled) to 7.5 million cubic metres; wood pulp exports increased eight-fold (to 1.0 million metric tonnes); wood-based panel exports increased fivefold to 15.2 million cubic metres; and paper and paperboard exports increased sevenfold to 6.3 million metric tonnes. Against this pattern, and unlike the
global trend, Asia-Pacific industrial roundwood exports have decreased by 3.2 percent to 31.2 million cubic metres.
Conditions, however, have changed somewhat since 1990. For example since that time: industrial roundwood exports have declined marginally; wood-based panel exports are up 22 percent; wood pulp exports are up 20 percent; and paper and paperboard exports are up 60 percent, though from a small base. In the case of sawnwood, there has been a 13 percent decline during the 1990s. Exports of furniture components, mouldings, etc., have increased substantially. As markets have changed, resource conditions altered, product forms changed, and consumption levels within domestic markets altered, there have been substantial changes in the importance of different countries as exporters.
Table 5.2: Major Asia-Pacific forest product exporters and importers
Country
Exports-1995 (US$1,000)
Indonesia
Malaysia
Japan
New Zealand
The Republic of Korea
The People's Republic of China
- Hong Kong SAR, China
- Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Australia
Thailand
Papua New Guinea
Myanmar
Cambodia
Solomon Islands
Philippines
Laos
Viet Nam
Fiji
India
Other
TOTAL Asia-Pacific
Country
Imports-1995 (US$1,000)
Japan
The Republic of Korea
The People's Republic of China
-Taiwan Province of China
-Hong Kong SAR, China
Thailand
Australia
Singapore
Malaysia
Philippines
Indonesia
India
New Zealand
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Viet Nam
Bangladesh
Korea DPR
Brunei
Macau
Other
TOTAL Asia-Pacific
Source: FAOSTAT.
Increased proportion of production exported
Globally, the share of total production that is exported has increased for all products except industrial roundwood. This situation is also generally reflected in the Asia-Pacific region. For example, in Asia-Pacific the proportion of sawnwood production exported increased from 10 percent in 1970 to 24 percent in 1995; the share of wood-based panels (mainly plywood) exported increased from 22 percent to 34 percent; the share of wood pulp exported increased from 1 percent to 5 percent; and the share of paper and paperboard exported increased from 5 percent to 7 percent. By contrast, the share of industrial roundwood production that was exported fell from 18 percent to 11 percent.
A few countries dominate both exports and imports
In 1995, five countries accounted for 55 percent of world exports of forest products and ten accounted for 70 percent. Canada and the United States alone accounted for almost one-third. On the import side, five countries accounted for 48 percent and ten countries for 66 percent. The United States and Japan alone were responsible for almost one-third. As with the global situation, a small number of Asia-Pacific countries account for the bulk of the region's exports and imports. In 1995, five countries accounted for 72 percent of the region's exports of forest products and ten accounted for 92 percent. The major exporters are Indonesia and Malaysia, which together account for almost half of the total. Malaysia (mainly Sarawak) is the world's third largest exporter of logs (after United States and the Russian Federation) and the seventh largest exporter of sawnwood (Table 5.2).
Asia-Pacific countries account for 29 percent of world forest products exports, but 67 percent of the world's plywood exports. Indonesia dominates plywood exports with 45 percent of the world market, while Malaysia has been expanding its share in recent years and in 1995 accounted for 19 percent. Sixty percent of the region's pulp exports are provided by New Zealand; and five countries provide three-quarters of the region's paper and paperboard exports. The People's Republic of China, Indonesia and the Republic of Korea are increasing their exports of these latter products. Exports of logs from Asia-Pacific countries have reduced only slightly since 1990 but there has been a major change in the source of these logs. There has been a substantial (60 percent) reduction by Malaysia, the largest exporter, counterbalanced by a strong increase by New Zealand and to a lesser extent the People's Republic of China, Cambodia, Papua New Guinea, Fiji and Myanmar.
Changing product mix for exports
Although expanding in absolute terms, globally industrial roundwood's share of the value of total forest product exports dropped from a peak of 15 percent to 8 percent, largely since the early 1980s (Table 5.3). This trend seems likely to continue. Wood pulp's share has declined steadily as importers have moved to importing final products. Sawnwood exports have remained relatively stable. By contrast, the share of both wood-based panels, and paper and paperboard increased, reflecting the growing emphasis on higher-value forest products in world trade. Paper and paperboard products now account for approximately 46 percent of the value of world forest product exports, followed by sawnwood (17 percent), wood pulp (16 percent) and wood-based panels (11 percent). Similar trends have taken place in the Asia-Pacific region where the importance of industrial roundwood has declined, while that of sawnwood remained static and wood-based panels and paper and paperboard rose.
Table 5.3: Share of products in total exports - 1970 and 1995 (percent by value)
Commodity group
Asia-Pacific
World
Industrial roundwood
Sawnwood
Wood-based panels
Wood pulp
Paper and paperboard
Declining significance of tropical products
Despite the substantial attention they receive, tropical forest products represent only a small share of global exports for most product categories. Tropical roundwood production is estimated to represent about 15 percent of world industrial roundwood production. Tropical products account for small but varying shares of the total exports of different product categories: 20 percent of industrial roundwood exports; 10 percent of sawnwood exports; less than 10 percent of pulp and paper and paperboard product exports; and 39 percent of wood-based panel exports. Tropical plywood, however, accounts for 71 percent of global plywood exports.
In Asia and the Pacific, export volumes of tropical logs and sawnwood have reduced substantially since 1990, while those of panels, pulp and paper and paperboard have risen slightly. The decline in log and sawnwood exports is due to various factors, with regional totals frequently masking considerable country changes. The decline in tropical log exports largely reflects a reduction by Malaysia, which reduced the harvest level in Sarawak and banned log exports temporarily from Sabah (partially lifted in 1996). The reduction in sawnwood exports reflects a drop by Malaysia and Singapore. The increase in panel exports reflects increased exports from Malaysia and Indonesia, despite reduced exports by Singapore and Hong Kong SAR, China. The rise in paper and paperboard exports is due to increases by Indonesia, Thailand and Hong Kong SAR, China.
Increasing imports
In addition to their traditional position as exporters, as their economies have grown a number of Asia-Pacific countries have increased their importance as importers, and also their share of global imports. This has occurred mainly with logs and semi-finished wood products, but also paper products in some cases. Five countries account for 78 percent of the region's forest product imports, with Japan alone importing a 44 percent share. While Japan is by far the largest single importer in Asia, imports by a number of the developing countries are growing rapidly. Of note are the Republic of Korea, the People's Republic of China and Thailand.
India is also showing increased and significant potential as an importer because of its size, recent relaxations of import restrictions, and harvesting controls in natural forests have been imposed in some regions of the country in an effort to preserve declining resources. A major challenge for India will be to rapidly develop adequate infrastructure to support the opening of its markets to import competition. India's per capita consumption of industrial roundwood is among the lowest in the world as a result of heavily constrained domestic production and (until recently) an effective embargo on importing forest products through extremely high trade barriers and administrative complexity of import procedures. As a consequence, the first shipments of logs arriving at India's ports face uncertain transportation and processing facilities that must rapidly adapt to log dimensions and species that may be generally unfamiliar, or inappropriate for installed technology. Especially
in the case of sawmilling, but also in other sectors of wood processing, many enterprises in India tend to be small. Exporters to this fairly dispersed market may initially face significant transaction costs.
Changed supply levels from major suppliers outside the Asia-Pacific region
One area with a considerable impact on the region has been the Russian Far East. This area's market situation changed significantly in recent years. For many years, the former USSR (largely Russia) has been a major supplier of logs to Asia, particularly to Japan, but also to the Republic of Korea and the People's Republic of China. Total exports of industrial roundwood from the USSR reached a peak of 21 million cubic metres in 1988 and then declined to around 12 million in 1991. The Russian Far East has again increased exports since the early 1990s, and in 1995 exports matched the 1988 level. The main Asian markets accounted for about one-quarter of the total Russian Far East exports in 1995.
The overall trade pattern of the region and its reliance on other regions is largely influenced by the purchasing patterns of Japan (Box 5.1). Japan depends on imports for about 80 percent of its consumption. Since the late 1960s, imported wood has steadily increased its share in the Japanese market due to its price advantage over domestic timber, supply capacities and distribution systems. Almost half of Japan's forestry imports are sourced from North America, which provides a dominant source of coniferous wood products, notably logs, sawn timber and wood pulp.
Japan also imports significant amounts of logs from the Russian Far East, an area where poor infrastructure is known to be a significant barrier to rapid increase in harvests. Recently, Japan and Russia made progress on the status of the Kuril Islands that may lead to resolution of this long-standing issue. Should this happen, some policy barriers to Japanese investment in Russia could disappear. The possibility exists that investments in Russian Far East infrastructure would improve accessibility of the forest resource enough to significantly alter the wood trade patterns into Japan.
Box 5.1: CASE STUDY: JAPAN - THE KEY MARKET IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION Dominance as a market for the region
Japan is, without doubt, the pivotal market for forest products in the Asia-Pacific region. In 1995, Japan's gross trade in forest products totalled more than US$21 billion and comprised 33 percent of all forest products trade in the region. Japan is heavily forested with 67 percent of the country's total land area under forest, but its annual harvest of industrial roundwood is only about 23 million cubic metres per annum. Very high forest harvesting costs in Japan make it financially more logical to import forest products than to harvest trees domestically. Japan's imports of industrial logs in 1995 totalled 48 million cubic metres, and imports of processed forest products (sawn timber, panels, pulp and paper) were estimated to have a roundwood equivalent of 72 million cubic metres. Thus, Japan's turnover (production + imports) of forestry products has a roundwood equivalent of approximately 143 million cubic metres - an amount equal to almost exactly half of the
Asia-Pacific region's total industrial roundwood harvest.
Japan's dominance of the industrial wood market has a number of important policy implications for the region. Most significantly, if Japan unilaterally (and substantially) reduced wood consumption (or alternatively, substantially increased domestic wood production), there would be both a significant lessening of industrial harvesting pressures on the region's forests, and a significant economic dislocation for forestry producers in the region. By extension, through its domestic policies, Japan has significant leverage to change behaviour throughout the region. For example, Japan's targeting of a 55 percent recycled component in pulp and paper products has significant impacts outside of Japan.
Profile of supply sources and of demand
Total supply of wood: The 1995 Japanese timber supply totalled 111.9 million cubic metres, of which 20 percent (22.9 million cubic metres) was domestic and 80 percent (89 million cubic metres) was imported. Of the total supply, the percentage breakdown by enduse is as:
Imported
(million m^3)
Domestic
(million m^3)
Total
(million m^3)
Domestic (%)
Total
Logs
Rdwd equiv. of sawnwood
Rdwd equiv. veneer & plywood
Chips
Pulpwood
Others
Note:* = percent of total of "chips" and "pulpwood".
Demand for roundwood for sawn timber; the factory intake of logs was 36.7 million cubic metres in 1995, with the breakdown by sources of supply (in million cubic metres) being:
Volume (million m^3)
Total supply
Domestic supply
Foreign supply
Of which:
North America
Russian Far East
New Zealand
Tropical Asia
Other sources
Under current plans, Japan intends to achieve a self-sufficiency ratio of 50 percent for sawnwood in about 25 years (i.e. around year 2023).
Demand for other categories of roundwood: (i) For plywood-. Production of ordinary plywood in Japan was 4.4 million cubic metres in 1995. Roundwood delivered to plywood factories totalled 7.3 million cubic metres, of which 0.2 million cubic metres (3 percent) was domestic and 7.1 million cubic metres was foreign. Recently, a major increase in the use of coniferous wood in plywood manufacture has occurred. Most coniferous species utilised include Russian larch and New Zealand radiata pine. (ii) For pulpwood. Demand for pulpwood in 1995 was 37.2 million cubic metres as input into producing 29.7 million tonnes of paper and paperboard. The paper and pulp industry has already been promoting paper recycling and by 1995 the recycling ratio had reached the relatively high ratio of 53.4 percent. The industry is aiming to achieve "56 percent recycling of used paper by the year 2000."
Source: Adapted from Forestry Agency (1998): Country Report - Japan: Document APFSOS/W P/15.
Tropical wood is still a significant element of Japan's imports. Of this, Indonesia and Malaysia provide the bulk (almost 24 percent of Japan's imports were sourced from these two countries in 1995, mainly as logs, sawn timber and plywood). Other major wood suppliers are the Russian Federation (5 percent of value of total forestry imports), New Zealand (3 percent) and Papua New Guinea (2 percent) for mainly logs; Australia (3 percent) and Chile (2.5 percent) for woodchips; and the Scandinavian countries (3 percent) mainly for paper products.
Despite its huge size, Japan's market is mature. In the future, apart from possible shifts in import-dependency, the most important aspects of the Japanese trade market will be where its imports are obtained.
The other key market in Asia is the People's Republic of China. Its size and growth potential make it an important country to monitor as a key emerging market (Box 5.2).
Box 5.2: DEVELOPMENTS IN A MAJOR EMERGING MARKET - THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
The People's Republic of China is likely to be one of the most influential markets in the region in the future. Significant changes are occurring in the Chinese market,^49 Between 1981 and 1992, for example, roundwood dominated Chinese forest product imports, accounting for 32 percent of the total value. Paper and paperboard accounted for an additional 29 percent, followed by pulp and wastepaper (19 percent) and finally plywood (18 percent). In recent years, however, due to log-export bans adopted by other countries and the subsequent increase in the price of logs, China has dramatically reduced its imports of logs, while increasing imports of plywood, veneer, paper and paperboard. The amount of pulp, wastepaper and sawn timber imported into the country has remained steady.
^49 For details, see Country Report - The People's Republic of China: Document APFSOS/WP/14, 1977.
There have also been changes in the species that are imported. Before 1991, coniferous species dominated roundwood imports but since 1992, the proportion of conifers has declined from about 89 percent (in 1988) to only about 36 percent (in 1994). There is also a shift in the sources of imports. The coniferous roundwood imports of China previously were mainly from the United States (the United States proportion in China's coniferous roundwood imports in 1988-1989 was nearly 62 percent). However, due to the high price of United States products, China's imports of coniferous roundwood have shifted toward Russia and New Zealand. China's imports of hardwood logs, plywood, veneer and even sawn timber are primarily tropical products. The country's imports of tropical forest products between 1988 and 1994 rose very rapidly. Tropical roundwood imports rose an average of 13.7 percent annually; plywood 10.4 percent; veneer 49 percent; and sawn timber 22.5 percent. Both roundwood and
plywood imports exceeded 2 million cubic metres annually but sawnwood was only about 0.7 million cubic metres in 1994.
Source: Country Report - The People's Republic of China: Document APFSOS/W P/14,1977.
Changing trade status
A number of countries in the region are becoming either increasingly dependent on imports, or have reduced the extent to which they export. These changes have been caused by a number of factors, such as the increasing demands of domestic markets, and reduced supply due to the increased pressure on the forest resource and the changing demands being placed on it. The only country in the region that remains a net exporter in all five major product categories is New Zealand, which has substantially increased exports of all products except paper and paperboard.
Only four countries (Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea) are significant net exporters, with net exports of over $500 million from each country (Table 5.4). Several countries have changed their status: the Philippines is now a net importer of all products except pulp; Thailand is a net importer of logs, sawnwood, and panels; and Singapore has become a net importer of sawnwood and panels. Malaysia has increased panel exports and furniture but has reduced log and sawnwood exports, and is now importing increasing volumes of paper and paperboard. Indonesia has continued its exports of solid wood products and of paper and paperboard, but is increasing its imports of pulp. The Republic of Korea has increased its imports of sawnwood, wood-based panels and pulp while the People's Republic of China has increased imports of all products.
Table 5.4: Net forest products trade in the major Asia-Pacific countries
Imports (US$1,000)
Exports (US$1,000)
Net trade (US$1,000)
(- equals net importer)
Japan
Rep. Korea
The People's Republic of China
-Taiwan POC^50
-Hong Kong SAR
Thailand
Australia
Philippines
Singapore
India
Pakistan
Sri Lanka
Korea DPR
Viet Nam
Fiji
Laos
Solomon Islands
Cambodia
Myanmar
Papua New Guinea
New Zealand
Malaysia
Indonesia
^50 Taiwan Province of China.
Changing trade patterns
Trade patterns have changed substantially in the region over the past decade, particularly through increasing trade between developing countries. Countries such as the People's Republic of China, the Republic of Korea, Thailand and the Philippines have increased their imports from outside the region but also (and increasingly) from other countries in the region such as Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and New Zealand. Japan has also changed some of its sources and some of the products it imports. It is importing from new suppliers outside the region such as Africa and Scandinavia, as well as from new countries within the region. The changes in the direction of trade reflect a wide range of factors including changes in resource availability from natural forests, investment decisions (both relating to forests and processing plants), market preferences and recent attitudes to environmental issues.
On a macro-scale, three regions dominate the global trade in forest products. Europe, the largest region, is effectively self sufficient in forestry products with total exports and imports very broadly in balance. North America is a significant net exporter of forest products. The Asia-Pacific region is a major net importer. Patterns of trade for individual forest products, however, show more variation. For industrial roundwood Asia-Pacific is by far the dominant importing region, while both the former USSR (15.2 percent) and Africa (10.4 percent) provide significant shares of global exports. The Asia-Pacific (especially Indonesia) and Latin America export wood-based panels that help to balance supply shortfalls in Europe, while North America is effectively self-sufficient in panels. For paper and paperboard, Europe and North America provide 85 percent of globally-traded production, with all other regions being net importers of this capital-intensive product.
Most Asia-Pacific exports are traded within the region (Tables 5.5 and 5.6). For imports, however, other regions remain quite important as suppliers, especially North America and the Russian Far East.
Table 5.5: Main trading partners of Asia-Pacific exporters, 1995
Major Asia-Pacific forest products trading partners
Exporters
US$1,000
Main trade partners
Indonesia
Japan, the Republic of Korea, United States, and Hong Kong SAR, China
Malaysia
Japan, the People's Republic of China and Hong Kong SAR, China, Thailand, the Republic of Korea and Singapore
Japan
United States, Canada, Malaysia, Russian Federation, Chile, New Zealand, Finland, Brazil
New Zealand
Japan, Australia, the Republic of Korea, the People's Republic of China
The Republic of Korea
United States, Canada, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Chile, Russian Federation
Total Asia-Pacific
Source: FAOSTAT.
Table 5.6: Main trading partners of Asia-Pacific importers, 1995
Major Asia-Pacific forest products trading partners
Importers
US$1,000
Main trade partners
Japan
United States, Canada, Malaysia, Indonesia, Russian Federation, Chile, New Zealand
The Republic of Korea
United States, Canada, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Chile
The People's Republic of China
Malaysia, France, Indonesia, Canada, United States
- Taiwan Province of China
Malaysia, France, Indonesia, Canada, United States
- Hong Kong SAR, China
United States, Indonesia, Malaysia, Canada, Germany
TOTAL Asia-Pacific
Source: FAOSTAT.
Box 5.3: VALUE-ADDED PROCESSING IN MALAYSIA, THAILAND, THE PHILIPPINES AND VIET NAM
Malaysia: Malaysia provides the most graphic illustration of the trend toward further processing in Asia and the Pacific. Malaysia's exports of major wood-based products have increased nearly three-fold (from RM4.3 billion to RM12.3 billion) between 1985 and 1995.^51 However, the export mix has changed dramatically. Exports of logs declined from 65 percent of total export value in 1985 to only 18 percent in 1995. Exports of sawn timber also declined, as sawmillers were encouraged to add higher value to their products. By contrast, exports of downstream products like plywood, veneer, mouldings and furniture have expanded rapidly. Furniture moved from an export share of 0.3 percent in 1985 to 13.6 percent in 1995; the export value of mouldings grew almost threefold during the same period. Rubberwood has become the leading timber for value-added exports. In 1995, 95 percent of total furniture exports were wood-based, of which 80 to 85 percent were rubberwood-based.
^51 Details are in the Country Report - Malaysia: Document APFSOS/WP/07. FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
Malaysia's Second Industrial Master Plan (IMP2) specifically aims to generate maximum value from Malaysia's forest resources and to make Malaysia a highly visible and reputable manufacturer of furniture and mouldings/joinery. Priority projects for the wood-based industry identified under IMP2 are:
· to establish furniture complexes to encourage furniture production for export markets;
· to establish integrated rubberwood processing plants to maximise the utilisation of different sizes and quality of rubberwood; and
· to establish timber processing zones in Sabah and Sarawak to encourage local processing. The Malaysian developments reflect a regional pattern toward the export of value-added products.
Thailand: The Thai furniture industry's expansion is export driven. Total furniture exports in 1990 were valued at US$240 million, of which wooden furniture accounted for US$101.7 million. The export of furniture and parts was one of fastest growing export sectors in Thailand in the 1980s with value growth of about 47 percent annually between 1986 and 1990, and continuing the upward trend.
The government, in its drive to make Thailand one of the largest furniture production centres in Asia has provided numerous incentives. Rubberwood furniture accounts for 80 to 85 percent of total wooden furniture exports and is the fastest growing sub-sector within the furniture industry.
The Philippines: There has been a dramatic shift in the composition of forest product exports from the Philippines. By 1994, the volume of exported logs, lumber veneer and plywood had decreased to only 7.5 percent of the level of 1984. By contrast, the export value of wood-based manufactured articles had increased from US$52.3 million to US$130.1 million and forest-based furniture earned US$280.2 million in 1994, compared with zero foreign earnings in 1984. The export value of wood-based manufactured articles and furniture comprised 87 percent of total forest product export value in 1994, compared with only 16 percent in 1984.
Viet Nam: Value-added manufacturing is partly driven by the current shrinkage of forested area which has led the Government of Viet Nam to limit timber extraction from natural forests and the export of roundwood and semi-processed timber. An apparent benefit of the policy is that, despite a decrease in annual roundwood removals from 927,000 cubic metres in 1991 to 310,000 cubic metres in 1995, export earnings from forest products (after a temporary fall) have rebounded (from US$175.5 million in 1991 to US$135.6 million in 1995). Earnings from cabinet-work have increased most rapidly.
Source: For Malaysia - adapted from Baharuddin (Personal communication, January 1998); for Thailand- Document APFSOS/WP/46; for the Philippines - Document APFSOS/WP/33; for Viet Nam - Document APFSOS/WP/31.
Increased trade in higher value products
Paper and paperboard products presently comprise approximately 44 percent of the value of world forest product exports, followed by sawnwood (21 percent) and wood-based panels (13 percent). Additionally there has been an expansion in trade of products such as builders' woodwork and furniture. Although there is still substantial trade in unprocessed logs and woodchips between some countries in Asia and the Pacific, exports have tended to move toward value-added products such as plywood and secondary wood products (Box 5.3). Exports of furniture components, mouldings, etc., have increased substantially, a trend that is largely driven by a few countries. For example, Malaysian exports of secondary processed products have increased fourfold in value over the period 1990-1994 (mouldings rose by 30 percent and furniture rose almost sevenfold); those of Indonesia trebled; those of Thailand doubled; and the Philippines, Singapore and Hong Kong SAR, China showed increases of around
20 percent.^52
^52 ITTO "Annual Review and Assessment of the World Tropical Timber Situation 1996." ITTO, 1997.
Substitution of materials and products
Allied with the move toward higher-value products, there has been a substitution of non-traditional raw materials, such as rubberwood, coconut wood and rattan for traditional wood products in many countries. In Japan, softwoods are increasingly substituting hardwoods.
Important influences on trade
Developments related to tariffs
Non-tariff barriers (NTBs)
Impediments to trade
Moves to liberalise trade and increasing environmental pressures are two of the major change factors influencing forest product trade in Asia and the Pacific (and the rest of the world).
Developments related to tariffs
Tariff barriers have been declining steadily for a number of years. A major influence on this has been the international multilateral trade negotiations held under the auspices of the GATT/WTO. Very few large developed importing countries now apply significant tariffs on most forest products. Tariffs, however, are still a problem for some products, such as plywood, builders' woodwork and furniture. Even a relatively low duty can create problems for distant suppliers. Problems are especially acute in the competitive basic commodity product categories where price competition is greatest.
In the future, tariffs will continue to decline as the Uruguay Round results are implemented and as additional regional and bilateral negotiations take effect.^53 As a result of the Uruguay Round, many tariffs will be reduced over a period of years. The extent and the speed of the reductions will vary considerably between countries and also products, and in some cases the phased reductions may take up to 15 years to be fully achieved.
^53 The Uruguay Round was formally signed into force in 1994. For fall details see Barbier, E.B. "Impact of the Uruguay Round Agreement on International Trade in Forest Products," FAO, 1996, and Bourke, I.J. "The Uruguay Round Results - an Overview." hi Tropical Forest Update, ITTO, Vol. 6 (2), September 1996.
The reductions agreed to by developed countries in the Uruguay Round have been estimated by GATT to average (on a trade-weighted basis) 43 percent for solid wood products, and 99 percent for pulp and paper products. For paper and paperboard products, the main importers (i.e. United States, Canada, European Union, and Japan), together with some smaller importers, will phase out tariffs completely over an 8- to 10-year period. Similarly, some major importers such as the European Union, Japan and the United States have agreed to eliminate tariffs completely on furniture over the next 8 to 10 years. Despite this, for products such as wood-based panels (especially plywood), the post-Uruguay Round rates will remain high in some countries.
Tariff changes by developing countries will be more variable. In a number of cases they will be lowered; in many cases, they will be lowered substantially since they are currently very high. With limited exceptions, however, even after these changes, most rates will still be substantially higher than for developed countries. Some examples of the commitments from the pre-Uruguay Round level in the Asia-Pacific region are:
· Thailand will reduce wood-based panel tariffs by 20 to 50 percent and furniture rates by 60 percent;
· The People's Republic of China will make 30 percent reductions for furniture and 10 percent for particleboard and builders' joinery;
· the Republic of Korea will reduce tariffs on paper products by 9 percent and on furniture items by 7 to 9 percent;
· India will reduce sawnwood tariffs by 27.5 percent; and
· Malaysia has agreed to reduce rates on most solidwood products by 5 percent, on logs and furniture by 10 percent, and on coated paper by 7.5 percent.
In most major markets, developing country exporters benefit from preference schemes that reduce tariff rates and sometimes provide preferential access to markets. Probably the best-known of these is the UNCTAD Generalised System of Preferences (GSP). Under this system, developed importing countries offer low (often zero) tariffs to selected developing countries without requiring any reciprocal benefits. However, with the general reduction in tariffs that has occurred in recent years, the benefits of schemes such as the GSP have declined.
In addition to the influence of the GATT/WTO negotiations, there are bilateral and regional negotiations that also have an important influence in the Asia-Pacific region. Of note are the efforts of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN),^54 the Asia Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC),^55 and the Australia and New Zealand Closer Economic Relations Trade Agreement (ANZCERTA). This latter agreement has resulted in a phasing-out of tariffs between Australia and New Zealand and the progressive elimination of import licensing and trade quotas. APEC has yet to have a significant effect on trade liberalisation in the region, but may do so in the future. It is seeking to liberalise regional trade, and has set a target of free trade by about 2010 for the developed nations, 2015 for the newly industrialised countries, and 2020 for the developing countries. ASEAN has reduced rates among its members and reached agreement to establish an ASEAN Free-Trade Area (AFTA) in
2000, with programmed tariff cuts starting from that date.
^54 ASEAN includes Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Laos, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Brunei and Viet Nam.
^55 APEC includes Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia, Brunei, the Philippines, Australia, Canada, the Republic of Korea, Japan, New Zealand, the United States, the People's Republic of China and its territories, Papua New Guinea, Mexico and Chile.
Non-tariff barriers (NTBs)
In addition to tariffs, a wide range of non-tariff barriers exists. These include a host of different rules and procedures, ranging from health and technical standards to measures influencing prices. They are much more complex and difficult to recognise and therefore assess than tariffs, especially in quantitative terms, and may also have widely differing effects on different trading partners. Even where they are not formal barriers they make exporting more difficult, especially for smaller and less experienced developing country exporters.
Continuing efforts are being made to reduce NTBs, or at least limit them. At present, most restrictions do not appear to be of major significance. Of special note for forest products, however, are health and technical regulations, and standards for product and processing methods. They include restrictions related to protection of animal and plant life from pests and diseases, human health and safety, and maintenance of air, water and land quality. Some that are having considerable effects on trade include growing restrictions on trade in wood panels that use formaldehyde glues, bans or controls on some timber-preservation processes and materials, and controls on processing methods (e.g. chlorine bleaching of pulp).
Some lessening of these restrictions could follow from two of the agreements that were negotiated in the Uruguay Round: the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement), and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT). The former could improve conditions surrounding inspection and quarantine, and the latter could limit the use of technical regulations for other than legitimate health, safety, product quality and environmental protection purposes.
Although import restrictions are the most obvious barriers in forest products trade, export restrictions also have a considerable effect. These latter are common in most Asia-Pacific developing countries and have had a major impact on world forest products trade patterns. Export restrictions include total bans, export quotas, or selective bans based on species; indirect quantitative restrictions due to controls on harvest levels; direct charges such as export taxes or export levies; indirect charges in the form of royalties and reforestation levies; and administrative controls such as permits and licences. For example, log export restrictions are in force in Indonesia; in India, tariffs for imports have been reduced but exports of timber are banned; there is also restriction on exports of many NWFPs to protect the interests of tribals dependent on them. Export restrictions seem likely to continue, as developing countries find them the most direct way of controlling some of
the undesirable practices that exist in their forestry sectors, and most notably to encourage domestic processing.
It is important to recognise, however, that export restrictions create, as well as solve, a number of forest products problems. The elimination of the potential for legal trading opens the door for illegal trade. More importantly, the elimination of international competition for a product, usually logs, allows the domestic price (and hence value) of the product to fall. A log ban consequently lessens pressure to utilise resources efficiently, and also lessens the incentives for reafforestation and good forest management.
Impediments to trade
The trade restrictions discussed above are institutional measures which restrict trade - either overtly or in many cases covertly. There are, however, other restrictions that are less clearly identifiable as trade barriers but still have significant impacts on trade. These restrictions are either legal under GATT/WTO rules, or outside the WTO's sphere of control. Although not strictly trade barriers, their impact or potential impact is very similar to more formal measures - and in many cases their intent is the same.
Many of these unofficial barriers can, deliberately or by default, result in increasing trade difficulties. The actions currently taking place around environmental issues such as certification, eco-labelling, processing methods, and the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) are examples. Also falling in this arena are sub-national and private market actions taken under the guise of concern for the environmental (real or imagined) and certain requirements for post-consumption disposal of products.^56 Many of these have had relatively limited effects to date but seem likely to have a greater impact in the future. In the case of CITES, this has recently surfaced as a very controversial issue for forestry due to attempts by developed countries, strongly supported by conservation groups, to have a number of commercially important species found in tropical developing countries placed in CITES appendices. Concern has been expressed
by forestry and trade interests that CITES is being used to stop or limit trade, and that the mere fact of having a species listed - even in Appendix III - will have a negative impact on trade in that species. The newest environmental measures are those aimed at limiting trade to products that come from a sustainably managed forest resource.
^56 Bourke, I.J.(1995): "International Trade in Forest Products and the Environment". in FAO, Unasylva, Vol. 46, No. 183, p. 11. October.
Environment-related issues are likely to have significant impacts on forestry in the Asia-Pacific region. To date their effects have been less significant in this region than in regions such as Europe and North America. It seems likely however that their impact will increasingly be felt, as countries see benefits in adopting the measures, or as the moves in other regions become more widely adopted. In particular the legislation in markets outside the region could have important consequences for Asia-Pacific exporters, since they may be disadvantaged by having to meet a variety of different requirements in different markets, or simply through the difficulties of keeping informed of new regulations and requirements.
Other actions which will have an increasing impact on many Asia-Pacific exporters are (so called) voluntary measures such as product boycotts being introduced in Europe and North America. Although these usually have no direct links to official government policy (but may be unofficially encouraged by governments), their goal is the same - to limit imports to selected products that are sourced from sustainably managed forests. The main measures used to date have been bans on the use of tropical timber by regional and local councils; decisions to cease handling products by some retailers and a few timber traders; and some unknown level of consumer resistance to buying wood products.
Most of these measures are being associated with forest products certification. Although certification is still in its infancy, and its effect on trade is limited and primarily focused on Europe, a considerable degree of market uncertainty is being generated in many markets. Even though most certification schemes purport to be voluntary, they may in effect become compulsory since important retailers may be unwilling to carry uncertified products (as is presently occurring in the United Kingdom). Consumers may even switch to substitute products made from material other than wood (as is already occurring to a degree in some European countries).
To date, major Asia-Pacific import markets such as Japan, the Republic of Korea and the People's Republic of China, are showing little or no interest in this type of action. Despite this, Asia-Pacific exporters such as Malaysia and Indonesia are actively developing their own certification schemes, both as a defensive market strategy and a means of improving their forest management practices. The moves by these major forestry countries may encourage or force others in the region to follow suit. The procedures and actions being taken in other regions may extend to Asia-Pacific markets over a period of time and have an impact on them.
Perhaps the main effects of environmental measures on trade have been, and will continue to be, the impacts on supply arising from forest management actions. Moves toward sustainable supplies will reduce the volumes that are harvested, and may also influence processed production. Pressures in these areas have encouraged International Tropical Timber Organisation (ITTO) member countries^57 in the region to commit to the ITTO Year 2000 Objective, which specifies that all internationally traded timber from ITTO members should come from sustainably managed forests by the year 2000.
^57 ITTO members from the Asia-Pacific region as at November 1997 were Australia, Cambodia, the People's Republic of China, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines and Thailand.
Non-wood forest products (NWFPs)
NWFPs are receiving increasing attention in trade. While a vast range of NWFP variants are produced and traded, those that have potential to be of significance in global trade are very limited. The present export values in all the but the very largest non-wood forest products are relatively small (Table 5.7). By far the most important NWFP export is natural rubber, which provides one of the few examples of a successfully domesticated NWFP.
Excluding natural rubber, the total value of NWFP exports from Asia-Pacific forests is slightly under US$1.5 billion. The most important exports are mushrooms, nuts and plaiting materials. The People's Republic of China is the largest NWFP exporter (excluding rubber), having exported US$900 million worth of NWFPs in 1996. In addition to the well-known NWFP exports, China ships commercial volumes of Chinese dates, gingko, tea oil, Chinese tallow, and tung oil. China's forest chemicals industry has also progressed significantly in recent years, earning US$180 million in foreign exchange in 1992.
NWFPs generally face low barriers because their trade is limited and they receive limited attention. They seem most likely to be affected by measures such as health standards and phytosanitary rules since many enter food industries.
Table 5.7: Value of exports for the major Asia-Pacific non-wood forest products, 1996
Non-wood forest product
1996 Value of exports US$1,000)
Major exporters (US$1,000)
Lac, natural gums, resins
Indonesia
Essential oils
China
Natural rubber, balata, gutta-percha, guayule,
Indonesia
chicle and similar natural gums
Malaysia
Plaits and similar products of plaiting materials
China
Honey
China
Edible products of animal origin
Singapore
Ambergis, castoreum, civet and musk, etc.
China
Mushrooms (fresh or chilled)
China
Mushrooms and truffles (dried)
China
Walnuts
China
Chestnuts
Rep. Korea
Ginseng roots
Rep. Korea
Bamboos
China
Rattans
Singapore
TOTAL
Source: FAO - extracted from UN COMTRADE Database.
<section>b</section>
6. People and forests^58
^58 The primary reference for this chapter is a paper prepared on behalf of the Regional Community Forestry Training Centre (RECOFTC), Kasetsart University: Fisher, R.J., S. Srimongkontip and C. Veer (1997): People and forests in Asia and the Pacific: situation and prospects. Document No APFSOS/WP/27. FAO, Rome/Bangkok. Other important sources are (a) Paine et al. (WCMC) 1997: Status, Trends and Future Scenarios for Forest Conservation including' Protected Areas in the Asia-Pacific Region. Document APFSOS/WP/04. FAO, Rome/Bangkok; and (b) Kuchelmeister, G., (1998): Urban forestry in the Asia-Pacific Region - situation and prospects. Document APFSOS/WP/44. FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
Introduction
The nature of people/forest relationships
Common considerations
Forests central to livelihoods
Forests as a complementary basis for livelihood
Forests and urban people
Introduction
People are at the centre of forestry development. How they interact with forests both as managers and users will determine whether forestry as we know it today remains a viable proposition.
The Asia-Pacific region is a leader in developing collaborative forest management (CFM) even though achievements to date are scattered and in many countries the process has yet to become mainstream. Still, CFM has the potential to consolidate and enter the mainstream, to the benefit of millions of poor rural communities. Furthermore, as the region with the largest total urban population in the world, Asia also has an opportunity to seize leadership in urban forestry. Asia's cities represent the full spectrum of wealth and poverty, the inhabitants of which demand everything from a green environment to forest products for their daily lives. Forestry must find ways to satisfy these urban demands despite the high price of land and competition from alternative uses.
The nature of people/forest relationships
The people most intimately related to forests are the hunter-gatherer populations for whom forests offer shelter, fuel and food. Progressively less close are relationships, for example, with carpenters whose livelihoods depend on wood; artisan brick makers, fishermen and tobacco farmers who use wood as fuel for smoking or drying produce; and city dwellers who daily use paper derived from wood. Forests can contribute to human livelihoods in many other ways including household (subsistence) or commercial uses of wood, NWFPs and services; food security, including through income generation; and employment. Forests also serve the age-old role of being a land bank upon which agriculture and other land developments draw. The above are relationships of dependency and consumption but many people also relate to forests in terms of how they participate in forest management.
Whether relationships are dependency-oriented or management-oriented, there are normally important gender considerations (Box 6.1). Rural communities continuously adapt in response to economic developments, migrations and other social change. The relationships of both men and women with forests will also have to adapt over time but the effects will not necessarily be the same for the two groups.
Three main types of people/forest relationships cover the spectrum of livelihood benefits:
· People who live inside forests: often surviving as hunter-gatherers or shifting cultivators, and who are heavily dependent on forests for their livelihood. Such people are often indigenous minority ethnic groups and tend to be outside both the political and economic mainstream; however, non-indigenous migrants into forests are also becoming significant.
· People who live outside but near forests: farmers generally practising their agriculture outside the forest, who regularly use forest products in their agricultural activities (e.g. as sources of fodder or manure), for subsistence or for income generation.
· People engaged in forest-based commercial activities: trapping, collecting minerals or employed in forest industries such as logging. As income is often derived from forest-dependent labour, this type of people/forest relationship exists in both developing and highly industrialised societies (Box 6.2)^59. Some people in this group may also pursue some subsistence practices.
^59 For example, small rural communities in countries with much forest industry (such as Malaysia or Indonesia) and even highly industrialised countries like Australia or New Zealand can be almost totally dependent on wages from commercial logging or forest products processing.
Box 6.1: GENDER IN FOREST MANAGEMENT IN ASIA-PACIFIC
The gender of those who actively manage the forest and those who collect the different forest products has important implications for sustainable forest management. It is well recognised that men and women often have different roles in forest management and utilise the forest for different products. While the different roles are readily acknowledged, the lack of gender-disaggregated information often results in general stereotypes (e.g. "Women collect fuel, leaf litter for fodder, foods for domestic consumption; men fell trees, and are interested in income derived from forest resources"). Such generalisations ignore the subtleties and the changes that are occurring in the region.
Rural communities are being transformed in response to the dynamic trends of rural outmigration, economic restructuring, and commercialisation of local economies. Although both men and women migrate to urban areas, men migrate in greater numbers (at least in the initial phase of outmigration) and for longer periods. Older couples, adult women, and children increasingly populate rural communities. Women are more frequently assuming not only the role of caretaker for parents and children but also the primary responsibility for fields, trees, and forests. The wide range of responsibilities and activities has in some instances led to a degradation of local forest resources as women have been forced to collect products closer to home rather than from more distant resources.
While the downsizing of extension services in the regions also has a negative impact on the access of men to extension services, even in areas where extension services are available women may find themselves excluded. Cultural barriers in some countries discourage women from becoming extension agents, and severely limit the access of women to male extension agents. Even in countries where such cultural barriers do not exist, other barriers to access to extension services may exist. In the People's Republic of China, for example, the official flow of information within the village is still primarily through the men, so that women are excluded from information from extension services (and men are trained) for products for which women have responsibility.
The current realities of who is managing the forest and what products are utilised (and wanted) must be considered in the formulation of forest policy, implementation, and services. Sustainable forest management will depend increasingly on the needs and actions of rural women - and on the services and support provided to them.
To this list must be added:
· Urban dwellers: people who need forests or trees for amenity/recreation and physical consumption, depending on income stratum.
The rural population of Asia and the Pacific is 2.13 billion (67 percent), with urban population totalling about 1.06 billion (33 percent). The number of people directly dependent on forest resources totals around 0.43 billion in the region (13 percent). It is not possible to reliably ascertain how many other people fall into the categories "people who live outside but near forests" and "people engaged in forest-based commercial activities," but it is likely that these are at present the largest single categories. The exact numbers are not critical; it is, however, important to note that no one category is so small that its interests can be ignored.
Box 6.2: THE PARTICULAR IMPORTANCE OF FORESTS FOR MOUNTAIN COMMUNITIES -THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA AND JAPAN
In the People's Republic of China, poverty is particularly acute in the mountainous areas. Of the 80 million poverty-stricken people in China in 1994, most lived in remote central and western mountainous areas with poor access and a stagnant economy. The per capita availability of arable land is about 0.1 hectares, 10 percent lower than the national average. In 1992, the average per capita income for mountain farmers was 20 percent lower than the national average. The mountainous areas have 90 percent of China's total forest land, 80 percent of the country's total wood growing stock, and are the main sources of tree/shrub oilseeds, fruits, tea, bamboo, forest by-products, special produce and medicinal herbs. Forestry is, therefore, the basis and pioneer of other industries in the mountainous area; without it, vigorous advancement of other industries cannot be promoted and achieved. In the near future, it is envisaged that forestry development with an annual growth rate of 15
percent will promote the development of the mountain economy.
In Japan rural communities, especially those in mountainous regions, are rapidly losing vitality and need improved income and employment opportunities and better infrastructure. Promoting forestry, which is a major industry in mountainous regions, and strengthening its linkages with agriculture is necessary for development in these areas. It is intended to improve infrastructure and to improve living conditions, such as facilities for water supply and household waste disposal. Japan will also promote exchange between urban and rural communities through multiple use of forests and better information distribution, apart from training talent for local leadership.
Sources: Country Report - China: Document APFSOS/WP/14. Country Report - Japan op cit.: Document APFSOS/WP/15.
People relate with forests positively, negatively or indifferently. They may get forest-based jobs and useful products and services from them, which may motivate them to manage forests carefully. Or, they may damage forests either due to real need for forest products or for land or because they feel alienated. Many people are so removed from forests as to be indifferent. The Asia-Pacific region offers examples of all shades of these relationships. The following are important to note:
· the highest level of reliance on extensive forests is in the hilly zones and in tropical forest areas;
· the highest level of reliance tends to be in areas with ethnic minorities outside the dominant national culture (leading to relative powerlessness and vulnerability in the face of outsiders); and
· in areas with high population and intensive agriculture, tree products tend to be obtained more from "homestead forests" than from large areas of de jure forest.
Common considerations
When deciding policies and changes to improve the relationships of people with forests, it is most relevant to consider who has rights to access and use forests, who actually uses or manages forests (and for what uses), and who controls the resources (Box 6.3). These factors are more important than the location of people (i.e. whether they live in, near or far from forests). It goes without saying, however, that proximity over long periods often confers rights to the forests or at least may legitimise claims to them by virtue of residence.
Another common consideration in assessing people's relationships with forests is the changing economic situation. In most countries of the region, it is now difficult to find a forest so remote that it is not touched by the expansion of the modern economy. Economic growth has been so rapid that opportunities to adopt new lifestyles have come within reach of people who formerly had little option but to work the forest. The age of forest dwellers' splendid isolation is largely over. In many countries, there are now new economic opportunities - many of them outside forestry altogether. Furthermore, there has been increasing market-orientation of rural areas as they are drawn into the monetised economy. With this integration, and given that the region is rapidly industrialising, it is very likely that far fewer people will depend principally and directly on forests for subsistence livelihood in the future.
Box 6.3: DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS FOR FOREST/ PEOPLE RELATIONSHIPS
· Where forests continue to be central to livelihood systems: meeting local peoples' needs should be the principal objective of forest management, and this should be reflected in control and tenure arrangements that are centred on them.
· Where forest products play an important supplementary and safety-net rote: users need security of forest access, but will need to work through resource-sharing arrangements among several stakeholder groups.
· Where forest products play an important role but wood is more effectively supplied from non-forest sources: management of forests tends to be geared toward agroforest structures; control and tenure may need to be consistent with individual (private) rather than collective (common property) forms of governance.
· Where people need help in exploiting opportunities to increase the benefits they obtain from forest products and forest activities: support and facilitation may need to be provided in accessing markets and credit, and developing skills.
· Where people need help in moving out of dead-end forest based product activities: people may need to be provided with new livelihood options, which are quite likely to be outside forestry.
Source: Abbreviated from Byron and Arnold (1997): cited in Fisher et al. (op cit.).
Mobility of populations has also increased and exposed forest-based people to other lifestyles, not least by bringing migrants or transient outsiders to the forests. Mobility has introduced new mind-sets and offered choices for those who would rather not remain forest-dependent and have capacity to embrace a different lifestyle. Education has accelerated this phenomenon. Due to this opening up, people/forest relationships are no longer influenced only locally. Success or failure often depends on events or decisions physically far removed. International economic and political factors do not merely impinge on the relationships between people and forests, they form a crucial part of the context in which the relationship exists. The development of a global economy and the international environmental movement are the two most important factors.
Given the high value of forests and the associated land resources, it is not surprising that people/forest relationships are often characterised by tensions among interest groups. However, different people and interest groups have different capacities (including political power and influence) to capture opportunities. It is these differences in power, apart from skills and ability, that help to explain why tribal societies often fail to defend their long-held rights over forests against better-informed migrants. The migrants tend to know better how to tap the resources of the mainstream economy and its institutions for their own benefit.
Forests central to livelihoods
Old and new forest dwellers
How forests support forest dwellers
Old and new forest dwellers
Although there are no reliable published estimates of forest-dependent peoples in the region, "guesstimates" for six countries provide indicative numbers (Table 6.1).
Table 6.1: "Guesstimate" of numbers of forest-dependent people in selected countries in Asia-Pacific
Country
People directly dependent on forest resources (millions)
People living on land classified as public forest (millions)
India
Indonesia
Nepal
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Source: Lynch and Talbott (1995): cited in Fisher R. J. et al. (op cit.).
In earlier times, most of the people living in the forest were tribals living as hunter/gatherers. In a few forest areas this is still the case, while in many other areas forest dwellers maintain livelihoods as subsistence farmers (often shifting cultivators). However, as pressure for land has grown, migrants have crowded in and the traditional indigenous forest dwellers' existence has been put into a state of flux.
In the Philippines, for example, the country's forest lands are under constant pressure to be converted to other land uses. Shifting cultivation remains a big problem with the presence of some 30 percent of the country's total population within, or in the fringes of, forest areas. The Philippines' upland population is growing at 4 percent annually and 70 percent of upland residents are migrants from the lowlands seeking forest land to farm. Other examples of this in-migration process are in North India, Bhutan, the Eastern and Western Ghats of India, the Northwest Frontier Province in Pakistan and much of Southeast Asia.
There is general acceptance that it is a human right for people to be able to choose to live in the manner they are accustomed to if they so wish. The question raised by policy-makers and some analysts is whether, in fact, indigenous dwellers really have a choice or are forced to maintain their forest lifestyles for lack of alternatives and lack of the capacity to recognise and capture alternative opportunities. Supporting this view is the fact that most forest dwellers in the region are tribal communities in remote areas, often little exposed to either education or any other capacity building that would enable them to exist in any other mode. On the other hand, it is very clear that the needs of forest dwellers are rarely given attention by national governments and little consideration is given to their claims to rights over resources, including forest resources.
In the absence of some recognition of rights to forest resources and of increased education and other capacity-building, indigenous forest dwellers are highly vulnerable when migration brings new populations into forests and adjacent lands. Migration leads to or exacerbates: (a) conversion of forest land into farms or cash tree crop plantations; (b) pressure on people already living in forests to reduce fallow periods in shifting agriculture; (c) reduced ability to manage forests along traditional lines due to lack of control over the new arrivals; and (d) emergence of new, more commercially-oriented forest dependency by the immigrants. Where there was formerly traditional ownership or management of land, migration often brings uncertainty and competition, with the new arrivals introducing their own perspectives. There are new opportunities for value addition to forests but indigenous inhabitants are ill-prepared to benefit; their traditional subsistence needs are often
threatened and extreme hardships may result.
At the same time, new migrants are often inexperienced in sustainably using the forest for livelihoods. Thus they tend to aggressively clear forests for farming and so may cause much destruction of forests in settlement areas.
The emergence of community forestry as a social movement, the development of networks of forest users, and increasing advocacy by NGOs reflect the increasing efforts of forest-dependent peoples to protect their interests.^60 Formal statements of policy commitment toward more collaborative-participatory forest management are also being made more frequently. This process is often encouraged by pressure from various donors and international NGOs.
^60 Gilmour and Fisher (1997): cited in Fisher et al. (op cit.).
It is impossible to suggest a "most likely scenario" for the future of forest-dwelling people. There are some obvious trends (often in competing directions). The long-term outcomes are likely to be different in various countries, depending on the outcomes of competition between the various concerned actors. There are indications that over time forest-dependent peoples may gain a much greater say in the management of forests. If this happens, the impact on sustainable management of forests may depend on whether it is the migrant forest dwellers or the indigenous people that take the lead.
How forests support forest dwellers
Full subsistence dependency
Livelihoods of indigenous groups revolve around hunting, gathering wood and NWFPs for direct use and marginal commerce, and swidden (shifting) cultivation. Currently, many governments in the region seek to "improve" the lot of forest dwellers by: (a) stabilising swidden cultivation; and (b) promoting livelihoods based on NWFPs.
Swidden farming continues to be a major type of people-forest interaction in many parts of Laos, Viet Nam, Cambodia, Thailand, southern China, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. Many authorities dislike shifting cultivation, but even after decades of attempts to "stabilise" it have had little success. In Laos, government policy is to end shifting cultivation by 2000. The government has programmes to formalise land tenure, improve local land-use planning, enhance productivity of crops and livestock, and provide alternatives to shifting cultivation income. Experience has shown that careless attempts to stop crop rotation (the essence of shifting cultivation) may exacerbate soil deterioration. Rather than preventing shifting cultivation, an alternative approach is to focus instead on long-term economic development that creates jobs outside agriculture.
NWFPs are often assumed to be capable of supporting many rural people and numerous efforts are underway to promote NWFP-based income-generation. There is little evidence to support this assumption. While NWFPs are important, their potential contribution to livelihoods should not be exaggerated and forest dwellers should not be encouraged to base their livelihoods on commodities that are marginal to mainstream commerce. In particular, NWFP development efforts should not lead to forest dwellers missing out on alternative or complementary economic opportunities within and outside forestry.
Further, and perhaps more importantly, focus on NWFPs should not be allowed to distract attention away from the need for forest-dwelling people to benefit from some of the income from commercial timber harvesting and processing. Whether this benefit is arranged through payment of royalties to them in partial or full recognition of traditional rights, through positive discrimination in employment by new enterprises, or through other policy measures, is a decision for society to make in each situation.
Commercial opportunities
Some indigenous people and many migrants-turned-forest-dwellers seek opportunities that are commercial or monetised in nature. The logging industry offers one such opportunity. For example, in Laos a trial programme in Joint Forest Management includes a scheme giving local people the right to share the benefits of commercial logging. In Indonesia, the government introduced a community development programme in 1991 under which forest concessionaires are "to assist in improving the standard of living of forest-dwelling communities." Other major opportunities would be in countries such as Malaysia (Sabah, Sarawak), Papua New Guinea and in the more heavily forested Mekong countries (Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos).
Unfortunately, because logging can be a major source of state revenue and political power, it is often a flashpoint for conflict among indigenous local people, political leaders and commercial interests. Among other problems, logging can reduce availability of forest products (including NWFPs) or local people's access to them and can lead to increased competition for resources and economic opportunities with migrant populations. Migrants who follow the logging industry already have skills wanted by the industry and this blocks skill-transfer to local inhabitants. Migrants also occupy and settle on land partially cleared by logging, thus displacing indigenous people. In worst case situations, indigenous dwellers have been forcibly removed^61 or forced to accept compensation in exchange for reduced access to forest products.^62
^61 Fisher (op cit.).
^62 One example from the Solomon Islands indicates that a one-off royalty payment caused each villager to lose annually the equivalent of over US$3,900 worth of forest benefits.
Forest dwellers, forest conservation and forest management capacities
Many countries are moving away from trying to achieve conservation goals solely through strictly protected areas surrounded by areas of largely unregulated land use.^63 Conservation is moving closer to the people and, unlike the past, will no longer be confined to remote forests. Even in countries where population pressure is light, efforts to extend protected areas under the old "preservation" approach will usually face problems from indigenous and migrant forest dwellers as well as from settlers outside but near the forests. In areas where strict preservation is essential, the outer reaches of the areas will increasingly have to be managed as "buffer zones" to allow some development or utilisation.
^63 Paine et al. (op. cit.)
In the long term, economic development, especially in East and Southeast Asia, may help achieve forest conservation. This could arise for several reasons: (a) wealthier people can afford to attach higher values to environmental conservation; (b) economic development can reduce the pressure to clear or degrade forests and protected areas, as people move to better urban jobs (as observed, for example, in the Republic of Korea, Malaysia and southeastern China); and (c) prosperity may bring the ability (as well as the desire) to channel resources into conservation of biological diversity.
In the meantime, the question arises as to whether forest dwellers can manage forests well. There are sharply contrasting views. One school of thought stresses the possession by indigenous people of long-held traditional knowledge and institutions that enable them to use forests responsibly. In this view, it is lack of meaningful control over resources that limits effective management by local people, not the absence of knowledge or local institutions. Another viewpoint is that conditions have changed so much that traditional knowledge and practices have by now lost relevance or efficacy. The latter school frequently portrays forest-dependent people (especially shifting cultivators) as destroyers of forests. Official policies in many countries of the region tend to lean to this view and laws generally mandate the exclusion of people from protected forests. Advocates of forest-dweller interests, however, increasingly ask why local people must suffer hardship to make room for
protected areas that often seem to be of primary interest to distant national or international constituencies (Box 6.4).
Box 6.4: THAILAND - TOWARDS LEGITIMISATION OF FOREST DWELLERS IN PROTECTED AREAS?
In Thailand, large numbers of forest-dependent people, usually members of ethnic minority "hill tribes," have been moved out of protected areas into buffer zones or live within protected areas under greatly restricted access to forest products. A Community Forestry Bill has been drafted to address these restrictions. The bill would grant management rights to people living in protected areas. It is, however, strongly opposed by some environmental groups concerned that the hill tribes will mismanage the watersheds crucial to the water supply of Bangkok and other cities. Other environmental groups support the initiative and regard the hill tribes as highly capable of responsible forest management. The issue has achieved great political importance and major protests have occurred to press for enactment of the Community Forestry Bill.
[It is important to realise that the people dwelling in protected areas generally lived in these places before they were designated as protected areas. Indeed, there are cases where hill tribes were forcibly relocated into areas that were subsequently declared to be protected areas.]
Source: Adapted from Fisher et al. (op cit.). Additional note in square brackets added from Fisher (Personal communication).
Indigenous and migrant forest dwellers differ in forest management capacities. The former tend to have interest in forests and traditional knowledge and institutions for management. Migrants generally have neither, and are often most interested in the land for farming. For the latter, probably the main approach to promoting sustainable forest management would be to support forest-based income opportunities, thus offering a justification for forest management.
Forests as a complementary basis for livelihood
Collaborative approaches to forest management
Growing trees outside the forest
Forest dwellers, even if recent migrants are included, are far fewer in number than the people who live outside but near forests. Indeed, most rural people, except in highly deforested countries such as Bangladesh and Pakistan, live close enough to interact with forests in a number of ways. Many continue to collect fuelwood and other forest products. Agriculture often depends on forests for water and forest products such as manure and fodder. Where forest resources are inadequate, many rural people take up tree planting. It is from these situations that much of the initial thrust toward collaborative forest management emerged. Recently, the scope of collaborative management initiatives has expanded to include management of well-endowed natural forests.
Collaborative approaches to forest management
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, there emerged a perception that the limited input by people living in and near forests over how forest resources were used was a major barrier to the effective management of such forests. This led to the development of programmes and policies known generically as "collaborative forest management." The key element is that government forest departments give local communities the responsibility for protecting and managing forests or establishing plantations. Local communities are given rights to collect and harvest certain forest products for domestic use, and increasingly also for sale. In drier areas (e.g. Rajasthan and Gujarat in India, Pakistan, Mongolia, western China), the possibility of grazing livestock in government forests is also a powerful attraction to local communities wishing to conclude joint forest management agreements.
In some cases, communities are promised a share of the proceeds from future harvests of forests that regenerate as a result of protection provided by local people. In Nepal, for example, the government hands over forests to forest-user groups (FUGs). Negotiated management agreements include provision for managed utilisation of forest products, including grass, fodder, fuelwood and NWFPs. Recently, there have been moves to initiate FUG-managed sawmills and the harvesting of timber from community forests, although these proposals are reportedly meeting resistance from within the Forest Department (Box 6.5).
Collaborative management in most countries is still in the early stages of development. Only 2 to 3 percent of India's public forest estate is estimated to be under community protection recognised by forest departments. A recent study suggests that this could increase to 25 percent by 2010 if forest departments and NGOs expand capacities to negotiate, demarcate, and register forest-dependent communities.^64 The likelihood of this may depend in part on progress in planting trees outside forests that reduce some of the need to depend on forests.
^64 Paine et al. (op cit.).
In collaborative management, forest tenure is widely regarded as a key factor in increasing effective local control over forest resources and in motivating communities to invest resources, effort and commitment into managing forests. Tenure does not necessarily have to convey outright ownership but can take a variety of forms that legitimise access and guarantee user rights. Tenurial arrangements can range from full local control to limited and specified access. (Boxes 6.6 and 6.7). However, tenure arrangements are only good if they are respected. It is of no use to have legal title that is simply ignored by insiders or outsiders. Therefore, confidence in tenure arrangements matters more than formality. If agreements must be formal, then there should exist enforcement capacity to match.
In order to be sustained, collaborative forest management approaches must become more profitable for the beneficiaries. Success will require allocation of more productive forests for improved income prospects rather than predominantly degraded ones as at present. There should also be better access by the communities to the commercial aspects of the forests they manage, including harvesting, processing and marketing activities.
Box 6.5: COMMUNITY FOREST-USER GROUPS OF NEPAL
In Nepal, users of the community forest are defined as those people who use or intend to use a particular patch of forest. Use rights involve more than just consumption of forest products; they include participation in decision-making, in preparing their own charter and operational plan for regulating the user group as an institution, and in managing forestry resources. User groups are now recognised by law as self-governing and autonomous organisations. The government still retains ownership of the land, but the users have rights over the products. They can even use forestry products as collateral for getting bank loans. But decisions have to be made by consensus of the users in an assembly. User-group committees do not have the right to make rules, only to implement rules formulated by the assembly of users.
The Forest Act and its operational guidelines acknowledge that legal awareness and confidence building are necessary if the poor, women and the disadvantaged are to assert their rights. It is of course essential to understand and recognise indigenous management systems, to understand the forest resources and possibilities for their management, and to assess local people's use patterns and needs. However, a more important first step in user-group formation is to identify real users, make them aware of their legal rights, and prepare the voiceless for asserting their rights.
The second step is to prepare operational agreements, to guide both institutional and resource management aspects. As the poor, women and disadvantaged lack bargaining power, they are brought together into small homogenous groups and facilitated in making their own rules, based on their own perspectives and needs. They are also helped to assert their rights by teaching them that they have equal rights with other users. The small groups work together in assemblies to prepare operational agreements, which are presented to the District Forest Officer prior to the handover of the forest resources.
User groups in Nepal still feel threatened by provisions that permit the taking back of community forests on flimsy grounds, the lack of attitudinal change among most government forestry staff, and the lack of awareness and political commitment among politicians and policy-makers. Powerful and opportunistic elite often exploit liberal provisions in the law to the disadvantage of weaker user-group members. In response to these problems, user groups are organising under a network called the Federation of Community Forestry Users in Nepal (FECOFUN). The network addresses various issues and undertakes lobbying and advocacy for users' rights.
Source: Adapted from N. Kaji Shrestha, Women Acting Together for Change (WATCH), Kathmandu (Personal communication), December 1997.
Box 6.6: ADAPTING TENURE TO ENCOURAGE FORESTRY -PAPUA NEW GUINEA AND MALDIVES
Papua New Guinea: With nearly 80 percent of the country's land under customary ownership, the people own most forests. The state is challenged to find ways of awarding rights to forest use that protect the people's interests, ensure responsible management or exploitation, and allow the investors adequate returns and security of access to resources. A number of instruments have been tried. The latest approach, intended for application on a large scale, is the Forest Management Agreement (FMA). Under the FMA approach, the PNG Forest Authority secures a commitment from the resource owners to follow recommended forest management practices, while simultaneously offering investors access to the forest for a minimum of 35 years. Implementation may involve the state issuing a Timber Permit under which it manages the forest on behalf of the customary owners for the duration of the FMA. State management roles can be implemented through a developer.
On a much smaller scale, "Timber Authorities" are issued by provincial governments upon the recommendation of provincial forest management committees and the consent of the National Forest Board. Such agreements allow the execution of harvest agreements concluded directly with the landowners. It is reported that many foreign companies have abused this facility. As such, new policies on Timber Authorities are now in place to protect forest resources and prevent unnecessary forest clearance on customarily owned land.
Maldives: In the Maldives, the community forest lands on inhabited and uninhabited islands are leased to individual developers of agriculture and tourism. However, uncertainty of land tenure acts as a major disincentive to developing and protecting forests and agroforests and is a significant obstacle to the promotion of tree growing. Very recently, a more secure system of leasing land has been adopted (i.e. renting of uninhabited islands for a fixed term of not more than 20 years). This will encourage tree planting and will develop sustainable land use systems through out the country.
Source: Country Report 1996 - Papua New Guinea. Country Report - Maldives: Document APFSOS/WP/30.
Box 6.7: COMMUNITY-BASED FOREST MANAGEMENT (CBFM) IN THE PHILIPPINES
Community-based management has been adopted as the national strategy for management and sustainable development of forest resources in the Philippines, pursuant to a 1995 Presidential Executive Order. To date, more than 500,000 hectares of national forests have been turned over to communities, mostly of indigenous peoples. Unlike previous programmes that granted tenure over denuded and/or degraded forest lands (e.g. agroforestry initiatives), the CBFM approach extends tenure and use rights to well-stocked forests.
Organised communities operate within allowable cut limits set by the government. They harvest timber and other forest products to sell, to use for their own needs, or to process. Timber harvesting by communities typically follows a labour-intensive, low-impact approach. Felling uses small chainsaws, flitching and/or quarter-sawing is done at the stump, and animals are used to skid logs to roadside landings. Income from the sale of timber, rattan, bamboo and other forest products has created new income opportunities in upland communities where poverty is severe. Slash-and-burn forest destruction and illegal logging have declined dramatically in all areas where the CBFM concept has been introduced. In the words of one community leader, "Why should we burn or overcut the forest now that it belongs to us and not to some rich man from Manila?" Results thus far augur well for an expanded programme. The Philippines Master Plan for Forest Development envisions CBFM coverage of 2.0
million hectares within the next decade.
Source: P. Dugan (Personal communication, December 1997).
Growing trees outside the forest
In addition to community management of government forests, a major thrust in many countries has been to encourage people to grow trees on their own lands in what is called "farm forestry" or "agroforestry." The initial impulse came from the perceived need to supply fuelwood for rural users. Early efforts were made in South Asia, where heavy forest loss meant that many farming communities were far from forests.
Between 1980 and 1990, an estimated 9 billion trees were planted on private lands in India, averaging 9,500 trees per village.^65 Targets were exceeded in many states and some people planted trees even on irrigated land. After the first trees grew, it became clear that industry also offered an outlet for the wood. Most of the successful plantings took place on highly productive farmlands rather than the intended wastelands and dry areas, prompting concern that trees were capturing land from food crops. A key lesson is that people respond to commercial opportunities and market forces.
^65 Saxena, N.C and V. Ballabh (Eds), (1995). Farm forestry in South Asia. Sage publications, New Delhi.
It is precisely in situations where competition with agriculture would be a major concern that agroforestry is being promoted. In Asia and the Pacific, agroforestry builds upon long traditions of homegardens and similar practices. It also responds to concerns and prejudices against communal tenure in some countries as it focuses on private family land. Agroforestry has attracted considerable policy attention, and in countries such as Bangladesh it is the dominant element of programmes involving people and trees. It is also particularly important in social forestry programmes in the People's Republic of China, Pakistan, Indonesia, Viet Nam, Laos and the Philippines.
Good prospects exist for the private sector to work with rural communities, perhaps as subcontractors or outgrowers. India had early success with the WIMCO popular outgrower scheme for match bolts. In the Philippines, smallholder tree farmers have supplied significant amounts of pulpwood and peeler logs to the PICOP wood-processing complex. In other countries, notably Thailand, outgrowing is a developing trend that needs further encouragement.
The outlook for trees outside forests is bright. Even if subsistence needs become less prominent with rising prosperity, such trees have the potential to supply industrial raw materials. Nonetheless, farm tree planting and agroforestry will need to avoid blind promotion efforts that might flood markets and depress profitability. It will also be necessary to achieve higher efficiencies in terms of survival rates, yields, and more diversified species to meet a range of rural needs. Above all, the incentive structure has to reduce the need for direct government and donor intervention and financial assistance. The early successes of India, where private tree planting in high-potential regions was oversubscribed, shows responsiveness to market signals and offers experience to build on as economies liberalise.
Forests and urban people^66
^66 The main references for this section are: Kuchelmeister, G. (1998): Urban forestry in the Asia-Pacific region: status and prospects. APFSOS/WP/44; Kuchelmeister, G. and S. Braatz (1993): "Urban forestry revisited." In Unasylva, 173 (44) (3-12). FAO, Rome; Sene, E.H (1993): "Urban, and peri-urban forests in sub- Saharan Africa: the Sahel." In Unasylva, 173 (44) (45-51). FAO, Rome; Braatz, S. and A. Kandiah (1996): "The use of municipal waste water for forest and tree irrigation." In Unasylva, 185 (47) (45-51). FAO, Rome; Carter, J. (1994): The potential of urban forestry in developing countries - a concept paper. FAO, Rome; Webb, R. (1996): Urban and peri-urban forestry in South-East Asia - a comparative study of Hong Kong, Singapore, and Kuala Lumpur. Unpublished paper. FAO, Rome.
Context and definitions
Status of urban forestry in the region
Issues facing future urban forestry development in the region
Context and definitions
Only 34 percent of the people in Asia and the Pacific live in cities, but this is changing rapidly. By 2025, some 55 per cent of the region's people will be urban residents. The People's Republic of China's urban population is expected to increase from 30 percent to 55 percent; India's from 27 percent to 45 percent; Indonesia's from 35 percent to 61 percent; and Pakistan's from 35 percent to 43 percent. By 2015, Asia will have 17 of the world's 27 megacities (with populations of 10 million or more), with even more urban dwellers in other large but not yet "mega" scale metropolises. Today, over 60 percent of urban people live in towns and cities of one million or fewer people; only 15 percent live in larger ones.
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in the roles that forests and trees can play in meeting the needs of urban dwellers and improving urban environments. The focus of urban forestry has recently broadened beyond landscape architecture and horticulture for aesthetic purposes to include concerns related to air quality, cooling of cities, protection of water supplies and nature conservation. The fact that the major part of new urban growth is occurring in poor cities of the developing world adds another important dimension to the role of urban forestry - the provision of forest products (Box 6.8).
Box 6.8: DEFINITION, SCOPE AND FUNCTIONS OF URBAN FORESTRY
Definition and scope: Although there is no commonly accepted definition for urban forestry, a working definition may be "an integrated approach to the planting, care and management of trees and forests in and around the city to secure multiple environmental and social benefits for urban dwellers."^67 Current thinking leans toward considering the urban forest as all trees and related vegetation in and around towns and cities. It comprises natural woodlands within the urbanised zone and in adjacent suburban or peri-urban areas, parks and reserves, and trees along highways and roads, in yards and homegardens, around public buildings, and in playgrounds and other public places. Urban forestry thus merges arboriculture, ornamental horticulture and forest management and its scope includes activities in the city centre as well as to those in peri-urban areas.
^67 Modified version of definition given in Miller, R.W. (1988). Urban forestry planning and managing urban greenspaces. Prentice Hall, New Jersey, USA.
Functions: A conventional view of urban forestry focuses on city parks, green areas and trees for recreation, beauty and shade. But forests also play important roles in conserving soil and maintaining clean and reliable water supplies for cities. Trees are also essential in protecting against drying winds, sand storms and sand dune encroachment in many locations. The needs of low-income city dwellers, however, demand attention to fuelwood and charcoal, poles, thatch and other construction materials and food (such as fruit). Indeed, the "production" aspect of urban forest may well be needed most at the growth frontier of cities where natural resources are being destroyed rapidly, unplanned settlement is occurring, and the poor retain most of their traditional needs for forest products. Trees associated with urban agriculture, including those in homegardens, which are common in some Asia-Pacific cities, have a role in food production.
Sources: Based on Kuchelmeister G. and S. Braatz (1993), op cit.; Sene, E.H (1993), op cit..
Normally, a number of municipal bodies, ranging from departments of parks and gardens, public utilities, highways, housing, etc., have jurisdiction over various parts of the urban forest and urban green space. In addition, various private landowners, businesses and civic groups are involved in tree planting and management. Therefore, co-ordinating urban forestry development is often a daunting task.
A major reason that foresters may neglect urban forestry is because forest ministries are not responsible for forestry development in urban areas (it is generally under the jurisdiction of municipal governments and often carried out by landscape designers and horticulturists). Even where national forest administrations are responsible for peri-urban and urban forest resources, co-ordination with the municipality tends to be weak.
Urban forestry also suffers from a lack of political and financial support. Trees tend to rank especially low among the priorities of many developing countries where burgeoning populations demand attention to more pressing needs for shelter, food and sanitation. The result is that green spaces and trees disappear, and future options for developing these are cut off. Another constraint facing urban forestry development is high prices for land in urban areas. This leads to conversion of forest lands in suburban or peri-urban areas and pressure on green areas in the urban centres.
While the constraints to urban forestry are numerous, there are still ample opportunities for forestry development in cities. Growing demands of the urban citizenry for improved urban environments and living conditions, are translating in some places into more political and financial support for urban forestry initiatives. Particularly in some rapidly expanding cities in developing countries, there may be opportunities for urban forestry for productive purposes, due to concentrated demand and ready markets for products.
Status of urban forestry in the region
The status of urban forestry development varies greatly throughout the Asia-Pacific region, particularly in the developing countries. In Australia and New Zealand there is a considerable area under urban reserves. In very densely populated (and less developed) cities such as Jakarta, Old Delhi, Colombo and Dhaka, the area under urban forests is less than in Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, Sydney, New Delhi, Melbourne, Auckland and Wellington. The poor cities in the region are generally far below the international minimum standard (9 square metres of green space per city dweller) set by the World Health Organisation (WHO). The cover of green space ranges from negligible to more than 25 percent (Table 6.2).
Table 6.2: Green areas in three representative Asian cities
City
Green area (% of city area)
Green area per inhabitant (m^2)
Year of data
Beijing
Seoul
Delhi
1980s
References to areas of green space per inhabitant may tend to draw attention principally to trees inside the cities themselves. However, it is important to recognise the importance of managing trees in peri-urban and even more distant locations to meet the needs of cities. In Japan, for example, improvement of forests located in suburbs and villages is a priority concern of policy for the future,^68 the intention being to bring access to nature closer to people. Given their relatively easy access, forests and trees near roadsides can be important for cities, even if they are located at considerable distance from the urban centres.
^68 Source: Document APFSOS/WP/15, 1998.
The results of a comparative study carried out by FAO of three cities in Asia (Singapore, Hong Kong City and Kuala Lumpur) clearly illustrates the changing role of forestry in the cities in response to various social and economic needs (Box 6.9).
Issues facing future urban forestry development in the region
While it is impossible to predict quantitatively what will happen in terms of urban forests in the region, the future can only bring greater focus on forestry-related needs in cities. As urban populations increase and cities expand in size, forested land will be converted to more financially lucrative land uses, such as real estate development, fruit orchards, or market gardening. In the urban centre where land prices are higher, city planners weigh the social benefits of parks and green space against the financial benefits to the tax base through infrastructure development. The land pressure in poorer, rapidly growing cities will certainly be highest, reducing the opportunities for urban forestry development, both for production and protective purposes.
Box 6.9: urban forestry in three dynamic Asian cities - Hong Kong city, Singapore and Kuala Lumpur
A comparative study of urban forestry in Hong Kong, Singapore and Kuala Lumpur provides important lessons for cities that are at earlier stages in development of their urban forestry programmes. Afforestation of water catchment areas and the protection of remnant forests were the earliest and most important urban forestry activities in both Singapore and Hong Kong. Wood production was also a driving force behind afforestation efforts in Hong Kong. As the economies of all three cities have developed, street tree planting and urban green space for recreation have increased in importance.
Singapore was covered with tropical rainforest when the British arrived in 1819, but subsequent intensive agricultural schemes, coupled with logging and fuelwood collection led to significant deforestation and forest degradation. By 1884, only 7 percent of the island was forested. To provide for watershed protection and wood production needs, in the late 1880s, forest reserves were established and catchment areas of new reservoirs were put under protection. The centre of the island remains forested today, protected as nature reserves and a catchment area managed by the public utilities. Although planting of ornamental trees in Singapore dates from the middle of the last century (with the active involvement of the Singapore Botanic Garden), the most active programmes in street tree planting and urban greening have taken place since the 1970s. Rapid population growth between the end of World War II and the mid-1960s, led to urban congestion and housing shortages. The low rate
of population increase after the mid-1960s, and rising affluence, were important factors underlying the successful planning and revitalisation of the urban environment in Singapore. Beautification of the city through tree planting was part of an overall strategy to create a more pleasant and healthy living environment and to stimulate economic growth by attracting foreign investment and business development in the city.
In contrast to Singapore, Hong Kong had little natural forest cover when the British took possession in 1841. At that time, Hong Kong was described as "a barren rock" of grass covered hills with sparse woodland cover in the valleys and small patches of protected groves near the villages. Major reforestation programmes were carried out from the late 1800s to the early 1900s, and again starting in the early 1950s, following extensive deforestation during World War II. These reforestation programmes had a dual purpose: watershed protection and wood production. Government plantations and village woodlots were established to provide fuelwood, poles and timber for the rapidly growing population. In the late 1960s, these programmes were scaled down due to a decrease in the demand for fuelwood and increased availability of alternative fuels. Greening efforts picked up again in the 1970s with establishment of county parks and, later, with various tree planting initiatives. The
extremely rapid growth of Hong Kong's population and dense infrastructure development without planning for green space earlier in the century now limits the scope for street tree planting and urban green space in the older urban areas of Hong Kong. Nevertheless, particularly outside the urban core, various public, private and citizen-led efforts are being made in tree planting along streets and roads and in parks and other public areas.
The pattern of urban forestry development was different in Kuala Lumpur, where the major period of population growth occurred much later than in Singapore and Hong Kong. The major period of growth of Kuala Lumpur has been the last few decades, in particular since 1974 when the city became the capital of Malaysia. Kuala Lumpur lies in a region of rich tropical forest. There are still significant areas of forest within the city limits and extensive forest reserves in the peri-urban area, providing for watershed protection, recreation and nature conservation functions. Pressure on the urban and peri-urban forest for provision of wood products is relatively low. Demand for fuelwood is small because the average income level is relatively high and people have access to alternative household fuels. There are also ample supplies of timber for construction and other needs from other sources in the country. Similar to Singapore, Kuala Lumpur has put great emphasis on beautification of
the city, both for the benefit of urban dwellers and to attract businesses.
Source: Webb, R. (1996). Urban and peri-urban forestry in South-East Asia: a comparative study of Hong Kong, Singapore, and Kuala Lumpur. Unpublished paper. FAO, Rome.
It can be expected that the cities that have a stable or slow rate of population growth, and whose populations are becoming more affluent, will put more emphasis on tree planting, urban beautification and green space development, as has happened in Kuala Lumpur, Hong Kong and Singapore. It is also likely that there will be more support for nature conservation in peri-urban areas.
It is more difficult to predict what will happen in the poorer, rapidly urbanising cities in the region, although it is expected that the environmental and productive roles of forests will receive the most attention. The large influx to urban areas by rural poor, many of whom are unable to purchase fuelwood and construction materials, will put tremendous pressure on the local forest and tree resources. Increased degradation and clearing of urban woodlands and forests can be expected. As these resources are depleted, fuelwood and charcoal will be transported from further away, putting additional pressure on peri-urban forests and forests further afield.
End-use changes on the outskirts of cities will also have direct impact on forest resources. The area of squatter settlements can be expected to expand in many cities, swelled by new rural immigrants unable to afford or find legal housing. Spontaneous settlement generally occurs on seemingly unused or marginal lands, including forests. Degradation of important watershed areas will pose hazards locally from soil erosion and even landslides, and may be expected to create problems for the urban water supply. It may lead to increased sedimentation of water bodies and perhaps to increased incidence of flooding. Degradation of forests or forest remnants along rivers and other water bodies within the urban core will contribute further to water quality problems. Unless urban planning, and implementation of the plans, can be successfully carried out, these problems can be expected to continue well into the next century.
Conflicts are likely to arise because of the different demands on forest and tree resources. As watershed issues become more critical, conflicts arising from the need for watershed protection for the city and the needs of people for forest products and land can be expected to come to the fore. New settlers as well as people who have long lived in these watershed areas may be affected, as can be seen in the case of the Shivapuri Watershed on the outskirts of Kathmandu, Nepal (Box 6.10).
Box 6.10: SHIVAPURI WATERSHED MANAGEMENT FOR KATHMANDU'S WATER SUPPLY
One of the main sources of drinking water for the inhabitants of Kathmandu, Nepal's capital city, is the 14,000-hectare Shivapuri watershed. During the 1970s, the quality and quantity of water derived from this area declined, due to loss of tree cover, overgrazing, and cultivation on steep slopes. The Government of Nepal, in an effort to protect the area, established a watershed and wildlife reserve covering 11,200 hectares of the watershed. A boundary wall and road were constructed around the reserve, and the majority of scattered settlements within it removed, leaving only two villages. Hunting, grazing of livestock, and fuelwood and fodder collection within the reserve were prohibited. Residents forced to move off the land were compensated for the value of their lands and homes, but there was deep resentment by the local people at the loss of access to the forest and to forest resources needed for household use. In addition, many families, that previously had gained a
significant part of their income from the sale of fuelwood to the Kathmandu market, were considerably affected by the ban on fuelwood collection. Although illegal, use of the forest and gathering of forest products continued, albeit to a lesser degree. In response to these problems, in 1985, the government initiated the Shivapuri Watershed Management and Fuelwood Plantation Project.
The objective of the project was to implement measures that could help satisfy the needs of the Shivapuri people for forest products, yet maintain the integrity of the forested watershed. Various income-generating activities at the boundaries of the reserve were introduced and improved, and a management plan, which provided for the sustainable use of the resources without compromising the watershed protection function of the reserve, was developed. Efforts continue at Shivapuri to find ways in which conservation and development in the watershed can be compatible, if not mutually reinforcing.
Source: Carter, J. (1994). The potential of urban forestry in developing countries: a concept paper. FAO, Rome.
The extent to which cities can meet the rising demand for wood products will depend on the availability and price of land in peri-urban areas, options for supplying wood products brought from other areas of the country, institutional capacity to manage peri-urban plantations, and the accessibility of alternative fuels (e.g. kerosene, gas). Given the competition of more lucrative uses for peri-urban lands, production forestry must seek public land not needed for alternative uses, such as city waste dumps^69 or landfills.
^69 The possible use of waste dumps has raised some concern, muted so far, at the possibility of trees absorbing heavy metals and these being released into the atmosphere if the wood were later used for fuel; research is needed to ascertain if this concern is justified.
In some cities in arid and semi-arid areas, opportunities may exist for irrigated tree plantations using sewage wastewater. Sewage wastewater represents a source of nutrient-rich irrigation water, while also helping to solve the problem of prohibitively expensive conventional sewage disposal. Cities in Australia, the People's Republic of China and India have considerable experience in this regard. Limited analysis suggests that forests irrigated with sewage-derived waste water could be competitive with irrigated agriculture or possibly be even more profitable.
The future of urban forestry in the region depends to a large extent on how well urban planning can stay ahead of urban growth, and more importantly, the extent to which plans can be effectively implemented. Key issues will be whether urban forest and trees are considered important when urban infrastructure is first being developed. Effective implementation of the urban plans will depend upon co-ordination between the various entities involved and the means to address conflicts between competing demands on forests and tree resources.
<section>c</section>
7. Policies and institutions
The policy environment
Institutions for forestry
The Asia-Pacific region presents a complex forestry situation with tremendous diversity in social, economic, cultural, political and ecological conditions. This diversity is reflected in the area of policies and institutions. It is, therefore, extremely difficult to summarise the major policy issues and institutions affecting forestry across a vast and populous region such as this. Even within the main Asia-Pacific regional institutions, member countries have different perspectives and prospects, which affect the policies they pursue. There are, however, some general policy-related themes that recur throughout all the countries in the region.
The policy environment
A time of change
Factors influencing policy changes
Policy reform in the forestry sector
Major policy challenges
A time of change
The international environment within which countries manage their forestry sectors has changed greatly in the last two to three decades, and continues to change very rapidly. for example, privatisation, globalisation of economies and trade liberalisation were simply not on the agenda 20 years ago. international interest in the forests of Asia and the pacific has increased dramatically in recent decades. the current economic turmoil notwithstanding, the economic strength of the region has expanded tremendously. socially and politically, there have been subtle changes in the non-state sector (private sector and NGOs). inter-sectoral linkages have become pivotal in all development activities.
During colonial times, many of the declared national forestry policies of countries in the Asia-Pacific region were instigated largely by technical foresters striving to protect and manage forests for the national good and driven largely by a "custodial" mentality. In some cases, they tried to balance social and economic considerations along with biophysical and production concerns, but generally they gave more consideration to the forests than did the people who used them. They rarely thought of the potential implications of global economic and institutional reforms on their national forestry sectors.
Forestry has always had a diverse group of stakeholders at national, regional and global levels. These groups, however, have become more vocal and visible, and now demand a significant role in shaping the sector's agenda. A wide range of interests, for example, have played important roles in the international policy dialogue associated with the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) which is greatly influencing policies in the region (Box 7.1). Key among the post-UNCED changes are:^70
^70 Source: Document APFSOS/WP/14. Some countries have made policy changes that are clearly direct follow-ups to UNCED. For example, not long after the UNCED Rio Summit, the Chinese government put forward the Ten Major Policy Measures to promote environmental protection and development and then formulated China's Agenda 21, the Implementation Plan for the Priority Programmes of China's Agenda 21, The Forestry Action Plan for China's Agenda 21, Outline of China's Programme for Environmental Development, China Biodiversity Conservation Action Plan, China Wetland Conservation Action Plan, and China National Action Plan to Implement the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification.
· confirmation of trends already initiated toward people-centred development (including concern for the particular needs of forest-dependent indigenous peoples); and
· greater environmental responsibility in forestry development.
UNCED has also created challenges for governments to reconcile the priorities of national or local significance with global ones, of industry demands with community needs, of preservation with diversified management and use of forests.
Box 7.1: THE UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON ENVIRONMENT AND DEVELOPMENT (UNCED) INTERNATIONAL POLICY DIALOGUE ON FORESTS AND THE ASIA-PACIFIC REGION
UNCED and the world of forestry: The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, gave forests a prominent position on the international environmental agenda. It led to two main agreements on forests: Chapter 11 of Agenda 21 "Combating Deforestation," and the "Non-legally binding authoritative statement of principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests" (the "Forest Principles"). Strong forestry elements were also incorporated into the Convention on Biological Diversity, the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Convention to Combat Desertification.
The UNCED-related debate on forests has gained momentum since the Earth Summit. Outstanding issues in implementation of the UNCED agreements led to subsequent establishment of an Ad Hoc Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF) which concluded in 1997 and to its successor, the Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF) which will report in year 2000. Currently, although the basic philosophies regarding balance among economic, environmental and social functions of forests are enshrined in the Forest Principles, issues remain when it comes to implementation. In brief, the issues that justified the launching of the IPF fell under five main headings:
· progress in implementing UNCED decisions related to forests, including examination of sectoral and cross-sectoral linkages;
· international co-operation in financial assistance and technology transfer;
· scientific research, forest assessment and development of criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management (SFM);
· trade and environment relating to forest products and services; and
· international organisations and multilateral institutions and instruments, including appropriate legal mechanisms.
UNCED and the Asia-Pacific region: Like other regions, Asia and the Pacific has been heavily influenced by the UNCED-related dialogue and has, in turn, played a leading part in facilitating global debate. For example, India (with Britain) sponsored a meeting to agree on UNCED reporting arrangements for forestry; Malaysia (with Canada) sponsored a review process three years after Rio; Indonesia sponsored the Bandung Global Forestry Forum to promote global consensus; Japan (with Canada) sponsored work on criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management and an expanded programme of model forests; Japan also recently hosted the Conference of the parties of the UNFCCC; Australia has supported post-UNCED review of forest products certification and trade; the People's Republic of China has supported global consultations on combating desertification.
Asia-Pacific countries are working to mainstream the principles of UNCED. The region's countries have adopted several voluntary codes of responsible practice, for example. The South Pacific code on logging and trade in products from natural forests pioneered this approach, and was followed by the Code of Practice for Forest Harvesting in Asia-Pacific and various national codes. Some countries (Indonesia and Malaysia, in particular) are voluntarily introducing sustainability certification of their exports; and many more are adopting the ITTO year 2000 target to achieve trade in only sustainably produced timber products. Policies are in place or being adopted to maintain or increase conservation of biological diversity, partly through keeping a permanent forest estate. The speed of achieving all this is variable, according to country capacities.
A development with potentially tremendous implications for future investment is the planting of trees (or forest conservation beyond what may have been originally intended) as carbon sinks. In the South Pacific, such plantations have been created on a small scale so far, with costs being met by utilities in polluting countries which thereby "buy" the right to release greenhouse gases. A formal basis has recently been created for tradable pollution rights (under Article 6 of the December 1997 Kyoto agreement of the UNFCCC). This opens a door to a potentially major surge in development funding for afforestation of wastelands, desert margins, Imperata grasslands and even peri-urban lands in return for "carbon" funds. Market mechanisms for trading in carbon-storage/pollution exchange rights are yet to be concluded but they may offer opportunities from which the region can only gain.
The very rapid spread of the market economy since the 1970s is another important and significant trend that affects the forestry sector. The globalisation of product markets has been fostered by trade liberalisation and, to a lesser extent, by declining international transport costs. Integration and greater international mobility of capital in global markets has been facilitated by technological innovations in information flows. These changes have affected the Asia-Pacific region as much as anywhere. They have resulted in a rapid expansion of industry, financial and communication services and agribusiness.
Throughout the region there has been a greater emphasis on trade and industrialisation, to maximise domestic employment generation and value added, especially for exports of primary products. Liquidation and depletion of natural forests to finance investments in other sectors has occurred in many of the developing countries, while plantation investments have expanded the available resources in others. The need to increase production and decrease unit costs stimulates plantation development in the higher income countries with relatively cheap land, or developing countries with cheap land and labour.
Accompanying these economic changes, there has also been increased environmental awareness of issues such as biodiversity conservation and the threat of global climate change, and an increase in green consumerism -sometimes with emphasis on social issues. Internal and external pressures for environmental protection and conservation are increasing and forests are now increasingly seen as much more than just "wood-producing factories" or "tree-farms." Environmental concerns are expressed differently in countries at different stages of development. The advanced industrial societies (and the more affluent and educated urban groups even in poorer countries) have adopted major global environmental agendas. Meanwhile, in the poorer countries, interest is focused more on survival issues and local environmental matters.
There have also been noticeable changes in the political environment, including deregulation, smaller governments, the expanding role of the private sector and civil society, privatisation and devolution. This has been accompanied by increased regional co-ordination and collaboration, most notably within the APEC forum, but also within the expanded ASEAN (particularly the preparations for abolition of internal tariffs by 2005) and to a lesser extent, SAARC and SPC/SPF. Governments thus find themselves increasingly keeping track of, and meeting obligations to international commitments, many of which have possibly unintended implications for the forestry sector. At a time when they are expected to liberalise and deregulate, governments also find themselves required to meet international obligations such as ensuring responsible forest management, much of which is undertaken by the commercial private sector and free citizens with no direct involvement by governments.
At local levels, political changes have arisen as a result of more widespread recognition of the significance of forests to local people's livelihoods throughout the region. Conversely, the influence and importance of local people has increased with respect to the success of forest protection and management. The combination of these two considerations, especially in conjunction with the more general trends summarised above, has led to numerous policy experiments with devolving more management responsibility to local communities. This is widely believed to be compatible with the environmental trend above. However, a feeling is emerging that involving people and devolving management responsibilities may also need a commercial dimension if it is to be successful. For example, in New Zealand, a Korean company has established a commercial forestry joint venture with Maori people. In New Zealand, and increasingly elsewhere, the role of the State in forestry is changing from active
direct management of forests for commercial production, to policy making, regulating, supervising and stimulating private sector, civil society and NGO activities.
Factors influencing policy changes
Recognition of macro-economic impacts and effects from other sectors
Because forest activities are affected indirectly by a variety of other policies outside the sector, it is important to monitor changes in these policies and recognise their likely implications for forestry. Foresters now generally accept that the sector cannot operate in isolation. Consequently, forestry has become multi-disciplinary in nature. In particular, forests can be affected by the following sorts of changes outside the forest sector:
· changes in the general macro-economic environment such as significant and prolonged exchange rate shifts;
· opening up of large-scale agricultural and land settlement projects - this invariably leads to forest lands being cleared to accommodate settler families (as in the case of transmigration programmes in Indonesia and the Mahaweli settlement programme in Sri Lanka);
· developments in the agricultural regulatory environment and incentives for agricultural development, especially those influencing productivity;
· increases in rural infrastructure to open up rural markets to outside suppliers and improve access to outside markets;
· adoption of fanning practices that integrate trees outside forests as parts of the agricultural landscape or near rural settlements;
· changing demands on the availability of household labour as a result of changes in agricultural technology;
· rapid industrialisation (which can have both positive and negative impacts on forestry; it will tend to accelerate the extraction of raw materials from the forests, but it will also move rural people out of the villages to work in urban industry; and
· changes in environmental policies (which usually have the most direct impact on lands controlled by the state).
Some of the changes in other sectors tend to be associated with Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs) initiated in the process of adopting more market-driven economies. Under SAPs, many countries have restructured their economies, including devaluation, lifting of subsidies and contraction of government establishments. A recent review^71 of the impacts of SAPs on forests, including those in Indonesia, concluded that devaluations and export promotion policies generally increase pressure on forests. The study found that spending on roads near forested areas was maintained or increased under SAPs, or fell only briefly; subsidies for frontier agriculture and colonisation programmes rose in some cases, but declined in others. Overall, it was concluded that SAPs did not significantly weaken public capacity to promote sustainable forest management for the simple reason that capacity was minimal even before SAPs began.
^71 Kaimowitz, D., Erwidodo, O. Ndoye, P. Pacheco, and W. Sunderlin (1997). Forests under (structural) adjustment in Bolivia, Cameroon and Indonesia. Draft Paper. CIFOR, Bogor, Indonesia.
Only a few of the trends identified within forestry in the region can be directly attributed to policies or actions taken within the sector. On the contrary, the forestry sector in many Asia-Pacific countries seems to react (often belatedly) to much more powerful and widespread forces outside the sector. Research completed for this study suggests that developments in other sectors may have had negative effects on forests in the region in the short-term. However, the general, widespread consequences of economic development and consequent prosperity probably hold the key to improved forestry sector outcomes, including conservation in the region, over the next one to two decades.
Urbanisation and social differentiation
In cities and towns, industries and the service sector are booming, creating prosperous enclaves throughout the region. This new prosperity rarely reaches people living in or close to the forest, however. Poor rural people have mostly been unable to participate in the booming economies of the region unless they have migrated (at least temporarily) to the cities and ports, contributing to rapid urbanisation. Those remaining in the villages and forests often feel economically and socially deprived. One of the few assets that they can draw upon for income is the forest, which also serves as their land bank. The low rural incomes continue to condemn millions to practising low-input, low-yield, extensive agriculture for which production increases are mostly achieved by clearing more land and forests for farming.
Accompanying these commercial pressures is the weakening (or even collapse) of traditional management and regulatory systems, customary laws, taboos and social controls. This leads to the erosion of traditional social structures that often had a (successful) forest management component.
Traditional forest management practices
The emphasis on timber harvesting has tended to obscure the value of traditional forest management systems, which have been practised in many areas. These systems tend to be sophisticated and widespread, both short-term and long-term in perspective, and capable of integrating agriculture and forestry temporally and spatially. Despite this, they are generally poorly known outside their specific areas. For example, there has been little research into smallholder forest management systems (most has only covered the first few years of swidden-fallow management). Some argue that such systems are no longer in the mainstream and that to support them perpetuates a subsistence livelihood that leaves rural people with few options. Yet the numbers who will continue to derive livelihoods in this fashion is, in some countries, so large that a deeper understanding of them is necessary, if only to prepare for appropriate progression into the modern era.
In some cases, forests are of great cultural significance to indigenous communities (exemplified by the sacred groves of India, Nepal and Bhutan). Many cultural minorities, including the indigenous populations of Yunnan, the Philippines, Borneo and Melanesia, follow very conservative management practices. In many other areas, the watershed protection functions and amenity values of forests are explicitly recognised by societies and governments.
The cultural importance, critical environmental-protection functions and subsistence and commercial importance of collecting, growing, processing and marketing of NWFPs from local forests, all provide an ethical basis for local users to have a strong voice in the management of such forests (including protected areas). That long-standing indigenous management systems still exist after centuries of practice in many countries, is evidence that local community management can indeed be "sustainable, productive and equitable" under certain conditions.
Policy reform in the forestry sector
Overall policy and its reform
Existing forestry policies, focusing on wood production and the management of forests by governments have, until recently, tended to neglect traditional forest users and the need for more land for agricultural production. Growth of agriculture, commerce and industry has led to land-use changes (i.e. losses of natural forest) despite forest policy efforts at resource conservation. Thailand is often cited as an example of agriculture and trade policy leading to rapid conversion of forests for farming (in this case export-oriented cassava and rice production). Admittedly, these policies have brought tremendous social gains to Thailand, but it remains to be seen whether such lands will remain productive.
Even though forestry policies are changing in the aftermath of UNCED, most current forestry policy still divides natural forest areas into "production" and "protection" forests, each with separate management. In production forests, logging companies commonly operate, but rarely with adequate controls, particularly in countries with weak government institutions (Box 7.2). Nonetheless, existing policies and regulations would be of considerable benefit in protecting forest resources if they were adequately enforced.
NWFPs tend to remain a secondary consideration in policy. In a few cases, efforts have been made to bring them into the mainstream. In the process, however, local people have often subsequently lost control of the formal production and marketing systems.
Considerable evidence indicates that resource degradation has been made worse by restricting indigenous people's secure rights to land and neglecting their customary uses and their capacities to preserve forests. As part of addressing all these issues, policy reform in the forestry sector should examine current policies toward the control of land use and the development of forest industries.
Box 7.2: POSTPONING THE INEVITABLE? - ASIAN MULTINATIONALS IN OVERSEAS LOGGING
In a world with a liberal, free-trade environment, the Asia-Pacific region's needs for wood are easily met through imports. In addition to the major inflow of processed forest products, the Asia-Pacific region is now importing increasing volumes of industrial roundwood from outside the region,
For many decades, Japan and the Republic of Korea were major importers of tropical roundwood (mostly from tropical Asia but also further afield) until log-export bans in much of Asia cut off supplies. A more recent phenomenon is the harvesting of timber in tropical developing countries by transnational corporations from developing Asian countries. For example, today the largest foreign logging companies in the Amazon basin are from Malaysia, Indonesia, the People's Republic of China and the Republic of Korea. Logging ventures have been started in the Pacific Islands (especially in Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands), the forested countries of the Mekong basin (Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar), Africa, and South America. There are particularly large areas under concession in Cambodia (more than 4.2 million hectares) and in Suriname (almost 3.5 million hectares).
The general perception is that the investors are operating in environments where institutions are weak and that they are taking advantage of this to get away with more lax environmental stewardship. If this is the case, access to substantial sources of foreign log supply under these conditions is buffering the region's private industry from reality. The reality is the need for urgent and energetic adoption of new, sustainable management practices and for heavy investment in forest plantations. The operation of concessions under low environmental standards, if true, may be doing a major disservice to Asia-Pacific forestry in the long run.
The phenomenon is likely to be short-lived. Just as the main tropical Asian timber countries resented exporting their unprocessed raw logs to the rest of the world, the new suppliers, whether in the Mekong basin, the South Pacific or Africa and Latin America, are likely to also soon press for local processing.
Criticism has also begun to mount over the apparently limited respect for environmental standards of the companies. More than one of these companies has been described as a "transnational predator." Such hostile reactions may, at a minimum, lead to closer supervision. The impacts of this growing perception are already being felt in the wider sphere. In January 1998, the Amazonas State Government (Brazil) put on hold investment projects by logging companies from the People's Republic of China and Malaysia worth millions of dollars. The authorities in Amazonas have reportedly acted on the grounds that Asian companies already operating in their state are failing to comply with forestry laws, and are refusing to pay fines. In 1997, a Brazilian federal congressional committee issued a report highlighting the continuing destruction of the rainforest by these companies.
Questions have been raised also within the region. Probably the most controversial issue in South Pacific forestry is the influence of overseas interests in forestry, particularly in Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu. Apart from claims that logging is beyond sustainable limits, there are two main thrusts to the criticism: (a) that the concession holders do not pay a fair price for the timber; and (b) that they do not invest in further processing in-country. Allegations of physical dissuasion, bribery and corruption in the allocation of timber concessions have also been made. A basic problem is the pervasive poverty and general state of under-development, which creates conditions conducive to exploitation.
Sources: Enters (1977): Document APFSOS/WP/25. Byoung II Yoo (1977): Document APFSOS/WP/06. World-wide Forest/Biodiversity Campaign News (various bulletins - 1997/98) http://forests.org/.
Commercial timber exploitation and related land use policies are the focus of considerable attention. Studies find that logging is likely to lead to increased forest conversion by an influx of migrants, if the following conditions all apply:
· roads are built that open up new areas, especially if they remain open after harvesting is completed;
· there is very poor enforcement of forest boundaries by government agencies;
· there is an institutional or legal context in which people believe that land which they occupy, claim or "stake out," will eventually be recognised or even legalised as theirs by the government (regularisation of encroachments); and
· there exists a large pool of unemployed or landless people, with relatively low incomes and poor economic prospects, who could expect to earn a lot more money by colonising forest areas.
All the widely known instances of rapid forest clearance by "squatters" in Asia appear to be consistent with this scenario. Conversely, where these conditions do not apply, forests can be logged without much risk of uncontrolled future deforestation or forest degradation (e.g. Peninsular Malaysia). This suggests that part of the answer to the deforestation problem is not to stop logging, or to stop logging in all new areas, but rather to reform those policies, institutions, and economic circumstances that at present make forest colonisation seem more attractive than potential migrants' current options. The evidence from the rapid economic growth of the NIEs of the region is that as employment and income prospects outside the agriculture sector improve, fewer people want to undertake the dangerous, difficult, sometimes unprofitable and often illegal work of clearing forests for agriculture.
Industrial forestry policy
To be sustainable, forest industries need policies that ensure renewal or addition of forest resources. Policies should establish appropriate incentives, disincentives and regulatory mechanisms to achieve sustainable and efficient results. One risk is that in the drive to promote forestry, industries are favoured excessively thus undermining incentives for efficiency (Box 7.3).
Box 7.3: PRIVILEGED ACCESS TO RAW MATERIALS BY INDUSTRY
In a significant number of countries, the desire to support forest industry is reflected in privileged access to raw materials and other advantages. The most obvious case is banning exports to favour domestic processing. Another insidious problem is that of government-controlled prices. The experience of India provides an example. Indian policies in fact give mixed signals. They attempt to favour industry (such as through supply of raw materials at below market prices), but at the same time they encourage wasteful use of forest resources and forest degradation and fail to encourage private producers to plant trees for industrial uses. As a result, the government has had to fund reforestation to supply industry. Industry efficiency has additionally been undermined by government protection from foreign competition.
By providing subsidised seedlings under social forestry schemes, the government has unwittingly encouraged the planting of inferior stock by farmers and has subsequently brought low returns to them. It has also discouraged private nurseries which could supply good planting material at reasonable and realistic prices. Furthermore, free or subsidised seedlings have encouraged wastage and planting of too many trees per hectare.
India has recently moved to remedy these problems. The policy of supplying wood materials to industries at concessional prices has been changed, for example. Industries are now required to use alternative raw materials and to produce wood for their requirements in direct nexus with farmers. Since 1991-1992, industrial policy has allowed the liberalised import of forest raw materials without special permits. Preference has also been given to small-scale industries and industries using alternative raw materials like bagasse, rice straw, grasses or any other non-woody vegetation and wastepaper. Farmers are now growing trees and selling their produce freely, with no support price for their produce except in some states wishing to promote agroforestry.
Earlier, privileged access to government raw materials left India's forest industries ill-prepared for the environment-oriented policy decision to ban felling in natural forests. Recent policy reforms are changing the situation, but it will take some time for supplies from farms to fill the gap.
Source: Adapted from M.F. Ahmed. Document APFSOS/WP/26.
Most forests in the Asia-Pacific region are managed day to day by the private sector. Forest policies, however, guide the activities of private companies in managing government or communal forests, with regard to the scale of operations, the duration of licences, harvesting methods used, grades and sizes of timber to be removed, intensity of harvests, etc.
A common criticism of current forest policies (or rather their implementation) is that they tend to be exploitative (i.e. natural forests in particular are harvested with little emphasis on regeneration or care of residual forest resources). Other concerns are high-grading, the failure to harvest less commercially desirable species, illicit removal of under-sized logs, and damage to residual trees. On the positive side, policies have successfully promoted plantations (for example, in Japan, New Zealand, Australia, the People's Republic of China and India). An emerging trend is policies promoting greater use of residues, recycling, and other activities designed to reduce the need for timber harvesting. More important, however, is the trend to favour value-added secondary processing that enables countries to earn the same or even more income from smaller volumes of forest products. Value-added products such as furniture or components also use small-dimension wood that is
otherwise wasted.
Governments have a tendency to try to devise and enforce rules for every situation. Unfortunately, they are rarely capable of enforcing them. A few countries (e.g. Australia and New Zealand) are changing from a prescriptive approach to an "outcome-orientated" approach. This requires adoption of a framework that specifies the required results but leaves it open to individual operators to devise the most efficient means to meet those standards, subject to the law being respected.
Policies related to fees charged and collected for forest harvesting are also major tools for forest management. In particular, the following are important:
· Extremely low stumpage fees and charges: Low fees may be justified to attract new investment or for other reasons, but their continuation may encourage high grading and wastefulness and reduce incentives for efficiency and tree planting;
· Transferability or sale of cutting licences and rights: In many countries, the fact that logging rights are not transferable reduces the incentives to manage a forest to maintain a high residual value;
· Use of performance bonds: Performance bonds designed to induce reforestation have had mixed results in the region, often because they are set so low many companies find it cheaper to forfeit the reforestation deposit than to replant. Suggestions have been made that bonds might be more useful if targeted at encouraging better harvesting practices, rehabilitating harvest sites, and (controversially) closing off roads to discourage settlement;^72
· Linking fees and cutting rights to domestic processing: Charging lower fees for logs used for local processing than for those exported has accelerated industrialisation in Indonesia and Malaysia, but additional incentives related to investment, trade and tariffs, taxes, log-export restrictions, and worker-training programmes were also important. And while accelerated forest industrialisation has succeeded in Indonesia and Malaysia, the same cannot be said of Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and several other log-producing countries.
^72 The creation of roads may, however, be considered a benefit by planners looking at overall development given that it is an investment in infrastructure upgrading with benefits beyond the forestry sector. The issue may be to ensure that settlement is orderly and productive.
Improved forest harvesting practices is an important objective, but if the greater threats to the continued existence of most tropical forests come from any source other than legal, export-oriented, large-scale, industrial logging, a wider view is required. The pace of other technological changes, and social, demographic, political and economic changes outside the sector are likely to dwarf initiatives from within. Of particular importance is the need to find ways to reduce incentives for forest land conversion. One option is to increase agricultural productivity and so reduce the need for extensive farming.
Of the factors within forestry, technological upgrading of the sector could contribute most in the long term to more sustainable forest management. By giving low priority to technology development and adoption, the forestry sector institutions in Asia-Pacific as elsewhere are perhaps doing the greatest disservice of all to the sector's capacity to successfully face the future.
Major policy challenges
Each country in the region seeks to achieve an appropriate balance among the economic, environmental and social contributions of forests to meet its particular national needs. The policy challenges facing the countries, therefore, cover as wide a spectrum as their levels of resource endowment and socio-economic development. In the richer countries, societies can better afford to conserve much of their remaining natural forests for environmental, recreational and aesthetic values. The remaining natural forests are considered far too valuable for their environmental and social roles to be logged. In the poorer countries, harvesting and exploitation is more necessary to support economic and subsistence needs. Most societies would like more of all types of forest benefits, but realism demands that choices are made; no country has an unlimited budget. The challenge is to increase all types of benefits simultaneously, perhaps through greater skills, technology and efficiency. In
all these efforts, effective institutional arrangements and policies are crucial.
With regard to economic contributions, the challenge is to maintain strong commitment to forestry and forest industries. Even in countries where forestry is very important, it rarely represents the main force for development. Indeed, its relative significance is generally decreasing as other sectors expand much more rapidly. Furthermore, the land occupied by forests is already in many cases more valuable in alternative uses. The pressure for forest conversion may not abate until countries achieve greater economic stability and food security. In general, forests will be permitted to remain when the people deciding the forests' fate conclude that the continued existence of forests generates higher incomes (or cultural or social values) than their removal.
Institutions for forestry^73
^73 Space constraints make it impossible to explore institutional issues in-depth here; detailed analysis has, however, been undertaken for this outlook study and is presented primarily in the reports of Banerjee (APFSOS/WP/21, 1997) and Muttiah (APFSOS/WP/36, 1997). Institutional matters in specific contexts also feature prominently in the reports of: Hammond (APFSOS/WP/22, 1997); Byron (APFSOS/WP/09, 1997) (in the context of policy options for the forestry sector); Balsiger (APFSOS/WP/37, 1997) (environmental civil society organisations) and Fisher et al. (APFSOS/WP/27, 1997) (with a "people and forests" perspective).
Relevance of a wide range of institutions
Current government roles in forestry
The commercial private sector
Institutions for community-level popular participation
Industry/community partnerships
Major institutional challenges
Relevance of a wide range of institutions
Historically, analyses of forestry institutions have concentrated on government forestry departments and agencies. The fact that developments within the forestry sector are often determined externally to the sector suggests that it might be best to examine institutions from a broad perspective since many agencies and groups external to forestry have a significant impact on the sector's development. While keeping this broad perspective in mind, this study focuses on internal institutions in the belief that the sector's own institutions generally have the greatest vested interest in drawing attention to the sector's needs and potentials.
Effects of ownership
Given the great diversity of forest ownership patterns in the Asia-Pacific region, there can be no single "correct" system nor can any approach remain permanently valid over time. Numerous possible institutional arrangements exist in the Asian region for forest management and use (e.g. ownership of forests, responsibility for their management, responsibility for harvesting, and responsibility for processing and utilisation can all be assigned to the State, private sector entities or communal groups). In terms of official forestry administrations, in many federal countries (e.g. India, Pakistan, Malaysia and Australia), responsibility for forestry rests with the provinces or states with the central government agency being concerned with national policy, planning and strategy. In other countries, central forestry ministries are directly involved in operational matters, sometimes through government corporations (e.g. in Indonesia, Myanmar and the People's Republic of China).
Forestry institutions are expected to: (a) establish conditions conducive to forestry development and to ensure appropriate policies, laws and regulations; (b) anticipate, identify and prioritise goals and promote their achievement; and (c) provide or develop support services such as training, extension, education and research as a basis for increasing or maintaining productivity and competitiveness of the forestry sector. Many also play an important public information role by helping to create awareness, interest and consensus. Proper institutional arrangements are also needed for ensuring adequate funding for forestry development.
As policies and priorities change, the focus of forestry institutions also changes and adapts. At present, many countries are making a conscious effort to achieve balance among economic, environmental and social goals of forestry. The changes that have affected policy making in the forestry sector in recent years have also affected the way forestry institutions work. In the public sector, planning has taken on a much more prominent role than previously with the preparation of National Forest Action Plans or Forestry Sector Master Plans. The orientation of planning has, however, moved away from being prescriptive and the process itself has grown more consultative.
Public forestry institutions in many countries of the region are inadequately staffed and have very limited budgets. There is also a widespread tendency to draw more value out of the sector than is put in. In India, for example, monetised and non-monetised forest products worth Rs300 billion are withdrawn annually but investment at present is only Rs8 billion annually, or only about 2.7 percent of total estimated withdrawal, and less than 1 percent of total development outlay of the country.^74 The shortage of domestic allocations in a number of developing countries has led to undue reliance on external aid, threatening the sustainability and continuity of efforts.
^74 M.F. Ahmed (1997). Document APFSOS/WP/26.
In the private sector a number of policy challenges exist. Forestry companies have started to complement their reliance on natural-forest concessions with establishment of industrial plantations, but there is still far to go in most countries. Where concession holders have moved into remote tribal areas in countries such as Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, mechanisms for amicable and effective co-operation have proved inadequate. Concession holders have sometimes succumbed to the temptation of exploitative practices, taking advantage of weak traditional institutions. Often, the local people's resentment has led to complex disputes over land tenure and the distribution of benefits, which governments are ill-prepared to resolve. Under these circumstances, environmental NGOs and human rights organisations have moved into the perceived institutional vacuum. They have become involved in a wide spectrum of forestry activities from advocacy to extension and education. Some (for
example in the Philippines) have even become sub-contractors to governments or donors in implementing participatory development projects.
Current government roles in forestry
Governmental roles and responsibilities
Forestry enjoys only a modest institutional profile in most countries. Government responsibility for forestry is assigned to the Ministry of Agriculture (e.g. Bhutan, Viet Nam and Japan) or Ministry of Environment (e.g. Bangladesh) in several countries. It is unusual to have a separate Ministry of Forestry, although many governments have separate Forestry Departments (or their equivalents), sometimes linked with wildlife management and national park authorities. In general, central government institutions tend only to consider forestry when it is part of a wider issue (e.g. land-use planning, rural development or environment), leaving regional or lower-tier government agencies to focus on the sector.
A common feature of many forest services in the region is their maintenance of a "custodial" approach to forest conservation. For many, this is a legacy of colonial times under which forests were set aside and protected. Given that many Asian countries are crowded, and that people already live and farm in national parks and forests, this model of forests and national parks is often inappropriate and unworkable.
Most logging and processing industries throughout the region are in the private sector. Several countries, however, still have at least one government corporation involved in these activities (e.g. the Forest Industry Organisation in Thailand, the Forest Industries Development Corporation (FIDC) in Bangladesh, the Forest Development Corporation in Bhutan, Perum Perhutani and the Inhutanis in Indonesia, Sabah Forest Industries in Malaysia, and the Nepal Timber Corporation). Nepal also has several boards and state companies to produce and process rosin and turpentine as well as herbs. The number of these corporations that earn a profit is very limited in spite of the fact that many of them enjoy privileged access to raw materials or even price subsidies for raw materials. Nor are many of them any more environmentally responsible than their private-sector counterparts. With so few advantages to show, there is pressure for government corporations to achieve profitability or be
privatised.
In most countries, government forestry institutions have tried to retain control over a wide range of functions. The capacity of many has not kept pace with the growing complexity and increasing inter-sectoral nature of issues, however. As governments are streamlined in the age of liberalised economies, many government forest services find themselves overburdened and under-budgeted. Some hold onto traditional structures and mandates even when conditions clearly require that they now plan without being prescriptive, that they regulate without stifling the initiative of private firms and NGOs, and that they encourage all interest groups to have a stake in the way forests are managed. Many will have to change more radically in the way they operate.^75
^75 There may not be consensus regarding whether decentralisation should lead to reduction in the overall size of government forestry agencies. Some may argue that the increase in forestry activity, the very dispersal of efforts, and the interest in forests which this decentralisation is intended to respond to would seem to require the opposite. This is particularly true considering the range of interests which government agencies are now expected to involve and consult with about the management of forests.
A general concern is the weakening capacity of government forestry agencies to enforce laws, except in a few countries. The adoption of participatory measures passes some responsibility for enforcing public behaviour to communities but there are still many forests where these arrangements do not apply.
Forestry research and education
Forestry research and training (particularly lower-level or specialised training) are two functions which central government forestry institutions carry out in nearly all countries of the region. Increasingly, however, these functions are being assumed by private institutions or non-governmental organisations.
For both research and education, there is considerable evidence that support is inadequate. Only a few forestry research institutions in the region can claim a major international reputation (e.g. selected institutes in the three industrialised countries and in Malaysia, Indonesia, the People's Republic of China and India).
Major breakthroughs like the successful development of technologies for the utilisation of rubberwood by the Forest Research Institute of Malaysia (FRIM) may provide incentives for better support. A second breakthrough on oil palm (at the same Malaysian institute) illustrates the powerful incentive that earlier success may generate (Box 7.4).
The relevance of forestry education and research, and the effectiveness of their delivery to users, are frequently called into question in Asia and the Pacific. Critics point to the fact that industry rarely helps to fund research (with notable exceptions such as in New Zealand and Malaysia) as evidence of the irrelevancy of forestry research in Asia and the Pacific. There appears to be considerable opportunity for making Asia-Pacific research more client-driven.
Another issue is the lack of boldness in the forestry sector's research community. In a region that paved the way to the green revolution in rice production, there have been no apparent comparable breakthroughs in forestry.
Box 7.4: MALAYSIAN FOREST RESEARCH BREAKTHROUGH AT THE FORESTRY/AGRICULTURAL INTERFACE
On November 8, 1997, the Malaysian Minister of Primary Industry, presided over the signing of an agreement between a Malaysian firm and a partner from the People's Republic of China to set up the first medium-density fibreboard (MDF) mill to use fibre strands from the empty fruit bunches of oil palms.
The two companies will use technology developed from research by the Forest Research Institute of Malaysia (FRIM), reflecting the benefits of close co-operation between FRIM and the private sector.
The medium-density fibreboard will be based entirely on fibre strands of the oil palm's empty fruit bunches which are a residue from the processing of the fruits. The characteristics of the fibre strands are comparable to those of local timber and can be converted to quality panel products.
Source: Adapted from FRIM Press Release.
In general, research capacity tends to be linked to countries' overall institutional and economic capacity. For this reason, several networking efforts have been initiated in Asia and the Pacific. These networks function with a view toward improving the efficiency of research and development, and helping less capable countries benefit from the skills and experiences of others in the region (Box 7.5).
Box 7.5: FORESTRY NETWORKS WORK IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
The long-term nature of forestry projects necessitates long time periods before new technologies derived from research can be translated into proven production systems that enhance economic, ecological and social benefits to people and nations. This situation is further aggravated by extreme limitations in forestry research capabilities due to lack of trained manpower, research facilities and funding among developing countries. Thus, a number of these countries are unable to take advantage of the full potential of their land and forest resources to contribute maximally to socio-economic uplifting and environmental stabilisation.
One effective remedy is the establishment of networks among countries in the Asia-Pacific region to hasten the sharing of knowledge and information about forestry-related technologies, and the exchange of experiences and lessons learned from the application of such technologies. Such sharing promotes co-operation and complementation, minimises wasteful duplication, avoids "re-invention of the wheel" and provides opportunities for the less endowed nations to rise up to par with the others in the arena of forest management.
Such regional networks now exist, and their impacts on forestry development have been impressive. The Bangkok-based Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia and the Pacific (FORSPA) has been effective in stimulating forestry research and in establishing avenues for rapid dissemination of new information among network members. FORSPA has also helped organise the Asia-Pacific Association of Forest Research Institutes (APAFRI). The Forest Tree Improvement Programme (FORTIP), based in the Philippines, has succeeded in focusing collective research efforts to increase productivity of forest plantations to meet rising needs of expanding populations. TEAKNET based in Yangon, Myanmar, focuses on teak research and utilisation. The Asia-Pacific Agroforestry Network (APAN) has brought together the collective efforts of member countries in promoting agroforestry as a viable production system in the ecologically fragile uplands. The Regional wood Energy Development Programme for Asia
and the Pacific (RWEDP) addresses the problems of sufficiency and sustainability of low-cost and renewable energy derived from wood. The International Network for Bamboo and Rattan (INBAR), recently established in the People's Republic of China after preparatory years of operation in Delhi, facilitates the exchange of information and promotes sustainable management and use of these important non-wood resources.
Source: Adapted from Vergara, N.T. (Networks - Personal communication, November 1997).
Early forestry education institutions in the region were established in India (Dehra Dun), the Philippines (Los Banos) and Burma (Rangoon) during the colonial era. After the Second World War, other forestry schools were established in Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Papua New Guinea and other countries to meet expanding demand for professional tropical foresters. Forestry education in the region has since grown by leaps and bounds.
State-of-the-art facilities for instruction and research have been established throughout the region; staffs have been strengthened through graduate training; and curricula have been updated to focus on ecological stability, biodiversity conservation and social equity. The region's education institutions are increasingly training experts from Africa and other regions, as well as from Asia-Pacific, in tropical forest management, agroforestry and social forestry.
The establishment of the Regional Community Forestry Training Centre (RECOFTC) in Bangkok exemplifies the spirit of responsiveness in forestry education to changing needs. In other ways, however, the universities in the tropical countries of the region have not been particularly bold. The situation is improving, as some universities are taking on training in cutting-edge topics such as forest recreation and ecotourism, intensive plantation management and environmental impact assessment.
The Asia-Pacific region offers a full range of forestry education institutions that cover ecosystems from the humid tropics to temperate and boreal regions. The region thus has the opportunity to provide specialised training and for institutions to develop complementary programmes and curricula. Fields with growth potential include sustainable management and utilisation of biological diversity, re-greening of wastelands, non-wood forest products, and technologies for efficient processing of non-forest fibres which complement or compete with forest fibre. The whole area of mainstreaming medicinal plants requires expertise and basic research which universities can contribute to or lead. Strengthening of the universities as a regional "system" could come from better networking among universities.
The commercial private sector
Government co-operation with the commercial private sector
Around the world, privatisation and deregulation of economies are the orders of the day. It is now commonly accepted that most economic activities are run more efficiently by the private sector and that removal of government intervention from commercial activities can unleash the productive power of businesses driven by profit motives. Indeed, Asia's booming economies largely exemplify private-sector capacities and market orientations.
The commercial private sector, however, is not generally interested in producing socially oriented, non-revenue generating goods and services, which often dominate forestry. Consequently, except where central planning remains significant, the private sector leads in the production of marketed forest products, while the state or its parastatal enterprises and agencies concentrate on more socially and environmentally oriented outputs. Increasingly, governments are being exhorted to confine themselves to policy making, regulatory and monitoring roles. Even some of these roles could be contracted out.
Despite the push for private-sector implementation of forest management, several potential symbiotic opportunities exist for governments and the commercial sector to work together. Businesses depend on governments to establish and implement policies that offer stability, create atmospheres for free and fair competition, and break down trade and market barriers. Recent experience in Sabah highlights the prospects for innovative collaboration between government and the commercial private sector (Box 7.6).
By preferentially directing human and other resources at target sectors, governments in several high-performance Asian economies have built up comparative advantage in sectors as diverse as electronics and general manufacturing - even where no particular comparative strengths existed before. Such an approach has also been successfully applied in the forestry sector (e.g. the development of Indonesia's plywood industry).
Before the recent economic turmoil, some analysts were suggesting that such a strategy was on the horizon for the pulp and paper industry of Southeast Asia.
Box 7.6: SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT BY THE PRIVATE SECTOR -THE SABAH, MALAYSIA INITIATIVE
New opportunities for joint activities between government and the commercial private sector have been made possible through a recent initiative of the State Government of Sabah Malaysia. In September 1997, the government established 27 Forest Management Units (FMUs) with the objective of ensuring sustainable forest management (SFM) in the state. Each FMU is about 100,000 hectares in size and management agreements with private companies will offer secure tenure for 100 years. The FMUs are generally logged-over areas or forests currently under logging.
The private sector is invited to participate in the management of these FMUs using long-term SFM principles, including development of conservation, natural forest management and tree-crop plantations. Forest management plans must be prepared and approved by the Forestry Department. Similarly, other plans for harvesting, reforestation and other activities have to be prepared for approval by the Forestry Department before being implemented.
This scheme is unique and innovative in that the private sector is being invited to participate not just for logging but for sustainable resources management under certain terms and incentives provided by the government.
Source: Salleh Mohd Nor (Personal communication, October 1997).
Private-sector co-operation with governments is often co-ordinated and channelled through industry and trade associations. The roles of such associations are perhaps not adequately appreciated. They provide opportunities for sharing costs in implementing programmes of mutual benefit that individual firms operating independently could not afford. Benefits go beyond financial aspects, however, in that associations facilitate information exchange, adoption and harmonisation of voluntary standards, promotion and policing of self-imposed codes of conduct, diffusion of best-management practices and training. Joint policy dialogue with governments and other interest groups, and lobbying, are other important roles.
A perception exists that private-sector opportunities in forestry exist mainly in the high-forest countries of Southeast Asia and Papua New Guinea, or the plantations and native temperate forests of Oceania and North Asia. This need not be true. Even in countries where forests serve mostly environmental and social functions, opportunities for private-sector entities to discharge forest management can be created if governments are creative. Management of recreation and nature-based tourism sites, for example, are increasingly being assigned to the private sector under contract or lease arrangements. Even where operations are not commercially viable (such as the management of watershed-protection forests), the state need not directly undertake the management but can meet the full cost and contract private firms to carry out the management.
Roles of associations of private forest owners
In many countries, numerous individuals and small forest owners practise forestry on private lands. Many cases exist, particularly in Japan and the Republic of Korea, where these small forest owners form cooperatives or other associations for mutual support in promoting their interests. In the case of the Republic of Korea, the associations are a third pillar in forestry development, alongside government and commercial firms (Box 7.7).
In many developing countries, associations of tree farmers have also been established. In India and Thailand, in particular, such associations help groups of tree farmers learn about new management practices and marketing options.
Box 7.7: FOREST ASSOCIATIONS IN THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
In the Republic of Korea, the government, private sector and forestry associations all have traditionally carried out forestry activities. Forestry associations in Korea were based on "Sanrimgae," the rural people's self-regulated organisations dating back to the 15th century. The Sanrimgae were reorganised into modern forestry associations to supervise forestry-related business affairs, including execution by proxy of government forest projects, establishment of the foundation for self-supporting operation, systematic organisation and structural adjustment. Membership included all forest owners and village residents in mountain areas. The government provided technical and economic information to the associations, but financial constraints hampered the effectiveness of the forestry associations.
In 1993, the "Forestry Co-operatives Law" replaced the "Forestry Association Law" and forestry associations were reorganised into forestry co-operatives, which have become an important force in Korean forestry. Membership in the cooperatives is voluntary. Co-operatives are non-governmental organisations established to manage the forests of owners rationally by enlarging the management scale. The co-operatives help pool the land, labour and capital resources of small-scale private forest owners. The co-operatives also focus on improving the socio-economic position of the members.
The forestry co-operatives plan reforestation; manage forests; harvest, collect, store, and sell forest products; and provide loans for forestry. Under the co-operatives, silvicultural activities for members doubled between 1993 and 1995, and marketing of NWFPs such as mushrooms increased 1.8 times. Federal forestry co-operatives are also considering supplying drinking water to urban people from mountain sources. Income from this activity would go toward increasing the efficiency of member's forest management practices.
Source: Adapted from the In-depth Country Study- The Republic of Korea: Status, trends and prospects to 2010: Document APFSOS/WP/06.
Institutions for community-level popular participation
Philosophical underpinnings
Toward the end of the 1970s, two international gatherings had a seminal role in shaping the future institutional approaches to managing forests. The first was the World Forestry Congress of 1978, held in Indonesia under the theme "Forests for People." The second was the FAO World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) in 1979 which adopted a "peasant's charter." A central perception which drove the new philosophies of development was that people work best when they have a stake in the outcome and when they can help set the agenda for their own lives. The two events ushered in the age of people's participation in rural development.
Since these two milestone meetings, the focus of institutional change to support involvement of people has been on getting closer to people, encouraging greater consultation, ensuring gender equity, and empowering people. There has been greater decentralisation and devolution of responsibilities to lower levels of government, in partnership with non-governmental institutions (including rural communities' own institutions) and with NGOs. Bilateral and multi-faceted partnerships, including those with the commercial private sector, are also increasingly recognised as relevant in bringing stronger income and employment dimensions to participation.
Experiences with institutional devolution for participatory forestry
Two decades after the Jakarta Congress and WCARRD, it would seem reasonable to expect that local people's institutions would be in place to take responsibility for forest management. Unfortunately, however, success has not been achieved on a significant scale.
Nepal is frequently mentioned as a success story, but while the mechanisms of participation appear well developed, the success is not well documented in terms of physical achievements. India is another country that has implemented participatory forest management on a significant scale. A recent assessment^76 estimated that 50 percent of India's plantations established since 1980 (around 10 to 12 million hectares) have been developed through participatory approaches. This is an impressive feat, but even after many years of effort, India can claim only about 2 percent of its forests under Joint Forest Management.
^76 Chandrasekharan (1997).
Some common problems encountered with participatory forest management include:
· forest department staff often do not accept rural communities as full partners in forest management and harbour doubts as to the competence of rural people in forest management;
· there is a tendency to allocate degraded land or forests, with limited value, for participatory programmes;
· schemes often operate with insufficient resources, with consequent dependence on government or other external funding;
· government officials continue to exercise excessive domination in participatory programmes;
· there is a tendency for collusion between the traditional elite and government staff; where forest resources are rich (e.g. in some South Pacific countries), local people face particular danger of being exploited.
A number of these problems are reflected by the experiences in the Philippines (Box 7.8),
Box 7.8: DEVOLUTION OF FORESTRY FUNCTIONS - THE PHILIPPINES EXPERIENCE
The Philippines Local Government Code of 1991 conferred certain government powers and authorities on local government units (LGUs). In forestry, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) devolved some of its conservation, management, and protection functions to LGUs and reassigned some 1,000 staff members to capacitate local authorities.
It is also planned that DENR will transfer budgets, assets, and records that correspond to the Department's devolved functions and programmes but there has been only limited progress in this. Many LGUs are attempting to defer the devolution citing, inter alia, lack of clarity in defining the new responsibilities of local authorities, lack of financial capability, inadequate office space to accommodate new staff, and complexities in administrative arrangements.
Source: P. Dugan (Personal communication, 1997).
In India, communities often fear that they will lose control of land if it is planted with trees. This fear has constrained the development of community forestry in some areas. Large-scale grazing is another cause of poor success of community land plantations: so is excessive government regulation that discourages farm-forestry practices. For example, in most Indian states, the harvest and transport of privately grown wood requires cumbersome permits.
There are also promising developments in the region. For example, Laos and the Philippines are initiating participatory joint management programmes for well-endowed forests that hold promise of financial viability. Indonesia has also recently granted new recognition to traditional forest management regimes practised by communities in dense forests and agroforests.
There is a common tendency to assume that any efforts to involve people in forest management is a "good" thing, and will necessarily succeed. In fact, this is not the case. In India, for example, there are reports of some of the state governments using Joint Forest Management to bypass the Forest (Conservation) Act of 1980, and distributing benefits to people for short-term political advantage. Also, in the northeastern states of India, where most of the forests are under the control of local people, degradation and deforestation rates are the highest in the country.
Industry/community partnerships
New opportunities
Partnerships among non-governmental institutions, such as between private firms and local community institutions, are emerging in which government merely sets the policy framework or (as in the Pacific) serves as guarantor/protector of the people's rights. In the Philippines, Nepal, Laos, India, Pakistan and Thailand increasing private-sector demand for wood has stimulated smallholders to boost tree growing for sale to industry. In Indonesia, large-scale corporate investments in wood production have led to the establishment of joint ventures with many small-scale landowners in the forest plantation sector. Farmer/industry co-operation could also increase through subcontractor roles for raw materials harvesting and transport. As industries are increasingly forced to use small-diameter logs, there may also be new opportunities to engage local farmers in growing and delivering raw materials.
Balancing the needs of forest-dependent people and of the private sector
It is common for conflicts to arise from differing perceptions of private commercial firms and local communities. Forest-dependent people^77 often need the very same resources that are also attractive to private commercial firms. Many cases exist where lands that are required to maintain traditional livelihoods are leased under concession arrangements, resulting in restricted community access. Local people have then sometimes protested and reacted violently to central control over their forests. Conflicts over resources place governments in the difficult position of having to weigh the worth of traditional needs for perhaps a very small number of people against the larger prosperity achievable through commercialisation of forests.
^77 The current population of the forest dependent is unknown but estimates by Fisher et al. (1997) suggest 481-579 million. With the 1995 Asia-Pacific population at some 3.15 billion, the forest-dependent would appear to be about 15 to 18 percent of the regional population. This share is quite significant but is thought to include those with fairly loose dependence. True hunter and gatherer populations with almost total forest dependence are more likely to be around 3 percent of the population.
To a large extent, power relationships explain the private sector's upper hand over local communities in access to forest resources. Commercial corporations are large, wealthy, and can lobby effectively, given their access to the centres of decision-making. Large companies involved in the international timber trade earn foreign exchange and have far more to offer governments and administrators than marginalised people. By contrast, forest-dependent people are usually poor members of ethnic minorities, isolated geographically from the sources of power and almost always politically marginal. They have little capacity to influence national governments in their favour. Such people can participate meaningfully only if the problem of marginalisation is addressed. NGOs seek to do this by playing an advocacy role or serving as mouthpieces of local people, offering a bridge to government institutions that would otherwise not exist.
Involvement of NGOs
To more effectively involve people in forest management, governments have in some instances formed alliances with local, national or international NGOs. Sometimes NGOs or local community organisations have themselves taken the initiative to carry out forest management. The importance of NGOs varies by country according to traditions, culture and political systems.
Increasingly, donor funds are being directed to NGOs. Globally, the amount of international donor funds channelled through NGOs rose from US$3.6 billion in 1983 to about US$7 billion in 1990 (i.e. the equivalent of 16 percent of total bilateral aid flows).
The lobbying skills of NGOs often influence policies in industrialised countries. For example, NGOs have played major roles in pushing for boycotts of tropical timber, and certification of timber. As in the rest of the world, Asia-Pacific environmental NGOs advocate better deals for forest-dependent peoples, more environmental sensitive forest harvesting and industrial processing, use and trade of sustainably-produced forest products, and greater recycling of forest products.
Some NGOs in the region are strongly development- and field-oriented. For example, in the Philippines a number of social forestry and protected area projects are co-managed by NGOs and the government.
Major institutional challenges
The choice of institutional arrangements is, just like decisions on policies, a prerogative of individual countries. Lessons from elsewhere in the region or the world may, however, provide options that may be applicable and beneficial. The indications at present are that central government authorities responsible for forestry will remain important and relevant to forestry development in the region, notwithstanding the weaknesses they may have. They continue to be needed to play all roles that require "official" status. Perhaps just as important, however, they are needed to rally the cause of forestry, and promote consensus, joint action and unity of purpose.
Forestry institutions of today need to work across sectors and to use forestry's external linkages to advantage. They also need to maintain forestry on the development agenda and provide an effective channel for society's diverse groups to contribute toward sustainable forestry according to their capacities, attributes and comparative advantages.
Currently, most forestry agencies cannot claim to be meeting these objectives. Challenges that require particular improvement and adaptation appear to be:
· Ability to promote better co-ordination, consensus and co-operation in forest management'. The challenge is to facilitate on board the growing number of interest groups, all with diverse agendas and interests and differing capacities to participate.
· Better capacity to operate in a cross-sectoral setting: The importance of this comes from the fact that decisions in certain other sectors greatly affect forestry (e.g. agriculture competes with forestry for land, the energy sector links to woodfuels). Also many sources of wood or wood substitutes are from other sectors (e.g. trees on farms or tree crops such as rubberwood, oil palm, coconut).
· Establishing new or improved mechanisms for dealing with emerging areas of forestry activity'. Particular emerging aspects of importance for Asia and the Pacific are urban forestry, commercialisation of biological diversity, and exploitation of forest-based ecotourism.
· Enhancing international co-operation: Key opportunities for Asia-Pacific countries include emerging trade conditions and agreements, meeting obligations under international agreements relevant to forestry and capturing gains from new international mechanisms for co-operation (e.g. investments from carbon offsets under the UNFCCC agreement). Good opportunities also exist for participating in networks and other mechanisms established to diffuse "best-management practices" (e.g. the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission's ad hoc Working Group on Sustainable Forest Management, which recently developed the Code of Practice for Forest Harvesting in Asia-Pacific). Many of these mechanisms provide avenues for securing international funding, investment and new technology.
<section>d</section>
8. A summary of the present - a setting for the future
From the past - the future
Key forestry themes in the Asia-Pacific region
From the past - the future
The key to providing meaningful forecasts of the future is understanding the past and the complex interplay of incentives and disincentives that have created patterns of land use, forest utilisation (including conservation and preservation), trade, investment, and the host of interrelated outcomes that constitute the "forestry situation." If the key forces that guide decision-making are identified and understood then it is possible to predict with some certainty what decisions are likely to be made in the future and the outcomes of those decisions. At the same time, developing future outlooks is fraught with difficulty and uncertainty. Imperfect information, the complexity of the task, irrational decision-making and a host of often unexpected circumstances all broaden the margins for error.
Nonetheless, the task is worthwhile. Only by examining the broad range of factors that affect people's decisions and behaviour, and by systematically assessing forests in the context of these factors, will anything approaching a true picture of the situation emerge. And by acquiring better insights into the situation, new policies can be formulated to improve future outcomes.
Key forestry themes in the Asia-Pacific region
Increase in demand for forest products and services
Increasing restrictions on access to forests
Growing pressures for sustainable forest management
Greater attention to multiple roles of forests
Trade will remain important
Increasing globalisation and regionalisation in forestry industry
Demands for social equity will continue and increase
New roles for all sector participants
Two attributes are of overwhelming importance in describing the Asia-Pacific region. It is a region of contrasts, and it is a region of change. It is, nonetheless, possible to identify broad themes that appear to be the most important features of the future direction for forestry throughout the Asia-Pacific region. By definition, these propositions are highly generic, but at the same time they are trends that cut across, and affect, all countries in the region. Particular countries' responses to the challenges and opportunities inherent in these themes will differ according to the respective behavioural incentives within each country. The Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study notes eight interrelated key themes (Box 8.1) that are described in greater detail in the sections that follow.
Box 8.1: SELECTED KEY FEATURES OF THE FUTURE OF ASIA-PACIFIC FORESTRY
· Demand for the broad range of products and services presently supplied by forests will continue to increase.
· Physical and regulatory constraints on forest resources will continue to increase.
· Pressures for sustainable management (and other environmentally oriented policies) will continue to gather force.
· Increased attention will be paid to the multiple roles performed by forests and efforts to achieve the benefits of multiple use forest management.
· Trade will continue to be an important element in the forestry sector.
· Globalisation and regionalisation in the forestry industry will increase.
· Demands for social equity will continue and increase.
· New roles and opportunities will emerge for all sector participants
In addition to these, the question of progress related to technology must be considered. Leadership in any facet of the sector requires progress in the technological fields. Yet, present indications are not encouraging (Box 8.2). Apart from small enclaves, the region has to date not been moving as fast on the technological front as it has capacity to do.
Box 8.2: RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY SCENARIO
Determinants and driving forces for technological change: Technological changes in the Asia-Pacific forestry sector have occurred at different paces throughout the region. In most countries, technology modernisation is confined to small pockets. Changes have mostly been limited to a small segment covering the modern wood industry and short-rotation plantations. Most of the technological changes have been investment driven (i.e. investors bring with them new technology). Hence, there is a gap between developed and developing countries, and between the more advanced developing countries and the weaker developing countries. These features and driving forces seem likely to persist for the outlook period to 2010. However, environmental considerations are expected to become more important and could lead to fairly rapid adoption of more environmentally friendly technologies.
Forestry technologies and expected scenarios: The natural forests of the region have benefited little from technology-driven productivity gains. Similarly, most public-sector industrial plantations are managed on low-productivity regimes. Community plantations have even lower yields and most have been grown from unselected seed. Improved productivity gains will likely be confined to pockets of plantations primarily managed by the private sector.
The focus of biotechnology companies on high-value non-timber forest products, especially medicinal plants, and for synthesising new products, will continue. This will mostly be in developed countries and a small number of developing countries. It is unrealistic to expect major breakthroughs in biotechnology uses in wood production during the time horizon of this outlook study.
Due to low public sector investment in research, there is limited knowledge of ecosystems and - therefore, despite interest in sustainable management, mixed cropping and intensive multiple-use management techniques will change little by 2010. In agroforestry, homegarden systems have little scope for significant improvements as they are already highly productive; however, the proportion of commercially important species in homegardens is expected to increase. In other agroforestry systems, plantation-forestry technologies are being transferred and adapted but mostly where farmers are supported by industries. Thus, farm woodlots linked to industrial wood processing will generally be the most intensively managed.
Sustainability and environmental concerns: These concerns are leading to more rigorous environmental standards. Diffusion of technologies to reduce industry emissions will increase but small-scale mills, particularly for paper, may for economic reasons largely remain incapable of fulfilling standards. Low-impact logging systems, rehabilitation of natural forests, and mixed plantations are outcomes of the increasing concern for the environmental value of forests.
Value addition/end use efficiency: Major breakthroughs in developing new products and processes, especially related to plant- and animal-based pharmaceuticals and other products, will be spearheaded by transnational corporations. Linked to these will be some increase in the efforts to domesticate and systematically cultivate some medicinal and aromatic plants. In wood industries, most processing is dominated by traditional technologies especially for sawnwood. Main efficiency gains will come from recycling. Other major gains could arise from investment in new panel-production capacity to use small-diameter logs and to process more residues than at present. Patent laws could, however, limit the easy access to processing technologies. Wood-energy applications will need to introduce available technological options on a wider scale if woodfuels are to avoid remaining outside the mainstream.
Information: Remote sensing techniques and communication and information processing are all expected to achieve higher diffusion rates and to develop new techniques. Rapid developments in these technologies are making forest inventory, forest damage assessment (from pests, diseases and fire), monitoring forestry operations, etc., easier and simpler. Technologies to monitor forest cover, degradation, and damage from fires and pests, on a fairly large scale will be widely applied. In this regard, the difference between developing and developed countries will be narrowed. A wide gap is, however, expected to persist with regard to micro-level application of remote sensing.
Source: Adapted from Nair (Personal communication, FORSPA).
Increase in demand for forest products and services
There is little doubt that demand for the goods and services provided by forests will increase throughout the foreseeable future - a proposition that is as self-evident as it is pervasive in forestry decision-making. The greatest challenge in the forestry sector arises from the realisation that forests are not limitless resources, but are subject to the fundamental economic questions relating to allocation of scarce resources.
At the most basic level, prices and relative purchasing power will determine how resources are allocated throughout the region (Box 8.3). Notwithstanding cultural and ecological differences, a simple comparison of current consumption patterns for goods and services of forests in the AIEs of the region, compared with patterns in other countries, clearly indicates the disparities created by wealth. Industrial wood consumption on a per capita basis is an order of magnitude greater in the AIEs than in any other sub-region. Conversely, consumption of wood for fuel is negligible in the industrialised countries.
A key point is that, as populations and incomes increase, not only will demands for agricultural and urban land, industrial wood products, and fuelwood increase, so too will demands for forest conservation, non-wood forest products and other non-extractive services of forests. Emerging perspectives in the Asia-Pacific (and globally) include recognition and acceptance of a much wider set of forest values, but in the context of increasing demands on forests for all these outputs. In resolving this demand conflict, market forces are initially likely to play a subsidiary role to policy and legislative instruments. For governments in poorer, often forest-depleted countries, the decision becomes one of balancing economic, social and environmental benefits to determine the best possible welfare outcome for their people.
To a considerable extent, demands placed on forests follow a hierarchy of needs.^78 In the poorest countries where obtaining food, fuel, shelter and money are daily concerns, the primary demands on forests are to satisfy evident physical or survival needs. In the most wealthy countries, where survival is not at stake and physical needs are adequately met from non-forestry pursuits, aesthetic values attached to forests may well take precedence, particularly given that the economics of harvesting forests in wealthy countries (for example, Japan) may be relatively unattractive.
^78 Maslow (1954).
Economic performance, technological advancement, population growth and urbanisation are the key determinants of demands placed on forests. Subsidiary determinants are price competitiveness of forest products and services compared to non-forest substitutes, and consumer preferences for forest products and services compared to non-forest products and benefits. Trends toward urbanisation may well be the area of greatest change in the medium term for the bulk of countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
A discernible urban drift is forecast for almost all countries of the region (although absolute numbers of rural residents will continue to increase for a significant number of countries, including several large ones). This shift breaks a direct dependence on land and consequently lessens pressures to convert forest lands to agriculture. Conversely, for those who remain there may be incentives to compete with urban prosperity by increasing clearing and harvesting of forests.
Population pressures, in part, have led to Asia and the Pacific arguably being the world's most environmentally degraded region. Nonetheless, the region has enormous biological wealth and, with more careful husbandry of its resources, the potential for a "re-greening" of the region need not be prohibitively expensive. The potential to recover some costs of restoring degraded forest areas and reforesting wastelands (through, for example carbon credits) provides opportunity for some revision of development philosophies for forestry in the region.
Box 8.3: SHORTAGE OF LARGE LOGS AND POSSIBLE RESPONSES TO IT
Overall, fibre and wood availability is abundant in Asia and the Pacific and looks likely to remain so for the near- to medium-term future. However, wood scarcity is still common in some parts of the region. The most common causes of such scarcity are:
· Poor accessibility (due to policy, economic, or physical reasons);
· Mismatches between current consumption patterns and wood availability (i.e. the region's dependence on processing large logs which are becoming increasingly scarce); and
· Mismatches between the location of trees and forests and locations of high demand.
In particular, the region's predilection toward processing large logs from the natural forest will be a pressing issue in the near future.
Currently, the long-term prospects for sawlog supply are bleak. An analysis of non-coniferous sawlog supply carried out under the FAO Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSS) showed that the region's long-run sustainable yield of sawlogs will be only 59 percent of current harvest levels. This is considerably worse than in other tropical zones.^1 The analysis also snowed that investment in better logging practices could alleviate this decline, but this would require massive investment in training.
^1 Source: Reino E. Pulkki (1998): Conventional versus environmentally sound harvesting: impacts on non-coniferous tropical veneer log and sawlog supplies. In Unasylva, Vol. 49,193 1998/2. FAO, Rome.
The region has three options to address this issue: invest in better logging and processing techniques to more efficiently use large trees; establish plantations for sawlog production and diversify supply sources more widely; or change processing patterns toward more reconstituted wood products (such as in Europe and North America). There are already signs that some countries in the region have started to take the latter course of action.
In Indonesia,^2 the dominant processor of large logs, production of sawlogs has stagnated. The reported harvest level for 1995 was about 27 million cubic metres, having peaked at 30.3 million cubic metres in 1992. The composition of panel products manufactured is also shifting: in 1991 particleboard constituted 4.2 percent of total panel production but by 1995 it was 8.9 percent of a higher total; plywood output peaked at 11.91 million cubic metres in 1993 and has returned to its 1992 level. This trend will probably continue in Indonesia and be followed by others in the region.
^2 Country Report - Indonesia: Document APFSOS/WP/45.
Increasing restrictions on access to forests
Deforestation and degradation have undoubtedly been the most notable forest resource trends in the Asia-Pacific during the past thirty years. For example, the Forest Resource Assessment 1990 estimated annual deforestation between 1981-1990 in tropical countries of the Asia-Pacific to be 1.2 percent.
There are no reliable statistics on forest degradation but it is known to be even more extensive than deforestation. With both forest area and overall forest quality declining, it seems evident that the future holds greater physical resource constraints. In a climate of increasing demands on forests such a trend seems to presage disaster. There is certainly a perception that the biggest challenge is shortage of forest resources relative to needs. That the Asia-Pacific region is already a leading net importer from other regions of many forest products lends weight to the concern.
Of equal concern is the rapid loss of forests that is threatening the capacity to provide many environmental services. Part of the reaction to this has been increasingly strict legal restrictions on access to forests. In the Philippines, for example, logging has been banned in old-growth forests. India, Australia and New Zealand have also introduced similar controls and the trend is likely to continue. In Thailand, the "logging ban" of 1989 has been a key factor in the country becoming the world's top importer of hardwood sawnwood. The Malthusian "forest crisis" conclusion is, however, too simplistic and the ability of people and technology to adapt to these changing market dynamics should not be underestimated.
Several adaptive measures are being implemented. Strong incentives have emerged to better utilise available resources. Improved agricultural techniques mean the agricultural land base becomes more productive and less new land must be cleared to feed growing populations; eventually the area of farmed land will shrink as marginal agricultural land will not be needed under highly productive agriculture. Forests can then regenerate as is happening in developed countries. Similarly the development of fast-growing tree plantations in countries such as the People's Republic of China, Indonesia, New Zealand, India and Australia mean that wood and wood fibre for industrial products and energy can be produced more intensively, thereby reducing pressures on natural forests. Technology improvements also help alleviate scarcity. The development of a variety of reconstituted panel products, more efficient sawing technology and patterns (and productive outlets for residues), utilisation of
recycled paper as a major fibre source, and the development of technologies and applications to use non-traditional wood and fibre sources (e.g. rubberwood, coconut and oil palm) all help produce greater outputs from existing resources.
The need for major changes in production techniques is becoming increasingly evident as changes in the nature of the forest resources available for production become evident. The most important changes will result from an increasing scarcity of large tropical logs suited to current sawing and peeling facilities. With a high proportion of available production forest having been cut over at least once, many of the largest trees have been removed. As a result, wood processors in major roundwood importing countries (Japan, the Republic of Korea, and the People's Republic of China) have already begun to substitute coniferous wood from North America, Russia, and New Zealand. Similarly, there has been a marked growth in consumption of panel products, particularly of fibre-based MDF, OSB and particleboard. There has been enormous investment in MDF facilities throughout the region in recognition of the need to alter processing techniques and products to the changing resource
environment. Such newly popularised products have the additional advantage of using residues thus stretching limited roundwood raw material further.
In the tropical countries, a scarcity of large logs should not be interpreted as a shortage of fibre. There are still enormous wood-fibre resources in Asia and the Pacific in terms of secondary species, harvesting residues left in the forest, small logs, and mill residues. Many of the production forests have been exposed to high impact logging techniques that have rendered many of the remaining trees unsuitable for high-value solid wood applications. Nonetheless, there is enormous potential to utilise this fibre in reconstituted applications, while using improved harvesting and silvicultural interventions to improve the quality of degraded forests.
For panels, paper and paperboards, there are few technological limitations on the fibres that can be successfully processed into substitutes for wood products (such as reconstituted boards or pulp for paper). Suitable non-wood fibres (agricultural straw, bagasse, etc.) are abundant in the. region.
Trees outside forests also provide a hugely significant contribution to wood supplies, particularly for fuelwood purposes. The best estimates are that two-thirds of all fuelwood in the region comes from outside forests. As fuelwood consumption accounts for almost 75 percent of all wood used in Asia and the Pacific, this means that about half of the region's entire demand for wood (excluding imports) is being met from sources that, until recently, were discounted from wood supply equations.
The inclusion of trees in farming systems and around homesteads has a long tradition in many countries of the region. In several countries (e.g. Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and much of India and the People's Republic of China), wood from farmlands supplies not only household fuel needs, but also surprising amounts of industrial needs.
Trees and NWFPs in farming systems are also elements of a wide range of agroforestry systems in the region. Agroforestry has been the forest management system least affected by technological changes and lacks remunerative markets and basic inputs such as improved seeds. A notable trend, however is that wherever profitable markets have been established tree planting has prospered.
Apart from scattered and informal integration of trees in agriculture, the region is a leader in plantations of domesticated trees, particularly of rubber, coconut palm, and oil palm. Wood is increasingly coming from these tree crops: rubber alone covers about 9 million hectares in Asia (3.04 million hectares in Indonesia, 1.83 million hectares in Malaysia, and 1.78 million hectares in Thailand).
If penalties for breaking regulations or traditional restraints are negligible or avoidable, they will be ineffective as deterrents to individuals who stand to gain from unsustainable practices. As a consequence of inadequate policing capacity and lucrative incentives to break forestry regulations, illegal logging, NWFP harvesting, and wildlife poaching is prevalent in a number of Asia-Pacific countries. Similarly, inadequate inventory records, an absence of effective monitoring, and the perverse incentives built into many concession agreements promote poor or illegal harvest practices by many forestry concession holders.
Growing pressures for sustainable forest management
The principal efforts toward sustainable management regimes for forestry in the Asia-Pacific region have focused around the 1992 UNCED outcomes, notably calls for "the formulation of scientifically-sound criteria and guidelines for the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forest." A large number of meetings, fora and organisations have moved to address the issues of sustainable management.
At the global level, the principal dialogue on sustainable forest management was picked up from the April 1995 Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) review of forests, followed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Forests (IPF). IPF reported to the Fifth Session of the CSD in April 1997 where it was determined that evolution of the IPF programme should be carried forward by an Intergovernmental Forum on Forests (IFF).
Distinct from the global stream of policy dialogue, three major efforts relevant to Asia-Pacific forestry have worked to develop criteria and indicators for sustainable management. ITTO has developed national-level criteria and indicators for sustainable management in tropical forests. The Montreal Process has developed national-level criteria and indicators for sustainable management in non-European temperate forests. Through a non-governmental process, the Forest Stewardship Council has developed criteria and indicators applicable at the forest-management-unit level.
While intense interest is evident in the principles of sustainable forestry management, it is clear that few forests in Asia and the Pacific are currently being managed sustainably. It is highly doubtful, therefore, that appropriate incentives to encourage sustainable forest management are in place. For countries where population pressure is already very high, it must also be asked, "Should better incentives be offered to those who seek to provide forest products from farmlands (farmers, tree-crop growers, etc.)?" Creating such incentives is a major challenge facing policy-makers striving for sustainable forest management. To date, successful market mechanisms that enable practitioners of sustainable management to recover their greater costs have yet to be demonstrated on a large scale.
While certification of sustainable management holds promise for some areas and products, it has not been adequately demonstrated that significant numbers of consumers are prepared to pay a premium for timber from sustainably managed forests. As a consequence the economic incentive structure remains tilted against sustainable forest management. Furthermore, certification focuses on internationally traded products while on a global scale, most forest products are consumed domestically. Consequently, at present, persuasion is largely on moral or ethical grounds as opposed to financial rationale. Should "green consciousness" gather momentum this balance could begin to shift.
Widely varying estimates have been made of cost and productivity differences between "environmentally friendly" and traditional harvesting. Some estimates are of costs being 5 percent above traditional methods; others suggest costs up to 25 percent higher. Most estimates anticipate that sustainable forest management would also result in lower net harvested volumes (e.g. 9 to 18.4 percent less for Indonesia), but it is expected that the lower damage to residual stands and faster regrowth after logging will compensate in the long term.
Progress has been made in the following areas: adopting codes of good practice (Box 8.4); reducing waste from wood residues and in complementary industries; improving tree felling operations; implementing low-impact wood extraction systems; and improving forest road construction. While some countries in the region (e.g. Malaysia and Indonesia) have made considerable progress toward implementing sustainable forest management, change is slow. By the end of this century, the area managed under improved harvesting practices will probably be no more than 10,000 hectares.
Box 8.4: TOWARD A REGIONAL CODE OF HARVESTING PRACTICE IN ASIA-PACIFIC
Under the aegis of an ad hoc Working Group on Sustainable Forest Management of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission (APFC), the region is working toward establishment of the Code of Practice for Forest Harvesting in Asia-Pacific, a non-legally binding set of guidelines and benchmarks for responsible harvesting. Forest harvesting practices, particularly timber harvesting activities, are among the factors under the control of foresters by which they can contribute to achievement of responsible management of forests. The code provides guidelines for harvesting production forests with minimal adverse impact on the forest environment. It is designed to balance commercial considerations with protection of environmental and social values.
The Code of Practice is designed to cover all countries in the Asia-Pacific region and complements the Code of Conduct for Logging of Indigenous Forests in Selected South Pacific Countries developed in 1995 and national codes of practice in use or under preparation in a number of countries. Being regional, the code is necessarily broad and countries that have not already done so are encouraged to develop national codes to provide more location-specific guidance for harvesting practices under their conditions. Among other purposes, the Code of Practice for Forest Harvesting in Asia-Pacific is intended to serve as:
· an active tool to support implementation of sustainable forest management (SFM);
· an interim minimum set of guidelines to improved harvesting practices against which aspects of SFM can be assessed against criteria and indicators;
· a guide for countries that wish to develop specific national codes; and
· a support for forest administrations seeking government backing and political support for improved forest harvesting practices.
While recognising the importance of all forest products and the benefits of multi-purpose forest management, the primary focus of the draft code is on timber harvesting. This is because the harvesting of timber has greater impact on forest ecosystems than the harvesting of other products. With due modification, however, the code's general principles and approaches can be applied also to non-wood forest products in a national or location-specific context.
To have a significant impact, the draft regional code and related national ones need to be given wide publicity and promoted so as to garner more visible political and administrative support at national and regional levels, Following adoption, national legal authorities should be designated to implement the regional and associated national codes; furthermore, capacity should be built up in how to apply harvesting codes in the context of overall pursuit of SFM.
Source: P. Durst (Personal communication, 1998).
Greater attention to multiple roles of forests
Forest values can essentially be classified into four types:
· provision of wood products: mainly industrial roundwood and fuelwood;
· provision of non-wood products: a range of other physical products of forests including food, fodder, vines for weaving, composts and fertilisers, medicines, perfumes, animal by-products and chemicals;
· provision of services: these include, agricultural services, watershed services, carbon sequestration services, ecological services, socio-cultural services, aesthetic and scenic services; and
· opportunity costs of forests: this relates mainly to the value of forest land being utilised for alternative purposes such as agriculture.
Some of these uses can be mutually exclusive and it requires imagination to implement integrated management systems in a way that harmonises uses and enables the forest to provide elements of all values. Difficulties are accentuated by incentive structures that favour one forest value over another.
It is generally accepted in economic circles that resources should be allocated to their most valuable purpose. In the forests of the Asia-Pacific region there are a number of impediments to this efficient allocation. Most important is the fact that many of the values of forests are intangible, difficult to value and virtually impossible to collect revenue against. For example, many of the aesthetic and scenic values of forests have a strong "public good"^79 component to them. Often, however, because no mechanism is in place to collect revenue against these less tangible values, decision-makers prefer benefits that give financial returns such as industrial harvesting or land clearing, even if their true value may be lower than that of the intangibles. The key challenge for forest policy-makers is to find ways of making less tangible values explicit, to make the public aware of them, and particularly to capture these values in financial terms. Perceptions that non-timber
forest values cannot be economically realised will have to be altered. Mechanisms for valuing non-timber forest outputs and identifying beneficiaries will have to be developed. Investment in the provision of services of forests must be mobilised. Integrated and sustainable management for the full range of forest values must be encouraged. Commercialisation of biological resources, ecotourism, carbon sequestration, and watershed maintenance are all areas that show promise.
^79 A public good is one that can be consumed costlessly by an infinite number of people and for which it is impossible to control or regulate consumption.
Trade will remain important
With 55 percent of global population but only 33 percent of the world's wood production, it is not surprising that the Asia-Pacific region is a net importer of industrial forest products.
In the area of trade, Japan's economic power^80 leaves little doubt that it will be hugely influential in the development of future industry and development. In 1995, Japan accounted for 44 percent of the region's imports by value. Consequently, developments in the Japanese domestic forestry industry are of vital interest to forest product exporting countries (Box 8.5).
^80 For comparative size of national and sub-regional economies in the region, see Chipeta, Whiteman & Brooks (1997). Review of Asia-Pacific Economic and Social Development Till 2010 (with focus on economic growth and population: Document APFSOS/WP/47. FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
It is important to note, however, that Japan's economy is mature and can, at most, sustain growth in the range of 2 to 2.5 percent per annum. By contrast, the already large economy of the People's Republic of China has recently grown at 9 to 10 percent per year; India's at 5 to 6 percent annually; and many economies in ASEAN at 6 to 10 percent per year. Thus, with the Japanese market likely to remain largely stable in terms of overall wood volumes traded, a decisive feature of future market conditions in the region will be the extent to which the demand for wood develops in very high-population countries (e.g. the People's Republic of China, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Bangladesh).
Box 8.5: CASE STUDY - THE POTENTIAL FOR JAPAN TO SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE ITS HARVEST AND IMPLICATIONS FOR TRADE
Japan is one of the most highly forested countries in the world with forests covering about 25 million hectares, or 67 percent of the total land area. More than 40 percent (10.4 million hectares) is classified as plantation forests. The total growing stock is currently estimated at 3.5 billion cubic metres, with a mean annual increment of around 100 million cubic metres, of which annual roundwood removals have, however, averaged only 24 million cubic metres between 1993 and 1995. Consequently, Japan's wood resources have steadily increased at a time when resources have declined in many other countries.
Not all of Japan's forests, however, can be considered as production forest. The long-run sustainable wood supply from forests that are available for production is estimated at 70 million cubic metres. Plantation forests could supply around 60 million cubic metres and natural forest supplies could contribute a further 10 million cubic metres. However, these are estimates that do not take proper account of institutional and economic restrictions or demand. And they are highly optimistic under the current economic realities faced in forestry.
Until about 30 years ago, forestry was one of the most profitable rural industries in Japan. However, during the last three decades the price of wood has been unable to keep pace with the costs of forestry activities. For example, in the past 15 years, plantation costs have more than doubled while stumpage prices for typical Japanese coniferous "sugi" declined by almost half. The average internal rate of return for a sugi plantation has gradually decreased and is presently estimated at less than one percent. Consequently, private forest owners, who control about two-thirds of the forests, are unable to profitably maintain silvicultural and harvest operations except in the most economically favourable stands. At the current level of wood prices, it is estimated that 35 percent of private forests (6.1 million hectares) and 54 percent of national forests (4.2 million hectares) can be profitably harvested (although this calculation ignores sunk growing costs). One of the key
variables is the proximity to forest roads. If the government were to adopt an aggressive scenario, such as doubling the extent of the forest road network and drastically reducing the cost of harvest and reforestation, all plantation forests could become viable production forests. In such a case, the maximum profitable production from forests in Japan would rise to an estimated 40.3 million cubic metres.
Presently, annual wood demand in Japan totals 112 million cubic metres, thus the current average removals averaging 27 million cubic metres are only about a quarter of demand, with more than three-fourths of wood demand being met through imports. Consequently, although Japan has a huge biological potential of wood supply, the economic realities constrain its development. However, Japan still has the possibility to rapidly increase wood production if internal problems can be solved, or if external factors (such as export bans imposed by foreign countries) push the price of wood to levels whereby domestic harvesting becomes competitive.
Future scenarios are outlined in the Japanese Government's "Basic Plan on Forest Resources" and "Long Range Demand and Supply Projection on Important Forest Products," the fourth revisions of which were approved by Japan's Cabinet Council in late 1996. The maximum projection for domestic production in 2015 is 40 million cubic metres while total demand is estimated in the range of 119 to 126 million cubic metres. If, however, current forestry trends continue in the future, then wood supplies from domestic forests could decline by 17 million cubic metres while total demand remains at around 115 million cubic metres. Certainly, the most likely scenario is that demand for imported wood, which is expected to shift to plantation forests gradually, is likely to be stable or increase in the foreseeable future. Consequently, Japan's high dependency on imported wood is not expected to change drastically in the next few decades.
Source: Ishihara, H. (Personal communication).
Trade will continue as a major means of alleviating wood shortages in the Asia-Pacific region. Increasing scarcity of large tropical logs is being countervailed by imports of large coniferous softwood logs, largely from the Russian Far East, Canada, the United States and New Zealand. Patterns of supply sources are also changing. Traditional Asia-Pacific suppliers of logs, such as the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand and Malaysia, have given way to Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Myanmar as supplies have become depleted and exporting countries move toward value-added processing.
Government interventions in trade have created a host of conflicting incentives throughout the Asia-Pacific region, many of which have had significant unintended impacts. Probably the dominant interventions have been those designed to promote domestic processing, particularly the use of log-export bans, taxes and quotas. These actions can have impacts in a number of spheres. A ban acts by artificially removing demand for logs. A consequence of this is that the value of logs on the domestic market will generally decline, assisting the international competitiveness of domestic industry and promoting employment opportunities. However, a major price reduction also reduces incentives for processing efficiency, encourages wastefulness, and reduces the returns to forest owners (and consequently incentives for reforestation and forest management).
On a regional basis these bans may also have compromised processing efficiencies by shifting processing from relatively technologically advanced facilities in consumer countries (where residues also had a ready market and therefore overall raw material use was more complete) to mills in log-producer countries. Such mills tend to be less efficient but even if they are state-of-the-art, most developing producer countries have limited domestic capacity to industrially use their own residues, which are therefore commonly wasted. Conversely the absence of government trade restrictions, or an inability to enforce existing restrictions, has also had detrimental impacts on forests in the region. In Papua New Guinea, for example, log exports have sometimes exceeded the allowable cut when upstream concession regulations have been abused.
Increasing globalisation and regionalisation in forestry industry
Developments in trade and sustainable management are key components of an overall trend toward globalisation in the forestry sector. The Asia-Pacific holds a pivotal position in the global development of forestry. Asia-Pacific's dominance of world population and its social and economic dynamism make the region a focal point for future global growth. Only a few countries in the region, however, wield sufficient power to cause significant shifts in the balances of various issues. Japan, the People's Republic of China, India, Malaysia and Indonesia carry sufficient weight to influence the development of most global policies. Other countries can apply more subtle influences (e.g. Singapore, through its liberal trade stance, New Zealand by taking a lead in plantation forestry and Pakistan through research on combating desertification).
Trade is the key beneficiary as well as economic influence governing regionalisation and globalisation. International interest in the markets of the Asia-Pacific region has increased as the economic strength of the region has increased. Probably the most crucial developments in industrial markets in the coming decade will be the evolution of the respective supply and demand situations in Russia and the People's Republic of China. These will be of enormous importance in determining balance in the forestry sector.
Global trends in trade policy have also had significant impacts on the Asia-Pacific region. The development of substantial regional trading blocs such as the European Union and North American Free Trade Area have been mirrored by the development of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) which is working toward the development of an Asian Free Trade Area (AFTA). Similarly, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) provides a less structured trade forum with a specific mandate to promote "open regionalism" in trade.
A significant development in the internationalisation of the forestry industry has been a freeing of the global investment market that has resulted in the development of a number of truly multi-national forestry companies. Most countries have overseas investment in their domestic forest industries, if not in forests, at least in processing facilities, and most countries have companies that have invested in forestry mills abroad. There are a number of important outcomes from this investment internationalisation. These include:
· improvements in technology transfer (which accompanies capital);
· pressure to remove trade barriers;
· more efficient and strategic location of mills;
· more efficient marketing and distribution networks; and
· allocation of development capital to less wealthy countries.
Environmental issues are the other major area where globalisation is becoming important. Many forestry activities have global impacts (e.g. climate change) and have attracted global attention. Avoiding or mitigating environmental problems is often a costly endeavour and tends to reduce the economic competitiveness of companies and countries that attempt to institute environmental policies. Consequently, unless environmental options are pursued jointly and to comparable degrees internationally, environmentally progressive companies and countries may be penalised or forced out of business. In some cases, the problems are merely exported. For example, there is little gain from a global perspective, for one country to manage its forests sustainably, if the resulting decline in supply is merely made up by aggressive imports from a second country that is willing to tolerate unsustainable harvesting practices.
Demands for social equity will continue and increase
A central thesis of this outlook study is that forestry decision-making needs to occur across three very broad dimensions (i.e. environmental, social and economic). Typically, two of the dimensions - the economic and environmental dimensions - are clearly recognised and the relationships and trade-offs between these two facets of forestry are well understood. The third dimension - the social aspect of forestry - is less understood, less easily conceptualised, and has received generally less attention from decision-makers. Nonetheless, there is general recognition of the roles of forests in local people's livelihoods and at least a theoretical acceptance of the importance of involving local people in developing successful forest management strategies. In practice, however, it is the social aspects of forestry that are often most neglected, and are often sacrificed in pursuit of financial expediency.
There are innumerable instances of unsatisfactory or insensitive social policies being carried out in the region. Many of these examples can be traced back to colonial policies tending toward "custodial" forestry, but often sometimes much earlier. In the recent past, it is doubtful whether any country in the region has escaped criticism on some contemporary aspect of its social policies. Overt authoritarianism of many governments, repressive regimes, ethnic violence, and the harsh faces of right wing monetarist policies are some of the examples that can be cited across the region. Often, the rights of indigenous people have been ignored or repressed in favour of commercial interests.
In many instances, conflicts have resulted in disenfranchisement of communities. Generally, private sector companies dominate power relationships with communities, particularly in developing countries where communities may be poor, uneducated and without means to follow complex administrative processes. Such communities may easily be marginalised by "development" projects.
Demands for greater participation in forestry decision-making are increasing, however. In part, this may be a result of globalisation, which has brought greater exposure to outside ideas and greater international scrutiny. The changing faces and perspectives of governments are also encouraging this trend.
There is general agreement that managing forests, and devolving the management of forests, to meet social needs and objectives is an excellent and worthwhile goal. A central development philosophy is that people work best when their own interests are at stake. A major problem, however, is that while defining and achieving social goals for forestry is generally consistent with environmental goal-setting, it is often less compatible with financial and economic goals relating to production, investment and trade. Social goals should, therefore, strive to match the hierarchy of a country or community's needs. This may suggest an initial emphasis on ensuring subsistence forest-dwellers' needs. However, an underlying and long-term goal for most countries is to provide people with greater self-determination.
Consequently, community forest management schemes have been established in a number of countries throughout the region. The programmes in India, Nepal and the Philippines have received the most international attention. A major challenge for all these schemes is overcoming the perception that participatory forestry cannot meet economic or production objectives efficiently. For example, only 2 percent of India's forests are currently operating under Joint Forest Management schemes. In many production forests, returns to governments from logging concessions are much higher than the returns that would be gained by turning forests over to poor or marginalised users.
New roles for all sector participants
A final key trend in the region is one toward changing roles for the key forestry sector participants. Within the three broad forestry dimensions: economic, social and environmental, it has been traditionally convenient, if highly simplistic, to represent the private sector, communities and environmental NGOs as the respective advocates (and perhaps beneficiaries) of each of these dimensions. Governments have seen themselves as arbiters among the groups, as well as generally: (a) having an active interest in each dimension (e.g. through industrial forestry activities by forestry agencies, management of parks and reserves, and community welfare programmes); and (b) providing supporting services (e.g. policy and legal frameworks, research, extension, education and training). In recent times, the lines of this simple model have become less discernible. While it is fair to say that economic dimensions continue to dominate forestry development in the well-endowed countries of the
region, there is clear evidence that perspectives are shifting toward greater emphasis on the other dimensions. With this changing emphasis has come changes in the roles and behaviour of each of the key groups.
Perhaps the key change for governments in the region has been a shift away from the belief that GDP and wealth are the only measures of national success. Social, cultural, environmental and aesthetic values are increasingly seen as integrally linked goals alongside purely economic goals. As part of this change, most governments in the region have more clearly identified their roles as arbiters, and "participation" and "consultation" have become key watchwords in public affairs. Several, governments in the region have initiated efforts to devolve direct managerial responsibilities for forests. Privatisation and resource allocation have been undertaken by several countries, most notably, New Zealand, Australia, the People's Republic of China and Viet Nam. Devolution to community user groups has been significant, particularly in South Asia, the Philippines and Laos. The globalisation of environmental issues and governments' commitments to a range of global environmental
agreements have also imposed a degree of environmental accountability on administrations throughout the region. Consequently, governments that have committed themselves to particular environmental targets have also been required to take a more active role in regulating the forestry sector to comply with international standards.
Government roles in the social dimension have also changed and matured. Increasing demands for community participation in forestry are requiring governments to carry out much more extensive consultative activities. Increased community participation generally also requires that communities be equipped with the "tools" to participate. Governments throughout the region are moving from prescriptive approaches to more facilitative approaches whereby people are assisted, encouraged and enabled to undertake forestry activities. The pace of change is slow, but progress is occurring.
Within the forestry sector, change is also occurring toward increased accountability. Increased regulation and monitoring by governments, greater pressure from environmental NGOs, and market demands for environmentally sensitive products are forcing companies to adjust both their practices and their attitudes. The private sector is increasingly seeing the benefits of being regarded as good corporate citizens, and particularly the benefits of voluntarily adopting environmentally and socially acceptable practices as opposed to having these prescribed and enforced. Moreover, the private sector is now more frequently working together with community groups and environmental NGOs to establish mutually beneficial projects. The establishment of the Forest Stewardship Council is just on example of an NGO private-sector initiative.
As government and private sector attitudes and perceptions have changed, so too have the methods employed by environmental NGOs. NGOs have generally become more sophisticated and constructive, moving away from the highly confrontational methods of the 1960s and 1970s. It is now usual for NGOs to work with government agencies, private sector and communities to achieve environmental goals. Environmental groups throughout the region sponsor a wide range of forestry projects. The roles of communities in forests have largely been a reflection of the changing roles of the other participants. Some communities have had forest management responsibilities devolved to them, others have received legislative protection of traditional forest-user rights. In general, the interaction of people with forests is undergoing considerable, and sometimes rapid, transition, but in varying ways around the region.
Forest communities of long tradition are being joined by an influx of new migrants with limited forest management traditions. The global economy is also having an impact on forest dwellers as alternative livelihoods are emerging.
One of the most important frontiers of people/forest interactions concerns farmers and others outside forests that depend on forests for varies needs and supplementary opportunities. These largely respond to commercial opportunities. Another important and rapidly growing frontier of interaction is with urban populations. As much of the urban growth is occurring in developing countries, the need for urban trees goes far beyond mere aesthetics. Poor urban dwellers need firewood and construction materials; they may even need forest-based medicines and some foods. New types of planning and policies are needed to make this access to forest goods a reality.
<section>e</section>
9. Major driving forces and challenges for the future
Driving forces for change
What are the challenges and potentials?
Driving forces for change
Summary of key driving forces
Selected major driving forces influencing the future
Summary of key driving forces
A number of important factors and developments will shape the forest sector in the Asia-Pacific region in coming years. In broad terms, forestry like all other sectors responds to macro-level factors. These include:
· economic growth (and related changes in personal wealth, prosperity, and consumption patterns);
· population growth and changes in demographic attributes (rural/urban balance, agricultural dependency, incomes and prosperity, changes in aspirations and expectations such as greater interest in environmental issues);
· land-use change (particularly deforestation);
· changes in social dimensions (including changes associated with cultural, ethnic, gender equity issues; changes in socio-political structures, and issues associated with improved education, welfare, and other social services); and
· evolution of political orientations and policies (within and outside the sector); and institutional/policy adaptations (such as economic liberalisation and deregulation, decentralisation, adherence to trading blocks, becoming parties to international agreements and the associated obligations).
Somewhat distinct from these more "human" macro-dimensions are environmental factors. Increasing concerns over pollution from industrial discharges, climate change, soil and water degradation, deforestation and forest degradation, and visual/aesthetic pollution are of marked significance to the forestry sector.
More direct in their influence on forestry are developments in linked sectors. Most important in many countries are developments in the agriculture sector, including developments in population settlement that may be associated with it. Critical to the future of forests is the rate at which farm productivity grows. Higher yields on land already cleared might enable a point to be reached where population increases no longer automatically call for more forests to be cleared for farming.
The energy sector is also closely linked to forestry. Most directly, woodfuels and farm residues are important elements in national energy budgets. The rate at which they are displaced by "modern" conventional fuels or at which they enter the commercial mainstream themselves will affect the forestry sector.
Transport infrastructure, particularly roads, can also have major impacts on forestry. By improving access to forests, roads offer greater ease of settlement, encroachment and deforestation. On the positive side, roads open up opportunities for viable commercialisation of forest resources.
An underlying factor often given too little attention is technological change. Apart from affecting farm productivity, it can directly increase efficiency in forestry and forest industries. The post-war period has demonstrated the power of technology to produce more from less. Between 1970 and 1994, global production of industrial roundwood rose minimally - by 15 percent. During the same period, however, products manufactured from roundwood rose by much greater margins - for example, production of wood-based panels increased by 80 percent; and production of paper and paperboard increased by 113 percent. The apparent gains for developing countries were even more striking: while production of industrial roundwood doubled, their output of panels rose 467 percent and output of paper and paperboard rose 533 percent. These improvements came largely from greater use of "wastes" to manufacture marketable products (such as reconstituted panels) and recycling of fibre for paper
manufactures. Improving conversion factors in all processes also contributed significantly.
Selected major driving forces influencing the future
Population and rural/urban dynamics
Continued population growth, particularly in countries with large rural populations and a high dependency on agriculture, is likely to result in continuing conversion of forest land to agricultural and other uses. While, in a few countries, there has been a reduction in land permanently under crops, in most of the large countries in the region the area being permanently cropped has increased, and can be expected to continue to do so. In many countries, this expansion will take place through the conversion of forest to agricultural land. In turn, this will likely lead to a future in which the ability of the region's forests to produce the products and services expected of them is reduced. In many countries, however, tree growing outside the forest has permitted continuing availability of wood, mostly for subsistence needs but increasingly also for smallholder supply of industrial raw materials.
The rural-urban balance is shifting in the region. In some countries, both the proportion and the absolute numbers of rural people will fall; in others, only the proportion will fall while absolute numbers will increase. UN projections of rural population changes suggest that by 2025, the region as a whole will have had a net loss in rural population of some 24 million people. For the region as a whole, therefore, a slight easing of direct pressure on forests by rural people is likely with time. There will, however, be contrasts. While almost all of North Asia will become more urban, the situation in Southeast Asia will be mixed, and South Asia will have a net increase in rural population.
Unless agricultural productivity improves significantly in the countries with expected increased rural populations, increased direct pressure on forests for farming can be expected. Population pressures will increase migration pressures and immigrants may disrupt existing communities. Where these communities are forest-dwelling or forest-dependent, a broad range of social forestry issues will arise.
Prosperity
Because income is such an important influence on consumption of almost all goods and services, increasing prosperity will present major challenges for forestry in the Asia-Pacific region. Average real per capita GNP in the region tripled between 1962 and 1992, from $438 to $1,310. During the same period, the world average grew by only 75 percent, from $1,688 to $2,956. A recent review^81 projects that within the next 15 years some 700 million people in the People's Republic of China, India and Indonesia alone will have an average per capita income equivalent to that in Spain today. If past rates of economic growth are continued, by the year 2010, the Asia-Pacific region (excluding Japan) will have gross spending power about 50 percent more than that of the United States of America today.
^81 Original sources cited in Chipeta, M.E, A. Whiteman and D. Brooks (1997). Review of Asia-Pacific Economic and Social Development till 2010 (with focus on economic growth and population). Document APFSOS/WP/47. FAO, Rome.
Although recent economic adjustments in a number of Asia-Pacific countries have had dramatic, short-term consequences, most observers continue to expect renewed long-term growth in the region's economies. The following may also be noted:
· A great increase in domestic purchasing power in the region will create domestic markets far larger than the world has seen before. Such changes will be challenging for both timber-based and non-wood forest products. For non-wood forest products, many of which are gathered at low intensities, methods of production and distribution must be adapted to market conditions. In countries where the control of access to forests is weak, this could lead to greater problems of illegal logging and poor forest management as producers seek to meet expanding market demands. In countries with large forest products export sectors, the diversion of supplies to domestic consumption could be quite rapid. This would lead to major net importers such as the People's Republic of China and Japan importing more from sources outside the region. If external sources are also limited, substitution by other materials for wood-based products would need to be contemplated;
· Forest products have been an engine for economic growth in several countries of the region (notably Malaysia and Indonesia). The forestry policy challenge facing these countries, and others hoping to emulate them, will be to achieve developed-country status without excessively depleting forest resources in the process. This will require better long-term planning in the forestry sector and probably stronger forest protection policies.
· Greater interest in non-production forest functions may develop with greater incomes. Many of these will be environmental and recreation services. Concern for the environment and for the ecological services provided by forests are not yet perceived as priorities in the greater part of Asia and the Pacific, as many countries are more preoccupied with the role of forests in producing economically or socially useful physical goods. As the region's people become richer, however, they are likely not only to put additional pressures on forests in the Asia-Pacific region through increased demand for goods, but they will also shift the balance of their demands toward greater prominence of services.
· The developed countries of the region have already withdrawn large areas of their natural forests from industrial production functions. This trend has now spread to some of the developing countries. India and Thailand, for example, have introduced environment-driven policies restricting industrial harvesting in natural forests. If this trend continues as countries prosper, there could soon be considerable reduction in the future wood supply potential. It might also require a large redirection of forestry policy in some countries in the region to favour industrial plantations or other compensatory measures, including increased import-dependency (as India is already responding to log shortfalls).
Trade developments
For the Asia-Pacific region, as elsewhere, reconciling increasing demand and expanding market opportunities with sustainable forest management will be a challenge in the future. For a number of countries in the region, industries producing for both domestic and export markets rely on imports of raw materials, particularly fibre for paper and paperboard. Trade is thus a way to complement the region's own resources where they fall short; but it also offers an outward channel for products in surplus. Interdependence through trade is increasing both within the region and further afield, but it complicates the policy challenges facing the region's forest sector. Specific developments that could affect sector development include the pace of progress toward greater liberalisation;^82 progress in mainstreaming trade certification; and attitudes toward tropical timbers in international trade. Widespread adoption of environmental guidelines (of the kind seen increasingly in Europe)
requiring larger shares of recycled fibre in paper, could also affect the sector and trade patterns, including commodity composition.
^82 Two analyses prepared specifically for this outlook study provide in-depth insights: (1) Brown, C. (1997): The implications of the GATT Uruguay Round and other trade arrangements for the Asia-Pacific forest products trade. Document APFSOS/WP/03. FAO, Rome. (2) Waggener, T R. & C. Lane (1997): Pacific Rim demand and supply situation, trends and prospects: implications for forest products trade in the Asia-Pacific region. Document APFSOS/WP/02. FAO, Rome.
What are the challenges and potentials?
Broad challenge - achieving appropriate leadership
Services of forests
Non-wood forest products
Wood energy
Industrial wood products
Challenges related to people and forests
Challenges related to forest and tree resources
Challenges related to policies and institutions
Broad challenge - achieving appropriate leadership
The Asia-Pacific region has some major attributes and endowments that give it potential for a high profile on the world forestry stage. For example:
· the region continues to have an extensive forest resource endowment ranging from humid tropical forests to temperate forests; it has one of the world's most biologically diverse forest resources;
· the Asia-Pacific has the world's largest forest plantation estate and substantial stocks of agricultural tree crops with wood- and fibre-production potential (coconut, rubber, oil palm, etc.); both are being expanded at a rapid pace;
· the region consumes more woodfuels than any other region;
· the Asia-Pacific has large and growing markets spanning subsistence to sophisticated modern consumption, and comparable in size to the European market for many industrial forest products;
· the region is a significant producer of much that it consumes but still relies heavily on imports;
· several countries in the region are major forest product exporters, while several others are major importers; the region thus figures prominently among the major trading regions in forest products;
· the Asia-Pacific is unique among the global regions in spanning both developed and developing countries;
· the region has demonstrated institutional capacity to organise its societies for rapid and sustained development; and
· the region has a rich endowment of forest biological diversity, and a long tradition of using the forest as a source of medicines, food and other non-wood products, some of which are already entering the modern mainstream.
A broad challenge for the Asia-Pacific region relates to achieving appropriate leadership in forestry. The region possesses an enormous level and variety of knowledge, skills and practices that are relevant and valuable for other countries and regions. The region is, however, only beginning to assert itself as a leader in world forestry. The region needs to confidently identify areas for potential leadership and move forward robustly in promoting its strengths to capture these areas of leadership.
Services of forests
The biggest challenge related to the provision of services of forests will be to achieve public awareness and acceptance that services are as important as timber benefits and that they can be economically realised. This may require convincing the middle class that ignoring ecological services of forests will cause enormous downstream costs that will directly affect them in negative ways. A further challenge is to create self-sustaining "markets" for services or ways for beneficiaries to share the costs of sustaining forests for noncommercial service functions.
Accordingly, an influential factor will be developing further valuation methods for pricing externalities and for identifying beneficiaries. If policy-makers can be influenced by such methods, it will be possible to secure more support for maintaining and investing in the diversity of services of forests.
Non-wood forest products
The main challenges that are likely to face NWFPs development in the future include the following as key elements:
· Policy and institutional issues
- Lack of focus in programmes: in most countries, NWFPs have not been screened to identify those with potential to develop into mainstream products. Promotional efforts are thus dispersed over too many NWFPs, many of which have no commercial future. It will be necessary to ruthlessly select for priority attention only those products with great potential (according to location and socially sensitive criteria) and draw promotional resources to them.
- Absence of investment in research and development: efforts are also handicapped by lack of a focused agenda; there are too many NWFPs for all to be supported.
- Institutional and policy neglect: this is partly due to lack of awareness of potentials and to dispersed attention. Once priority NWFPs are identified, programmes for their sustainable development can be more easily prepared and supported.
- Lack of competitiveness and consequent challenge from synthetics: there is need for aggressive marketing of the "environment-friendly" attributes of NWFPs, and efforts to gain mainstream acceptance for selected products rather than to simply have "niche" status in the market.
· Resource issues and responses
- Small scale of industry: this tends to be associated with marginalisation in national economies, weak absorption capacity, and high transaction costs.
- Economic weakness of NWFP-dependent communities: the weakness of such communities means that they are unable to protect themselves against powerful outsiders that may appropriate most of the value in commercialising NWFPs.
- Deficient management practices: due to the small-scale of operations, management systems and practises have not been adequately developed for many products.
· Technical and management issues
- Absence of inventory information: without such information, sound management decisions are difficult to make.
- Lack of integration into the overall management of forests: NWFPs and timber are mutually supportive if NWFPs are managed along with wood in an integrated manner.
- Domestication of NWFPs: for NWFPs that achieve mainstream commercial importance, domestication and plantation establishment are essential. Yet within "forestry plantation" programmes, little has been done to deliberately integrate selected NWFPs.
- Unsustainable harvesting: at present, incentives encourage over-exploitation of many NWFPs, and there are few regulatory checks on their harvesting.
- Inefficiency in processing: technology for processing most NWFPs is outdated and research to improve it is lagging. The situation is exacerbated by lack of skilled workers, management expertise, investment and marketing arrangements.
Wood energy
The main policy challenge for wood energy development in Asia and the Pacific is to promote technically viable, economically efficient and environmentally sustainable woodfuel use. The broad policy areas that need to be addressed include: improving information related to wood energy, improving the functioning of markets, developing wood-energy strategies, and strengthening wood-energy planning capabilities.
Related to the main policy areas, the major challenges to wood energy development are:
· Social: the challenge is primarily due to the low socio-economic status of the majority of traditional fuel users. Low socio-economic status means they and their problems are easily marginalised.
· Economic: the main challenge is to ensure the financial feasibility of large-scale dedicated wood-energy supplies, particularly on public lands (forest and community lands) where a majority of the poor collect their woodfuel.
· Technological: this challenge is primarily associated with the costs of technological adoption. Technology transfer is expensive.
· Institutional: government policies for bio-energy development and the role of the private sector are not clear in most countries.
· Legislative: existing policies and legislation in the forestry, agriculture and energy sectors are not geared to promote wood-energy development and may often not be conducive to its planned development. For example, issues related to land ownership and tree tenure are especially important in wood-energy development.
Industrial wood products
Ensuring reliable supplies of industrial wood products at prices that are competitive with other industrial consumer products is among the key challenges the region will face in the future. Given its open trade stance, the Asia-Pacific region would be ill advised to seek self-sufficiency for all products that are in "deficit." In keeping with the spirit of Asian success, it would be more appropriate to identify and pursue those products and forest activities for which the region has a comparative advantage while continuing to import other products.
Decisions on what policies and products to emphasise may need to be taken soon. It is likely that regional and global supplies of wood will contract in the near future in response to environmentally driven policies. Policies to support industrial forest products will need to be compatible with such environmental policies, and they will have to be realistic in their approach with regard to wood supplies.
The following themes and trends represent immediate challenges for the industrial wood sectors:
· Increasing substitution of coniferous timber for hardwood production. While supplies of natural forest hardwood timbers are increasingly constrained, a number of countries within the region and outside the region have rapidly maturing plantation estates that will provide significantly increased volumes of softwood in the next decade. These supplies, particularly in engineered forms, will provide considerable scope to substitute for hardwood species in many applications. Natural forests in the Russian Far East also have potential to replace North American supplies in the future.
· Adapting to greater emphasis on fibre processing as opposed to solid-wood processing. As supplies of high-quality, large-dimension logs suitable for sawnwood and plywood decline, the focus will shift toward substitute products, including small-dimension logs, residues, non-wood fibre and recycled fibres. Revamping industrial capacity in tropical Asia to cope with smaller logs will be one of the biggest challenges affecting competitiveness of the sector; however, it will require considerable re-investment.
· Further moves toward increased processing in developing producer countries (as opposed to consumer countries). This has progressed furthest in countries such as Indonesia and Malaysia, but is steadily occurring in other countries with extensive resources as well. Considerable difficulty exists, however, in countries with weak institutional capacities.
· Increasing dependence of the region on trade to meet demands for forest products. Wood production within the region, with the exception of the few plantation-rich countries, is unlikely to increase markedly from the present.
· Adapting to increased environmental measures in trade. Irrespective of the degree to which certification may become a requirement, there will be pressure to accommodate more strict criteria for forest management in order to trade easily.
Challenges related to people and forests
Four main areas related to people/forest relationships warrant special attention. The first is to assist indigenous forest-dwelling communities to increase the range of livelihood-supporting options. Increasing interaction with migrants is exposing traditional forest-dwelling people to competition, but also to skills and to knowledge of alternative lifestyles. The challenge is to use this contact positively and to minimise conflicts.
The second challenge relates to mainstreaming collaborative forest management between governments and local communities living near forests. So far, the tendency has been to release only poor-quality forests for joint management. This has understandably produced a climate of mistrust. Attempts to cede richer forests and to introduce lucrative processing activities into joint forest management agreements have been introduced only recently and in only a few locations. Building capacity and enhancing confidence among local people are needed to enable them to take on modern management and commercial tasks successfully. Three-way collaboration among people, government and commercial firms may be useful in transferring capabilities to local people.
The third challenge is to make tree planting on farmlands more financially attractive. Agroforestry and tree planting have too often been subsistence focused. Where commercial orientations have been adopted, oversupply has sometimes occurred and prices have fluctuated erratically. A considerable challenge, therefore, is to accompany promotion of tree planting with support for market development.
The final major challenge is to promote production forestry for low-income urban centres or to make existing forestry activities more responsive to needs of urban areas with many poor people. The main issues relate to ensuring high productivity to compensate for high land costs near cities and identifying and strengthening institutions responsible for urban forestry.
Challenges related to forest and tree resources
Generally, countries with high incomes are increasing forest cover (although many first destroyed their forests and have since regrown new ones), while lower-income countries are losing forests or significantly degrading them. This suggests a clear link between wealth and capacity to conserve or increase forest cover. The main driving force through which wealth operates is in reducing the need for land conversion to agriculture and rural settlement. Wealth may also reduce the pace at which forests are harvested for subsistence needs (such as fuelwood), but could lead to increased industrial harvesting.
A major challenge is to avoid irreplaceable or irreversible losses or damage until incomes rise sufficiently to enable developing countries to reverse forest-cover changes. One sign of hope is that in many "deforested" countries, trees outside forests are actually increasing in number. Particularly in South Asia, where forest loss has been greatest, a challenge will be to promote an integrated view of forest and non-forest goods and services, and to manage these as a unified system. At present, foresters tend to focus on forests and act as if trees outside strict forest areas matter less. Similarly, they tend to ignore tree crops (being the responsibility of agricultural agencies) despite the fact that these yield substantial raw material that substitutes for forest products and is used by forest industries. For their part, agencies responsible for agriculture often focus only on the oil, latex or fibre for which the tree crops were initially planted. In the future, blending
objectives and achieving acceptance of joint responsibility for such "frontier" or "interface " crops will be one of the key policy and institutional challenges in the region.
To promote progress in developing forest and tree resources, the following main challenges will have to be successfully addressed:
· setting achievable targets and implement forest development plans that combine forest resource expansion, conservation, enhancement and rehabilitation, and holistically cover wood, non-wood and service benefits of forests;
· taking firm action to progressively enhance conservation, reforestation and forest productivity and to reduce or halt deforestation and forest degradation; policies and actions both within and outside the forestry sector are needed;
· introducing and scientifically implement integrated management of forest resources;
· emphasising socio-economic benefits in forestry programmes in addition to financial profitability; and
· complementing forest resources with supplies from small-scale woodlots and trees outside the forest by providing incentives, removing obstructions and disincentives, and supporting research, extension, technology transfer, market information development and local credit facilities.
Challenges related to policies and institutions
Policy challenges
The forestry policy challenges facing the Asia-Pacific region cover as wide a spectrum as the countries' levels of resource endowment and socio-economic development. In the richer countries, societies can better afford to conserve much of the remaining natural forests for their environmental, recreational and aesthetic purposes. Some developing countries and territories, such as Singapore, the Republic of Korea, Hong Kong SAR, China and to a lesser extent Malaysia and Thailand, are also moving in this direction. The rest of the region will find it very difficult in the near-term to forego economic benefits from forest exploitation. These countries have fewer alternative income and employment-generating sectors to provide for the material needs of their societies.
Most societies would like more of all types of forest products and services, but trade-offs are necessary. The challenge is to maximise the output of all forest benefits simultaneously, perhaps through increased efficiency, better technology, and more skilled labour. Sound policies and solid institutional capacity will be crucial in this endeavour.
In identifying the policies and strategies to implement, an open approach is needed without preconceived value-judgements about forests, their value to society, deforestation, forest change, and suchlike.
In coming years, it will likely become increasingly difficult for forestry to capture the attention of policy-makers on the basis of economic development alone. Even in countries where the sector is internationally important, it rarely represents the main motor of development. Indeed, the relative significance of forestry, even in economies of moderate size, such as Malaysia, is decreasing as other sectors expand much more rapidly. Furthermore, the land occupied by forests is, in many cases, more valuable in alternative uses. Therefore, policy discussion should increasingly centre on trade-offs such as those between maintaining forest cover versus converting forests to agriculture or other land uses, maintaining forests in production status versus protection status, and sustaining benefits for indigenous forest dwellers versus broader society.
Institutional challenges
Trees and forests can be managed in many different ways. The Asia-Pacific region offers a full continuum of possible institutional arrangements. There is no single "correct" system; each must be judged according to its ability to deliver goods and services within the local historical, cultural, economic and political context. The exact choice of institutional arrangements is, just like decision on policies, a prerogative of individual countries.
Throughout the region, and the world, however, institutions are rapidly changing and many new institutions are demonstrating strong interest in forestry. The result is that institutional arrangements related to forests and forestry have become much more complex. A major challenge in coming years will be to mediate the differing views of the diverse interest groups in forestry and to channel their energies into productive forestry activities.
There will also be a need to function more effectively in cross-sectoral situations considering that the decisions in other sectors often have major impacts on forests. Similarly, the increasing globalisation of forestry requires that national and even local institutions dealing with forestry become au fait with international forestry issues and discussions.
To remain relevant in the future, forestry institutions will need to develop improved knowledge and mechanisms for dealing with emerging issues such as urban forestry, commercialisation of genetic resources, carbon sequestration, ecotourism, joint forest management, verification of sustainable forest management practise, product certification and various transboundary issues.
<section>f</section>
10. The outlook for Asia-pacific forestry
Introduction
Outlook for the demands placed on forests
Outlook for forest resources and land use
The setting for policy choices
Introduction
This chapter provides an outlook for forest resources in Asia and the Pacific, and for their production potential through the year 2010. It also projects the likely demands that will be placed on forests in the region. Finally, it attempts to provide a foundation for subsequent analysis related to future policy choices that could be made to ensure better forestry contributions to economic, environmental and social objectives.
Outlook information and projections are essential for developing sound forest policies. Among the critical elements of effective, long-term planning is information on prospective levels of demand and sources of supply. There is always some uncertainty associated with key factors that will affect demand and supply of forest products (such as rates of population growth, economic growth and technological developments). It is, however, possible to prepare an outlook for the forest sector in which scenarios are used to organise and display possible future developments and the magnitude of uncertainty surrounding these projections.
The policies and choices made by decision-makers and individuals both within and external to the forest sector can lead to many different outcomes. The outlook presented here is, therefore, useful primarily as an indicator of future trends. It is intended to serve as a starting point for discussions of alternative futures that can be shaped by policy decisions made now or in the near future.
Outlook for the demands placed on forests
Outlook for services of forests and for non-wood forest products
Outlook for consumption, production and trade for wood-based forest products
The impacts of the current economic downturn
Outlook for services of forests and for non-wood forest products
It is not possible at present to develop a quantitative outlook for services of forests and for most non-wood forest products. Data is too scarce to enable formal modelling. The future qualitative changes to be expected were largely described in analysing status and trends (Chapter 3) and are summarised below.
Outlook for services of the forest
The outlook for forest-provided services will range between two extremes. One scenario would result if deforestation and forest degradation continue without commensurate corrective efforts. The result would be increasing social costs due to falling agricultural productivity, environmental hazards, erosion of biological diversity, deterioration of wildlife habitat, and impairment of water quality and streamflow regimes.
A more positive scenario of the future would be marked by intensive efforts to control deforestation and forest degradation, and to expand and enhance the area under forest cover. Regional and inter-regional collaboration and co-operation would promote sharing of responsibility for international rivers and their watersheds and for managing forests for global benefits related to biological diversity and mitigation of climate change. For either scenario, the key future challenges specific to forest-based services, will include the following:
· altering perceptions that: (a) forest values, other than those solely related to timber benefits, can be financially realised and are important; and (b) ignoring values of ecological services of forests will cause downstream costs. Dominant values of forests have come to be equated with commercial resources based on extractive industries. The social, cultural and ecological services of forests have been largely ignored. This can be overcome by establishing belief and interest in the crucial importance of forest-provided services. The creation of both public and political awareness of these services will help to ensure forests are ascribed their true value in decision-making;
· developing more effective valuation methods for pricing externalities and for identifying beneficiaries: this will include designing innovative approaches for measuring externalities and incorporating benefits and costs of forest-provided services in both policy decisions and investment analyses.^83 Capturing the value of services to demonstrate their usefulness is a key challenge;
^83 A recent attempt to value the ecosystem services supplied by wildlands suggested an average annual value of US$33 trillion, a sum that is double the annual Gross Global Product. Even if this estimate is substantially wide of the mark, it nonetheless indicates a huge equivalent monetary value for these difficult-to-value services. (Costanza, R. et al. The value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital. In Nature, 387:253, 15 May 1997.)
· developing mechanisms to maintain the diversity of services of forests while forests continue to provide economic benefit: such an approach will need to recognise the socio-cultural basis for these services, including as they relate to indigenous and local people's rights;
· mobilising investment for developing forest-provided services: the challenge is to create a self-sustaining "market" for services or to develop methods whereby beneficiaries share the costs of sustaining service functions through taxes, charges, or voluntary contributions; and
· ensuring integrated and sustainable management of forest-provided services:: that is, ensuring that continued provision of forest services is an integral component of the objectives and actions of forest resource management.
Certain developments in services will have an international dimension. It is particularly urgent for countries to reach agreement with regard to:
· valuation of forests in upstream conservation for internationally-shared river systems where the benefits of efforts to conserve upper catchment forests largely accrue to other countries downstream;
· the role of forests in protection against global warming by sequestering carbon (the potential for major investment flows based on "selling" the capacity to sequester carbon through fast-growing tree plantations should provide an impetus, particularly for the region's developing countries); and
· valuation and use of forest genetic resources, to ensure that global benefits are derived from genetic resources and that source countries are appropriately compensated for valuable natural endowments.
Non-wood forest products
Data for most non-wood forest products (NWFPs) are scarce and often inconsistent. They therefore form an unreliable basis for future projections. Nevertheless, there is considerable evidence that NWFPs are both socially and commercially important in most countries in the Asia-Pacific region, particularly for many indigenous and poor people living in or close to forests. At the same time, collection, processing and distribution of NWFPs in organised markets provides employment for large numbers of people. Estimates of employment associated with NWFPs range up to 100 million people in Asia and the Pacific.^84 Exports of raw materials and products (such as furniture) manufactured from NWFPs contribute substantially to local, regional and national revenue. The value of trade in NWFPs has been estimated to be in the hundreds of millions of dollars.
^84 Mittelman et al. (1997). Document APFSOS/WP/28.
A number of developments will have a significant effect on the outlook for NWFPs:
· increasing commercialisation of some NWFPs resulting from large-scale exploitation, and developing markets;
· declining importance of subsistence use of some NWFPs in some areas as alternative products (for local consumption) and alternative sources of income emerge;
· disintegration of traditional systems of using and managing NWFPs, brought about in part by intrusion of commercial timber harvesting concessions and the granting of NWFP extractive permits to outside groups;
· the possible beneficial effects (for NWFPs) of interest in devolution of forest management to community-based institutions and authorities; and
· the possibility that emerging niche markets, and policy initiatives (such as efforts to promote equitable access to both resources and markets) may combine to enhance the contribution of NWFPs to social, economic, and environmental objectives.
A major factor to be considered is how growing prosperity may affect the numbers and habits of forest-dependent people. Although within the 2010 horizon of this outlook study the absolute numbers of forest-dependent people may not decline, their needs and demands could change significantly as alternative livelihood opportunities open up to them.
Outlook for consumption, production and trade for wood-based forest products
For this outlook study, the main projections of future demand and supply of wood products are based on an equilibrium econometric model that calculates quantities and prices at a national scale, based on explicit consideration of regional and global market conditions. The model is referred to as the "Asia-Pacific Forest Products Model (APFPM)" and is linked to other regions through a global model of which the APFPM is a sub-component.
Outlook for fuelwood
Fuelwood and charcoal have been dominant uses of wood in the developing countries of the Asia-Pacific region in the past and will continue to be well into the future. During the last three decades, consumption of fuelwood and charcoal has shown sustained increases, mainly as a consequence of population growth. The region's total production (which generally equals consumption, as there is little trade) increased from 679 million cubic metres in 1980 to 1023 million cubic metres in 1994 (Table 10.1). The latter is just over half of the world's consumption of fuelwood, and 2,8 times the region's use of industrial roundwood in 1994.
Table 10.1: Outlook for fuelwood^85
^85 Self-sufficiency for fuelwood is best assessed locally or, at most, nationally. By 2010, the percentage of consumption relative to sustainable production potential will be: 299 percent (Maldives), 247 percent (Pakistan), 178 percent (Nepal), 144 percent (Bangladesh), 92 percent (Viet Nam).
Production and Consumption^86 ('000 cum)
Net Change - Production and Consumption -1994-2010
Quantity
Advanced Industrialised Economies (AIE)
Newly Industrialising Economies (NIE)
North Asia (NA)
Southeast Asia (SEA)
South Asia (SA)
Pacific Islands (PI)
ASIA-PACIFIC
World
Asia-Pacific Share (%)
^86 International trade in fuelwood is insignificant for virtually all countries. This analysis assumes zero trade for convenience and because gross fuelwood trade falls within the margin for error.
Source: RWEDP
The total Asia-Pacific consumption and production of fuelwood and charcoal will reach about 1,295 million cubic metres by the year 2010,^87 a 27 percent increase over the 1994 level, or an average annual increase of 1.5 percent per year. The top three consuming countries will continue to be India (362 million cubic metres), the People's Republic of China (342 million cubic metres) and Indonesia (104 million cubic metres), with Viet Nam and Thailand also being important.
^87 Document APFSOS/WP/34, 1997.
In the AIEs (Japan, New Zealand and Australia), high incomes have led to relatively low demand for fuelwood and charcoal, as these countries have shifted their energy focus to fossil fuels and electricity. Analysis by the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme (RWEDP) indicates that historical baseline data of fuelwood use was underestimated. This has led to upward revision of the current estimated consumption for these countries relative to past estimates. Consumption of fuelwood and charcoal in these three countries will increase from 12.8 million cubic metres in 1994 to some 16.4 million cubic metres by the year 2010. Fuelwood consumption in all other sub-regions of the Asia-Pacific is expected to increase even more rapidly, with the vast bulk of the increase occurring in populous North and South Asia.
As in the past, most countries in the Asia-Pacific region will continue to "make do" with fuelwood and charcoal that is locally available, because transportation of these products is uneconomic. While estimates of woodfuel supply potential indicate that supply is greater than consumption at an aggregate level for the region, there will clearly continue to be woodfuel shortages in specific countries or locations within them. These local woodfuel shortages can best be addressed through an integrated approach to forestry, agriculture and energy policies, both for traditional use and more technologically advanced applications.
One aspect of energy development that has the potential to dramatically alter the future prospects for woodfuel use in the region is the growth in industrial energy generation using wood. In cold, well-forested countries, particularly in Scandinavia, wood (especially surplus wood-processing mill wastes) is a mainstream fuel for public heating and contributes also to power generation. In most of the Asia-Pacific region except the cold parts of Northeast Asia, the demand for space heating is limited. Industrial use of woodfuel may, therefore have more limited potential to be profitable in comparison with commercial fuels (Box 10.1).
Box 10.1: POTENTIAL FOR COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USE OF WOODFUELS
Industrial use of biomass in the Asia-Pacific region is extensive, but generally on a small-scale and based on traditional technologies. More recently, in some countries of the region, modern bio-energy applications (mainly co-generation, whereby heat and power from industrial processes or residues are generated and captured) have been adopted by some forest industry companies. For example, two plywood companies in Sumatra Indonesia (PT Kurnia Musi Plywood Industries and PT Siak Raya Timber) have invested in waste-fired boiler systems. The latter company estimates its investment of US$5.6 million will result in fuel cost savings of US$1.7 million per annum. Examination of co-generation, and other electricity producing alternatives, offers potential to optimise utilisation of countries' wood residues and biomass resources.
As in several industrialised countries, such as Finland (19 percent), Sweden (17 percent) and Australia (13 percent), other countries of the Asia-Pacific could obtain significant proportions of energy requirements from biomass resources. Certainly smaller scale electricity generation through co-generation is likely to be increasingly adopted by wood processors in the region, since this offers opportunities both to save on fuel and to dispose of residues. The key is acceptance of the systems' efficiency and environmentally benign attributes.
Woodfuels could offer an alternative to power stations using fossil fuels in some areas. Advantages in terms of cost and environmental impacts certainly exist under some circumstances - especially where adequate and economic supplies of biomass are available. Within the region, the Philippines attempted a national-scale dendrothermal electricity programme in the 1980s. The programme was largely unsuccessful due to, among other things, to a lack of cost-effective wood supplies.
Source: Adapted from Biomass energy in ASEAN member countries: RWEDP in association with EC-ASEAN COGEN and ASEAN-EC EMTRC.
Outlook for industrial roundwood
The combined influences of a growing population, strong economic growth, and explicit policies of forest-based industrialisation in key countries have led to large increases in production and consumption of industrial roundwood in the Asia-Pacific over the past 15 years. Total consumption of industrial roundwood in 1994 was an estimated 318 million cubic metres, or 21 percent of the world's total (Table 10.2) compared to 276 million cubic metres in 1980 (20 percent of the world total). Although future economic growth in the region is expected to be slower (as compared to the rates recorded for 1980-1995), the APFPM forecasts industrial roundwood consumption will continue to increase to 466 million cubic metres by 2010. This is an average increase of 2.4 percent per year from 1994 to 2010, compared to 1.2 percent per year from 1980 to 1994.
Japan, the People's Republic of China, Malaysia, Indonesia and India are expected to remain as the region's five main consuming countries, collectively accounting for about 75 percent of consumption in 1994 and 81 percent in 2010. Consumption of industrial roundwood in China alone presently accounts for about 29 percent, and by 2010 would account for 33 percent of the region's industrial roundwood.
In 1994, the region's production of industrial roundwood was 284 million cubic metres; by 2010, this is expected to increase by 48 percent, to 420 million cubic metres. The regional share of world production is expected to increase from 19 percent to 22 percent. The projected annual growth rate for production is 2.5 percent for 1994-2010, compared to 1.2 percent per year in the period from 1980 to 1994. The region's largest producers will continue to be the People's Republic of China, Indonesia, Malaysia, India, Japan, Australia and New Zealand. These seven countries accounted for 91 percent of industrial roundwood production in the region in 1994, and are expected to account for an equivalent share in 2010.
The People's Republic of China is the largest producer of industrial roundwood in the region, and is expected to remain so with production increasing from 99 million cubic metres in 1994 to 152 million cubic metres in 2010. Over the same period, Indonesia is projected to increase production by 50 percent (much of the increase coming from pulpwood as supplies of large logs are already tight), while Malaysia's output remains largely static. Australia and New Zealand are also forecast to substantially increase production (notably from plantation forests). Although India and the People's Republic of China have declared restrictions on timber harvests in natural forests, the APFPM predicts significant output increases for these countries. The increases, if they are achieved, will likely come from earlier tree planting programmes that are reaching maturity and, in the case of China, the very large stocks of agricultural tree crops, such as fruit trees, shelterbelts and farm trees.
The Asia Pacific region consumes only around 22 percent of the world's industrial roundwood but accounts for over half the imports. This underscores the region's very high dependency on imports to meet its needs. Imports of roundwood expanded very quickly from the mid-1960s until the late 1970s, peaking at 80 million cubic metres in 1979. Subsequent declines in log imports were partly a consequence of log export bans by Indonesia and Malaysia; these countries no longer made large volumes of unprocessed logs available to importing countries.
In 1994, Japan's imports were more than 70 percent of the region's total and nearly 40 percent of world imports. Japan's role as the leading log importing country is expected to continue, although the Republic of Korea may increase imports significantly in the coming decade.
The gross changes in the volume of industrial roundwood consumption mask some important structural changes in the types of roundwood being utilised. In many cases there has been a major shift away from tropical logs in favour of temperate softwoods. This trend is likely to continue. The Republic of Korea, for example, has closed down or converted much industrial capacity that manufactured sawnwood, veneer and plywood from large tropical logs because these are no longer readily available in adequate volumes.^88 Another example of structural changes in consumption is the shift in Japan's imports toward woodchips (which accounted for 55 percent of Japan's 48.5 million cubic metres of roundwood imports in 1995) as a result of several key supplier countries restricting or banning log exports.
^88 Byoung Il Yoo (1997). In-depth Country Study - the Republic of Korea. Document APFSOSAVP/06. FAO, Rome.
The APFPM model projects that imports of industrial roundwood by countries in the Asia-Pacific are expected to increase to 80 million cubic metres in 2010 from 64 million cubic metres in 1994. Combined imports by the Republic of Korea and Japan are expected to increase from 56 million cubic metres in 1994 to 69.5 million cubic metres.
Table 10.2: Outlook for industrial roundwood
Production
Production
Exports
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific Share %
Consumption
Change 1995-2010
Production
Consumption
Quantity
Quantity
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific Share %
Although log export restrictions have been imposed by a number of countries in the region, industrial roundwood exports from Asia-Pacific countries were still 30 million cubic metres in 1994, about 27 percent' of the world's total. Exports of industrial roundwood are projected to remain steady at about 34 million cubic metres through 2010. Decreases in exports from Malaysia and Indonesia have been partially offset by a 5 million cubic metres increase in industrial roundwood exports from New Zealand and Australia (dominated by woodchip exports). New Zealand is expected to continue to increase exports of industrial roundwood. The region's share of world industrial roundwood exports is expected to fall from its current 27 percent to 25.6 percent in 2010.
More than half of Asia-Pacific imports of industrial roundwood comes from outside the region. In contrast, exports from countries in the region tend to go mainly to countries within the region, primarily Japan. Exports to countries outside the region account for less than 1 percent of total roundwood exports. The top three importers in 1995 were Japan with 45 million cubic metres, the Republic of Korea with 9 million cubic metres and the People's Republic of China with 7 million cubic metres. Major external suppliers of industrial roundwood to the Asia-Pacific region are the United States (accounting for more than half), Russia, Chile and Canada. Combined roundwood imports from these countries represented more than 90 percent of imports from all sources outside the Asia-Pacific region.
There are several key unknowns in the supply equation for the region. The first is the extent to which the Russian Far East will be able to access its forest resources, in particular to meet demand from North Asia. A second large uncertainty is the extent to which the demand for forest products in the People's Republic of China will increase, and the country's capacity to meet demand from its own resources given recently expressed intentions to restrict natural forest harvest (Box 10.2). China's own forecasts to 2010 suggest that a doubling in consumption of forest products is not unlikely. In this event, not only will China's forest resource be placed under considerable pressure, but so too will the ability of key suppliers to match this demand. Only a major shift to sources outside forests and newly maturing plantations can offer supplies on a significant scale. A third uncertainty originates from environmentally oriented policy directions that may be taken in North
America. In 1995, North America's coniferous log exports to Pacific Rim countries had fallen to only half their 1990 level of 21 million cubic metres.^89 Many analysts expect this downward trend to continue.
^89 Original sources cited in: Chipeta, M.E. (1997): The FAO 1996 provisional outlook for global forest products and its implications for policy. In FAO provisional outlook for global forest products consumption, production and trade to 2010. FAO, Rome.
Box 10.2: INDUSTRIAL ROUNDWOOD PRODUCTION: THE IMPACTS OF ASSUMPTIONS IN MODELLING
The modelling of industrial roundwood production for countries in the Asia-Pacific region results in a number of predictions at variance with expectations provided in outlook study country reports. For example, Table 10.3 compares the unmodified estimates of industrial roundwood production for key countries, produced by the APFPM, with the estimates provided by the same countries in their country reports.
Disparities exist between the estimates for all countries, but the most proportionately significant are those for Malaysia, Indonesia and Japan where different assumptions on the extent of harvestable resources and, particularly, harvest regulatory measures have caused significant deviation. Further investigation to clearly explain and reconcile these differences is warranted. For Japan, a significant degree of deviation between the estimates is likely explained by noting that the country estimates are derived from pure woodflow models while the APFPM estimates are derived in a market clearing model. Notably, the Japanese Government's "Long Range Demand and Supply Projection on Important Forest Products" notes that, depending on economic conditions Japan's harvest could be as much as 17 million cubic metres less than the 40.3 million cubic metres quoted below.
Assessing consumption, production and trade of industrial roundwood, the following features stand out:
· while the AIEs accounted for 29.5 percent of consumption in 1994, their share will decline to 27.6 percent in 2010;
· North Asia (excluding Japan and the Republic of Korea) will increase its share of consumption from 31 percent to 33 percent and South Asia's share will increase from 9 percent to 12 percent, while the share of Southeast Asia will decline from 25 percent to 23 percent;
· the main forces for trade will remain with Japan (predicted net supply shortfall of 57.5 million cubic metres) and the NIEs with a shortfall of 12 million cubic metres; and
· North Asia will be a major consumer of industrial roundwood, but is not expected to be a major influence on roundwood trade because China's own capacity to supply from plantations and non-forest areas is expected to increase significantly. China will, however, likely become important in the trade in processed products.
The regional level of supply shortfall (the difference between consumption and production) is predicted to be nearly 40 million cubic metres in 2010 and is clearly unevenly distributed across the region. Japan alone is predicted to exceed the regional shortfall (implying the rest of the region as a whole will generate a roundwood surplus). Nonetheless, Table 10.3 suggests significant variation in production from those modelled are not only possible, but likely (variation among the major producers forecasts in Table 10.3 is 48 million cubic metres). The potential supply shortfall highlights the question of where additional wood might be obtained.
Table 10.3: Comparative estimates of industrial roundwood production for selected countries in 2010
Country
Unmodified estimate produced by Asia-Pacific Forest Products Model (million m^3)
Estimate provided in Country Report or in-depth review source to APFSOS study (million m^3)
Difference(%)
China
Indonesia
Malaysia
India
Japan
^90 Source: Blanchez (1997). Document APFSOS/WP/17.
^91 Source: Blanchez op cit.
In 1995, world exports of roundwood totalled 122 million cubic metres of which Asia imported 70 million (57 percent). Within the region, there are few obvious opportunities to expand production. New Zealand may offer an additional 15 million cubic metres and both Australia and Papua New Guinea also have scope to increase. Other countries are holding production steady, diverting an increasing proportion of harvested timber for national needs (e.g. in Southeast Asia), or are restricting harvests for environmental reasons. Most plantations in the region are young and will not yield large volumes of timber in the next decade. North America has for some time been reducing its roundwood exports due to environmental pressures; the Russian Far East has infrastructure bottlenecks; and Japan faces high costs.
Information to resolve the above questions requires time to accumulate. The main lines of exploration could focus on the following:
· the degree to which technology can reduce the need for raw material, in particular with regard to:
- greater use of residues currently left in the forest and at mills;
- earlier and enhanced contribution of forest plantations (current data are too weak to predict output potential with confidence);
- reliable, predictable level of supplies from trees outside forests, especially in key countries such as the People's Republic of China and in the whole South Asia sub-region;
· policy and political developments that could unblock timber supplies currently accessible only with difficulty, especially:
- incentives to make commercially attractive the currently costly and unprofitable harvesting of Japan's fragmented forests;
- the prospects for Japanese investment to improve infrastructure in the Russian Far East to permit larger-scale harvesting (given recent Japan/Russia progress in addressing the political issue of the Kuril Islands); and
- possible resolution of policy and institutional problems to allow profitable harvesting and transport of logs from Siberia.
Outlook for sawnwood
Over the past 25 years, the rate of growth in sawnwood consumption has been low relative to other wood products. Sawnwood use has expanded moderately in developing countries, but has remained flat in most developed countries. This is due, in part, to increasing scarcity in supplies of large-dimension logs suitable for sawing. It is also because of the rapid substitution by other wood products, particularly reconstituted panels and plywood, and by non-wood materials. The lower prices of wood-based panels relative to sawnwood, and the relative ease with which panels can be installed, have prompted this substitution. Despite these trends, sawnwood remains the most important and widely used primary processed solid wood product. In 1994, for example, sawnwood consumption (112 million cubic metres) was 3.3 times that of panel products.
Sawnwood consumption in the Asia-Pacific region increased from 96 million cubic metres to 112 million cubic metres between 1980 and 1994, an average annual growth rate of 1.1 percent. At the same time, the region's share of world consumption increased from 23 percent to 27 percent (Table 10.4). The region's largest consumers are Japan (accounting for one-third of the regional total), the People's Republic of China and India. Indonesia, Malaysia and the Republic of Korea are also significant consumers. Together, these six countries accounted for nearly 90 percent of the region's total consumption in 1994, and are expected to remain the main consumers of sawnwood to the year 2010. Although continuing economic growth is expected in the region, total sawnwood consumption is not projected to increase significantly in the next decade and a half; projected growth is only 1.4 percent per year, leading to a level of 142 million cubic metres by 2010. This suggests a slight
acceleration in growth in spite of the continued trend of substituting panel products for sawnwood. The largest increases in consumption will be in Japan, the People's Republic of China, India, Indonesia and Malaysia.
Table 10.4: Sawnwood
Production
Imports
Exports
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific share (%)
Consumption
Change 1994-2010
Production
Consumption
Quantity
Quantity
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific share (%)
The region produced 101 million cubic metres of sawnwood in 1994, only 7 percent more than in 1980 but nearly double what was produced in 1962. Nonetheless, the Asia-Pacific region's share of world production increased from 22 percent in 1980 to 24 percent in 1994. The region's largest producers are Japan, the People's Republic of China, India, Malaysia, Indonesia and the Republic of Korea, together accounting for nearly 90 percent of production. Japan, alone, accounts for more than 25 percent of regional production, although this percentage is down significantly from its 39 percent share of production in 1980.
Sawnwood production in the Asia-Pacific region is expected to grow slowly, in line with consumption, during the period leading up to 2010. The region's share of world production is projected to remain constant at 24 percent. Of particular concern is the predicted overall 8 million cubic metre shortfall in the region's production relative to expected consumption. Japan and the People's Republic of China will be the most significant contributors to the shortfall. The supply deficit in these two countries will total 20 million cubic metres.
Asia-Pacific countries exported about 8.3 million cubic metres of sawnwood in 1994, a minor increase from exports in 1980 (7.9 million cubic metres). The region's share of world exports declined from 10.4 percent to 7.7 percent over this period. Most Asia-Pacific sawnwood exports are of non-coniferous wood (6 million cubic metres in 1995). New Zealand is the only significant exporter of coniferous sawnwood (more than 1 million cubic metres in 1995). Prior to 1989, Malaysia and Indonesia were the two main exporters of the region, but in 1989 the Indonesian Government introduced heavy export taxes, which reduced exports. Since 1989, Malaysia has continued to dominate the trade in non-coniferous sawnwood, with 4.1 million cubic metres exported in 1995, 69 percent of total Asia-Pacific exports.
Exports of sawnwood by Asia-Pacific countries are projected to decrease from 7.6 million cubic metres in 1995 to 7.0 million cubic metres in the year 2010, and the region's share of world exports is expected to decrease slightly from 7.7 percent to 5.9 percent. Given anticipated harvest cutbacks in Malaysia, that country will likely no longer figure among the largest exporters in the region by 2010, as annual exports may decline to under 1 million cubic metres within the decade.
Total imports of sawnwood in the Asia-Pacific region increased sharply from 8.8 million cubic metres in 1980 to 19.5 million cubic metres in 1994. The region's share of the world total also increased substantially, from 12.5 percent in 1980 to 18.6 percent in 1994. More than half of the region's sawnwood imports is coniferous wood. Within the region, the largest importers in 1994 were Japan, (10.7 million cubic metres), the People's Republic of China (2.4 million cubic metres) and Thailand (2.4 million cubic metres).
Asia-Pacific sawnwood imports are expected to increase by 33 percent between 1994 and 2010, from 19 million cubic metres to 26 million cubic metres. The region's share of the world's total is projected to increase from 19 percent to 24.5 percent. Japan is expected to remain the largest importer through 2010, with 12.5 million cubic metres imported per year. Other countries that are expected to import more than 1 million cubic metres in 2010 are the People's Republic of China (with Hong Kong SAR, China) (8.1 million cubic metres), Thailand (2.3 million cubic metres) and the Republic of Korea (2 million cubic metres).
Box 10.3: INTERNATIONAL TROPICAL TIMBER ORGANIZATION (ITTO) ANALYSIS OF FUTURE WOOD PRODUCTS SCENARIOS
Since 1993, ITTO has used a trade model to study structure, changes and prospects for supply and demand of forest products in the region, with focus on its member countries. The results of its three-phase study have been issued in stages under the general title Analysis of macroeconomic trends in the supply and demand of sustainably produced tropical timber from the Asia-Pacific region. ITTO has also contributed a thematic study to the APFSOS based on the trade model results. The major conclusions of this study are:
Logs and the log trade
Natural forest log scarcity will be offset: sufficient incremental log supply will become available to avoid scarcity through improved utilisation of current log sources, low-impact harvesting of sensitive sites, and the importing of conifer logs.
Hardwood log trade will decline: hardwood log trade will decline across the region, and several more ITTO producer countries will become net importers by 2010. Some expected national developments are:
· Malaysia becomes an importer of logs: Malaysia, principally Peninsular Malaysia, is already an importer of hardwood logs; this trade will grow. The volume of trade in hardwood logs will decline as Sarawak and Sabah progressively curtail log exports.
· Indonesia becomes a net log importer: Indonesia discourages log exports^92 and is considering importing logs from Viet Nam, Myanmar, and the Solomon Islands to offset declining log supplies. Log imports are likely to increase during the study period.
^92 Though under recent agreements reached with the IMP for structural reform, it is intended to liberalise the log trade.
· Papua New Guinea will probably continue to export logs: Papua New Guinea's current policy is to reduce log exports by 10 percent each year for the period 1995-2000, and ban log exports thereafter. The PNG domestic processing industry may be unable, however, to absorb a significant increase in log supply. Log exports are consequently likely to persist well past 2000 and may even expand.
· Myanmar and Viet Nam have an export opportunity: These countries have an opportunity to expand log exports in the short term as the major exporters curtail their trade.
Coniferous log imports will expand: The region will import substantial volumes of coniferous logs to substitute for tropical logs in the manufacturing of sawnwood, plywood, and reconstituted boards and panels.
Manufacturing
Manufacturing will relocate to producer countries: The trend of relocating manufacturing capacity to producer countries will continue as the producer countries become more competitive and their manufacturing capacity becomes more efficient. Policy incentives for relocation are expected to accelerate the process.
Sawnwood manufacturing will increase: Sawnwood manufacturing will increase in the producer countries, largely in response to growth in domestic demand and the development of secondary manufacturing for export. If sawnwood manufacturing is to increase in consumer countries, it will be based on imported conifer logs.
Plywood manufacturing will decline: Plywood manufacture will decline across the region as the supply of peeler-quality logs declines and consumers adopt reconstituted panels.
Manufacture of substitute products will expand: While substitute products will be imported from outside the region, new capacity will also develop within the region to manufacture substitutes, especially reconstituted boards and panels based on the increasing supply of coniferous logs and small logs.
Trade in manufactured products
Sawnwood and plywood trade decline: Although processing capacity will shift to the producer countries, the overall trade in sawnwood and plywood will decline.
Substitute products trade increases: With new manufacturing capacity for substitute products being established in the producer countries, the trade in substitute products will expand in the region.
Prices
Prices will remain stable: Although demand will continue to be strong in the region, product and technological substitution could cause real prices to remain stable, or even decline. This result is sensitive to the rate at which consumers can accept product substitution and the rate of growth in demand for tropical timber solid-wood products.
Source: Abbreviated from Document APFSOS/WP/20: Forest industry structure and the evolution of trade flows in the Asia-Pacific region - scenarios to 2010. ITTO. Yokohama.
Outlook for wood-based panels
The status, trends and outlook for wood-based panels are summarised in Table 10.5. A full review of the dynamics of the panels' sub-sector in the region is given in a working paper by Michael Lyons^93 and for China by Lu Wenming.^94
^93 Lyons, M.J (1997): FAO Outlook study on wood-based panels production, consumption and trade in the Asia-Pacific region 1996-2010. Document APFSOS/WP/40(a), FAO, Rome/Bangkok.
^94 Lu Wenming (1997): Study on China's wood-based panel market outlook for the years 2000-2010. Document APFSOS/WP/40(b), FAO Rome/Bangkok.
Three dominant uses of wood panels are construction, furniture and packaging. Over the past three decades, wood-based panels (particularly veneer and plywood) have spurred the growth of forest products consumption, production and trade in the Asia-Pacific region.
From 1980 to 1994, consumption of wood-based panels in the Asia-Pacific region increased from 19.5 million cubic metres to 35.3 million cubic metres, accounting for 28 percent of world consumption (Table 10.5). This represents a growth rate of 4.3 percent annually. The leading consumers in the region in 1994 were Japan (13 million cubic metres), China (9.8 million cubic metres), and the Republic of Korea (3.4 million cubic metres). The growth in consumption in China, in particular, has been phenomenal. Apparent consumption of wood-based panels in China increased 668 percent between 1980 and 1994.
Table 10.5: Wood-based panel products
Production
Imports
Exports
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific share (%)
Consumption
Change 1995-2010
Production
Consumption
Quantity
Quantity
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific share (%)
The historical trends in wood-based panel consumption are likely to continue over the outlook horizon period. The region's consumption is expected to increase by some 47 percent between 1994 and 2010, from 35 million cubic metres to about 51 million cubic metres. This is an average growth of 2.4 percent per year. Over the same period, the world total consumption of wood-based panels is projected to increase from 126 million cubic metres in 1994 to 179 million cubic metres in the year 2010 (nearly 2.3 percent annually). Thus, the Asia-Pacific region's share of the world total is expected to rise marginally from 27 percent in 1995 to 28 percent by the year 2010.
In terms of panel type, the region's consumption in 1994 comprised 68 percent of veneer sheets and plywood, 17 percent of particleboard and 15 percent of fibreboard. In the coming years the plywood share is expected to decline to around 58 percent of consumption in 2010. The decline could be more substantial if the industry is unable to reinvest in new equipment to peel the smaller logs that will dominate in the corning years. In that case even more significant substitution in favour of reconstituted panels is likely to occur.
Asia-Pacific production of wood-based panels has also increased substantially, from 19.4 million cubic metres in 1980 to 36 million cubic metres in 1994. The region now accounts for 28 percent of world production. The region's largest producers in 1994 were Indonesia (10.5 million cubic metres), Japan (7.5 million cubic metres), the People's Republic of China (6.2 million metres) and Malaysia (4.9 million cubic metres).
Asia-Pacific Forest Products Model panel products forecast
As demand in the region continues to increase, production of wood-based panels in the Asia-Pacific region is also expected to increase - from 35 million cubic metres in 1994 to 49 million cubic metres by the year 2010. The region's share of world production is projected to decrease marginally from 28 percent to 27.3 percent. By 2010, the major producers of wood-based panels in the region will be the People's Republic of China (13.9 million cubic metres), Indonesia (12 million cubic metres), Japan (9.5 million cubic metres), and Malaysia (4.1 million cubic metres). Almost 55 percent of the total increase in production between 1994 and 2010 is projected to take place in China.
Of the projected 13.7 million cubic metres increase in production between 1994 and 2010, plywood and veneers are expected to account for 2.9 million cubic metres, an increase of 11 percent over 1994 levels. Particleboard and OSB production is projected to increase by about 77 percent (4.1 million cubic metres) and fibreboard production (including MDF) by 147 percent (6.7 million cubic metres).
The total panel imports of the region were 13.8 million cubic metres in 1994, or 36.7 percent of the world's total. More than three-quarters of imports were plywood, and the majority of these products originated from countries within the region, particularly Indonesia and Malaysia. The two largest panel importers in 1994 were Japan with 5.6 million cubic metres and the People's Republic of China with 3.9 million cubic metres. Together, these countries account for almost 70 percent of the region's total imports of wood-based panels. Other important panel importers are the Republic of Korea and Hong Kong SAR, China.
Although the Asia-Pacific region has long been a net exporter of wood-based panels, a reversal of this pattern is expected by the year 2010. Regional consumption, projected to be 50.9 million cubic metres by 2010, is expected to exceed production by 1.9 million cubic metres (3.7 percent). This small gap masks significant shortfalls projected for North Asia and the NIEs.
As a result of these shortfalls, total imports are projected to increase 6 percent from 13.7 million cubic metres in 1994 to 14.6 million cubic metres in 2010, while total exports are projected to decline slightly, from 12.7 million cubic metres to 10.6 million cubic metres. The region's share of world panel imports is forecast to increase from 36 percent to 38 percent between 1994 and 2010. The region's share of world exports is projected to decline from 38 percent to 33 percent during the same period. Japan will be matched by the People's Republic of China as the region's largest consumer, by 2010. The region will also become a net importer of plywood, largely as a result of Indonesia consuming more of its own output. Indonesia, Malaysia and New Zealand are predicted to heavily dominate wood panel exports by 2010 with these three countries expected to account for 98 percent of the Asia-Pacific region's total panels exports in 2010.
Panel products forecasts by other contributors to APFSOS
Difficulties with panel products data, and the supply-side construction of the Asia-Pacific Forest Products Model make it worthwhile to also examine the projections produced independently by the ITTO and Michael Lyons in support of this study (Table 10.6).
International Tropical Timber Organisation Trade Model^95 The ITTO model predicts consumption of panel products will increase by 51 percent in ITTO member countries between 1995 and 2010. The consumption of plywood is predicted, however, to decline by 35 percent in this period and production of plywood is expected to decline by 45 percent. Significant substitution by other panel products produced from mill and harvest residues, small logs and coniferous logs are the primary elements associated with these changes, a result that accords closely with the resource trends identified in Section 4. It is notable, however, that while the APFPM and the ITTO models differ considerably in their assessment of the mix of panel products, the magnitudes of increase in overall panel products consumption predicted by the two models are both high (APFPM 47.5 percent: ITTO 51.3 percent).
^95 Results are presented for the ITTO Trade Model's Base Scenario. Detailed results (and assumptions) for this scenario, a scarcity scenario, and a scarcity scenario with strong demand, are presented in APFSOS/WP/20. The ITTO Trade Model uses a methodology similar to the APFPM but focuses on trade balances in logs, sawnwood and plywood in ITTO member countries only (Box 10.3). It is, therefore, less sensitive to global scale and multi-product changes in supply and demand than the APFPM, but is more responsive to industry structural changes within its domain. A major difference in the data structure of the models (and hence results) is that the APFPM utilises aggregated roundwood supply data, whereas the ITTO model differentiates saw/veneer logs from small fibre logs. This enables the ITTO model to identify clearly problems associated with shortages in larger dimension logs while the APFPM has insufficient log-assortment resolution to track this particular issue. As a
consequence, the forecasts of the two models, with respect to plywood production in the Asia-Pacific region, are markedly different.
Lyons Survey-Assessment of Wood-Panels' Trends. In a background study for the APFSOS, Lyons^96 estimates consumption in the region for the different types of panels under three scenarios. For the year 2010, consumption of wood-based panels in the Asia-Pacific region is estimated at 96.4 million cubic metres in the "most probable" scenario. This is significantly greater (by 90 percent) than the APFPM estimate of 50.9 million cubic metres. In his "most pessimistic" scenario for the year 2010, Lyons estimates consumption of wood-based panels at 78.8 million cubic metres (a 77 percent increase over current levels of consumption).
^96 M.J. Lyons (1997). Document APFSOS/WP/40(a) op cit.
Table 10.6: Estimates of changes in wood panel consumption in Asia-Pacific, 1995-2010
Scenario
Total panels (%) (A)
Plywood & veneer (%) (B)
Particlebd/OSB (%) (C)
Fibrebd/MDF (%) (D)
Reconst. panels (%) (C+D)
Lyons "Pessimistic"^97
Lyons "Most probable"
FAO: APFPM - this study
ITTO "Base scenario"
^97 Specific panel-type percentages are proportionate with "Most probable" scenario.
Two important features are predicted by all the studies. First, consumption of panel products will increase substantially over the next 15 years. Second, the rate of increase in reconstituted panel products will be markedly faster than for plywood and veneer. The relative magnitudes of increase (or decrease) are largely dependent on assumptions of rates of economic growth and assumptions on availability of large-dimension logs.
Outlook for pulp and paper products
Except in South Asia and the People's Republic of China (where small-scale production units are common), the pulp and paper sub-sector is dominated by large-scale mills with well-documented capacity and output. For mainstream wood pulp and paper and paperboard manufacture, capacity changes and investment plans are regularly reported in the sector press, and statistics on capacity are published annually by FAO^98 Thus projections can be based on more reliable information than for many other products.
^98 The FAO statistics are published as a three-language Pulp and paper capacities with a 5-year time horizon, the latest being 1996-2001. The compilation is by Jaako Poyry Consulting (Asia-Pacific) Pte. Ltd, Singapore (see below).
The region's consumption of paper and paperboard increased from about 33.5 million metric tonnes in 1980 to 81.5 million metric tonnes in 1994 (Table 10.7). In 1994, consumption was 8 million metric tonnes of newsprint, 23 million metric tonnes of printing and writing paper, and 49 million metric tonnes of other paper and paperboard. The largest consumers in 1994 were Japan and China, each consuming 29 million metric tonnes. These two countries accounted for two-thirds of the region's total consumption in 1994.
Table 10.7: Paper and paperboard production, imports, exports and consumption (1,000 metric tonnes)
Production
Imports
Exports
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific share (%)
Consumption
Change 1994-2010
Production
Consumption
Quantity
Quantity
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
N/A
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific share (%)
The region's paper and paperboard consumption is projected to increase by 34 million metric tonnes, to around 127 million metric tonnes, by 2010 (Table 10.7). This implies an average annual growth rate of 3 percent. Over the same period, the Asia-Pacific region's share of the world's consumption is projected to increase from 30 percent to 33 percent. These projections are moderately lower that those of Jaako Poyry's recent study" (1997), which predicts that regional consumption of paper and paperboard in 2010 will be around 150 million metric tonnes. That study, however, assumed faster economic growth rates than those assumed for APFSOS.
^99 J. Poyry Consulting (June 1997). Business opportunities in the Asia-Pacific pulp and paper industry. A close look at resources, markets and industry. Jaakko Poyry Consulting (Asia-Pacific) Pte. Ltd, Singapore.
The People's Republic of China's consumption of paper and paperboard is expected to grow by more than 50 percent to reach 48 million metric tonnes in 2010. (China has already overtaken Japan as the largest consumer in the region.) Sizeable increases in consumption are projected for Japan, the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, India, Australia, Thailand and Malaysia.
In 1994, the Asia-Pacific region produced 28 percent of the world's production of paper and paperboard. The largest producers in the region in 1994 were Japan (29 million metric tonnes) and China (27 million metric tonnes) which together account for 75 percent of regional output. Other major producers are the Republic of Korea (6.3 million metric tonnes), Indonesia (3.0 million metric tonnes), India (2.6 million metric tonnes) and Australia (2.2 million metric tonnes). Japan, the Republic of Korea and Indonesia are basically self-sufficient, while other countries depend to a greater or lesser degree on imports to meet domestic needs. By 2010, the Asia-Pacific region will be a significant net importer from other regions - probably North America and Russia. There is, however, potential within the region to make use of the large volumes of low-quality fibre from wastes, natural forest and young plantations.
Production of paper and paperboard in the region is projected to rise by 52 million metric tonnes to nearly 127 million metric tonnes by the year 2010. Of the total production in 2010, about 13 million metric tonnes are expected to be newsprint, 39 million metric tonnes are forecast to be printing and writing paper, and 75 million metric tonnes will be "other paper and paperboard." The region's share of world production is projected to increase from 28 percent to 32 percent. In 2010, the People's Republic of China (with expected production of 51 million metric tonnes) is expected to be the major producer of paper and paperboard in the region. Other significant producers are expected to be Japan (45 million metric tonnes), the Republic of Korea (9 million metric tonnes); and Indonesia (5 million metric tonnes). There are several constraints to be overcome, however, in relation to future production growth in the region (Box 10.5).
Box 10.4: ASIA-PACIFIC'S LARGE LATENT DEMAND FOR PAPER AND PAPERBOARD
The region has major growth potential for consumption of paper and paperboard, which remains latent due to low incomes. The case of India illustrates this well: in 1995, per capita paper consumption was 242 kilograms in Japan, 24 kilograms in the People's Republic of China, 17 kilograms in Indonesia and only about 3 kilograms in India. In that year, India's consumption was about 3.3 million metric tonnes for a population of 929 million. With such a large population, and low current consumption, even small increases in per capita use result in massive absolute increases.
For example, if India's consumption merely reached Indonesia's average (a relatively low level that could be a realistic possibility by year 2010), national requirements would rise nearly sevenfold to 19.6 million tonnes, since India's population will by then have reached 1.15 billion. A consumption rate equal to the People's Republic of China's present one would translate into a demand of 27.7 million tonnes, which is nearly equal to China's or Japan's current consumption. Long-term planning will need to focus on developments in per capita consumption rates and policies that affect it, such as literacy drives and packaging standards.
The Asia-Pacific region has been a net importer of paper and paperboard for the past three decades. Total imports of the region increased from 4.1 million metric tonnes in 1980 to 14 million metric tonnes in 1994. About 60 percent of those imports were other paper and paperboard - newsprint, and printing and writing paper accounted for about 20 percent each. In 1994, the largest importers were China (4.0 million metric tonnes) along with Hong Kong SAR, China (2.9 million metric tonnes) and Japan (1.4 million metric tonnes). Nearly half of Hong Kong SAR, China's imports were re-exported, mainly to its parent. Australia, Malaysia and Singapore also imported sizeable amounts of paper and paperboard.
Box 10.5: CONSTRAINTS TO DEVELOPING PULP AND PAPER CAPACITY
Production forecasts for paper products (Table 10.7) suggest that a major increase in the Asia-Pacific region's papermaking capacity is imminent. At present, Indonesia and the People's Republic of China in particular have very large pipelines of proposed investments.^100 China has five new paper mills planned to come on line in 1998, with 32 new projects announced, each with a capacity exceeding 100,000 metric tonnes. The rest of Asia has confirmed plans totalling another 9.5 million tonnes, including Indonesia with publicly announced capacity increases totalling nearly 5,9 million tonnes. Overall, pulp and paper capacity in the region is projected to increase by more than a third by 2010. There are, however, substantial hurdles to overcome if such a scenario is to be realised within such a relatively short timeframe. Some key constraints may be:
^100 An up-to-date but pre-financial crisis assessment of situation and capacity plans is: Jaako Poyry Consulting (1997): Business opportunities in the Asia-Pacific pulp and paper industry - a close look at resources, markets and industry. Jaako Poyry Consulting (Asia-Pacific) Pte. Ltd. Singapore.
· the need for very rapid establishment, and consumer acceptance and participation, of substantial wastepaper collection networks;
· the need to access very substantive sums of investment capital to ensure the establishment of sufficient industrial capacity. This may be very difficult in the present economic climate;
· locating economically accessible forest resources to meet fibre demands; forests may be geographically inaccessible, too dispersed to provide sufficient fibre to large-scale mills, or comprised of species unsuitable for particular types of papermaking (or more highly valued in alternative uses or for conservation); and
· technical limits relating to fibre properties of various tree species, tree ages, and specific pulp mixes (e.g. the variable quality of various mixed tropical hardwood pulps is a problem in a number of applications). Similar constraints exist on the proportion of recycled fibre that can be mixed with virgin fibre to produce satisfactory paper quality.
The Asia-Pacific region is expected to remain a net importer of paper and paperboard over the outlook period. Total imports are, however, projected to decline as new capacity is installed in the region. Imports are expected to decline by 13 percent, to 12 million metric tonnes in 2010. The region's share of world imports is expected to decrease from 20 percent to 16.7 percent. The three Newly Industrialised Economies are expected to become the largest importers of paper by 2010, collectively accounting for 63 percent of the region's imports. China's imports could remain significant if the observed market preference for wood-based paper drives demand away from non-wood paper. At present, stocks of such paper are accumulating while the country imports wood-based paper products.^101
^101 Zhu Zhaohua et al. (1977). The status, trends and prospects for non-wood and recycled fibre sources in China: Document APFSOS/WP/35 (1997).
Exports of paper and paperboard in the region increased from 1.6 million metric tonnes to 6.9 million metric tonnes between 1980 and 1994, increasing from 5 percent to 9.5 percent of the world's exports. "Other paper and paperboard" exports accounted for three-quarters of total exports. In 1994, the major exporters were Hong Kong SAR, China (1.4 million metric tonnes), the People's Republic of China (1.1 million metric tonnes) and the Republic of Korea (1.3 million metric tonnes).
Total exports of paper and paperboard in the Asia-Pacific region are projected to increase slightly, to 7.9 million metric tonnes by the year 2010. As a result of increases in domestic consumption, many countries in the Asia-Pacific region are expected to reduce exports. By 2010, Japan and the People's Republic of China are expected to account for 72 percent of regional paper and paperboard exports.
Outlook for residues, recovered paper and non-wood fibre for pulp and paper manufacture
With expected continuing growth in the production of most forest products in the region over the next 15 years, expansion of the pulp and paper industry will depend to a large extent on the availability of raw material. Analysis conducted for the APFSOS indicates that a substantial increase in the use of residues, wastepaper and non-wood fibre can probably provide all the raw material needed for the production of pulp and paper products as well as reconstituted panel products. These raw materials can complement, and in some cases substitute for, scarce industrial roundwood. Many countries have papermaking capacity without their own pulp manufacturing and are, therefore, fully dependent on imports of both recovered paper and virgin pulp.
The composition of fibre-furnish for paper manufacture is already adjusting to these new raw material opportunities, with a detectable shift toward increased use of waste-paper (Table 10.8). For the region as a whole, wood pulp's share of total fibre-furnish is expected to remain stable at about one-third, through 2010, but the use of recovered paper is forecast to rise from 42 percent to 48 percent. The share of non-wood fibre is expected to decline from 25 percent to about 19 percent. Non-wood fibre use will likely remain concentrated in North Asia (especially the People's Republic of China where around 41 percent of fibre-furnish is expected to come from non-wood sources by 2010).
Non-wood fibres are widely available in the region but the People's Republic of China and India account for most of the existing production and use of this raw material. Production of non-wood fibre pulp in the region increased from 7.2 million metric tonnes in 1980 to 20.6 million metric tonnes in 1994. Recent preference in China for wood-based paper, however, coincides with closure of the smallest non-wood fibre pulp mills for environmental reasons. These trends, if continued, could substantially reduce growth of this sub-sector. Non-wood fibre pulp production is, however, expected to show some growth, reaching an estimated 30 million metric tonnes in 2010. Almost all of the growth is expected to occur in China.
Table 10.8: Trends in consumption production and trade in fibre-furnish
Fibre Furnish
Production
Imports
exports
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific share (%)
Fibre Furnish
Consumption
Change 1995-2010
Production
Consumption
Quantity
Quantity
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
N/A
TOTAL
World
Asia-Pacific share (%)
Wastepaper offers significant additional potential as an alternative raw material. Further collection and re-use of wastepaper will become increasingly feasible with increased urbanisation. To date, Japan and the Republic of Korea are the only countries that are close to reaching maximum practical capacity rates of utilisation for wastepaper, and both countries also import significant quantities of wastepaper. The People's Republic of China is, however, rapidly increasing domestic use of its wastepaper resource. Between 1980 and 1994, the consumption of wastepaper in the region increased by over 55 percent from 13 million metric tonnes to 33 million metric tonnes, predominantly due to increases in these three countries. Between 1994 and 2010, consumption of wastepaper is expected to rise by a further 81 percent to 60 million metric tonnes. Imports of wastepaper are expected to continue but more reliance is expected to be on regional and national resources. Japan, the
Republic of Korea and China will continue to dominate wastepaper consumption, but large increases are also expected in India (increasing from 750,000 metric tonnes to 1.6 million metric tonnes) and Indonesia (increasing from 990,000 metric tonnes to 1.9 million metric tonnes).
Harvesting and processing residues constitute a large resource that is likely to be increasingly utilised in the region. Use of these residues is limited partly by the distance from their production to locations where they can be utilised (i.e. pulp and paper or reconstituted-panel mills). In many cases, sawmills are small and scattered, and transporting chips and other residues to pulp mills may not be financially feasible. Furthermore, much forest harvesting and milling occurs in countries that do not have large enough markets for reconstituted panels, or lack a pulping industry to use residues and smallwood.
Outlook for prices for wood-based products
Historically, the price of sawnwood has paralleled the price of industrial roundwood, mainly because roundwood is a major part of the total cost of sawmilling, reaching as high as 60 to 70 percent. There is little likelihood of significant global price changes for industrial roundwood, sawnwood, wood-based panels, and paper and paperboard products over the next 15 years, other than normal cyclic shifts. For panels, at the global level, there has, in fact, been a mild price decline from the 1960s through the late-1980s. Only small price increases for wood-panels can be expected in the period till 2010.
For paper and paperboard products, there has been a long-term slow-but-steady general decline in real prices (notwithstanding the marked cyclic patterns) during recent decades. This trend is expected to continue till 2010.
In summary, the outlook suggests that the real price of industrial roundwood, worldwide, will remain relatively stable over the next 15 years. The prices of sawnwood and plywood are expected to increase slightly, while those of the other wood-based panels, and paper and paperboard will change little or perhaps decrease slightly.
Summary of outlook for wood-based products
In general, demand in the region for all forest products will increase significantly due to population growth and an anticipated return to strong economic performance. Absolute consumption will be greatest in Japan, the People's Republic of China, and India. Although many countries are expected to expand production and consumption, this will be from relatively low base levels. Asia and the Pacific will likely increase its share of global consumption relative to other regions.
There is broad consensus among recent studies that wood supplies at a global level will be adequate to meet demands for both industrial wood and fuelwood in the immediate future. For the Asia-Pacific region as a whole, there is little evidence to suggest the supply-demand balance will be any more seriously compromised than the present levels of shortfall, through the year 2010. The one major exception is for large-size logs, which are already in short supply.
Several other specific points relative to forest products that have emerged from the APFSOS are important to highlight:
· the Asia-Pacific will increase its dependence on imports for all industrial wood products;
· by 2010, Asia-Pacific consumption of wood-based panels and paper and paperboard will exceed consumption in both North America and Europe; Asia-Pacific consumption of sawnwood will be second only to that in North America (Table 10.9);
· Asia-Pacific will become a net importer of wood-based panels, changing from its current position as a net exporter;
· For the region as a whole, imports are expected to supply 16 percent of the region's industrial roundwood; 18 percent of sawnwood; 28 percent of wood-based panels; 9.2 percent of paper and paperboard; and 11.6 percent of fibre-furnish;
· regional production of paper and paperboard will likely increase to 126 million metric tonnes from 75 million metric tonnes;
· consumption of practically all commodities is led by the needs of North Asia, particularly demand in Japan and China; these countries will be the dominant influence in trade;
· use of wastepaper will continue to expand and the region's countries will increasingly collect and re-use paper collected in domestic recovery operations; imports will, however, continue to be significant;
· use of "other fibre" pulp will remain important but growth will be modest due to environmental concerns and adverse market preferences, particularly in China; and
· the very large latent market for paper and its products could emerge to create huge new demands for paper, particularly if economic growth accelerates in key countries such as India; this would likely lead to major investments in new production capacity and expanded levels of imports.
A critical aspect of the outlook for the Asia Pacific region is the considerable differences among countries of the region, with their different resource endowments, levels of economic development, and population growth rates. There are, therefore, likely to be some significant deficits of specific wood products (e.g. large-diameter logs) while overall supplies may appear adequate at the aggregate. The situation will be exacerbated by anticipated rapid growth of consumption in some countries such as China, and other countries' shifts from exporting status to importing status as domestic consumption grows.
Table 10.9: Regional comparison of projected consumption in 2010
Commodity
Units
Asia-Pacific
Americas
Europe
World
Sawnwood
million m^3
Wood-based panels
million m^3
Paper & paperboard
million MT
Industrial roundwood
million m^3
The region will remain heavily dependent on trade to balance national and regional supply shortfalls. The Asia-Pacific region is already the world's largest net importing region, and this situation is expected to persist for the foreseeable future. By 2010, the region is projected to be a net importer of all forest products. Net imports and import dependence are both projected to increase as compared to 1994 (Table 10.10). Some countries (e.g. New Zealand) will likely expand their exports while other countries will likely reduce exports as their domestic markets expand and forest resources decline. Intra-regional trade will continue to be extremely important, particularly between neighbouring countries, and between those with trade agreements.
The general thrust toward more liberal trade policies, through the World Trade Organisation, and through regional agreements such as APEC and ASEAN, should assist both in matching supply and demand, and encouraging more efficient production and processing of wood. For example, the removal of import restrictions and lowering of tariffs should eliminate margins for wastage by protected domestic processors. Nonetheless, it is notable that most of the countries that face the most severe pressure on wood supplies are not participants in the key regional trade agreements and often lack the capacity to participate adequately in trade. For these countries the focus is likely to be on developing domestic production capacity to alleviate supply shortfalls.
Table 10.10: Actual and projected Asia-Pacific consumption and net imports in Asia-Pacific
Commodity group
Units
Consumption
Net imports
Consumption*
Net imports*
Fuelwood
million m^3
Industrial roundwood
million m^3
Sawnwood
million m^3
Wood-based panels
million m^3
Wood pulp
million MT
Waste paper
million MT
Paper & paperboard
million MT
* Model-based projections.
The AIEs (especially Japan), and NIEs will be crucial in determining the patterns of forestry trade within the region. Japan is by far the region's largest importer of forest products and almost all of the region's exporting countries depend heavily on the Japanese market. Changes in Japanese consumer preferences, Japan's economic growth rate, or any large increase or decrease in harvesting of Japan's forest resources, would likely result in significant disruption of trading patterns in the region.
In general, Japan is likely to play a leading role in determining changes in production and consumption of wood in the region. For example, a shift in Japanese consumption patterns, in terms of substituting softwood for hardwood in some applications, could offset potentially declining production of tropical timber in major supplier countries such as Malaysia and Indonesia. Another example is Japan's successful programme to increase the use of recycled paper to supplement wood-fibre supplies. Japanese regulatory requirements, for recycled fibre to comprise a fixed proportion of manufactured paper, may encourage more widespread development of wastepaper collection systems.
The relative stagnation in sawnwood production is likely to persist to 2010. The declining availability of large diameter logs, concurrent with improved technologies for manufacturing engineered wood products and panels will likely encourage the continuing shift away from sawnwood. It seems also likely that panel products consumption will continue to grow spectacularly. Based on the North American experience, there will likely be significant substitution by medium-density fibreboard and oriented strandboard for hardwood plywood for construction purposes.
In pure volume terms, the largest growth can be expected in the paper and paperboard sector. This sector, however, offers significant opportunities to relieve pressure on forests through recycling and the use of non-wood fibres and wood residues. Asia, with its large urban areas, has enormous potential to improve collection and utilisation of wastepaper. At present only Japan, and possibly the Republic of Korea, appear to be utilising the full potential of the wastepaper resource. Similarly, use non-wood fibres can potentially expand beyond the People's Republic of China and India.
Many countries are likely to give increased emphasis to the production and trade of higher-value products, although there will be considerable variation between countries in the region. For some countries this will mean moving toward panels and paper, for others toward furniture and builders' woodwork.
Two major areas of uncertainty concerning trade will remain: 1) the future supply situation of the countries of the Russian Far East; and 2) the economic development of the two large developing countries - the the People's Republic of China and India.
The impacts of the current economic downturn
In mid-1997, a number of key Asian currencies suffered significant depreciation, signaling the beginning of what is now recognised as a major recession. In May 1998, the currencies of Malaysia, The Philippines, the Republic of Korea and Thailand were trading at about two-thirds the value of May 1977. The Indonesian rupiah was trading at 25 percent its May 1997 level. Major economic and structural problems became evident in most of these countries as liquidity tightened and major recessionary conditions took hold.
In terms of forest products trade, the key variable at the regional level is the extent to which Japan, the dominant importer, is drawn into the recession; at the global level the most important factor is whether the recession spreads to American and European markets. At present, recession is confined to the Asia-Pacific region, with a Japanese economy that is showing few signs of resurgence. The major impacts are:
· overall, reduced demand for all forest products, with the most significant affected countries being Japan, the Republic of Korea, the People's Republic of China and Thailand;
· increased competitiveness of affected exporting countries (including Malaysia and Indonesia) through exchange rate depreciation, but in the face of reduced demand;
· falling prices for forest products throughout the region;
· reduced earnings in the forestry sector resulting in closure of mills, reduced harvests and workforce lay-offs. These effects have spread outside the Asian region to a number of countries with heavy dependence on Asian markets.
Modelling the economic downturn
The full impacts of the downturn have yet to clearly emerge. For example, it is presently unclear how badly Japan may be affected by the turmoil in neighbouring economies or how adversely Japan's own continuing recession will affect neighbouring countries' ability to recover. In the interim, however, it is useful to provide some modelled estimates of potential effects on wood products of a downturn of approximately the current magnitude. The APFSOS has, therefore, generated a scenario of adjusted national GDP growth rates and assessed the likely impacts of such a downturn. These, in turn have been utilised in the APFPM to estimate potential impacts of the downturn. These GDP assumptions are listed in Table 2.5 as the APFSOS downturn scenario. The central assumption is that immediate effects of the downturn, across the region, while being significant, are not devastating. The impacts of the downturn are, however, modelled as being persistent and for most countries the
modelling could thus be generally described as reflecting a long but relatively shallow recession. The impacts income specific countries are, however, assumed to be more severe.
The overall general effect of the downturn is to reduce-demand and consumption relative to the base scenario (which ignores the economic downturn). Gross volumes of production, consumption and trade are, however, expected to continue to increase during the next decade despite the economic downturn. The variables that drive overall growth under the base scenario are assumed merely to operate in a more muted fashion in the downturn scenario. Most of the subsequent discussion compares the relative outcomes of the two scenarios. The key results of the modelling are summarised in Table 10.11.
It is important to recognise that the results of the modelling are merely indicative. The model presents one possible future and set of actions that are intuitively reasonable but by no means deterministic.
Outlook for fuelwood (downturn scenario)
Since a large proportion of fuelwood production and consumption occur outside of the formal economy the downturn is forecast to have little impact on the fuelwood sector and consequently no specific modelling was attempted for fuelwood. Demand for fuelwood will continue to be influenced by a complex, and poorly understood, set of income and substitution effects. Thus, in some areas where fuelwood is a marketable commodity (for example, in cities), lower incomes may cause consumption to decline or increase depending on the costs of fuelwood relative to kerosene and alternative fuels. In areas where fuelwood is freely gathered (mainly rural areas), the income effects are likely to be negligible though substitution effects, particularly those operating through employment markets, may well have some impacts.
Table 10.11: Production, consumption and trade in selected wood products - downturn scenario
INDUSTRIAL ROUNDWOOD
Production
Imports
Exports
Consumption
Sub-region
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
Pacific Islands
Total
SAWNWOOD
Production
Imports
Exports
Consumption
Sub-region
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
Pacific Islands
Total
WOOD BASED PANELS
Production
Imports
Exports
Consumption
Sub-region
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
Pacific Islands
Total
PAPER AND PAPER BOARD
Production
Imports
Exports
Consumption
Sub-region
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
South Asia
Southeast Asia
Pacific Islands
Total
Outlook for industrial roundwood (downturn scenario)
The overall impact of the Asian economic downturn on wood markets is most apparent in its effects on industrial roundwood consumption in the region. In the period 1996-2010, the APFPM estimates that cumulative^102 industrial roundwood consumption will be almost 250 million cubic metres (4.3 percent) lower than estimated under previous economic conditions. Cumulative production of industrial roundwood in the region is estimated to fall by a similar magnitude (220 million cubic metres) with a decline in imports from outside the region accounting for most of the difference. Total volumes of industrial roundwood exported by countries in the region are expected to be largely unaffected and, in fact, are likely to increase marginally in the downturn scenario (Table 10.11).
^102 Cumulative being the sum of all annual reductions (or increases) between 1995 and 2010.
Under the downturn scenario, the APFPM predicts that the Republic of Korea and the People's Republic of China will import significantly greater log volumes to 2010 than would otherwise have been expected. Japan's log import volume is predicted to decline commensurately. A rationale for this is that under the downturn scenario, total demand and prices for both logs and processed products will decline. If the price of processed products in Japan falls sufficiently, higher-cost Japanese mills may be unable to compete with processors in lower-cost economies such as Southeast Asia. Thus, imports of industrial logs will likely decline while imports of processed products may rise relative to expectations prior to the economic downturn.
Outlook for sawnwood (downturn scenario)
Associated with a lower rate of consumption growth in industrial roundwood under the downturn scenario is, naturally, a decline in the rate of production of processed products. In the period 1996-2010, the APFPM predicts that production of sawnwood will cumulatively total approximately 63 million cubic metres (3.9 percent) less than the volume expected prior to the economic downturn. In addition, imports of sawn timber by countries in the region are predicted to be cumulatively 14 million cubic metres lower than previously expected. Exports are expected to decrease cumulatively by around 9 million cubic metres. Total consumption of sawnwood in the Asia-Pacific region between 1996 and 2010 is, therefore, expected to total almost 68 million cubic metres less than previously anticipated.
Both the NIEs and the North Asian sub-region are predicted to have higher cumulative production under the downturn scenario than under earlier estimates. Import substitution in both sub-regions, however, is forecast to be sufficiently strong to more than offset this growth. Imports of sawnwood into Japan are forecast to be higher in most years under the downturn scenario, reflecting relatively cheaper prices for processed products arising from exchange rate depreciation. Exports of sawn timber from Southeast Asia are expected to be 42 percent higher by 2010 under the downturn scenario. This reflects lower demand in strongly affected countries (especially Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand), exchange rates that favour exporting to less affected countries, and exchange rates that encourage development of sawmilling capacity in some of the smaller countries of Southeast Asia.
Outlook for wood-based panels (downturn scenario)
The trends for wood-based panels under the downturn scenario are similar to those for sawnwood. In the period 1996-2010, the APFPM predicts that total cumulative production of wood-based panels will be 63 million cubic metres (an average of 4.2 million cubic metres per annum) lower than in the base scenario. The cumulative decline in consumption growth, however, is expected to total only 57 million cubic metres as a result of markedly increased volumes of imports, particularly into Japan (and to a lesser extent, China). These two countries, both assumed to be only marginally affected by the downturn, are predicted to take advantage of favourable exchange rates to significantly boost imports of wood panels. Conversely, the NIEs that have undergone exchange rate depreciation are forecast to produce significantly more wood-based panels and import significantly less. Exports to countries outside the region are predicted to be lower.
In terms of specific panel products, the greatest impacts of the downturn are expected to fall on the plywood and veneer sector. Total cumulative plywood production is expected to be 10 percent lower under the downturn scenario relative to the base scenario. As noted above, however, both Japan and the People's Republic of China are expected to import significantly greater volumes of plywood under the lower prices of the downturn scenario. Most of the increased export volume is predicted to come from Indonesia. A very similar pattern is expected for particleboard. An interesting projection of the APFPM relating to particleboard is that under the base scenario, Indonesia and New Zealand are jointly the largest exporters in the region; under the downturn scenario, low-cost Indonesian exports to a large extent squeeze New Zealand out of the market. The total production and import volumes of fibreboard are largely unchanged between the two scenarios. Export volumes of fibreboard
are marginally higher under the downturn scenario.
Outlook for fibre-furnish, paper and paperboard (downturn scenario)
Production and consumption of paper and paperboard under the downturn scenario are forecast to be lower than anticipated prior to the downturn in every sub-region except the Pacific Islands, where consumption is projected to be marginally higher in several years. The total cumulative production of paper and paperboard is predicted to be 96 million tonnes lower in the downturn scenario for the period 1996-2010 (an average of 6.4 million tonnes per annum). Total cumulative consumption is expected to be 91 million tonnes (5 percent) lower under the downturn scenario. Higher volumes of imports of paper and paperboard by Japan and, particularly, the People's Republic of China will likely push cumulative imports for the region up by as much as 4 million tonnes under the downturn scenario. Markedly higher export volumes predicted from Southeast Asia and the Advanced Industrial Economies (under the downturn scenario) offset lower export volumes from North Asia and the NIEs,
resulting in roughly equal volumes of exports under the two scenarios.
Production of all types of fibre-furnish is expected to be lower under the downturn scenario in every year. Total cumulative trade in wastepaper is forecast to be higher under the downturn scenario but overall consumption is predicted to be lower.
Conclusion
The results of the APFPM modelling show four key forces influencing change in the wood products sector as a result of the economic downturn:
· at the broadest level, the downturn has reduced capacity for consumption in the Asia-Pacific region. This is clearly reflected by anticipated overall reductions in consumption of every product in almost every sub-region (excluding logs in the NIEs and paper and paperboard in the Pacific Islands);
· resource-rich countries affected by the downturn have increased incentives to export both as a result of more favourable exchange rates and due to reduced domestic demand. This is particularly evident for Southeast Asian countries;
· resource-poor countries affected by the downturn have incentives to develop domestic processing capacity as a means of avoiding exchange rate costs on processed (value-added) products. Consequently, the APFPM predicts a significant increase in log importing by the NIEs as they attempt to avoid consuming imported processed products; and
· countries less affected by the downturn will have incentives to increase imports of processed products where exchange rates have become more favourable. The model predicts this result for the AIEs in particular, especially for imports of wood-based panels.
Outlook for forest resources and land use
Prospective land-use evolution
Outlook for the area of natural forests
Outlook for protected areas
Outlook for the area of plantations
Outlook for trees outside the forest
Potential wood and fibre supply prospects for the region
The outlook for forest resources and land use has been prepared assuming that the trends in land use change experienced in the region in the recent past will continue in the future. These changes have been combined with expectations of future developments of the forest sector in the region (particularly the development of plantations and the extension of the harvesting boundary in natural forest) to give estimated changes in production potential.
Prospective land-use evolution
Recent trends suggest that land uses in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010 will be distributed in a manner reflected by the figures presented in Table 10.12. The need to produce more food for the region's increasing population will drive continued expansion of the area of arable land, while the high profitability of permanent crops will encourage an expansion in cropping area by about one-third from 1994 levels. Together, these changes will take about 36 million hectares away from other land uses. A large proportion of this expansion in agricultural and permanent crops will take place in North and Southeast Asia.
In contrast, the area of permanent pasture is expected to decline by 48 million hectares, or less than 5 percent. In some countries, this will be driven by conversion of pasture to higher value land uses such as those mentioned above. In others, the loss will result from farmers abandoning pastures due to low profitability, soil erosion or other problems. A large part of the overall change in the region will be experienced in China and Australia. This shift away from permanent pasture also accounts for the quite large increase that is expected in the category of "other land" (Table 10.12).
Table 10.12: Estimated changes in land use in the Asia-Pacific region, 1994-2010
Land-use type
Area in 1994 (million ha)
Estimated area in 2010 (million ha)
Change 1994-2010 (million ha)
Change 1994-2010(%)
Arable land
Permanent crops
Permanent pasture
Forest and other wooded land
Other land
Note: the area of permanent crops was found to be slightly higher than reported in FAOSTAT when all the individual components (fruit orchards, coconut, oil palm and rubber plantations) were added together.
In terms of forest and other wooded land, it is expected that past deforestation rates will continue and that about 17 million hectares of forest and other wooded land will be converted to other land uses (mainly arable land and permanent crops) by 2010. It is expected that most of this conversion will take place in Southeast Asia.
Outlook for the area of natural forests
The total area of natural forest in the region is expected to decline from 490 million hectares in 1994 to 465 million hectares in 2010, or a decline of 35 million hectares in total. As in the past, some of this will be due to conversion to plantations or other land uses and some will be due to degradation of forests to the point whereby they are classified as "other wooded land." This rate of loss is considerably lower than predicted by the Forest Resources Assessment 1990 (FRA 1990) and reflects a recent slowing in the loss of forests and other wooded land (FOWL).
Within this overall change framework, it is also expected that there will be changes in the area of forest available for supplying commercial timber and in the status of forests with respect to harvesting (Table 10.13). The area of disturbed natural forest is expected to increase as some currently undisturbed areas are harvested, and some currently inaccessible areas are opened up by new roads or more sophisticated harvesting technologies.
In countries that have currently inaccessible forest areas, it is assumed that these will become accessible at a rate of 2 percent per annum, resulting in a decline in the area of inaccessible forest in the region from 135 million hectares in 1994 to 100 million hectares in 2010. For the purpose of estimating potential supply, it is assumed that these areas will enter the undisturbed forest category. In total, therefore, the area of disturbed forest available for timber production is expected to increase from 190 million hectares to 230 million hectares. The area of undisturbed forest available for supplying commercial timber will decline slightly from 40 million hectares to 30 million hectares. Combined with the effects of planned conversion and other unplanned land-use changes, the result is likely to be a slight increase in the area of forest available for wood supply (from about 255 million hectares to about 265 million hectares).
Table 10.13: Estimated changes in area of natural forest in the Asia-Pacific region, 1994-2010
Natural forest type
Area in 1994 (million ha)
Estimated area in 2010 (million ha)
Change 1994-2010 (million ha)
Change 1994-2010 (percent)
Natural forest available for wood supply
Disturbed
Undisturbed
Planned conversion
Unplanned conversion
Natural forest unavailable for wood supply
Inaccessible areas
Legally protected areas
Total natural forest
Outlook for protected areas
There is considerable pressure on countries in the region to increase the amount of forest area under legally protected status. These pressures, of course, must be weighed alongside the increased demands for forest products and the need for socio-economic development. Nonetheless, there is scope in many countries for increasing these areas, and it is likely that the extent of protected areas will increase modestly by the year 2010. This will only occur, however, as a result of conscious efforts by forestry and environmental policy-makers. Therefore, it makes little sense to make deterministic projections about the likely future extent of such areas. Questions particularly remain as to whether new protected areas will be strictly protected or in less stringent conservation categories. The policy options and institutional aspects of protected area designation and management, and how these might change in the future, are considered in following sections dealing with alternative
scenarios for the future.
For purposes of classifying future natural forest areas, it has been assumed, as a base-case scenario, that the area of forest in legally protected areas will remain constant at about 100 million hectares. Under this assumption, coupled with the expectation that timber harvesting will expand to new areas as a result of new technologies, the total area of natural forest unavailable for timber harvesting is expected to decline from 235 million hectares to about 200 million hectares.
Outlook for the area of plantations
During the course of the APFSOS, estimates of current plantation establishment rates were obtained for all countries in the region. Assuming that establishment continues at these rates throughout the period to 2010, the area of industrial forest plantations is expected to increase from 40 million hectares (in 1994) to about 64 million hectares in 2010 (Table 10.14). Most of this increase is likely to be in fast-growing short-rotation plantations, intended for use as pulpwood. The majority of the plantations will be established in South and Southeast Asia, with substantial increases also in North Asia.
Table 10.14: Estimated changes in plantations in the Asia-Pacific region, 1994-2010
Region
Current annual planting rate (million ha)
Ind. plantation area in 1994 (million ha)
Ind. plantation area in 2010 (million ha)
Total change (million ha)
Total change (%)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
Asia-Pacific
Outlook for trees outside the forest
Based on the overall analysis of land-use change and forest change, the area of "other wooded land" in the region is projected to decline from about 270 million hectares to 260 million hectares. The situation is, however, more complicated than this simple net change implies. Some "other wooded land" is likely to revert to natural forest or be converted to plantations, while other areas may be converted to other land uses.
Considering the three agricultural land categories shown in Table 10.12, it can be seen that the area of agricultural land in the region is, on balance, expected to decline (largely due to losses of permanent pasture in China and Australia). However, arable land and permanent crop areas are expected to increase such that the composition of the agricultural land base is likely to shift toward more productive land and land containing (or with the potential to contain) more trees. This is particularly so in the case of permanent crops (i.e. agricultural tree crops). The area of agricultural tree crops is expected to increase by 15 million hectares to about 60 million hectares by 2010. More importantly, however, due to the age structure of these crops, the area requiring replacement each year is expected to increase by 50 percent from 2 million hectares to 3 million hectares. At an estimated average standing volume of 200 cubic metres per hectare at replacement, this will have a
dramatic impact on the potential of such crops to produce utilisable timber and fibre.
Potential wood and fibre supply prospects for the region
The maximum potential annual supply of logs and fibre from various sources in each of the Asia-Pacific sub-regions has been calculated for the year 2010 (Figures 10.1 to 10.4). These projections have been based on the land-use changes that are expected (as presented above), but have not taken into account any changes in harvesting intensities or increment that might occur in the future.
Figure 10.1: Total potential annual supply of wood from the natural forest in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010
The main change expected in the supply potential of the natural forest is a slight increase, from 340 million cubic metres per year in 1994 to 360 million cubic metres in 2010, as the area of forest available for wood supply expands. Overall supply potential per hectare will decline slightly as harvesting moves progressively from undisturbed to disturbed forest, but this effect will be offset by the increase in areas available for harvesting.
Most of the increase in production potential is expected to come from North Asia (where an increase of 20 million cubic metres per year is expected over current levels) and the Pacific Islands (where parts of the relatively large currently inaccessible areas of forest will likely be brought into production). In contrast, total annual production potential of the Southeast Asian countries is expected to decline by 10 million cubic metres per year. This decline is expected because most of the Southeast Asian countries will be increasingly moving timber harvesting operations into secondary forests (where harvesting volumes will be less) in the years leading up to 2010. It is assumed that timber production from conversion forests in Malaysia and Indonesia will last for 20 years (or until just beyond 2010). If, however, there is a more rapid conversion of forest in these two countries, supply potential in Southeast Asia could decline even more than currently projected.
The potential of plantations in the region will increase dramatically as current plantations mature and the area of fast-growing short-rotation crops continues to increase. Potential sawlog supply from plantations will increase from 90 million cubic metres per year to 150 million cubic metres per year, mostly in Japan, China and New Zealand. However, other demands on forests in these developed countries might prevent much of this potential from being realised.
Potential supply of pulpwood from plantations will increase dramatically across the region, from 130 million cubic metres per year to 270 million cubic metres per year. Growth will be particularly concentrated in South and Southeast Asia, as many of the large areas of plantations previously established start to mature.
Figure 10.2: Total potential annual supply of wood from plantations in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010
The potential annual supply of wood from trees outside the forest will also increase, by about 125 million cubic metres, bringing the total annual potential supply from trees outside forests to just over 1 billion cubic metres per year (Figure 10.3). This increase will almost totally be attributable to the agricultural tree crops sector and, as such, will mostly occur in North and Southeast Asia. While specific utilisation of these agricultural tree crops by forest industries is difficult to predict, it is expected that more research and development (such as has already taken place in Malaysia) will lead to increasing use of these materials in the coming years.
The potential availability of wood and fibre from secondary sources will perhaps increase more than other available sources of supply, from 1 billion cubic metres equivalent per year in 1994 to 1.25 billion cubic metres equivalent in 2010 (Figure 10.4). In wood raw material equivalent terms, the potential availability of recycled fibre will increase from 140 million cubic metres equivalent in 1994 to 230 million cubic metres equivalent by 2010. Most of the absolute increase will occur in the AIEs and NIEs, and in North Asia, but the increases elsewhere will be no less dramatic in percentage terms.
Figure 10.3: Total potential annual supply of wood from trees outside forests (including other wooded land) in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010
Figure 10.4: Total potential annual supply of wood and other fibre from secondary sources in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010
Harvesting residues are expected to increase from a current level of 720 million cubic metres equivalent to 850 million cubic metres equivalent in 2010, assuming no significant improvements in harvesting practices. Wood processing residues are expected to increase from 90 million cubic metres equivalent to 110 million cubic metres equivalent. Non-wood fibre supply potential is not expected to increase significantly due to economic and environmental constraints.
Box 10.6: INCREMENTAL SOURCES OF WOOD SUPPLY - THE VIEW FROM ITTO
"Incremental sources of supply" are those sources that are not currently producing a significant volume of logs, but could potentially do so if economic conditions become more favourable. The main incremental sources for the Asia-Pacific region are: (a) improved utilisation, including greater use of residues and currently non-commercialised species; (b) new harvesting technologies allowing environmentally benign harvest from steep and environmentally sensitive sites; and (c) greater use of conifer logs from Russia's Far East, Australia, New Zealand and Chile. Each of these sources offer potential, but wood from each is likely to come only at higher cost than current sources.
Improved Utilisation:
Considerable potential exists for increasing the wood supply in the Asia-Pacific region through better utilisation of forest residues and commercially less-accepted species. Currently, almost 50 percent of the volume in felled trees is left in the forest, and only about 26 percent of the standing volume in harvest areas is felled. ITTO estimates that a 25 to 50 percent increase in extraction volumes is physically possible across the region. Much of this additional supply is unsuitable for manufacturing traditional solid-wood products such as sawnwood and plywood, but could be used for making reconstituted wood or fibre products. The incremental cost of using these resources, however, could be as much as 50 percent higher than for wood currently being used. By improving utilisation practices, an incremental supply of sawlogs and veneer logs 25 percent greater than at present could be achieved by 2010, but at a delivered wood cost for the incremental supply of about 25 percent
above the cost of current sawlog and veneer log deliveries. It is anticipated that the incremental sawlog and veneer log supply will gradually become available and will be fully exploited by 2010. Incremental supply of fibre logs (for the manufacturing of reconstituted wood and fibre products) equivalent to 25 percent of the current supply could be developed, but at an estimated incremental cost of 50 percent.
Low-Impact Harvesting Technology:
New harvesting technologies, including aerial (helicopter and various skyline cable systems) and high-flotation/low-ground-pressure systems, allow the removal of timber from steep and environmentally sensitive sites that until now have been excluded from commercial timber production. Indonesia, Malaysia, and Papua New Guinea, in particular, have significant areas of forest on sensitive sites that would be suitable for application of these new technologies. ITTO has estimated that Indonesia and Papua New Guinea could each sustain a theoretical harvest of 20 million cubic metres per year from these sensitive areas. More achievable potential incremental supplies of sawlogs and veneer logs are estimated at about 5 million cubic metres per year for Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, and 2.5 million cubic metres for Malaysia. These incremental supplies would come at an average harvesting cost 50 percent above the cost of current log sources. These levels are forecast to become
available gradually and to be fully developed by 2010.
Conifer Logs:
Russia: Traditionally, the flow of logs from Russia has been primarily to Japan (averaging 4.6 million cubic metres for all grades of logs between 1991 and 1994), with small volumes going to the Republic of Korea. Both markets are increasing the use of Russian logs for manufacturing plywood. ITTO estimates that the supply of conifer sawlogs and veneer logs from Russia will increase from 1.0 million cubic metres in 1995 to 5.0 million cubic metres in 2010.
Australia, New Zealand and Chile: In recent years, conifer logs to substitute for tropical timber have increasingly been supplied from New Zealand, Chile, and, to a lesser extent, Australia. This supply is expected to increase steadily through 2010. ITTO estimates that the incremental supply of conifer logs from New Zealand, Chile and Australia available for export to the rest of Asia and the Pacific will rise from 1.75 million cubic metres in 1995 to 7.0 million cubic metres in 2010.
Source: Abbreviated from Document APFSOS/WP/20: Forest Industry Structure and the Evolution of Trade Flows in the Asia-Pacific Region - Scenarios to 2010. ITTO, Yokohama.
The extent to which the potential of all these categories is realised will depend very much on the forestry, industrial, environmental and recycling policies pursued by countries in the region. For example, so long as incentives for high-grading practices remain, there will be little incentive to intensify collection and use of forest residues.
The setting for policy choices
Wood and fibre supply/demand matching
Of crucial importance in evaluating the future of forestry in the Asia-Pacific region is assessing the adequacy of wood and fibre supplies to meet demands for physical wood products. The estimated supply and demand situation for wood and fibre in each of the Asia-Pacific sub-regions for the year 2010 is shown in Figures 10.5 to 10.11 and Table 10.15, which are based on the figures presented in Section 4.
Figures 10.5 to 10.11 compare the estimates of the maximum potential annual supply of wood and fibre against the projected levels of production in the year 2010. The figures reflect the potential of the region overall, and each of the sub-regions individually, to supply sawlogs and other fibre products (e.g. pulpwood, residues, recycled fibre and non-wood fibre) from the following seven sources:
· Natural forests (NF)
· Plantations (PL)
· Other wooded land (OWL)
· Trees outside forests (TOF)
· Harvesting residues (HRE)
· Recycled and non-wood fibre sources (RNW)
· Wood processing residues (WPR)
Each figure also shows the estimated levels of production of sawlogs, pulpwood, fuelwood and recycled and non-wood fibre that will be achieved in the region and each sub-region in the year 2010 (represented by horizontal lines at the estimated levels of production).
Figure 10.5: Total potential wood and fibre supplies in comparison with expected demand in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010
Figure 10.6: Total potential supplies of wood and fibre in comparison with expected demand in the AIEs in 2010
Figure 10.7: Total potential supplies of wood and fibre in comparison with expected demand in the NIEs in 2010
Figure 10.8: Total potential supplies of wood and fibre in comparison with expected demand in North Asia in 2010
Figure 10.9: Total potential supplies of wood and fibre in comparison with expected demand in Southeast Asia in 2010
Figure 10.10: Total potential supplies of wood and fibre in comparison with expected demand in South Asia in 2010
Figure 10.11: Total potential supplies of wood and fibre in comparison with expected demand in the Pacific Islands in 2010
Table 10.15: Potential wood and fibre availability and estimated production in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010
Region
Potential sawlog availability (million m^3)
Sawlog production/ utilisation
RNW Availability
RNW production/ utilisation
NF
PL
OWL
TOF
Total
(million m^3/%)
(million m^3 EQ)
(million m^3 EQ/%)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
N/A
All Asia-Pacific
Region
Potential pulpwood and fuelwood availability (million m^3 EQ)
Pulp/fuel production/ utilisation
NF
PL
OWL
TOF
HRE
WPR
Total
(million m^3 EQ/%)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Note: percentage figures are production as a percentage of potential availability.
The clear message emerging from analysis of the modelling results (Figures 10.5-10.11 and Table 10.15) is that potentially there will easily be sufficient fibre available in the Asia-Pacific region overall to meet demand in 2010. It must be stressed, however, that the supply figures presented above are estimates of potential supply. It is virtually certain that the full extent of the potential supplies will not be obtainable in many countries due to technological and economic hurdles. To achieve significant portions of this supply potential in non-traditional areas, it will be necessary to improve utilisation of residues from processing and harvesting and significantly develop collection and utilisation of recovered material (mainly wastepaper) in many countries. Such developments will require substantial capacity building efforts by a number of countries in the region, and will likely increase the overall cost of wood and fibre.
In addition, a number of factors of uncertainty may undermine the conclusion that potential supplies of wood and fibre will be adequate:
· considerable uncertainty exists about the sustainability of the harvesting intensities currently used in the region. There is a high probability that in the future effective wood harvests will be markedly lower than those used in compiling the supply estimates for this study;
· significant uncertainty persists over the extent of plantation resources. Much of this doubt stems from data compilation methods that often fail to account for mortality rates or are incomplete with regard to age profiles and intended management regimes. Consequently, both plantation areas and stocking ratios may be significantly lower than official statistics indicate for a number of countries in the region;
· accurate statistics on trees outside forests are almost non-existent. Since these resources play a crucial role in meeting the proportionately dominant woodfuel needs, there remains scope for major errors in estimating the ability of non-forest lands to satisfy demands.
Despite these caveats regarding the assumptions underpinning the potential supply of wood and fibre, countries in Asia and the Pacific can generally be encouraged by the analysis that suggests that the means to alleviate potential wood shortages exist in the member countries. There is, however, a need to ensure that appropriate measures are implemented quickly and successfully, particularly in those countries with projected supply shortages from traditional sources.
The situation is highly variable across the region and adaptive measures will be markedly different across countries. It is anticipated that log production will approach the limits of sustainable potential in Southeast Asia and that general fibre scarcity will continue in South Asia. The analysis indicates that South Asia is likely to consume 13 percent more than it can sustainably supply (Table 10.15), but much of the wood needs in South Asia are for fuelwood, which can often be supplied by using non-stem wood. However, even taking this into account, it seems evident that South Asia will be hard pressed to meet future wood requirements.
While South Asia will remain under severe pressure, other sub-regions (especially the more developed sub-regions) will enjoy a relative abundance of wood and fibre. Most countries will only have to access about 50-60 percent of wood and fibre supplies that are potentially available, although this varies by wood type and sub-region. For example, Southeast Asia will need to utilise close to 100 percent of its available large-dimension logs to meet forecast sawnwood and plywood production levels based on the very large capacities currently installed in Indonesia and Malaysia.
<section>g</section>
11. Implications and choices
Policy implications and choices
Summary of implications
Alternative scenarios for future forestry policies
Indicative implications for investment
Implications and choices for regional co-operation
Policy implications and choices
The scope of policy choices
Policy options
The scope of policy choices
The forestry sector can contribute to societies and economies in many important ways. Countries rich in forest resources can include industrial forestry among the "engines" for economic development, employment creation and foreign exchange earnings. Policies oriented to social needs can focus forestry in ways that help maintain rural welfare or provide basic needs. Policies aimed at environmental services or protection can provide important ecological benefits (often without compromising economic contributions).
While national forestry policies tend to recognise the many potential contributions of forests, the relative emphasis must necessarily vary by country. Furthermore, the emphasis should appropriately be re-oriented over time as economies and external forces change and as society's values and priorities evolve. Achieving a suitable balance among economic, environmental and social objectives is a complex process. In many cases, it is possible to advance all three objectives simultaneously by applying greater skills, technology, or efficiency, or by introducing improved management approaches or institutional reform. In other cases, trade-offs may have to be made, requiring difficult and painful policy decisions.
The great diversity of countries and circumstances within Asia and the Pacific means that some countries are much better positioned than others to pursue specific forestry development policies. Wealthier countries can afford to conserve much of their remaining natural forests for their environmental, social, recreational and aesthetic values; they face no survival pressure to liquidate forests to finance national development. On the other hand, poorer countries or those undergoing rapid development have greater need to harness forests for national development. The very poorest countries simply cannot afford to forego the economic benefits available from forest exploitation.
The dilemma facing almost all governments in Asia and the Pacific is that the global community is calling for greater conservation of forests while the majority of their people are demanding more forest exploitation. Moreover, within Asia-Pacific countries, there are often higher-income people whose priorities may be more akin to those in the industrialised world (i.e. they too want more social and ecological goals for forests) alongside poor people who depend on direct exploitation of forests for survival policy-makers are in the unenviable position of having to balance these views and perspectives.
Concerns for the protection of the local environment, for subsistence use of NWFPs, or for global issues like biodiversity conservation and combating climate change, are being felt across all countries in the region. But the priority these concerns receive varies, often with the financial and institutional capacity of countries to address such concerns. Limits to choice are most apparent at the local level. Even if governments wish to conserve forests, local people (who are least informed about and may care little for global concerns) often continue to clear forests. The large areas of forests that have been encroached upon, the large number of human settlements in national parks and protected areas and the progressive degradation of conservation areas is ample evidence of this. The de facto "choice" is often in the hands of the people on the ground even if, de jure, it is supposed to lie with government.
Another dimension of choice equally constrains both developed and developing countries - that is, the many policy decisions that are made outside the forestry sector, but that have major impacts on forests and forestry. As emphasised in earlier sections, the very extent of forest resources in the region often depends upon decisions made outside the sector or upon the pace and direction of overall economic and social change.
The forecasts of supply and demand for various forest goods and services presented earlier have largely been based on assumptions of no significant changes from current trends. Thus, for example, forecasts of consumption and production of processed products have been based on assumptions of no radical changes in the structure of the wood-processing industry or in consumers' preferences. More importantly, the forecasts for roundwood supply and demand have been based on assumptions that there will be no significant technological changes in harvesting or processing, no major changes in the extent of protected areas, and a continuation of current plantation establishment and other land-use trends.
Of course, many of the factors influencing the supply and demand for forest goods and services can, in fact, be altered in positive or negative directions by policies designed to achieve specific objectives. Of key importance for policy-makers is recognition that policy choices made today will have significant impacts on the future of forests in the region. Policy-makers have substantial power to shape the future of forestry by actions that are taken now and in the near future.
This chapter attempts to support the policy-making process by briefly reviewing the current and ongoing developments in forestry in the Asia-Pacific region that were discussed in detail in previous sections. It highlights possible implications of these developments and provides broad indications of sectoral responsibilities (within and outside the forestry sector). By extension, these sectoral responsibilities point toward opportunities for effective intervention. The chapter also provides indicative implications for investment in the forestry sector.
The primary focus of this concluding chapter, however, is the examination of several future orientations that policy-makers might choose to increase the economic, environmental and social performance of the forestry sector in the region. Each orientation scores differently in each of these dimensions. For example, a move to increase harvesting efficiency is economically valuable, but may also have environmental benefits. Greater protection of forest areas will have a higher environmental value, but may be less beneficial or even detrimental from an economic point of view. The scope for pursuing each of these orientations differs widely among countries. Some countries may attempt to proceed in several directions simultaneously. Thus, it is not practical to try to describe a comprehensive "economic" or "environmental" scenario. Rather, attempts are instead made to quantify what benefits each orientation might achieve and how such orientations might be pursued. Suggestions
regarding what policy and institutional changes might be necessary to achieve each orientation and what impacts they might have on the production of forest goods and services are also provided.
Policy options
Policy choices made now will impact crucially on the availability of forest goods and services in the region in the future. Some policy options are fully within the control and mandate of forestry officials. Other policy choices, however, lie outside the forestry sector, but have major impacts on forests. Still others require joint decision-making and implementation by forestry and related sectors (Table 11.1). For example, the possibility of expanding plantations in crowded countries requires joint decisions to be made by forestry and agriculture policy-makers.
Related to policy development is the need for effective co-ordination. To make better use of forest resources on forest lands targeted for clearing for agriculture, for example, agricultural officials, forest industries, and consumers must work closely together to effectively salvage forest resources before they are wasted. Similarly, encouraging greater use of alternative woods such as rubberwood will require co-ordinated policies by the industrial tree crops, forestry and processing sectors. Increasing the collection and recycling of wastepaper will require co-operation with environment ministries, industry, and consumer organisations. Restructuring of industries in the main timber-processing countries of tropical Asia and the Pacific will demand co-operation among forestry, industry and finance agencies.
Table 11.1: Sample forest policy options
Policy objectives
Aspect of forestry affected
Increase the rate of plantation establishment*
Area
Establish protected areas
Area
Increase green areas
Area
Increase recycling*
Quantity
Increase use of wood residues
Quantity
Increase harvesting efficiency
Quantity
Increase processing efficiency*
Quantity
Increase plantation yields
Yield
Modify harvesting intensity (due to management practices)
Yield
Increase use of timber from conversion forest* (salvage)
Quantity
Modify/plan the proportion of harvest sourced from arable land and open forest*
Quantity
Modify/plan the proportion of harvest from tree crops outside of the forest*
Quantity
* Policy options requiring joint action by forestry and related sectors.
Summary of implications
Table 11.2 summarises the main developments now underway in the forestry sector in Asia and the Pacific and highlights the possible implications of these developments. This summary provides the basis for subsequent in-depth analysis of selected implications.
A central issue for the region is whether or not policy-makers are realistic in expecting forests to provide ever-increasing volumes and levels of goods and services, while at the same time applying ever more rigid environmental restrictions and controls. While analysis suggests that the region is indeed capable of providing most of the forest goods and services being demanded, this capability is contingent on bold and innovative policies that will enable the sector to expand into new areas and increase efficiency throughout.
A combined agenda for policy, technology and market development seems to emerge from analysis of ongoing developments and their implications. This agenda includes the following:
· for policy-makers: to review the effectiveness and practicality of policies affecting supply and demand for forest products, pricing of forest resources, equity and access to forests and contributions of forestry to national and local development;
· for scientists and technologists: to develop affordable ways to use non-wood and non-forest raw materials as complementary sources of wood and fibre, to increase the efficiency in conversion of raw material into finished products and to identify effective incentives to push forestry development in desirable directions;
· for market specialists: to accelerate the shift of Asia-Pacific consumption patterns toward wood and fibre products that better reflect the rich endowment of low-quality fibre rather than products that demand large-diameter logs; and
· for forestry sector planners: to develop the necessary information to support analysis in all the above fields as a basis for rational decision-making, with forestry options considered pragmatically in a broad context.
Table 11.2: Summary of developments and their implications for response
Development
Implications
Main sectoral responsibility
Within forestry
Outside forestry
The significance of forestry in the economy is likely to decline even if in absolute terms the sector grows. [It is normal in the process of development for primary sectors - agriculture, forestry among them - to grow slower relative to other sectors.]
· Institutional visibility of the sector may decline and with it, the attention of governments; a major response could be to broaden the range of contributions, including values to which governments and society attach great value today.
· Economic importance of wood products seems likely to decline in relative terms; the social and political importance of forest services seems set to increase.
· Some exporting countries are promoting greater secondary processing for greater returns.
· Need to maintain research and development for sustained competitiveness.
Policies in favour of sustainable forest management will strengthen and their application may withdraw more forests from production.
· Tighter limits for management decisions. Withdrawal of natural forests from production is likely to continue. There is a need for plantations and more trees outside the forest for wood supplies.
· Develop programmes for holistic management of forests for wood, non-wood products and services; promote research and development for such management
· Create capacity for monitoring and complying with larger number of new conventions and the greater enforcement of older environment-related conventions, codes of practice, etc.
Pressure on ecosystems will continue to grow.
· Where populations are still low, continue to conserve representative ecosystems. In more populous Asia, lack of land may require innovative conservation approaches with greater interface with people.
Services of forests are beginning to enter the economic arena.
· Monitor better and quantify where possible; encourage private-sector concessions for services that can be commercialised (e.g. ecotourism, bioprospecting and R&D for genetic resources; carbon-capture afforestation).
· Study pricing and commercialisation possibilities for water to finance upstream conservation.
· Integrate services into sustainable forest management planning and implementation.
In general, non-wood forest products (NWFPs) continue to make progress only slowly.
· Sharpen focus in promotional efforts and move away from supporting all NWFPs irrespective of success or growth potential.
· Establish focal point agencies to mobilise contribution of support to selected candidate NWFPs and give them capacity to lead.
· Encourage domestication for the winning NWFPs.
Wood energy will remain very important.
· Despite importance, wood energy has failed to be mainstreamed: focus on achieving this in planning and policy within forestry, agriculture and energy sectors.
· Secure attention for wood energy as an essential element for rural development.
Supplies of large logs for sawmilling and veneer/plywood manufacture are getting tighter and in some countries, have run out.
· Encourage restructuring of industry designed for large logs as it gets obsolete and replace with technology for smaller material; if necessary, by raw material price management.
· Encourage change of consumption patterns toward products that can be manufactured from smallwood and residues.
Residues emerge as a major potential raw material and, if used fully, could make the clearing of much forest unnecessary.
· Encourage collection for industrial processing of residues; policies similar to those which encourage recycling may serve as models.
· Encourage collection for processing (or some in situ processing) of forest harvesting residues. The problem is poor financial feasibility. Price incentives may be essential in some instances, at least initially.
· Review industrial location policy and structure of industry to encourage spatial distribution and types of industry that can facilitate collection of residues for transfer among complementary industries.
Trade in industrial wood products will remain strong and even grow in importance.
· Maintain liberal stance of economies.
· For exporter countries, maintain responsiveness to international concerns linking trade with environment (e.g. certification, CITES application to timber, etc.) and follow closely emerging conventions and codes of practice, including international initiatives on criteria and indicators for SFM.
· Leave private industry freedom to achieve international competitiveness.
Trees growing outside the forest, including agricultural tree crops, are already important sources of both fuelwood and industrial raw materials.
· Develop institutional mechanisms for sectoral agencies in agriculture and forestry to jointly support these activities; may include consultative, clearinghouse and collaboration arrangements, including in research and development (as done for rubber/rubberwood and for palm oil/palm oil fibre in Malaysia).
· Make collaborative "social" forestry and other participatory forestry activities more commercially focused.
· Involve private sector which is important for agricultural tree crops.
Wasteland potential for forestry remains far from being realised.
· Seek new investment sources, such as carbon capture funding using tradable pollution rights under the Climate Change Convention, when operational.
· Bottlenecks include the social needs of marginalised people that use degraded lands as common-property low-value pasture, etc., seek their involvement and gain from afforestation.
· Maintain environmental forestry programmes (e.g. the People's Republic of China's protection afforestation), including through voluntary efforts of society.
Forest dwellers will remain but the conditions for their lifestyles will change rapidly - partly due to influx of settlers but also to economies modernising.
· Loss of access to extensive forests due to settlement and other claims on forests threaten traditional lifestyles that increasingly become dead-end options. Traditional dwellers might survive but only by further receding and becoming more marginalised. A more positive advance would be to give them skills, ability and power to choose alternative lifestyles. Contact with in-migrants and education could play a large part.
Collaborative forest management and social forestry (with people living near forests or on farmlands) will start consolidating.
· Need for institutionalisation of policies that permit richer forests to be co-managed with rural people and encourage profitable enterprises so that collaboration provides livelihoods and is attractive.
· Make social forestry less subsistence-oriented.
· Need for greater private-sector involvement in collaborative forest management and social forestry to provide markets and technical cooperation.
Forestry for urban areas will become important and will start diversifying significantly beyond amenity orientation (due to many large cities being poor).
· Need for urban green areas to have multiple purposes, including production functions.
· Institutional gaps in responsibility for urban forests (city administrations versus forestry services?) will need resolving.
· Need for research and development into highly productive forests to compensate for high land costs.
Institutions remain weak-particularly with regard to skills and research.
· Greater specialisation and networking among universities.
· Need for more client-driven research and for networking to strengthen weaker centres.
· Focus research agendas on areas of potential success or particular needs that help the sector remain relevant and competitive.
· Promote capacity development in working across sectors (to service trees outside forests, conservation in populated areas, wood energy in total energy context, etc.).
· Strengthen statistics and information on the sector and at its interface with linked sectors.
· Develop mechanisms for more secure funding, including internal ones such as greater commercialisation of some services and better pricing of goods and services.
Non-wood fibre for pulp and paper will remain relevant in some countries with limited forests.
· In view of environmental concerns, promote mechanisms for cost-spreading joint treatment of effluent or develop low-cost treatment technologies.
· Continue closure of the particularly small mills unable to afford pollution abatement.
· As the raw materials are abundant, in countries where forest supplies will always be difficult, consider R&D for process technologies specifically for these raw materials rather than adaptations from wood pulping.
Recycling of used paper will increase.
· Complement dependence on imports with domestic programmes to collect and sort wastepaper and provide incentives for re-pulping rather than alternative uses.
Alternative scenarios for future forestry policies
Background to the policy analysis
Options for the future
Synthesis and common themes for future policy development
Background to the policy analysis
The future of the forestry sector in the Asia-Pacific region will depend on the extent to which forestry policy-makers choose to focus on each of the three dimensions noted above - economic, environmental or social orientations. Concentrating on the economic utilisation of forests over the next decade will result in a very different type of forestry than will result if environmental improvements and sustainability criteria are the driving forces behind policy. Similarly, a very different outcome is to be expected if the primary concern of forestry policy is with social development and equity issues.
Irrespective of the orientation of countries' policy thrusts, the main features expected to influence the future of forestry in the region are summarised below:
Adequacy of wood supplies at the global level. A broad consensus among recent studies is that wood supplies at a global level will be adequate to meet demands for both industrial wood and woodfuels in the immediate future. For the Asia-Pacific region, however, it is evident that several countries, especially in South Asia, are facing localised woodfuel shortages. Not surprisingly, these countries are also those with the lowest utilisation rates of industrial wood. Nonetheless, for the region as a whole it appears that potential supplies are abundant. The main uncertainties regarding future supplies of wood relate to restrictions that might be placed on harvesting in natural forests and the rates of plantation development.
Attention to the multiple roles of forests. The past 30 years have seen a broadening in understanding of the multiple roles of forests. There is now a general acceptance among decision-makers and forest managers that forests should be managed to facilitate the provision of wood, non-wood products and services, and that these should be produced in a manner that takes account of the environmental, economic and social dimensions of forestry. Implementation of such integrated forest management is, for the vast majority of forests in the region, still a distant prospect. There remains disagreement on the best methodologies to achieve integrated management, and often resistance from people whose livelihoods are impinged upon. The overall trends, however, are toward adjusting and developing regimes to provide more balanced forest management and this should continue beyond 2010.
Dependency on trade. The region as a whole will undoubtedly remain heavily dependent on imports to meet demands. Asia and the Pacific is expected to remain the world's largest net importing region for the foreseeable future, with the inter-regional wood trade deficit likely to increase. The general thrust toward more liberal trade policies, through the World Trade Organization and regional agreements such as APEC and ASEAN, should help match supply with demand and ensure more efficient production and processing of wood. Nonetheless, it is notable that most of the countries that face the most severe pressure on wood supplies (e.g. in South Asia) do not participate in the key regional trade agreements and lack the capacity to participate adequately in trade. For these countries, the policy focus in the future is likely to be on developing domestic production capacity to alleviate supply shortfalls.
Dominating influence of Japan. Despite the rapid growth that is expected in the rest of the region, it is likely that Japan will continue to be the main driving force in determining the patterns of forestry supply, demand and trade within the region. Japan is the region's leading importer of forest products and almost all the region's exporting countries are dependent on the Japanese market. Any changes in Japanese consumer preferences, economic growth or domestic harvesting levels could significantly alter trading patterns.
Importance of a few suppliers within the region. The present concentration of wood producing countries within the region will not change before 2010, but the importance of individual countries within this group is likely to change. For example, wood supplies from the major producers of Southeast Asia are expected to level off or decline (particularly if they pursue their stated policies of restricting production from natural forests). On the other hand, production in North Asia and the AIEs is expected to increase. This will lead to a general shift from hardwood to softwood supplies in the region. Several other countries (including Viet Nam, Myanmar, Laos, Papua New Guinea and Fiji) have the potential to become relatively important suppliers in the region.
Supply and demand balance uncertainties. There are two major areas of uncertainty in the future supply-demand equation for the region. The first is the extent to which the Russian Par East will be able to supply forest resources to meet demand in Asia (particularly North Asia). The second is the extent to which demand for forest products in the People's Republic of China will increase and the country's capacity to meet demand from its own resources. China's own forecasts suggest that a doubling in the consumption of forest products by 2010 is not unlikely. In this event, not only will China's forest resources be placed under considerable pressure, but so too will the ability of key suppliers to match this demand, particularly if the Russian Far East is unable to contribute significantly.
Strong growth in the consumption of reconstituted wood panels and paper products. It is very likely that the already ongoing shift toward the use of reconstituted wood panels such as medium-density fibreboard and oriented strandboard will accelerate, while production and use of sawnwood and hardwood plywood will remain stagnant. In line with most other regions of the world, the greatest growth in demand is expected in the paper and paperboard sector. It is this sector, however, that offers significant opportunity to relieve pressure on forests through recycling.
Pressure on supplies. While the region apparently has enough wood to meet foreseeable demands, analysis of potential supplies and demand suggests that there may be considerable pressure on supplies within the region by 2010. This pressure may be intensified largely by restrictions that countries have indicated they might put on supplies (particularly from the natural forest). Historical evidence suggests, however, that such pressure is unlikely to result in significant price increases. It is more likely to lead to changes in the utilisation of different types and sources of wood, increases in harvesting and utilisation efficiency and changes in production mixes. As described below, the region has vast scope to accommodate such changes, but successful adaptation will depend in part on the policies that countries pursue in the near future.
Moves toward sustainable forest management. At the centre of global forest policy debate is the issue of sustainable forest management. Most of the tropical countries in the Asia-Pacific region have subscribed to ITTO's Objective 2000 for achieving exports of tropical timber and timber products from sustainably managed sources by the year 2000. Most of the temperate countries are participating in the Montreal Process to develop criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management. Commitment to these processes, and a variety of other initiatives under the auspices of the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development, development of forest codes of practice and certification programmes is gradually improving forest management. This is likely to lead to reduced harvests of wood from natural forests in the short term, but increased supplies in the future. It will also result in improved environmental functions of forests, including harvested forests.
Demands for social equity. A significant trend in a number of countries is a move toward devolving responsibility for forest management to local communities or private entities. Overall, this reflects governments' general interest in empowering people and providing them with resources to improve their own livelihoods. It is also a response to the increasingly vocal demands of people for a stake in managing resources for their own benefit. There remains considerable danger that traditional forest dwellers may be marginalised, but these groups are increasingly being given a voice in the decision-making process - either directly, or through concerned NGOs. The social dimension of forests, while probably still subject to significant institutional neglect, will receive increasing attention through 2010 and beyond.
Options for the future
It is against the general policy background discussed above, that the following six options to increase and improve the use and management of the region's forest resources have been developed:
1. increase production from forest plantations;
2. improve efficiency in forest harvesting and wood processing;
3. encourage structural change in the wood-processing industry;
4. stimulate greater utilisation of non-wood and non-forest fibre (including wastepaper) to supplement traditional wood fibre supplies;
5. increase the area of natural forest in protected areas; and
6. increase the potential for supplying forest products from non-forest areas.
The first four options can be seen as having mostly economic benefits, although they will also have substantial environmental and, to a lesser extent, social benefits. Option 1, in particular, could have considerable environmental benefits if plantation expansion emerges as a major tool for sequestering carbon and mitigating climate change. Similarly, Options 2-4 will each produce greater efficiency, which in most cases will lead to substantial environmental benefits by reducing waste.
Option 5 would mostly improve the environmental performance of the sector. Total exclusion of harvesting of forest products from increasingly large areas of natural forest could be considered economically (and possibly also socially) detrimental. There is, however, still considerable scope for movement in this direction without necessarily leading to negative economic impacts.
Option 6 is mostly about broadening supply sources for both wood and non-wood forest products. This option would produce significant social (and possibly environmental) benefits as much broader participation in forestry would be emphasised through agroforestry, farm forestry, and the permanent tree crops sub-sector of agriculture. It would not necessarily have much of an impact on supply as the option deals mainly with the issues of where and from whom wood is procured rather than how much is harvested.
The way in which such policy options might be implemented and the effects they might have (particularly on wood supplies) are described below. Of course, these options should not be seen as mutually exclusive. Countries may wish to choose one or several of them depending on their individual circumstances.
Increase production from forest plantations
Overall, current rates of plantation establishment in the region are about 1.5 million hectares per annum, with only a few countries, including the People's Republic of China, India and Indonesia, accounting for much of the total. Several other countries in the region, including Japan, New Zealand and Australia, have already invested heavily in plantations in the past. A major proportion of current planting, particularly in the tropical zone, is with short-rotation species for the production of pulpwood.
Two major policy objectives are likely to drive plantation development in the region between now and 2010. The first is the desire to increase wood supplies from plantations, either to expand overall supplies, or to substitute for wood currently obtained from natural forests. The second is the desire to reclaim derelict land or "wasteland." In pursuing either of these policies, it is quite likely that future plantation development will differ from current approaches. Thus, it is useful to examine the possible scope of such changes.
Increasing the rates of planting with the current species mix would have some impact on wood supplies before 2010 because plantations are often grown on rotations of only 5 to 10 years. Because, however, sawlogs are increasingly in short supply in the region while pulpwood is relatively plentiful, strong arguments can be made for increasing the planting of longer-rotation species with a view toward sawlog production. Although significant supplies from new sawlog plantations would not materialise before 2010, it seems appropriate to suggest that countries carefully consider opportunities for increasing the rate of plantation establishment for sawlog production in the near future.
With respect to the types of land to be planted in the future, it should be recognised that most countries in the region will be reluctant to allow forest plantations to be developed on land with good agricultural potential. Even if formal regulations do not restrict planting on prime agricultural lands, the cost of such land is likely to preclude most tree-planting operations. An additional constraint on the type of land to allocate for tree plantations is the reluctance of most countries to convert natural forests into plantations except when they are already highly degraded. Thus, it is likely that most countries will focus plantation development on degraded lands.
Policies to encourage afforestation of derelict land or wasteland will not only solve the problem of providing land for tree plantations without reducing agricultural potential, but will also have other positive benefits. For example, without countervailing measures, wastelands and degraded lands have a tendency to expand in area. Increasing tree cover is a proven measure to arrest the spread of wastelands. Furthermore, forests can renew the productivity of wasteland soils or protect them from further degradation, so that these might be more productive for agriculture at a later date.
Developers often hesitate to invest in planting degraded and scrub land because of its relatively low productivity and poor profitability, the lack of residual forest on the land (which can be cleared and sold to help defray plantation establishment costs) and competing tenure claims made by various groups and individuals. Governments often attempt to overcome these obstacles by offering public subsidies for establishment, such as grants, tax concessions and other incentives. A very important point, however, is that plantation establishment, particularly for sawlog production, is often unprofitable in many countries simply because log prices are kept very low by governments that maintain artificially low stumpage rates for timber coming from natural forests.
A relatively new prospect for encouraging plantation development is to provide measures for sequestering carbon. While specific details are still to be clarified, the Kyoto Protocol lays a foundation for potentially vast new investment in forest plantations in Asia and the Pacific. Depending on the credits that investing countries might obtain in exchange for supporting plantation establishment and the market mechanisms that are eventually established under the Kyoto Protocol, plantation investment could conceivably escalate dramatically in the corning years. It is still too early to predict with any degree of certainty how this might affect plantation establishment in Asia and the Pacific, but policy-makers would be well advised to monitor these developments carefully.
Taking into consideration the above points, policy-makers need to assess the extent of plantations that should be established to achieve specific objectives. A recent estimate by the Asian Development Bank (quoted in Blakeney, 1995) suggests that about 50 million hectares of plantations should be established in the region over the period 1995-2005 to restore degraded lands and meet wood demand (Table 11.3). This figure is far less than the total area of degraded lands in the region (Box 11.1), but would be a significant step toward meeting formal objectives of restoring degraded lands and would make a significant contribution to future wood supplies.
Table 11.3: Estimated forest plantation establishment requirements in the Asia-Pacific region, 1995-2005
Type or purpose of forest plantation
Area required (million ha)
Investment US$ billion
Reforestation to restore and secure ecological balance
Fuelwood plantations to provide for increasing population
Industrial plantations to meet increasing demand
Total required (over 10 years)
Source: Blakeney (1995).
The figures for plantation establishment presented by Blakeney (Table 11.3) may be somewhat higher than necessary, particularly with respect to fuelwood plantations. They do, however, provide a reasonable starting point for the analysis of what might happen if a more aggressive policy of plantation development were pursued in the region. Given that existing plans are to plant about 23 million hectares over the period to 2010, an additional 27 million hectares would have to be planted to meet Blakeney's total estimated requirements. Most of the areas planted under such an ambitious plantation establishment programme would likely occur in North, South, and Southeast Asia (Table 11.4). Assuming that longer-rotation tree species would comprise much of this additional planting, possible effects on potential wood supplies in the long run are also presented in Table 11.4.
Box 11.1: AVAILABILITY OF WASTELANDS FOR AFFORESTATION
If past trends continue, the total area of "other land" in the Asia-Pacific region will increase by 27 million hectares, to 640 million hectares, by 2010. Not all of this total, or the incremental increase, will be degraded land, but it is important to emphasise that such areas are vast and represent an enormous potential for tree planting. Because they are attractive for little else, they may be relatively easily released for forestry. The following examples give an indication of the scale of degraded lands in the region.
Degraded lands account for 22 percent of total land in Bangladesh, and 21 percent and 30 percent in India and Thailand, respectively. In some countries, wastelands are predominantly eroded landscapes that may have been formerly productive; in others, they are arid or desert (e.g. parts of Australia, the People's Republic of China, India and Pakistan). In a few locations, the land has been degraded by salination from inappropriate irrigation; in yet others, forest clearing has given way to undesirable grasses or shrubs (such as the Imperata grasslands of Indonesia, the Philippines and elsewhere).
Degradation of land is on the increase. Indonesia, for example, reports that such lands have increased from 12.52 million hectares at the start of the Fourth 5-year Plan to an estimated 25.03 million hectares by the Sixth Plan, of which a third is within forest areas. Degraded lands are expanding in several countries at the same time that other areas are being reclaimed and rehabilitated (e.g. in the People's Republic of China, India and Pakistan).
Out of a total land area of nearly 88 million hectares, Pakistan has nearly 33 million hectares (37 percent) of wastelands that could be planted with trees. Of this, 25 million hectares are degraded rangelands and the rest are desert or tidal lands. The land classification of Pakistan suggests that planning and policies need to consider current uses of degraded and wastelands. Many of these areas are currently being used for grazing despite their low productivity; therefore, any tree-planting initiatives will need to blend appropriately if they are to be socially acceptable.
Source: J. Blakeney (1995). Increasing the private sector role in forest resource expansion and rehabilitation in Asia. A draft Best Practice Technical Dissemination Note, Asia Technical Department, World Bank, Washington DC.
Table 11.4: Scope and likely impacts of a more aggressive plantation establishment policy in the Asia-Pacific region
Region
Plantation area in
Baseline projection of supply potential by 2010
Additional area by 2010 under
Additional impact on long-run supply potential
1994 (million ha)
area (million ha)
sawlog production (million m^3)
pulpwood production (million m^3)
a more aggressive plantation policy (million m^3)
sawlog production (million m^3)
pulpwood production (million m^3)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Table 11.4 assumes that long-rotation crops should be planted (in addition to existing plantation plans) in all areas except North and South Asia, where additional planting might be comprised of 50 percent long-rotation crops to meet industrial and environmental objectives and 50 percent short-rotation crops to meet fuelwood needs. On the basis of these assumptions and current yields in each of the sub-regions, an expanded planting programme would potentially yield an additional 200 million cubic metres of plantation-grown wood per year across the whole region, split about equally between sawlog and pulpwood (or fuelwood) production.
It also seems logical to concentrate additional planting for industrial wood supplies in Southeast Asia and, to a lesser extent, the Pacific Islands. These two sub-regions currently have the greatest pressure on the natural forest from commercial logging operations (primarily for sawlog extraction). If new planting in these sub- regions focuses on longer-rotation plantations for sawlogs, the additional sawlog production potential would reach 28 million cubic metres and 8 million cubic metres per annum in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands, respectively. This could reduce the percentage of potential sawlog production being utilised (using the 2010 production estimates) from currently predicted levels of 100 percent of the sustainable cut level to around 70 percent.
In addition to the financial investments needed to pursue an expanded plantation establishment programme (Table 11.3), other developments in the sector are needed to increase production from forest plantations. For a start, improvements in plantation establishment techniques are required. Currently more than 20 percent of all new planting in the region fails, leaving large areas that are left unplanted or that have to be replanted at additional expense. Better site preparation and species-site matching and selection would invariably lead to better plantation results. Indeed, plantation yields are currently well below potential and could be increased significantly. Such improvements might easily lead to greater benefits, in terms of wood production, than would be achieved by expanding the area of plantations. Substantial research in site and species selection, establishment techniques and human resource development in these and other areas are needed, however, if significant
gains are to be realised.
Another issue that requires attention is that of land conversion practices. Recent forest fires across much of the region have highlighted how policies designed to stimulate plantation development can have unwanted side effects. Better management of land conversion should involve a thorough investigation of sites that are best suited for conversion most appropriate conversion techniques. This applies equally to land conversion for agricultural purposes.
Several policy issues related to the investment environment for plantations need further review by countries in the region. While several countries purport to attract foreign investment capital and joint ventures for plantation development, they continue to restrain such investment through unnecessary bureaucratic procedures, restrictive investment requirement and limits on profit repatriation. Plantation establishment is unattractive in many countries because regulations encompassing forest production fail to differentiate between production from natural forests and plantations. Furthermore, in some cases, the private sector is encouraged to invest in plantations but is not given full control over their management and use. Cumbersome restrictions on harvesting and transport of wood constrain investment in many places. Such situations should be explored and the problems remedied.
A final issue that should be examined is that of subsidies and regulations for afforestation vis-a-vis pricing of logs. The profitability of plantation establishment is often reduced by low log prices, brought about by deliberately administered low prices on logs from natural forests. Subsidies are used to partly overcome this fundamental weakness in the sector, but in return this often leads to the sorts of bureaucracy and cumbersome regulation referred to above. It would be better for all if governments seriously reviewed their pricing policies for products coming from natural forests. Setting higher (i.e. more realistic) prices for wood from natural forests would make plantation establishment more attractive and thus reduce the need for subsidies and regulation. Some sectors of the forest products industry would undoubtedly resist attempts to increase the price of wood from natural forests, but such moves would likely benefit the sector as a whole in the long run.
Improve efficiency in harvesting and wood processing
Significant economic gains could be made in many countries of the region by improving harvesting and processing efficiencies. Such improvements would permit increased outputs of products from existing levels of raw material inputs and should lead to greater profitability. This strategy could also result in substantial environmental benefits, particularly if more efficient use of raw materials leads to reduced harvest levels in natural forests.
Current rates of product recovery range from about 50 percent to 80 percent for harvesting, and from about 40 percent to 60 percent for log processing (Table 11.5). As harvesting and processing efficiencies are directly correlated with potential raw material supplies from residues, improvements in harvesting and processing efficiencies will not result in any net increase in potential supplies of raw materials. Because of the impending shortage of large-diameter sawlogs, however, improved harvesting efficiencies that lead to increased availability of sawlogs will be of significant benefit to the sector.
Table 11.5: Current harvesting and processing efficiency in the Asia-Pacific region
Region
Harvesting efficiency
Processing efficiency in sawmills and plymills
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Note: All figures represent the proportion of utilisable product produced per unit of raw material input. The harvesting efficiency is an average of efficiency of production in the natural forest and plantations.
Currently, efficiency is generally greater in the more developed parts of the region both in terms of log recovery from the forest and sawnwood and plywood recovery from sawlog inputs (Table 11.5). There is, therefore, apparently tremendous scope for efficiency gains in some parts of the region. The current differences between log recovery rates in different parts of the region can be partly explained by differences in forest types. Tropical moist forests typically have a low density of commercially utilisable logs, many layers of understory at different vertical levels and little established harvesting infrastructure. Harvesting is therefore usually more difficult in these types of forests and recovery rates are lower.
Many studies of harvesting in tropical forests have shown, however, that log recovery can be significantly increased with better inventory and planning, more efficient road design and layout, improved felling practices (e.g. directional felling, cutting of lianas and creepers before felling) and better training in bucking and crosscutting. Investments in these measures have proven to produce immediate economic benefits. Such measures also could be expected to produce longer-term economic benefits by reducing damage to residual trees. Moreover, by reducing the disturbance to the forest and minimising soil erosion, these improved practices also yield substantial environmental benefits.
Examination of case studies from the region suggests that, in the areas where harvesting efficiencies are currently very low, recovery could be increased by at least 10 percent in many cases. The sub-regions with the lowest current recovery rates are Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands. As a tentative projection, therefore, it is assumed that harvesting recovery rates in the natural forest in Southeast Asia could be raised from 50 percent to 65 percent by 2010 and from 50 percent to 60 percent in the Pacific Islands. Such efficiency gains would increase potential sawlog availability by about 20 million cubic metres, or 3 percent, in total. This would allow the share of potentially available sawlogs that would need to be cut in Southeast Asia to meet production requirements to fall to less than 80 percent by 2010 (Table 11.6).
Similarly, improvements in processing efficiency could help to diminish the pressure on forests by reducing the volume of logs required to manufacture the same volume of products. The scope for improvement in processing efficiency is perhaps even greater than that for harvesting efficiency. The spread in percentage recovery among regions is less, but improvements in processing efficiency can probably be applied more widely and more readily throughout the region.
Table 11.6: Effects of potential improvements in harvesting and processing efficiencies on sawlog availability, production and utilisation in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010
Region
Baseline
Improved harvesting
Improved processing
Both improvements
avail. (million m^3)
prod. (million m^3)
util. (%)
avail. (million m^3)
prod. (million m^3)
util. (%)
avail. (million m^3)
prod. (million m^3)
util. (%)
avail. (million m^3)
prod. (million m^3)
util. (%)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
The main technical reason why some countries might have lower rates of processing efficiency than others is if they are forced to process smaller logs. The highest rates of processing efficiency are, however, currently found in the countries with temperate forests (i.e. those with generally the smallest logs). This suggests that, with technological improvements, processing efficiency in the tropical countries of the region should be able to match the rates found in the temperate regions, or perhaps even surpass them.
Using data from the FAO Yearbook of Forest Products, trends in processing efficiency have been calculated for the period from 1962 to 1988 (Figure 11.1). Data deficiencies are suspected of skewing the calculated efficiencies as much as 5 to 10 percent higher than empirical evidence would suggest. Nonetheless, the calculations and trends provide some useful insights with regard to processing efficiencies and patterns in the region:
· the AIEs have the highest rates of processing efficiency in the region, followed by the NIEs. The Pacific Island economies having the lowest rates of efficiency, and South and Southeast Asian countries lie somewhere in the middle;
· the processing efficiency in many sub-regions actually appears to have declined over the period. It is suspected that this might be due to a negative correlation between log supply and processing efficiency, both of which have shown strong trends over the period. That is, in many of the major log producing countries in the region, processing efficiency has gone down as log supply has increased (and logs have become cheaper);
· the rates of processing efficiency achieved in the AIEs have been fairly stable over much of the latter part of the period suggesting that they have perhaps approached the maximum possible efficiencies for the types of logs they are processing; and
· based on the trends for AIEs and NIEs (which probably produce the most reliable statistics), processing efficiencies can be practically improved by about 1 percent per year if starting from relatively modest levels of efficiency (e.g. NIEs from 1978 to 1988). Efficiency gains of only about 0.5 percent per annum are practically feasible if starting from already reasonably high levels of efficiency (e.g. AIEs from 1962 to 1972).
Based on these calculations of potential efficiency gains, it is not unrealistic to expect that processing efficiencies could be increased by 13 percent by 2010 in the Pacific Islands and by 8 percent in all other countries except the AIEs. Such improvements could potentially reduce the region's requirements for logs for sawnwood and plywood production by about 30 million cubic metres, or just over 10 percent, by 2010 (Table 11.6).
Figure 11.1: Trends in sawlog processing efficiency in the Asia Pacific region, 1962-1988
Source: FAOSTAT.
Note: The above trends are three-year moving averages. Processing efficiency has been calculated by dividing total sawnwood, plywood and veneer sheet production into apparent sawlog and veneer log consumption. All the trends shown above are considered likely to be on the high side due to under-reporting of log production.
Because it has been assumed that such gains in processing efficiency could be made across the region (except the AIEs), the resulting total reduction in the pressure on wood supplies in the region would be somewhat more than the assumed achievable benefits from improvements in harvesting efficiencies. If policies and strategies were effectively implemented to achieve these gains, the proportion of total availability of sawlogs that would have to be cut to meet requirements in the region would fall from 47 percent to 42 percent. Most noteworthy is that under these assumptions, utilisation of potential log supplies in the two regions under heaviest pressure (i.e. Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands) would fall significantly (Table 11.6).
If effective measures were taken to achieve gains in both harvesting efficiency and processing efficiency, the results would be even more dramatic. Under such a scenario, utilisation of potential supplies would fall to 40 percent overall for the region, and under 100 percent in all sub-regions (Table 11.6). This would clearly be the most desirable outcome in terms of protecting and extending the region's valuable forest resources.
Two major thrusts are needed to achieve significant improvements in harvesting and processing efficiencies -investments in human resource development and investments in new technologies and equipment.
Based on ITTO estimates for employment in logging, sawmilling and plywood manufacturing in the region, and current productivity rates, there are about 30,000 people employed in logging in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands and 120,000 people employed in sawmilling and plywood manufacturing (excluding the three AIEs). Obviously, it will be a major task to upgrade the skills of these people to the levels that are necessary to achieve the efficiency gains outlined above.
While enhancing human resources would go far toward improving efficiency, there is also significant opportunity for installing more efficient machinery and equipment in the region. New technologies such as computer-controlled sawmills and smaller self-centring spindles on log peelers can achieve dramatic increases in product recovery.
While tax incentives and subsidies can be used to motivate improvements in human resource development and installation of efficient modern equipment, more efficient and effective policy approaches might include appropriate pricing of forest resources. The incentive to invest in machinery and training to increase product recovery is much higher, for example, when log levies are US$100 per cubic metre (as in Malaysia) compared with around US$25 per cubic metre (in several other countries). Thus, appropriate pricing of the resource (which, in many countries in the region, means increasing log levies) is crucial to the achievement of improved efficiency.
Encourage structural change in the wood processing industry
At present, a very large portion of the region's wood products industry is oriented toward the production of sawnwood and plywood (Figure 11.2) and the industry is heavily dependent on large-diameter logs (particularly in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands). Analysis indicates that in these two sub-regions, the volume of logs that will be required to meet projected sawnwood and plywood production levels will come very close to the maximum potential sustainable supply in the future. In several countries, the maximum potential sustainable supply may even be exceeded (implying that, at the projected harvesting levels, some countries will be cutting wood faster than the forests are growing it).
The anticipated scarcity of large logs will likely create upward pressure on prices in the region. This in turn will logically encourage many producers and consumers to substitute other types of panel products that can be manufactured from smaller logs and alternative raw materials (e.g. particleboard and fibreboard) for traditional plywood and sawnwood. Historical trends and experience in Europe and North America provide evidence to suggest that such substitution will follow in Asia and the Pacific. Already, production of wood panels other than plywood has increased from almost nil to about 10 percent of the solid wood products sector in the region (Figure 11.2). ITTO analysis even suggests that plywood production in the region might decrease over the period to 2010 due to log scarcity (against a backdrop of increasing wood-panel production and consumption overall). The APFPM estimates that plywood production will continue to grow strongly through the year 2010, but it is
heavily influenced by past growth trends and the currently large investment in plywood processing capacity in the region.
Figure 11.2: Historical development of the production of solid wood products in the Asia-Pacific region, 1961-1996
The consequences of a more rapid shift to the production and use of other types of panels will be twofold. Firstly, the industry will have to restructure and grow in sectors such as particleboard and fibreboard production, rather than plywood production. For some countries, this will require a radical departure from previous forest industry development policies that were largely driven by the profitability of plywood production and the cheap and widespread availability of large logs.
The second consequence of such a shift in production orientation is that wood processors will be able to achieve higher rates of product recovery and utilise a much wider range of raw material inputs. Particleboard and fibreboard recovery rates are typically about 60 percent to 65 percent, compared with 50 percent for plywood production. On the input side, new technologies for making particleboard and fibreboard permit the use of harvesting and mill residues, agricultural tree crops and forest species currently considered as not commercially viable for sawnwood and plywood production, and smaller-sized timber that might typically be found in non-forest areas.
The likely effects of a rapid shift in production present interesting supply implications and opportunities (Table 11.7). Without major changes from the current production orientation, plywood production in the region is expected to increase from 26 million cubic metres per year to 34 million cubic metres per year by 2010, requiring 68 million cubic metres of large-diameter logs (based on current efficiency levels). Total roundwood requirement for all wood-based panel production would be around 94 million cubic metres.
If, however, plywood production is held at 1994 levels, and the industry is able to shift rapidly toward other forms of panel production, the outlook is quite different. The contribution of particleboard and fibreboard to the total mix of panels could increase from 11 million cubic metres currently to 24 million cubic metres by 2010 (rather than the 16 million cubic metres previously projected for 2010). This would reduce the overall roundwood requirement in the region in 2010 by 3 million cubic metres due to the better product recovery in the production of particleboard and fibreboard relative to plywood. More importantly, however, it would hold the volume of sawlogs required at 52 million cubic metres, effectively shaving 16 million cubic metres from the projected sawlog requirements for 2010. Because most of the logs used for plywood in the region come from Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands, shifting orientation rapidly from plywood toward particleboard and
fibreboard would have particular economic and environmental benefits for these two sub-regions.
Table 11.7: Implications for sawlog and other roundwood requirements of a shift toward other (non-plywood) wood-based panel production in the Asia-Pacific region
Baseline projection for 2010
Projection if all growth in wood-based panel (WBP) production was in "other" (non-plywood) panels
Plywood (million m^3)
Other WBP (million m^3)
Total WBP (million m^3)
Plywood (million m^3)
Other WBP (million m^3)
Total WBP (million m^3)
Production
Sawlog requirement
Small roundwood requirement
Total roundwood requirement
To a large extent, the industry structural changes described above are likely to occur without specific help or direction from forestry administrations. However, forestry policy-makers can probably influence the speed with which the restructuring will take place. In some countries that are currently heavily dependent on plywood production (e.g. Malaysia and Indonesia), it is probably quite important that forestry policy-makers act to encourage and assist this restructuring.
In countries that have existing measures to support the plymilling and sawmilling industries, policy-makers should consider adjusting these or extending them to other types of wood processing so that the transition to other types of panels can be more easily achieved. Of particular importance in this respect are policies that encourage utilisation of mill residues for panel production, or at least remove any existing barriers to such use.
A second area of support that could help accelerate the shift toward other types of panels is focused research, development and training, aimed at developing and applying the skills and techniques needed for producing other types of wood panels. Some countries have already initiated programmes along these lines (e.g. Thailand and Malaysia, in the case of processing rubberwood for sawnwood and medium-density fibreboard; and Malaysia in the case of processing empty fruit bunches from oil palm fibreboard production). Many others, however, have no meaningful programmes to assist these types of transitions. As the comparative advantage in plywood production in the region (based on the cheap and widespread availability of large logs) declines, such developments will become ever more important if the region's wood-panel industry is to remain competitive.
Finally, to facilitate the transition to particleboard and fibreboard, concession agreements and raw-material pricing policies should be reviewed and revised as necessary to encourage greater utilisation of smaller-diameter timber. Wherever revenue systems focus on the collection of flat-rate volume-based charges for roundwood extracted from the forest, there will always be incentives to high-grade or extract only the best and largest logs from the forest, leaving behind the smaller logs, tree tops and harvesting residues.
Stimulate greater utilisation of non-wood and non-forest fibre
The anticipated high rate of growth in paper production and consumption offers considerable scope for policy development. Many opportunities exist for increasing the use of non-traditional fibres in paper production. Non-wood fibres, agricultural tree crops, mill residues, and recovered paper could all play major roles in this expansion. For example, the potential for utilising sources such as oil palm fibre for paper-making is currently under examination, with potential fibre availability estimated at as much as 1 billion tonnes per annum. Bamboo, bagasse and agricultural crop residues are already commonly used in making paper in India and the People's Republic of China and offer prospects for wider application. Almost certainly, however, the greatest scope in this area is for the expanded use of recovered paper.
Current projections indicate that the region is likely to recover slightly less than 60 million metric tonnes of paper, or 45 percent of consumption, in 2010 (Table 11.8). In contrast, the theoretical maximum potential recovery is estimated to be around 90 million metric tonnes, or about 70 percent of anticipated consumption. However, the maximum effective rate of paper recovery is dependent on the mechanical properties of wastepaper used in the pulping process. Other technical and economic factors also preclude the theoretical maximum recovery rate from being achieved. The current recovery rate of just over 50 percent in the AIEs is probably much closer to the maximum that is technically and practically feasible when all these factors are considered.
Table 11.8: Projected paper consumption, wastepaper recovery and maximum potential recovery in the Asia-Pacific region in 2010
Region
Recovered paper production (million MT)
Paper consumption (million MT)
Recovery rate(%)
Maximum potential recovery (million MT)
Utilisation of potential recovery (%)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
All Asia-Pacific
Currently, recovery of wastepaper in the NIEs is partly hampered by the lack of processing facilities capable of handling this resource, and the large rural populations of South and Southeast Asia make wastepaper collection an expensive proposition in these sub-regions. Nonetheless, it is not unreasonable to expect that recovery rates in these three sub-regions could reach 40 percent by 2010 if supportive policies were enacted.
At 40 percent recovery rates, it is projected that 18 million metric tonnes of wastepaper would be collected in the NIEs, South and Southeast Asia in 2010. This would be 4 million metric tonnes above current expectations (the base-case scenario). Such an increase in wastepaper collection over that originally forecast would lead to the substitution of 10 million cubic metres of small roundwood. Although this represents only 1-2 percent of the baseline forecast production level for small roundwood in these three sub-regions, such a development would make a small contribution toward extending roundwood supplies in the region, and would have substantial environmental and social benefits for these countries outside the forest sector.
To substantially increase rates of wastepaper recovery, countries will probably need government intervention. In developed countries all over the world, high rates of wastepaper recovery have usually only been achieved with the aid of public subsidies for recycling schemes and government directives to retailers and industries (and in some cases, consumers) requiring collection and use of wastepaper. It is unlikely that the situation will be any different in Asia and the Pacific. Currently, however, except in a few AIEs and NIEs, no government subsidies or interventions are in place to support recovery of wastepaper. Small entrepreneurs with a profit motive undertake almost all the recycling that now takes place. In this regard, current recovery rates and those indicated in the base-case scenario of the outlook study, reflect the rates of collection that would normally take place as a commercial activity.
If countries wish to increase collection beyond the level projected in the baseline scenario, they must consider subsidising schemes to collect wastepaper that would otherwise not be profitable to recycle. Another approach would be to enact legislation or regulations that encourage or force recycling and re-use. Such policy instruments are largely outside the traditional remit of most forestry agencies, however. Therefore, if a strong case exists for such measures (e.g. on the grounds of limited wood supplies), forestry policy-makers will need to work closely with those responsible in this area (e.g. environment and industry ministries).
Increase the area of natural forest in protected areas
All over the world, a major concern for forestry agencies is to strike an appropriate balance between production of forest commodities and protection of forest resources. Most countries in the Asia-Pacific region are improving the manner in which timber is harvested to reduce the negative environmental impacts of forestry operations, and nearly all have some areas of forest in which harvesting activities are completely banned. The degree to which forests are excluded from timber production varies considerably, however, from country to country. Some countries (e.g. Myanmar and Papua New Guinea) have very little woodland in formal protected areas (i.e. where harvesting is completely banned). Others (e.g. Indonesia, New Zealand and Bhutan) have significant proportions of their forests within protected areas. Still others have total bans on logging in natural forests throughout the country (e.g. Thailand and Sri Lanka), even though those forests may not be strictly designated
protected areas. Total logging bans are often a last attempt to protect a country's dwindling forest resources, but it is questionable whether they can be successful without significant investment in forest protection and control (Box 11.2).
Forest harvesting can be compatible with many environmental services such as soil and watershed conservation and carbon sequestration if carried out properly. It can also be compatible with protection of species that are not drastically affected by occasional disturbances or the removal of selected timber trees. Complete exclusion is most appropriate in areas where soils are highly prone to erosion (e.g. on steep slopes) or biodiversity is particularly fragile or highly valued (e.g. mangrove forests).
Currently, about 100 million hectares, or just over 20 percent, of the natural forests in the Asia-Pacific region are either in legally protected areas or areas covered by complete logging bans. A few countries such as Thailand and Indonesia, however, account for a major share of this total (Table 11.9). IUCN suggests that it would be desirable to have 10 percent of all representative ecosystems in legally protected areas, implying that in some countries in the region the extent of protected areas should be expanded.
Box 11.2: THE TOTAL LOGGING BAN IN THAILAND
Since 1960, Thailand's forest cover has fallen from 54 percent to 27 percent, with annual deforestation rates in excess of 3 percent for much of the period. In response to this situation, the Thai Government introduced, in 1989, one of the most drastic forms of environmental protection in the forest - a complete ban on logging in the natural forests countrywide. Consequently, Thailand's industrial wood harvest declined by half from its peak of 6.2 million cubic metres in 1979 to less than 3 million cubic metres today. Current production comes mostly from plantation-grown timber, agroforestry and farm forestry plantings, rubberwood, coconut wood and mangroves (which are exempt from the logging ban). Illegally harvested timber from the remaining natural forests and imports (both legal and illegal) provide the rest of the country's wood supplies. In the future, Thailand's wood processing industry will be based on the development of a significant plantation resource and on
developing its status as an importer and re-processor of commodity wood products. With respect to the tatter development, the value of forest products imported into Thailand has increased from US$0.5 billion in 1988 to US$1.6 billion, while exports have expanded from US$140 million to US$320 million over the same period.
The success of drastic measures such as complete logging bans in achieving conservation objectives is open to question. Logging per se (particularly if conducted carefully) does not contribute significantly to large-scale deforestation, although it often makes the forest more accessible and vulnerable to clearance for agricultural purposes. In Thailand's case, for example, it is believed that agricultural encroachment (currently estimated to exceed 200,000 hectares per annum) is the primary cause of deforestation. There are also arguments that commercial activities can lead to greater protection of forests than total exclusion because concessionaires may have a vested interest in protecting the forest and, therefore, maintaining a permanent presence to guard the resource. Forests that are available for commercial exploitation also tend to be visited more frequently by staff of forestry agencies for the purposes of monitoring and control.
To succeed in conserving forests, logging bans must be accompanied by adequate measures for protection, monitoring and control. Current evidence suggests that most forestry agencies in the region are underfunded and understaffed to provide such protection and control.
Table 11.9: Effect on wood production potential of increasing the extent of protected areas to a minimum of 10 percent of the natural forest in all countries in the Asia-Pacific region by 2010
Region
Area of natural forest in protected status
Potential wood supply from the natural forest in 2010
Existing in 1994
With an increase to a minimum of 10%
Change (1994 to 2010)
Baseline
Increased protected area
Change in potential
(million ha)
% of NF
(million ha)
% of NF
(million ha)
% change
(million m^3)
(million m^3)
(million m^3)
% change
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Note: Countries/territories currently with less than 10 percent of natural forest in protected areas are: Fiji, Japan, Laos, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu and Viet Nam.
To increase the area of natural forest under protection to a minimum of 10 percent of the natural forest area in all countries, 11 countries and territories in the region would have to expand their protected area systems. Of these, however, only Papua New Guinea and Japan would have to increase their protected areas to a significant extent. If additional protected areas were designated mainly in forest areas not currently allocated for timber production, such expansion would have a negligible impact on future potential roundwood supplies in the region. It is estimated that such measures could be implemented with a resulting reduction of potential timber supplies from natural forests of only about 2 million cubic metres, or 1 percent of projected production in 2010 (Table 11.9). Only Papua New Guinea might experience problems meeting its projected log production requirements if the 10-percent minimum protected-area target were to be achieved.
Obviously, if large new areas of forest currently used for timber production are put into protected areas, the effect on potential timber supply will be much greater. Even if all additional areas needed to meet the IUCN targets (approximately 11 million hectares) were to come from areas currently allocated for timber production, it is anticipated that there would be a resulting decline of only about 11 percent in the potential timber supplies from natural forests, or a decrease of about 1 to 2 percent in overall fibre supplies.
Therefore, the results of this analysis show that achievement of the IUCN target would have little impact on total wood supplies in the region. Indeed, it is reasonable to expect that any production restrictions associated with an increased environmental focus would increase the incentive to improve wood utilisation efficiency. This, in itself, would be a desirable outcome from both economic and environmental perspectives.
The major requirement for expanding protected area systems in the region is significant additional investments in forest protection and conservation management (particularly for trained staff, equipment and local services and extension for people living in and near protected areas). Using estimates of US$2 to US$10 per hectare per year as the required level needed for effective protected area management^103 implies the need for an additional US$20 million to US$110 million to meet the needs of expanding the region's protected area systems to the IUCN target levels. Moreover, it is well recognised that current investment for managing existing protected areas is grossly inadequate. Therefore, the overall investment needs for protected area management in the region are likely to be several times greater than the level estimated for simply expanding the region's protected area systems.
^103 J. Paine (1997). Status, trends and future prospects for forest conservation including protected areas in the Asia-Pacific region: Document APFSOS/WP/04.
Increase the potential for supplying forest products from non-forest areas
A significant trend in many countries of the Asia-Pacific region is the devolution of forest management responsibilities away from centralised government agencies in favour of local and community organisations and individuals. This decentralisation and devolution process has taken many forms, from the privatisation policies of New Zealand, to the development of community forest management in Nepal and India, to land and forest allocation programmes in the People's Republic of China and Viet Nam. Decentralisation of forest ownership and use does not, however, merely constitute a redistribution of profit opportunities. Rather, as such a move involving communities, companies and individuals more directly in forest management, is more likely to stimulate these groups to actively participate in the future development of forestry and, hopefully, lead to less deforestation and forest degradation.
The last scenario to be considered in this analysis, therefore, addresses the issue of who will produce forest products in the future and under what circumstances. The choice of who should produce forest products is closely linked to the question of who benefits from forestry activities. As such, it is mostly about the social dimension of the sector's performance rather than its environmental or economic performance.
Table 11.10 shows current relative levels of production and the potential for increasing social benefits from the sector by increasing wood supplies from each source (similar tables could be developed for other forest products and potential sources of production, but lack of data limit such analysis to qualitative approaches). The first row shows the likely levels of social benefit derived by using wood supplies from each source. For example, using trees outside the forest (TOF) is likely to have high social benefits because such sources of supply are generally owned by smallholders and farmers who are often among the poorest members of society. Using recycled and non-wood fibre (RNW) might also have high social benefits because non-wood fibres tend to come from smallholders and collection of recycled material provides many job opportunities for poorer people in urban areas.
The next section of Table 11.10 shows the relative production potential of each source for the Asia-Pacific region as a whole in 1994, followed by an estimate of where current production probably comes from (by sub-region). It is not possible to accurately match current production with potential or to estimate exactly where current production comes from but some broad features of the current supply situation are known. For example, it is known that wood from natural forests accounts for a major part of supply in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands. Similarly, it is also generally recognised that wood from plantations accounts for a major share of production in the AIEs, NIEs and North Asia.
The bottom portion of Table 11.10 shows the relative production potential from each source estimated for 2010 and the scope for increasing social benefits through potential increased focus on each source. This analysis is quite subjective and the situation is likely to vary considerably from country to country. Nonetheless, the generalised analysis provides a starting point for policy-makers to consider the relative social impacts of emphasising various sources for obtaining forest products.
Table 11.10: Current probable levels of wood and fibre production from various sources and potential for increasing social benefits by increasing supplies
Supply source
NF
PL
OWL
TOF
HRE
WPR
RNW
Relative social benefit from wood & fibre production from each source
low
moderate
high
high
moderate
low
high
Relative production potential across the whole region in 1994 (%)
Probable level of production from each of these sources by sub-region
AIEs
low
high
low
moderate
nil
moderate
high
NIEs
low
high
low
low
nil
moderate
high
North Asia
high
high
low
high
nil
moderate
moderate
Southeast Asia
high
low
low
moderate
nil
low
moderate
South Asia
low
moderate
low
high
nil
moderate
moderate
Pacific Islands
high
low
low
low
nil
low
low
Relative production potential across the whole region in 2010 (%)
Potential for increasing social benefits from the sector by increasing utilisation of each of these sources
AIEs
low
low
low
moderate
low
low
low
NIEs
low
low
low
low
low
low
low
North Asia
low
moderate
moderate
moderate
moderate
low
moderate
Southeast Asia
low
moderate
moderate
high
high
moderate
moderate
South Asia
low
low
low
moderate
moderate
low
moderate
Pacific Islands
low
low
low
moderate
high
moderate
low
NF = Natural forests
TOF = Trees outside forests
RNW = Recycled and non-wood fibre
PL = Plantations
HRE = Harvesting residues
OWL = Other wooded land
WPR = Wood processing residues
The potential for increasing the social performance of the sector by changing patterns of supply is summarised, by sub-region, below.
Advanced Industrialised Economies and Newly Industrialised Economies. These countries are generally well-off, so the scope for increasing social benefits by changing supply patterns in these sub-regions is probably very limited. There is some potential to increase wood supplies from trees outside the forest (TOF) in some countries, which might serve to stimulate rural employment modestly. Increasing the production of other forest services, such as recreation, ecotourism and landscape enhancement is, however, more likely to increase the social benefits of the sector in these countries.
North Asia. North Asia already uses a diverse range of wood supply sources and is likely to continue to do so in the future. Thus, the scope for increasing social benefits from the sector by altering supply sources is limited. However, forestry in this sub-region is projected to grow considerably overall, providing income and employment opportunities to a wide range of people. It is expected, therefore, that this will bring a modest improvement to the welfare of many people across a wide range of backgrounds.
Southeast Asia. Wood production in Southeast Asia is currently heavily concentrated in the natural forests (NF), with considerable production from trees outside the forest (TOF) in Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines. Probably the greatest scope for increasing social benefits would be to gradually shift away from using wood from the natural forests (in countries where this dominates) in favour of trees outside the forest. This would likely benefit primarily smallholders in these countries. Increasing the utilisation of harvesting residues could also employ a significant number of people (including, perhaps, indigenous and forest-dwelling communities), and has the potential to increase social benefits significantly. More generally, as in North Asia, the sector is projected to grow considerably overall, and this will provide income and employment opportunities to a wide range of people.
South Asia. The scope for increasing the social performance of the sector in South Asia is limited by the fact that generally the opportunities for increasing production are quite limited. Sources of wood supply likely to have high social benefits, such as trees outside forests (TOF) and plantations (PL), already account for a very high proportion of all wood and are likely to continue to do so in the future. However, some growth in supplies from trees outside forests, from plantations, and from the collection of wastepaper is foreseen and this could have moderate social benefits to the people of these countries.
Pacific Islands. Wood supplies in the Pacific Islands are generally dominated by production from natural forests (NF) and this is likely to continue in the future. Increasing the utilisation of harvesting residues (HRE) probably has the most scope for increasing income and employment and, thus, the social benefits of the sector in this sub-region. Increasing supplies from trees outside forests (TOF) and utilising a greater extent of wood processing residues (WPR) also have some scope for increasing the social benefits of the sector, but only modestly.
The above analysis of the social performance of the sector has been carried-out purely in terms of production of roundwood and fibre. This aspect of the social development of the sector is the only one that easily lends itself to quantitative review. However, in terms of the more general social performance of the forestry sector, other impacts resulting from policy directions taken by countries in the near future could be equally, or more important, to the people of the region.
One such development is the movement toward greater community and private-sector involvement in the forestry sector. This has major implications for wood supplies as production is increasingly shifted to plantations, trees outside forests and recycled materials. Wider application of such a policy would also entail greater involvement of local communities in the management of natural forests. Both of these courses of action have wider implications and potential benefits far beyond simple production of wood and diversification of rural income and employment opportunities.
Firstly, in many countries, governments have invested significant resources to police the natural forests against encroachment. By diversifying the benefits of the sector to individuals and communities, the motivation to destroy the forest is reduced or eliminated. This minimises confrontation and frees government resources for other programmes. Nepal's moves to grant management authorities to forest-user groups, India's development of Joint Forest Management programmes, and community-based forest management programmes in Laos and the Philippines are demonstrating the broad-based social benefits of these approaches.
A second social benefit from such initiatives is that, by increasing community involvement in forest management and production, forest goods and services are more readily obtained by people who would otherwise often go without. For example, within an atmosphere of trust and mutual understanding, it is quite possible for local communities to collect fuelwood and NWFPs from the natural forest and plantations without confrontation with concessionaires or government agencies. In more developed countries, such use can take the form of hunting, fishing and other types of recreation, which are very compatible with timber production, but may currently be discouraged because of a lack of understanding among interested parties.
Finally, diversifying sources of supplies provides enhanced opportunities for the development of human resources and skills and greater choices for people with regard to livelihoods. Of key importance, is the impact that broadening forest product supply sources has on the development of small-scale rural enterprises and independent livelihoods. In many cases, this might be achieved through non-traditional commercial forest uses, including forest-based services (e.g. ecotourism) or non-wood forest products.
Without strong government intervention there is little reason to expect that, within the next decade, there will be significant changes in the sources of supply used to meet raw timber and fibre needs. If governments wish to increase the social performance of the sector, therefore, they will need to consider implementing measures to encourage the use of other sources of wood. As with other policy objectives, pricing is a key tool available to governments to bring about change (e.g. if wood from the natural forests becomes more expensive, wood from smallholders starts to be more attractive). However, governments should also consider more proactive forms of intervention such as training and extension to develop skills and opportunities in the private sector. Community management, including management of valuable timber resources, would also be one way of stimulating wider involvement in the sector. Such changes will undoubtedly require re-orientation and restructuring of
forestry agencies away from traditional monitoring and control approaches, instead and with a focus on extension and social development services. Several countries in the region have already begun this shift, but many are still locked in outdated and ineffective bureaucratic structures and procedures.
Synthesis and common themes for future policy development
The preceding analysis serves to highlight the tremendous scope for forestry policy-makers in the region to increase the performance of the sector in all three dimensions - economic, environmental and social. The analysis has concentrated on industrial wood supply, largely because this is the aspect of the forestry sector where most information is available. However, there is also tremendous scope and need for increasing other forest outputs such as fuelwood, NWFPs and forest services. Changes in these outputs are more likely to score highly in the social and environmental dimensions.
Most analysis indicates that wood and fibre demand generally will not exceed the anticipated potential levels of supply before 2010, but that future needs may approach potential supply for some types of wood and in some countries. Analysis also indicates that by using resources more efficiently, and expanding the resource base in the future, supplies and raw material requirements can be modified to accommodate any potential problems. Furthermore, it is apparent that the environmental and social performance of the sector could be improved by increasing the area of natural forests under protected status and by increasing the diversity of supplies used in the region. Both of these changes would bring about significant environmental and social benefits and could easily be achieved without significantly upsetting the future wood supply and demand balance.
In pursuing any of the options analysed above, it is likely that governments in the region will need to make changes in their forestry policies or support new directions for the development of the sector. Surprisingly similar changes are required for successful implementation of many of the options. Some of the changes to be considered are summarised below.
Pricing. Governments largely control the pricing of wood extracted from the natural forest in the region. Prices are often purposely set low to stimulate industrial development, but this has led to a number of unforeseen and undesirable effects, which are now constraining progress in the forestry sector. Low pricing of the resource discourages efficiency in harvesting and processing, reduces the incentive to invest in plantations and places alternative suppliers such as smallholders and recyclers at a disadvantage. Governments in the region should consider gradually increasing the price of wood extracted from natural forests to a level that more closely matches its true value.
Industrial regulation. Governments across the region have established a range of measures designed to stimulate the development of domestic wood-processing industries (e.g. preferential tax breaks, conditions attached to concession contracts, log-export bans, etc.). These should be reviewed to take into consideration the changes in wood-supply patterns that are expected in the future (i.e. fewer large logs from the natural forests, more plantation-grown wood and more recycled paper).
Institutional change. Forestry agencies in the region will be forced to deal with a wider range of forestry issues in the future. To increase the social and environmental performance of the sector, in particular, forestry agencies will likely need to devote more resources to these areas. Changes are also likely to be required within the traditionally powerful harvesting and utilisation sections of forestry agencies. Officials concerned with wood supply will increasingly have to adjust to working with large numbers of small suppliers rather than a few large concessionaires. Responsibilities and authorities will increasingly be decentralised and devolved to local and community groups, with government playing more supportive, less-controlling roles than in the past.
Human resources development. Virtually every aspect of change predicted for forestry in the future, or desired by policy-makers, will require massive levels of training and re-orientation. Considering the large numbers of people employed in the sector across the region, and the complexity of new technologies and practices, the task is indeed huge. To the extent that social objectives in forestry development are given greater prominence, human resources development becomes even more important - particularly where poor and underprivileged people become the focus of development.
Research. Future research will need to place greater emphasis on the technologies and processes that are likely to be employed to cope with changing patterns of supply. Research into improving plantation management and yields, processing of smaller trees, opportunities for increased use of wood residues and recycled fibres and efficient use of non-traditional timber crops are priority areas. Socio-economic research is critically needed to provide policy-makers with better understanding of the motivations of rural people with regard to producing and using forest resources, identify appropriate financial incentives and pinpoint efficient production strategies.
Investment. A later section of this chapter discusses the broader investment implications of anticipated and desired changes in the forestry sector in Asia and the Pacific through 2010. In terms of investment by the public sector, increased investment should be considered for protected area management, research, training, extension and institutional restructuring.
This list is by no means exhaustive, but provides an indication of the main areas where attention should be given for future policy development.
Indicative implications for investment
Investments needs in maintenance and general protection of forests
Investment needs for rehabilitation of degraded natural forests
Investment needs for development and maintenance of protected area systems
Investment needs for forest plantation development
Investment needs for non-forest sources of wood products
Investment needs in wood harvesting capacity
Investment needs in sawmilling capacity
Investment needs in the wood-based panels industry
Investment needs in the paper and paperboard sector
Investment needs for non-wood forest products and services
Total indicative average annual investment needs in Asia-pacific forestry
When applied to forestry, the term "investment" includes the costs involved in creating, managing and conserving forest resources, developing facilities for production and processing and marketing of forest products. Investment costs are influenced by several factors, including wage rates, levels of technology, availability of infrastructure, scale and organisation of operations, stage of development of the country involved, per capita income and propensity to save, level of efficiency and institutional support. In addition, integrated activities (e.g. multi-product or multi-purpose management) may be more cost efficient and require less investment. Furthermore, broad participation of local people, particularly in forest protection and resource creation, can help reduce investment costs substantially.
In the absence of detailed and specific information on the different variables at the country and product levels, any estimate of annual investment needs for forestry in the Asia-Pacific region to the year 2010 can only be indicative of the range of magnitude needed. The estimates presented here are based on the average annual changes anticipated in the baseline scenario developed for the outlook study.
Investments needs in maintenance and general protection of forests
It is assumed that the overall area of forest and other wooded land in the region during the period 1994-2010 will average approximately 797 million hectares. Annual investment costs for maintaining and protecting the resources base are estimated at US$2 to US$4 per hectare per year. Therefore, the indicative annual total cost for protection and maintenance of forests in the region is US$1,594 million to US$3,188 million (Table 11.11).
Table 11.11: Approximate annual investment needs for maintenance and general protection of forest and other wooded land in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs for rehabilitation of degraded natural forests
It is assumed that the total area of natural forest in Asia and the Pacific during the period 1994-2010 will average approximately 480 million hectares. Some 48 percent (about 230 million hectares) of the natural forests are estimated to have a crown density of less than 40 percent and require some form of rehabilitation. If the entire area were to be rehabilitated by 2010, approximately 14 million hectares per year would require attention. Assuming an investment cost of US$120 to US$180 per hectare, the total annual investment requirement for rehabilitation of forests in the region will range between US$1,680 million to US$2,520 million (Table 11.12).
Table 11.12: Approximate annual investment needs for rehabilitation of degraded natural forests in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs for development and maintenance of protected area systems
Assuming that the protected forest area requiring investment for infrastructure and other facilities is about 200 million hectares and that average annual investment required is US$5 to US$8 per hectare, the annual total requirement will be US$1,000 million to US$1,600 million (Table 11.13).
Table 11.13: Approximate investment needs for development of protected area systems in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs for forest plantation development
Plantation establishment costs vary with species used, intensity of site preparation, method of planting, the nature of protection, etc. For purposes of estimating the indicative annual investment required for plantation establishment in Asia and the Pacific, it is assumed that establishment costs will average US$650 to US$850 per hectare. With plantation establishment expected to average 1.5 million hectares per year, the overall investment requirements for the region will average between US$975 million and US$1,275 million. This will cover the silvicultural treatments and maintenance of plantations below 3 years of age. Protection and maintenance of older plantations is included under "maintenance and general protection" above. In addition, a third of the existing plantations are estimated to need rehabilitation ("beating up") during the period, costing about US$200 to US$300 per hectare. This implies an additional annual investment of US$300 million to US$450 million. The
total investment for forest plantation development would thus amount from US$1,275 million to US$1,725 million per year (Table 11.14).
Table 11.14: Approximate annual investment needs for development of forest plantations in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs for non-forest sources of wood products
An estimated 260 million hectares of other wooded lands including rubber, coconut and other similar estate crops, farm woodlots, agroforestry plots, homegardens, etc., are estimated to exist in Asia and the Pacific. Of this amount, some 80 million hectares are managed for forest products and in the remaining area, yields of forest and tree products are incidental. The 80 million hectares that are intensively managed require regular inputs for improving the capital stock, these imputs are estimated at about US$20 to US$30 per hectare per year. Thus, a total annual investment of about US$1,600 million to US$2,400 million is required (Table 11.15).
Table 11.15: Approximate annual investment needs for developing non-forest sources of forest products in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs in wood harvesting capacity
Investment needs for wood harvesting vary greatly, depending on the type of wood being harvested (e.g. industrial roundwood versus fuelwood), terrain, equipment used for extraction, etc. Nonetheless, approximate investment needs can be estimated for indicative purposes.
Roundwood production in 1994 in the region was approximately 1,307 million cubic metres, of which 284 million cubic metres was industrial roundwood and 1,023 million cubic metres was fuelwood. These levels are projected to increase to 1,711 million cubic metres (consisting of 417 million cubic metres of industrial roundwood and 1,294 million cubic metres of fuelwood) by 2010, or an average annual increase of about 25 million cubic metres over the period. Assuming the incremental capital needs for harvesting the additional wood to be about US$4 to US$6 per cubic metre, the annual investment requirement for additional harvesting capacity will range from US$100 million to US$150 million per year. Additionally, about 10 percent of the fixed capital (equipment, machinery and infrastructure) will need to be replaced or enhanced each year, at an estimated rate of US$272 million to US$408 million per year. Thus, the total investment for wood harvesting will be approximately US$372
million to US$558 million per year (Table 11.16).
Table 11.16: Approximate annual investment needs for wood harvesting in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs in sawmilling capacity
The outlook for sawnwood through 2010 is for relatively slow growth, with output expected to increase only by an average of around 1.4 million cubic metres per year across the region. For this projected increase, an annual investment requirement of about US$108 million to US$216 million is estimated.
Much of the existing equipment in many sawmills requires replacement or enhancement, however. At least 10 percent of the existing plants, equipment and infrastructure will have to be changed, modified or enhanced. This investment requirement is estimated at about US$30 to US$60 per cubic metre of installed capacity, or a total of about US$300 million to US$600 million per year. Thus, the total annual investment needs for the sawmilling industry may range from about US$408 to US$816 million (Table 11.17).
Table 11.17: Approximate annual investment needs for the sawmilling industry in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs in the wood-based panels industry
Wood-based panels include a range of products, with varying capital investment needs for additional capacity. However, in the absence of specific information on related costs in different countries, the average investment for incremental output is estimated to be between US$450 and US$500 per cubic metre of installed capacity. The outlook for panel products indicates that production will increase by an average of about 0.86 million cubic metres per year. This will required an estimated annual investment of between US$387 million and US$430 million.
Existing technology and the condition and maintenance of plants and machinery in the panel-products industry is generally better than that in the sawmilling industry. It is estimated that the annual rate of replacement or enhancement will be about 5 percent of currently installed capacity, at a cost of about US$300 per cubic metre of capacity. This will require an annual investment of around US$639 million. The total annual investment needs for the wood-based panel industry will thus be between US$1,026 million and US$1,069 million (Table 11.18).
Table 11.18: Approximate annual investment needs for the wood-based panels industry in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs in the paper and paperboard sector
The incremental capital investment needed for one added unit of paper or paperboard manufacturing capacity is about US$2,000 to US$2,100 per tonne of installed capacity. Assuming that production will expand by an average of 3.2 million tonnes per year through 2010, it is estimated that investment needs for new capacity will range from US$6,400 million to US$6,720 million per year.
It is also assumed that 5 percent of existing capacity will require replacement or enhancement each year, at a cost of US$1,000 to US$1,200 per tonne of installed capacity. This will require an additional US$3,730 million to US$4,476 million per year. Thus, the total annual investment needs in the paper and paperboard sector will be approximately US$10,130 million to US$11,196 million per year.
Because a large portion of the paper and paperboard industry is based on non-forest raw material inputs, total investment needs have been adjusted to attribute approximately 33 percent (US$3,332 million to US$3,722 million) to the forestry sector (Table 11.19).
Table 11.19: Approximate annual investment needs for the forest-based paper and paperboard industry in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Investment needs for non-wood forest products and services
No accurate information is available on the investment needs for growing, managing, harvesting and processing most NWFPs. Scientific management of NWFPs is, however, extremely important for the future sustainability of the forestry sector, particularly in terms of socio-economic and environmental benefits. An annual investment of US$1,500 million to US$2,000 million is, therefore, tentatively suggested, with an equally tentative distribution by country group (Table 11.20).
Table 11.20: Approximate annual investment needs for non-wood forest products and services in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Total indicative average annual investment needs in Asia-pacific forestry
In addition to the specific investment requirements estimated above, it is recognised that considerable investment is required for institutional support, human resources development and capacity building, research and technology development, extension services, information dissemination and institutional infrastructure. Investment needs for this component are tentatively estimated to be approximately 10 to 15 percent above the total annual investment in other categories. The total indicative average annual investment needs for the Asia-Pacific forestry sector are thus estimated to be between US$15,469 million and US$23,213 million per year (Table 11.21).
Table 11.21: Total estimated average annual investment needs in the forestry sector in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Component Investment Activity
Range of investment needs (US $millions)
Maintenance and general protection
Rehabilitation of degraded natural forests
Development of protected area systems
Forest plantations
Non-forest sources of forest products
Forest harvesting
Sawmilling
Panel products
Paper and paperboard
Non-wood forest products and services
Sub-total
Institutional support 10-15 percent of total of (i) to (x)
Sub-total
Unforeseen/unaccounted items 2-3 percent of total (i) to (xi)
Total
Table 11.22 provides a breakdown of the estimated total average annual investment needs by country group.
Table 11.22: Estimated average annual investment needs by country group in Asia-Pacific, 1994-2010
Country group
Range of investment (US$ millions)
AIEs
NIEs
North Asia
Southeast Asia
South Asia
Pacific Islands
All Asia-Pacific
Box 11.3: FUNDING FOR FORESTRY DEVELOPMENT
The challenge of securing "new and additional sources of funding" to enable developing countries to implement sustainable forest management (SFM) has been a prominent item on the agenda for international forestry dialogue associated with UNCED. For example, the new International Timber Trade Agreement (ITTA) calls for the establishment of a "Bali Partnership Fund" to support producing countries (many in the Asia-Pacific region) as they introduce SFM. The questions are - how adequate is funding for forestry in the region and how effective are institutional arrangements for it? There is unfortunately too little information to permit definitive answers, especially regarding what the countries themselves spend or invest in forestry. The Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission discussed the topic of forestry funding in 1993 and its assessment of issues is available as a FAO report.^104 FAO has recently reviewed funding for forestry in developing countries and published the results in
the FAO State of the World's Forests 1997 (SOFO) - much of that assessment is relevant to the Asia-Pacific region. Several points need to be highlighted:
^104 Report on the In-Session Seminar on Forestry Investment in Asia and the Pacific. Fifteenth Session of the Asia-Pacific Forestry Commission, Colombo, Sri Lanka, August 1993. Report No. FO:MISC/93/14. FAO, Rome.
· There has been relative neglect of often very important domestic forestry funding due to the preoccupation with international funding flows. In the absence of better information, the misleading impression is given that forestry development in the region is dependent on external funding;
· Not all Asia-Pacific countries need external funding to the same degree. The industrialised countries are generally self-sufficient with regard to capital needs - at least in the long term, Some of the developing countries in the region have the world's highest savings rates. Before the recent currency and stock markets upheaval, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong SAR, China were among the world's significant net capital exporters. Other developing countries in the region (e.g. Indonesia, Malaysia) had, in spite of very high savings rates, even higher demand for external capital to fuel extraordinarily rapid growth. Low funding availability is a less important barrier to forestry development than a lack of interest in forestry on the part of policy-makers.
· In some smaller countries, external funding can play a critical role.
· Put in brief, the situation, paraphrased from the outline in the FAO State of the World's Forests 1997, appears to be as follows:
Domestic official funding
· Forest revenue itself is important in all countries endowed with productive forests, an example being Indonesia's official Reforestation Fund which reportedly receives 32 percent of total revenue and now stands at close to US$1 billion - it is used to promote the establishment of private timber estates. Applying a "user pays" principle, fees on water from forests are charged to downstream water users to fund upland conservation in Japan; tourism gate fees for wildlife parks (most countries) and for "scientific tourism" (in Indonesia) are other examples in the region.
· Asia-Pacific countries have been among those trying innovative financing mechanisms: with tradable carbon dioxide permits for carbon sequestration (South Pacific, Malaysia); ecotourism charges (Thailand); and scientific tourism fees (Indonesia).
Official Development Assistance (ODA)
· Of total 1993 estimated ODA to the developing world of US$1.54 billion, the Asia-Pacific region accounted for 37 percent - the largest single share (US$0.57 billion) of the total - but a ratio that is far smaller than the region's size and economic weaknesses appear to warrant. These levels fall far short (under a third) of estimated needs to achieve UNCED goals.
· Globally, forestry appears to account for about 1.6 percent of combined 1993 official and private funding transfers to developing countries and forestry ODA is declining just like total ODA;
Private sector funding
· Since 1991, all of the increase in international funding comes from the private sector which now represents some 60 per cent of total external transfers to developing countries. Most international private investment (all sectors) benefited only about ten countries: China absorbed the largest share, with the remainder going mostly to India, Malaysia in Asia and seven other countries outside the region.
· Private-sector funding requires well-developed capital markets and this limits opportunities to only a few, already relatively well-off countries, even in a dynamic region like Asia-Pacific; this will leave the weaker countries marginalised until public support (both internal and ODA) helps to upgrade their capacities.
Issues and future priorities for action
· As for the world in general, the main funding-related issues for Asia and the Pacific include: shortage of information; weak policies and institutions (these restrict absorptive capacity for both ODA and private sector funding); concentration of private investment and aid on a few countries, A point highlighted by the 15th session of the APFC was that forestry agencies have a bureaucratic outlook rather than a development or investment orientation.
· New mechanisms with significant potential include: tradable carbon emissions reduction credits (with possible use of wastelands for planting); bioprospecting and patent rights fees; diversion of "sustainability certification" fees; taxation of lucrative commodities (such as those displacing forests).
· One avenue deserving exploration could be Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) funding, which the region has tapped with great success for public infrastructure and for utilities. The potential for this in building major forest industry complexes could be considerable.
Source: Adapted and abbreviated from State of the World's Forests 1997, FAO, Rome.
Implications and choices for regional co-operation
The nature of change in the forestry sector has implications not only for national policy orientations and choices, but also for collaborative choices and co-operation at a regional level. Increasingly, national policy directions are influenced by regional and global factors - thus national choices will also need to take into account policies in neighbouring countries and the tenor of international opinion in establishing balance between environmental, social and economic dimensions.
The following areas appear to require particular focus on international, regional or sub-regional co-operation:
· developing and refining trade regimes: Trade is crucial to meeting future economic aspirations of the Asia-Pacific countries, but is also of vital importance in alleviating environmental and social pressures. Within the global policy arena, a major emphasis is on addressing the trade and environment nexus, and developing non-discriminatory trade rules that also promote sound environmental practices. The ongoing evolution of international forest products certification systems similarly encourages countries to place greater emphasis on environmental dimensions of forests as a way to ensure future participation in the economic (trade) dimension. Within this broad framework, there will continue to be calls for trade liberalisation. Under APEC, the Asia-Pacific region should make considerable progress toward free-trade by 2010. This will affect both trade-flows and patterns of investment.
· sustainable forest management: Countries in the region are already co-operating in establishing mutually acceptable criteria and indicators for sustainable forest management through ITTO processes (tropical forests) and the Montreal Process (temperate and boreal forests). For countries with similar forest types, there will be benefits in co-operating and sharing information on how to meet various sustainable management criteria as well as how to measure performance. For a number of countries, co-operation in developing approaches for greater conservation and forest protection under conditions of high population density may prove worthwhile.
· watershed management: Where river systems cross international boundaries, joint action may be necessary to ensure appropriate policies are in place to enable downstream countries to obtain adequate water supplies without placing unrealistic burdens on upstream countries. This may require establishment of better mechanisms for management and policy negotiations and responsibility sharing for maintaining watersheds of international significance, particularly those originating in the Himalayas.
· new investment: There are potential benefits from adopting joint strategies for attracting investment from the new opportunities emerging from recent environmental agreements. Currently, the largest opportunities are for sustainable management of biological resources and for investment for carbon sequestration in exchange for pollution rights under climate change agreements.
· information sharing: An important aspect of globalisation is developing co-operative mechanisms and sharing information. Information and market intelligence are important factors for attracting investment or development aid. In effect, countries must market and promote their policy agendas. Co-operation to improve information on the forestry sector and related sectors (such as agriculture) will remain an important part of the policy agenda of international organisations and forums such as the APFC.
· education and training: The enormous facets of forestry mean it is not feasible for each country to provide specialised training in every sphere. Consequently, the development of new specialised regional training centres, such as the Regional Community Forestry Training Centre (RECOFTC), would enable better allocation of scarce training resources, promote sharing of information throughout the region and improve specialisation and networking.
· research: One of the areas where considerable progress can be made is through collaboration in transferring research and technology. Both IUFRO and FORSPA have agendas to assist and consolidate the gains from forest research networking. The recently established Asia Pacific Association of Forest Research Institutions (APAFRI) is also expected to increasingly serve this objective in the future. Particular areas that appear promising for such collaboration include technologies for managing and assessing trees outside forests; afforestation of wastelands, for carbon capture; urban forestry; management of selected biological resources; non-polluting processes for pulping non-wood fibres; technologies for mainstreaming wood energy as a commercial renewable fuel; domestication and management of selected high-potential NWFPs.
· a common voice for Asia-Pacific: A central theme of the APFSOS study has been the extensive similarities and commonalities among countries in the region. Nonetheless, in the international forestry arena there are few mechanisms - formal or informal - that draw the countries of the region together to discuss and develop supportive policy positions and to speak with a common voice on issues of significance for Asia and the Pacific. There may be significant benefits in further developing informal affiliations to promote an Asia-Pacific agenda in the international policy debate.
<section>h</section>
Annex: APFSOS working paper series
APFSOS/WP/01
Regional Study - The South Pacific (Chris Brown, FAO)
APFSOS/WP/02
Pacific Rim Demand and Supply Situation, Trends and Prospects: Implications for Forest Products Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region (Thomas Waggener and Christine Lane)
APFSOS/WP/03
The Implications of the GATT Uruguay Round and Other Trade Arrangements for the Asia-Pacific Forest Products Trade (Chris Brown, FAO)
APFSOS/WP/04
Status, Trends and Future Scenarios for Forest Conservation including Protected Areas in the Asia-Pacific Region (James Paine, World Conservation Monitoring Centre)
APFSOS/WP/05
In-Depth Country Study - New Zealand (Chris Brown, FAO)
APFSOS/WP/06
In-Depth Country Study - The Republic of Korea (Byoung Il Yoo, Forestry Research Institute, Korea)
APFSOS/WP/07
Country Report - Malaysia (Forestry Department Headquarters, Peninsular Malaysia)
APFSOS/WP/08
Country Report - Union of Myanmar (Ministry of Forestry, Myanmar)
APFSOS/WP/09
Challenges and Opportunities: Policy Options for the Forestry Sector in the Asia-Pacific Region (Neil Byron, Centre for International Forestry Research, Indonesia)
APFSOS/WP/10
Sources of Non-wood Fibre for Paper, Board and Panels - Production Status, Trends and Prospects for India (P.M. Ganapathy)
APFSOS/WP/11
Country Report - Pakistan (K.M. Siddiqui, Pakistan Forest Institute)
APFSOS/WP/12
Trends and Outlook for Forest Products Consumption, Production and Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region (Dali Zhang, Joseph Buongiorno and Shushuai Zhu, University of Wisconsin)
APFSOS/WP/13
Country Report - Australia (Department of Primary Industries and Energy, Australia)
APFSOS/WP/14
Country Report - The People's Republic of China (Shi Kunshan, Li Zhiyong, Lin Fenming, and Zheng Rui (Ministry of Forestry, the People's Republic of China)
APFSOS/WP/15
Country Report - Japan: Basic Plan on Forest Resources and Long-Term Perspective on Demand and Supply of Important Forestry Products (Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Japan)
APFSOS/WP/16
Country Report - Sri Lanka (Ministry of Forestry, Sri Lanka)
APFSOS/WP/17
Forest Resources and Roundwood Supply in the Asia-Pacific Countries: Situation and Outlook to the Year 2010 (Jean-Louis Blanchez, FAO)
APFSOS/WP/18
Country Report - Cambodia (Hong-Narith, Department of Forestry and Wildlife, Cambodia)
APFSOS/WP/19
Wood Materials from Non-Forest Areas (Napoleon Vergara)
APFSOS/WP/20
Forest Industry Structure and the Evolution of Trade Flows in the Asia-Pacific Region - Scenarios to 2010 (Douglas Williams, International Tropical Timber Organisation)
APFSOS/WP/21
Decentralisation and Devolution of Forest Management in Asia and the Pacific (Ajit Kumar Banerjee)
APFSOS/WP/22
Commentary on Forest Policy in the Asia-Pacific Region (A Review for Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Thailand, and Western Samoa) (Don Hammond)
APFSOS/WP/23
Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook: Focus On Coconut Wood (Romulo Arancon Jnr., Asian and Pacific Coconut Community)
APFSOS/WP/24
Ecotourism And Other Services Derived From Forests In The Asia-Pacific Region: Outlook To 2010 (Kreg Lindberg, Brian Furze, Marilyn Staff and Rosemary Black)
APFSOS/WP/25
Technology Scenarios in the Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector (Thomas Enters, Forestry Research Support Programme for Asia and the Pacific)
APFSOS/WP/26
In-Depth Country Report - India (Mohammed Ahmed)
APFSOS/WP/27
People and Forests: Situation and Prospects (Robert Fisher, Somjai Srimongkontip and Cor Veer, Regional Community Forestry Training Centre)
APFSOS/WP/28
Non-Wood Forest Products Outlook Study for Asia and the Pacific: Towards 2010 (Andrew Mittelman, Chun Lai, Neil Byron, Genevieve Michon and Esther Katz)
APFSOS/WP/29
Opportunities for Forestry Investment in Asia and the Pacific through Carbon Offset Initiatives (Anthony DiNicola, Don Justin Jones and Gerald Gray, American Forests and COPEC)
APFSOS/WP/30
Country Report - Maldives (Mohamed Zuhair)
APFSOS/WP/31
Country Report - Viet Nam (Nguyen Tuong Van, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Viet Nam)
APFSOS/WP/32
Country Report - Nepal (Ministry of Forests and Soil Conservation, Nepal)
APFSOS/WP/33
Country Report - The Philippines (Department of Environment and Natural Resources, the Philippines)
APFSOS/WP/34
Regional Study on Wood Energy Today and Tomorrow in Asia (Regional Wood Energy Development Project)
APFSOS/WP/35
The Status, Trends and Prospects for Non-Wood and Recycled Fibre Sources in China (Zhu Zhaohua, Jiang Chunqian, Zhong Maogong and Wang Huafu, Chinese Academy of Forestry)
APFSOS/WP/36
Outlook, Trends and Options with Special Reference to Legislation, Institutions and Capacity Building (A Review for Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, Myanmar, Japan and Viet Nam) (Saravannamuttu Muttiah)
APFSOS/WP/37
Perspectives of Environmental Civil Society Organizations on Forestry in the Asia-Pacific Region: Outlook To 2010 (Joerg Balsiger, FAO)
APFSOS/WP/38
Summary of the Country Outlook: Lao PDR (Kampheuane Kingsada, Department of Forestry, Laos)
APFSOS/WP/39
Forestry and Key Asian Watersheds (Aung Kyaw Myint and Thomas Hofer, International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development)
APFSOS/WP/40(a)
FAO Outlook Study on Wood-based Panels, Production, Consumption and Trade in the Asia-Pacific Region 1996 to 2000 (Michael Lyons)
APFSOS/WP/40(b)
Study of China's Wood-based Panel Market: Outlook for the Years 2000-2010 (Lu Wenming, Chinese Academy of Forestry)
APFSOS/WP/41
Scenarios for Extra and Inter-Sectoral Developments of Forestry: Outlook Study for Asia and the Pacific (Mok Sian Tuan)
APFSOS/WP/42
Country Report - Forestry of Mongolia (Lamjavyn Djortseden, Ministry of Nature and Environment, Mongolia)
APFSOS/WP/43
Country Report - Papua New Guinea (Papua New Guinea Forest Authority)
APFSOS/WP/44
Urban Forestry in the Asia-Pacific Region: Status and Prospects (Guido Kuchelmeister, Tree City)
APFSOS/WP/45
Country Report - Indonesia (Ministry of Forestry, Indonesia)
APFSOS/WP/46
Country Report - Thailand (Royal Forest Department, Thailand)
APFSOS/WP/47
Review of Asia-Pacific Economic and Social Development till 2010 (with focus on economic growth and population) (Mafa Chipeta, David Brooks and Adrian Whiteman)
APFSOS/WP/48
Country Report - Bangladesh (Forestry Department Headquarters, Bangladesh)
