<title>Coping with natural disasters : The role of local health personnel and the community</title>
World Health Organization
Geneva
ISBN 92 41542381
© World Health Organization 1989
Publications of the World Health Organization enjoy copyright protector in accordance with the provisions of Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright Convention. For rights of reproduction or translation of WHO publications, in part or in toto, application should be made to the Office of Publications, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. The World Health Organization welcomes such applications.
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers' products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
Printed in Belgium
88/7790--Vanmelle--7000
<section>Contents</section>
Acknowledgements
Introduction : An active role for communities and their health personnel
Part I : The disaster
Chapter 1 : Community rescue operations
Fear
Panic
Rescue operations
Reception at the health centre or hospital
Chapter 2 : The tasks of the local health personnel
Organizing the health centre or hospital to meet the emergency
Triage
Emergency care
Part II : The aftermath
Chapter 3 : Action by the community
The coordination committee
Assessment of requirements
Outside assistance
Coordination of groups from outside
Family groupings
Temporary shelter and sanitation
Displaced persons
Monitoring food supplies
Food distribution
Dealing with the dead
Dealing with animals
Post-disaster development
Chapter 4 : Action by the local health personnel
Post-disaster health problems and the organization of the local health personnel
Monitoring the community's health status
Vaccinations
Nutrition
Health education and sanitation
Mental health
Vulnerable groups
Periodic reports by the local health personnel
Part III : Preventing and alleviating the consequences of disasters
Chapter 5 : Action by the community
Analysis of past experience
Information on disasters
Some information on natural disasters
Knowledge of the risks and the resources
Evacuation of the population
Twinning
Exercises and activities to promote community preparedness
Basic education
Chapter 6 : Action by the local health personnel
Essential professional qualities of local health personnel for coping with disasters
Improving certain professional skills
Preparation of the health centre or hospital
The training of voluntary health workers
Preparedness activities for the population
Annexes
Annex 1 : Diseases to be monitored when people are housed in temporary shelters
Annex 2 : Specimen record card for use by person in charge of family grouping in preparing health report in collaboration with local health personnel
Annex 3 : Nutrition
1. Recommended daily energy and protein intakes for healthy individuals
2. Weight-for-height
3. Arm-circumference-for-height, young children (both sexes)
4. Indicators of likely need for a supplementary feeding programme (SFP)
Annex 4 : What to do in an earthquake
Annex 5 : Mercalli scale of earthquake intensities (ms)
Annex 6 : Community risk maps
Annex 7 : The signs of danger in disaster-damaged buildings
Annex 8 : Resource maps
Annex 9 : Medical equipment of the health centre or hospital for coping with a disaster
Annex 10 : Outline schedules for self-evaluation in the event of disaster
1. Self-evaluation schedule for action taken by the community
2. Self-evaluation schedule for action by the local health personnel
Annex 11 : The league of red cross and red crescent societies (LORCS)
Annex 12 : A short reading list for local health personnel
<section>Acknowledgements</section>
This publication without the valuable assistance of Dr Luciano Carrino, Health Department, Cooperation in Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Italy, who drafted and reviewed the various versions. Dr S. William Gunn launched the publication when he was in charge of WHO's Emergency Relief Operations (1977-1984); he also reviewed the final text in his capacity of Scientific Vice-President of the European Centre for Disaster Medicine.
WHO also wishes to thank Ferruccio Ferrigni and Patrick de Maisonneuve for their contributions on architecture and town planning; Teresa Volpe who prepared the original drawings; Giulia Dario for her advice on community action; Guido Bertolaso, Marta di Gennaro, Guglielmo Riva, Enzo Lucchetti, Carol Djeddah, Agostino Miozo, Giancarlo Samaritan and the health team of the Department for Cooperation in Development of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs for information and documentation on emergency health action; Adriano Mantovani for his contribution on veterinary medicine; José Luis Zeballos, Dorothy Blake, Jose Maria Paganini, Marc Parent, Don Washington, Luis Jorge Perez, Carmen BowenWright, Miguel Gueri; the University of Louvain's Disaster Epidemiology Team led by Michel Lechat; the participants in the WHO meetings on health activities in the event of disasters held in Rabat (1981), Trieste (1984), Ankara (1985), Brazzaville (1986) and Marrakesh (1986); and all the
other experts consulted.
Thanks also go to the teams in health centres/local hospitals at Giugliano (Italy), Ayapel (Colombia), Port Antonio (Jamaica) and Dire (Mali) who allowed us to field-test various parts of this manual.
Finally, acknowledgements are also due to the Campania Region and to the International Centre for Research-Intervention in Naples, which provided organizational support.
The following members of staff of WHO and the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (LORCS) also collaborated in this publication: Thomas Bergmann (LORCS), Claude de Ville de Goyet (WHO/Pan American Health Organization), Olavi Elo (WHO), Concetto Guttuso (WHO), John Jones (WHO), Andrei Kisselev (LORCS), Sten Kistner (LORCS) and Michael Tailhades (LORCS).
This Guide is in three parts:
o The first part deals with rescue work and emergency care immediately after the disaster has struck.
o The second deals with action taken when the acute period of the disaster is over.
o The third describes what can be done at local level to prevent and mitigate the consequences of disasters.
Each part consists of two chapters:
o The first describes what the community can do.
o The second describes what the local health personnel can do.
But the action of the community and that of the local health per sonnel are closely linked. In disaster situations, the local health personnel sometimes need to act as a referral point for the population, to solve problems relating to survival or to the general organization of the community.
<section>Introduction : An active role for communities and their health personnel</section>
It is usually assumed that in emergency only national and international agencies can mobilize the resources needed to deal with the situation.
Various countries set up systems for protecting the civilian population in the event of disaster that are based on central state authorities and make use of the latest equipment and technology. It is also certain, however, that the local communities have an active part to play before and after disasters:
o because a good state of preparedness before a disaster strikes may reduce its impact,
o because the greatest number of lives can be saved during the first few hours after a disaster has occurred, before help arrives from elsewhere,
o because the numerous problems of survival and health resulting from a disaster are dealt with more efficiently if the community is active and well organized.
The purpose of this Guide is to help local communities and their health personnel cope with the consequences of disasters, particularly natural disasters such as earthquakes, volcanic eruptions gales, tidal waves and droughts. It is intended for relatively small communities with scanty resources, in which there is a health centre or local hospital and where the local health personnel consists of a small team, including at least a physician or trained nurse.
Since it focuses on local action, the Guide might give the impression that a community can be self-sufficient in the event of a disaster. On the contrary, it must not be forgotten that a large number of problems can be solved only through outside assistance at various levels:
o the intermediate level: the nearest and best-equipped urban centres,
o the national level: the government and national bodies, including non-governmental organizations,
o the international level: international organizations and other countries.
However, an active and well-organized community will help to improve the quality of outside assistance and reduce the shortcomings often recorded, such as lack of information, poor evaluation of requirements and inappropriate forms of aid.
Two groups are envisaged that will take action in the event of a disaster:
o the local health personnel,
o the community: local authorities and persons or groups who concern themselves in the localities with rescue work, communications, transport, shelter and food supply.
The communities and local health personnel for the most part improvise their organization for meeting the emergency situation following a disaster.
The aim of this Guide is to encourage them to prepare beforehand, particularly in high-risk areas, for setting up the community's organization for dealing with disasters.
This is not just one more burden for already overburdened people and teams. Emergencies bring to light in an acute and extreme way things that in the day-to-day life of the community and in the functioning of the health services may long remain inapparent: lack of coordination, gaps in communication and information, unsatisfactory relationships between services and the population, inflexibility of the health services, a failure on their part to adjust to requirements, their poor territorial distribution and excessive concentration on hospital facilities, and many other shortcomings. On the credit side emergencies also reveal valuable professional and human capacities and qualities which in the normal course of events are not clearly apparent and are not put to use. In short, because they make it absolutely essential to find quick and effective solutions for dramatic problems, disasters at the same time throw into relief the deficiencies and potentialities of the services.
Ensuring disaster-preparedness largely consists in improving the quality and effectiveness of existing community services: the prospect of possibly having to face up to an emergency serves rather to bring to general attention many essential and priority questions that concern the community's health and life even under normal conditions.
The local population stricken by a disaster should be considered as taking action for itself, not as having action taken for it. This presupposes a fundamental change compared with the usual notion that the responsibility of caring for a disaster-stricken community should be entirely taken over by outside assistance and the State authorities. This notion is based on preconceived ideas: people panic and flee without regard for others, some of them will be bewildered or act impulsively, others will remain numb or stupefied; local organizations will be disorganized and unable to act effectively; there will be antisocial behaviour and looting. However, experience of disasters shows that the ways in which people really behave differ greatly from these stereotyped ideas. Cases of panic are generally localized and short-lived. The majority of people prefer to stay in the threatened area and generally take steps to protect their families and themselves. Indecision is usually due
rather to the poor circulation of information than to panic. Those stricken by the disaster usually react in a positive way and busy themselves quickly and spontaneously, together with their families, friends and groups, in rescue operations. Looting and certain types of antisocial behaviour (exorbitant prices, for example) have been exaggerated (or are perpetrated by people from outside the community). Conflicts and class differences may die down and a sense of community solidarity not ordinarily present may develop. Local communities, if they are not discouraged and made passive, react quickly and effectively, particularly if they are supported (but not overrun or supplanted) by assistance from outside.
<section>Part I : The disaster</section>
Every catastrophic event has its own special features. Some can be foreseen several hours or days beforehand, as in the case, for example, of cyclones or floods. Others, such as earthquakes, occur without warning. Whatever the type of disaster, for some hours the community and local health personnel have only themselves to rely on before outside assistance arrives. In a later chapter, this Guide will deal with organizing the community to manage the consequences of the disaster. Here it will confine itself to describing the steps to be taken by the community and the local health workers to carry out rescue work and provide emergency care immediately after the disaster has struck.
<section>Chapter 1 : Community rescue operations</section>
<section>Fear</section>
In most cases, despite their fear, people tend of their own accord to give assistance to their family, their neighbours and their friends and to take the injured to the health centre or local hospital. In the hours that follow, particularly when the danger persists, fear must be countered by issuing certain items of information or instructions (by using loudspeakers and mobilizing volunteers):
o what to do to be safe,^1
o information on the evolution and consequences of the disaster,
o where to obtain information on the scattered members of the family,
o information on essential matters: water, shelter, food, etc.
Instructions will vary according to the type of disaster. See Part III and annexes.
The dissemination of this type of information is one of the first tasks of the Emergency Committee^2 which the local authority sets up immediately and which remains in permanent session to coordinate local action and information.
See Part II, Chapter 3.
Generally, perceiving that the community is acting in a coordinated manner and that information is being circulated gives people a feeling that the situation is under control and in that way helps to control fear.
<section>Panic</section>
Panic is not a common reaction. It may occur when the disaster finds people crowded in an enclosed space (a place of worship, a cinema, etc.). In some cases instructions given over a loudspeaker (asking people to be calm, indicating where the exits are) may help to reduce the adverse effects of panic.
<section>Rescue operations</section>
A disaster may result in people being:
o trapped under the ruins of buildings that have collapsed,
o buried under mud or landslides,
o cut off by floods or the blockage of communication routes.
These people must be reached and rescued. The rescue work will mostly be earned out spontaneously by relatives, friends and local volunteers.
Often it is essential to have available:
o ladders,
o ropes,
o heavy gloves,
o spades,
o picks,
o planks,
o pocket torches.
Groups of volunteers must be organized to reach families that live in isolated places.
Certain elementary rules must be observed:
o Do not trample over ruins.
o Do not move rubble before being sure of not causing further collapses of buildings or falls of material.
o Use manual methods for preference and handle spades and picks very gently and cautiously.
When it is difficult to reach a victim or when there is a risk of further caving-in, it is advisable to leave the work of extrication to experts (firemen, trained volunteers, building workers, the army, etc.). As soon as the rescuers reach an injured person, they should be careful to:
o Maintain and ease respiration.
o Clear the victim's airways by using fingers to clean the mouth and throat, taking out dentures and loosening collars, belts and clothing.
o Use blankets to prevent the victim catching cold.
In order to locate those trapped under the rubble, an attempt must be made--with the help of those nearby or in the same building--to determine the number of people trapped and the places where they are probably to be found (stairwells, cellars, ramps, etc.). To find them, it is necessary first of all to obtain absolute silence and then to shout to them from different points in the ruins. If no response can be obtained, signals must be made, for instance, by knocking on pieces of metal pushed down into the rubble or by using loudspeakers. In the event of a response, contact must be maintained. The link with the person discovered is important: it is essential to talk to him and give him confidence. While the rescue workers are freeing the trapped person, those responsible for transporting him or her to the health centre or hospital will be preparing the stretcher.
The stretcher must be put down near the injured person. If no stretcher is available, one can be improvised with blankets, pieces of cloth or plastic, camp beds, ladders, doors, shutters, etc.
When lifting the injured person, certain rules must be followed:
o Movements must be calm and coordinated and carried out in accordance with the instructions of a rescue worker.
o The injured person must be moved as little as possible.
o The victim's head, neck and trunk must be kept in the same axis (see figure).
Conveyance to the local health establishment must follow certain simple, common-sense rules:
o The stretcher must go forward with the patient's head foremost.
o Jerkiness must be avoided (no sudden stops, bumps or tilting).
o No stretcher-bearer should walk backwards.
o The injured person, together with any ventilator equipment, must be fastened to the stretcher.
o If the victim is given artificial respiration (mouth-to-mouth, mask) the rescue worker responsible for it will get between the two shafts level with the victim's head; it is only in such a case, to avoid the rescue worker having to walk backwards, that the injured person will be transported feet first.
<section>Reception at the health centre or hospital</section>
The volunteers assisting the local health personnel organize the reception of the victims and those accompanying them at the health facility. It is essential to:
o Speak to those arriving, answer their questions and tell them where they can put themselves.
o Give them blankets if they are cold.
o Help them wash if necessary (people extricated from the rubble, people covered in mud, etc.) and give them tea or coffee.
o Look after the children.
o Help scattered families to reunite or communicate.
o Identify the injured, giving priority to whose who are unconscious or are not accompanied by members of their families. The name of the injured person and the place he or she was brought from will be noted on a sheet of paper, which will be placed in a plastic cover, for example, and attached to the person concerned. When the victim's name is not known. a note must be made of the information supplied by the rescue workers, which can later make identification easier (place where the victim was found, the circumstances, other persons present, etc.).
<section>Chapter 2 : The tasks of the local health personnel</section>
<section>Organizing the health centre or hospital to meet the emergency</section>
As soon as possible after disaster has struck, all local health personnel should report to the health establishment where they usually work. The first task is to assess quickly any damage suffered by the establishment and its health facilities and to decide whether it can still be used or whether it would not be better to move its operational base to a less damaged building or to a temporary shelter (tent or other). If a move is necessary, a new health centre or hospital will quickly be established, use being made of any health equipment and material it has been possible to salvage.
Experience shows that during the first few hours it is above all relatives, friends and local volunteers who bring the injured to the health establishment. Preparations to receive them must be made by setting aside a space where the local health personnel can screen them to determine what care they require, while the volunteers concern themselves with receiving them on arrival.
When there are enough local health personnel to receive the injured at the health establishment, one or more health posts can be established where rescue work is being undertaken and at which first aid can be given to the rescued before they are carried to the health centre or hospital.
The local health personnel can also act before a victim is extricated, for example by applying a tourniquet when the person concerned has had a leg or arm crushed or has lost all feeling in fingers and toes (thus preventing the "crush syndrome").
<section>Triage</section>
When a large number of injured people are brought at the same time to the health establishment, the more expert among the local health workers, taking into account the equipment and professional skills available, must sort the cases into the following categories:
A.
Those who must be sent urgently to the nearest properly equipped hospital. Among these two orders of priority may be distinguished:
A.1.
Emergency cases that must be operated on within the hour:
o acute cardio-respiratory insufficiency,
o severe haemorrhages,
o internal bleeding,
o rupture of the spleen,
o injuries to the liver,
o severe chest lesions,
o severe cervico-maxillary lesions,
o states of shock,
o severe burns (over 20%),
o skull injuries with coma.
A.2.
Emergency cases in which it is possible to wait a few hours before operating:
o ligatured vascular injury,
o intestinal lesions, severe haemorrhage or shock,
o open joint and bone injuries,
o multiple injuries with shock,
o injuries to the eyes,
o extensive closed fractures and dislocations,
o less severe bums,
o skull injures without coma.
B.
Those given attention is given to the most serious cases among those with a chance of surviving: there are those who are attended to while waiting to be sent to a specialized centre and those who do not need major medical care and can be treated on the spot. The B group also includes very serious cases with no chance of survival that it would be pointless to move.
Victims can be transported from the local health establishment to a better-equipped hospital by local means of transport or. later, by means of transport (ambulances, cars, helicopters, ships. etc.) from elsewhere. The people in the community or from outside who deal with transport must know what hospitals can receive the injured. This information must be given to the community by the authorities at intermediate level or the national authorities. The local health personnel must also be prepared for the possibility of all communications being cut and being forced for a certain time to rely solely on their own resources and professional skills.
<section>Emergency care</section>
In many cases the local health personnel do not have available the specialists and resources needed after a disaster to treat all emergency cases on the spot. Often they are forced to confine their efforts to screening the victims and providing care for those who are able to survive without major medical assistance. In every instance the local personnel must be trained to receive the following medical emergencies:
o haemorrhages,
o cardiovascular failure,
o respiratory distress,
o states of shock,
o skull injuries,
o fractures,
o dislocations,
o bums,
o exposures to toxic substances,
o electrocution,
o drownings,
o cases of accidental hypothermia.
The types of emergency vary according to the kind of disaster and how and when it strikes.
In earthquakes there is a high level of mortality as a result of people being crushed by falling objects. The risk is greatest inside or near dwellings but is very small in the open. Consequently earthquakes at night are more deadly. There are large numbers of injuries. During the night fractures of the pelvis, thorax and spine are common because the earthquake strikes while people are lying in bed. In the daytime injuries to the arms and legs, the collarbone and the skull frequently occur. There may be people in a state of shock and people suffering from bums (particularly in areas where electricity and gas are installed). Afterwards there may be surgical complications of fractures or infections of wounds.
In volcanic eruptions mortality is high in the case of mudslides (23 000 deaths in Colombia in 1985) and glowing clouds (30 000 deaths at Saint-Pierre in Martinique). may be injuries burns and suffocations.
In floods, mortality is high only in the case of sudden flooding: flash floods, the collapse of dams or tidal waves. Fractures, injuries and bruising may occur. If the weather is cold, cases of accidental hypothermia may arise.
In cyclones and hurricanes mortality is not high unless tidal waves occur. The combined effect of wind and rain may cause houses to collapse. A large number of objects may be lifted in the air and carried along by the wind. This may give rise to injuries, fractures, cuts and bruises.
In droughts, mortality may increase considerably in areas where the drought causes famine, in which case there may be protein-calorie malnutrition (marasmus, kwashiorkor) and vitamin deficiencies (particularly vitamin A deficiency leading to xerophthalmia and child blindness). In famine conditions measles, respiratory infections and diarrhoea accompanied by dehydration may bring about a massive increase in infant mortality. When people migrate and settle on the outskirts of towns and villages, poor hygiene and overcrowding may facilitate the spread of endemic communicable diseases (diarrhoeas, tuberculosis, parasitic diseases and malaria).
<section>Part II : The aftermath</section>
As the hours and days go by, the problems change.
Sometimes rescue work continues for several days, but very soon a mass of other problems arise as a result of the disaster.
This part of the Guide deals with the organization and activities of the communities and the local health personnel in the period following the disaster.
<section>Chapter 3 : Action by the community</section>
<section>The coordination committee</section>
To make the efforts of the community, mobilized after disaster has struck, more effective, the local authority must at once set up a committee with the task of coordinating action to cope with the emergency. The committee takes stock of the consequences of the disaster and concerns itself with the essential problems:
Rescue operations
: Where are there people to be rescued (collapsed buildings, places invaded by mud. isolated families, fires) ? What means should be used?
Water
: Is there water available? How can the water supply be ensured (tanker-trucks or other means of distributing water, urgent repair of the pre-existing water supply network. creation of new supply points) ?
Shelter
: Is temporary shelter needed for the victims of the disaster? How can it be provided (public buildings, tents, other means) ?
Food
: Is there a shortage of food ? What steps can be taken to ensure food supply
(stocks on the spot, outside assistance) and distribution ?
Communications
: What means of communication can be used (radio, telephone, other) ?
Transport
: What roads are practicable ? By what means of transport ? Do means of transport exist?
Gradually the Committee will organize itself to deal with the postdisaster period, assigning responsibilities in various fields:
o health,
o transport and highway maintenance; communications and information,
o water supply, food, means of survival,
o public works, building,
o sanitation,
o public order.
<section>Assessment of requirements</section>
As soon as contact has been established with the intermediate-level or central authorities, the committee will inform them of the requirements.
The purpose is to avoid confusion and obtain appropriate outside assistance. The exchange of information will cover general problems and activities for health:
A. General information:
o assessment of the number of homeless.
o estimate of the number of victims,
o evaluation of the type. extent and seriousness of the material damage.
o information on isolated villages,
o information on people cut off from their families.
o forecasts as to how the natural phenomena responsible for the disaster will develop.
B. Requests for assistance:
o machines for clearing rubble,
o means of transport. fuel,
o shelters (tents, materials for constructing shelters, caravans. other),
o blankets, clothing, boots, raincoats,
o food.
o tools. batteries. containers. materials.
o persons specializing in rescue work,
o others.
C. Requests made by the local health personnel on the basis of the number of people needing assistance and the type of care required:
o health equipment and material.
o medicaments.
o any health personnel required.
o suitably equipped hospitals to which patients may be sent who cannot be looked after on the spot.
o means and organization for evacuating the injured and the sick.
When there is no telephone or the lines are down contact can only be established by radio. If the community does not possess radio equipment, radio amateurs can sometimes re-establish contact. In any event the committee must have the communications centre at its disposal.
<section>Outside assistance</section>
National and international solidarity is certainly of very great importance for disaster-stricken communities. It may happen, however, that assistance from outside is more in line with the idea that the donors have formed of the disaster, or with what they are at any rate ready to give, than with real local requirements. Thus, certain forms of inappropriate assistance crop up again and again, such as consignments of medicaments not requested, field hospitals that will remain empty or unnecessary medical personnel.
It is therefore important for the community to request very early the assistance it really requires. In order to channel outside assistance more effectively in the period following the disaster, the community can ask the donors to send out first of all an expert with the task of helping to assess requirements and to formulate rehabilitation/reconstruction programmes that outside assistance can sustain. Experience shows that international assistance is much more important in the post-disaster period than in respect of emergency aid.
<section>Coordination of groups from outside</section>
Assistance from external groups (volunteers, associations) is important. However, steps must be taken to avoid each acting on its own account, without coordination, sometimes in competition or downright conflict. Especially when the community is poor and weakly organized, groups from outside may provoke serious imbalances, cause splits or induce dependence.
The ideal is for the coordination committee to be able to coordinate and guide the activities of the outside groups. When a community has lost its bearings, an essential task for the outside groups is to encourage the local authority, the local health personnel and the community and help them to organize so as to regain control of the situation. However, the community will be unable to coordinate disparate groups with their separate aims, resources and funding, unless the national government makes it obligatory for outside groups to consult the committees in the stricken communities and to act only with their consent.
International bodies can play an important role by themselves consulting the local committees and inviting the donors and outside groups to do the same.
<section>Family groupings</section>
Rapid steps must be taken to establish a system of continuous contact with the families stricken by the disaster. An effective way of setting such a system is to subdivide the community into groups consisting of neighbouring family nuclei and to put someone in charge of each group. The person may be designated by the group or, failing that, selected by the local authority. Each such person can delegate special tasks to members of the group.
Those in charge of groups are in daily touch with the community's coordination committee. A system of this kind makes it possible:
o to collect information on requirements,
o to pass on instructions and information,
o to distribute where necessary the means of survival (clothing blankets food etc.).
The local health personnel can also use the system for health activities.
<section>Temporary shelter and sanitation</section>
When the disaster has made houses uninhabitable and there has been no evacuation of the area, temporary shelter must be arranged for those affected who generally prefer to remain on the spot, in or near their property. It may happen that the population settles all over the place (waste ground, gardens, parks, squares, parking areas, sports grounds, etc.), using anything that comes to hand (planks, plastics, tents, cars, containers, boats, railway wagons, buildings under construction, schools, public buildings, etc.). The sanitary situation may then rapidly deteriorate and it becomes very difficult to assess requirements.
Communities exposed to the risk of disaster (and those that propose to give shelter to displaced persons) should select sites for temporary shelter (before a disaster strikes) and carry out the necessary preparatory work. The sites chosen for erecting shelters should be:
o flood-proof, above high-water level,
o preferably on a gentle slope to facilitate rainwater and waste water drainage,
o not too close to the water table; otherwise the ground could become marshy in the rainy season.
o protected against landslides and subsidence,
o easily accessible. not far from the centre of population,
o at a higher level than waste tips,
o downstream from sources of drinking-water.
On the site of temporary shelter it is necessary to arrange water-supply points, latrines and waste tips.
During the first few days it is sometimes necessary to use tanker-trucks for transporting water but as soon as possible water-supply points should be established by sinking boreholes, digging wells or laying pipes. If there is a shortage, people will obviously congregate near supply points. There should be one for every 200/250 persons, but it is sometimes difficult to achieve this ratio.
The simplest method of installing latrines is to dig trenches about 2 metres deep and 80 cm wide (the length will vary) and cover them with planks, with seats or slabs for squatting. The opening should have a cover to stop flies getting in. The latrines should not be installed too far away from the temporary dwellings.
Rubbish tips should be arranged for disposing of solid waste, which will be burnt and covered with earth to keep flies and rodents away.
In laying out camps of temporary dwellings. geometric designs with shelters arranged in anonymous rows should be avoided. On the contrary, groupings of families and the spontaneous choice of neighbourhoods must be encouraged while keeping the sanitary situation under control. If the settlement is expected to be used for a long period, the plan should make provision for housing the local administration, the health centre or hospital and the school and as far as possible other community services and activities.
<section>Displaced persons</section>
Only people displaced as a result of drought or famine are under consideration here. It is generally beyond the power of communities to manage displacements of population. It is for governments to plan the settlement of displaced persons by distributing them in areas best suited to receive them (with water, cultivable land, pasturage, possibilities of development, favourable sociocultural conditions, etc.).
But when no planned action displaced persons end by settling down on the outskirts of towns on sites with no facilities. If there are large numbers of them, an emergency situation arises characterized by considerable problems of health and survival. It is essential to begin to act as soon as possible while waiting for government intervention and international assistance. The local authority should set up a community committee for dealing with emergencies. When international bodies intervene, they should work in collaboration with that committee. Essential steps are:
A.
Appraisal of the site. If on the site of spontaneous settlement there is no possibility of water supply or if there are considerable risks (floods, subsidence. etc.), another site must be chosen and equipped with the participation of the displaced persons. The features of an acceptable site were described in the preceding section.
B.
Organization of the displaced persons into family groupings^1 and the selection of persons to be in charge. This implies taking a census of the displaced persons already settled on the site and of new arrivals.
C.
The tackling by the community and the displaced persons' organization of the most urgent problems:
o installation of water-supply points,^1
o digging of latrines,^1
o organization of waste collection and disposal.^1
D.
The local health personnel should establish a system to monitor:
o communicable diseases. giving priority to endemic diseases, including those of the area of origin of the displaced persons.^1
o the nutritional and health status of the children.^1
The advisability of setting up a provisional health post near the displaced persons should be considered. An attempt should be made to provide them with:
o routine care,
o vaccinations in accordance with the national plan,
o health education,^1
o community activities.
See the paragraph dealing specifically with this question.
The local health personnel will be assisted by volunteers from the community and by the displaced persons' organization.
<section>Monitoring food supplies</section>
When there is a danger of food shortages, the local authority and the community should organize a monitoring system to avoid speculation. It is a question, in particular, of monitoring arrangements for supply, storage and distribution to prevent foodstuffs disappearing from the market to be sold "under the counter" and to control prices.
<section>Food distribution</section>
When there is a risk of malnutrition because of food shortage, it may be necessary to distribute foodstuffs to the population. This happens particularly in the case of displaced persons. In most cases food aid comes from outside. It is, however, important that the community play an active part in organizing its distribution. can be set up with representatives of the community, the displaced persons and the donors. Establishing a committee to coordinate food distribution should reduce shortcomings and prevent favouritism and abuses.
It is important that the foods distributed should be culturally acceptable, of a kind known and used by the population. If it is necessary to hand out foodstuffs donated from outside, with which the local population is not familiar, demonstrations must be given of how they should be prepared. In very poor communities the distribution of manufactured foodstuffs should be avoided so as not to interfere with eating habits and the capacity to make use of local produce. Jars of baby food should be forbidden since they may give rise to the idea that only imported foodstuffs ensure that children are well fed. Feeding bottles should not be given.
As far as possible the distribution of ready-prepared meals should be avoided, since it may suggest that the disaster-stricken population is to be assisted en masse. In the field of nutrition also it is important to affirm the principle that the community should be helped to resume its activities, its autonomy and its initiative.
<section>Dealing with the dead</section>
When the disaster results in a large number of deaths, the community should organize:
o transport of the bodies,
o a place to put them before burial,
o their burial.
Although it is not one of their tasks, the local health personnel often have to supervise and control what is done in this domain. In particular, it is necessary to:
o remove the bodies from the disaster area as rapidly and discreetly as possible and, as soon as this has been done, attempt to gather and note down information necessary for identifying them (place where they were found, information from relatives and neighbours),
o transport the bodies, which should be covered, to the place where they are to await burial and where personal belongings are also deposited,
o identify the bodies and attach tags to them giving the identification particulars,
o draw up an official register of the deaths, containing identification particulars,
o bury the dead as late as is compatible with the laws and customs of the country, so as to enable identification; common graves should be avoided; the site of the graves, numbered and marked with identification data, should be entered on maps,
o hand over personal effects to the nearest relatives.
It is known that the risk of epidemics comes not from a large number of deaths but from endemic diseases already existing in the area. When it is feared that an endemic disease may spread (cholera. for example, in a displaced persons' camp), the staff handling corpses should wear gloves wash frequently with soap and use disinfectant. Personal effects should also be disinfected before being given back to relatives.
<section>Dealing with animals</section>
In a disaster animals may be killed (in large numbers in floods' for instance) or dispersed. They may lose their shelter. Endemic zoonoses may spread. Dogs may revert to the wild and go about in packs. The community, possibly using groups of volunteers (who will be more effective if they have been trained in advance), should take steps to carry out the essential tasks:
o Destruction of animal carcasses: this is not easy because they are difficult to burn and burying them involves a great deal of labour. Often they have to be sprinkled with petrol and covered with earth to protect them against predators until they can be destroyed or buried.
o Destruction of parts of animals. The same treatment as that described for carcasses should be given to parts of animals in butchers' shops, slaughterhouses and dwellings when they can no longer be kept refrigerated.
o Housing of shelterless animals: capture and treatment of stray animals. The animals must be brought together in specially prepared premises. fed, milked and looked after.
o Re-opening of slaughterhouses: existing ones if they are usable, otherwise in temporary premises or in lorries equipped for the carriage of meat.
As soon as possible the veterinary services in the area should:
o organize the monitoring of communicable animal diseases and of slaughterhouses,
o carry out mass vaccinations, depending on the local hazards. such as rabies, foot-and-mouth disease, swine fever, anthrax, fowl pest, etc.,
o eliminate any sick animals or isolate the farms affected.
Measures to save stock may be very important in the rural areas and have a great impact on the morale and economic recovery of the community.
<section>Post-disaster development</section>
Structural damage (to houses, public buildings, factories, warehouses, etc.) and damage to crops and livestock raising, together with the interruption of production and commercial activities, cause serious economic difficulties for the disaster-stricken community. Some countries in case of disaster pass special laws covering the areas involved, which provide not only for financial assistance but also for measures essential to a return to normal economic and social life: reconstruction, repair of housing, development plans, measures of protection and temporary concessions for the stricken populations.
However, care must be taken to avoid certain dangers. Often it is necessary to make sure that administrative red tape does not hinder the real availability of the sums set aside for the local communities. Administrative and control procedures must be devised for the emergency situation that do not hamper activities in the field.
Sometimes the financial resources made available to meet the emergency may give rise to speculation or illegal activities (exorbitant prices, corruption, organized crime). This is at once a political problem and one of public order and it is essential to be ready to bring it under control with the utmost severity, firstly because such phenomena delay, hinder and besmirch economic recovery during a precarious and difficult phase and secondly because they dishearten people, deprive public action of all credibility and create conditions for serious disintegration and degradation in the community.
Care must be taken to avoid the launching of inappropriate economic activities that create disruption and imbalance in relation to local resources and potentialities. Sometimes, pressure from certain firms or commercial groups, attracted by the prospect of making profits, may influence the public authorities or private persons by urging them to undertake activities and make choices that are not in line with the priority needs of the disaster area. Occasionally, the allocation of subsidies or special individual or family allowances ends by the population sinking into a state of dependence. Any such phenomenon created by gifts inappropriate in quality and quantity must be avoided. If these dangers are not forestalled, the development of the area may be seriously hindered or completely blocked.
The resources committed to renewed development should be used above all for:
o the launching and sustaining of local productive commercial activities based on the utilization and exploitation of the resources that exist in the area (schemes must be avoided whose success depends mainly on supplies. machines or spare parts coming from abroad)
o occupational training based on the above-mentioned economic activities and the creation of jobs in line with local realities.
o the establishment of infrastructures and services essential to the community.
o the improvement of transport and communications in and for the disaster area.
Experience of disasters shows that recovery is made easier by the active participation of the different sections of the community in preparing and carrying out reconstruction and development plans.
The local health personnel can make an important contribution to development through what they do in the community and by integrating health activities in activities designed to improve the quality of life.
As far as the health services are concerned, the main danger is restoring the situation to what it was before the disaster without subjecting the functioning of the preexisting structures to critical analysis. This danger may be aggravated by offers from donor countries to build hospitals, establishments for the handicapped or other institutions without their proposals being based on a correct evaluation of requirements and the most appropriate solutions. It is very important that the rehabilitation and reconstruction phase should make it possible to go beyond the limitations of the health services revealed by the disaster. A disaster is all the more serious in a country in which the existing resources and services are not sufficient to meet requirements in normal times. It provides an opportunity that should not be missed to give priority to policies of establishing and organizing health services in line with the objectives, structures and methods of work of primary health
care.
<section>Chapter 4 : Action by the local health personnel</section>
<section>Post-disaster health problems and the organization of the local health personnel</section>
After the emergency treatment phase, in addition to the need to resume routine health activities. problems arise that are specific to the post-disaster period:
o possible complications and sequelae of injuries, fractures, cuts and burns,
o the possibility that poor sanitary and living conditions may favour the recrudescence and spread of diseases already present in the area,
o the psychological suffering and disquiet that affect individuals and diminish the community's power of recuperation.
The local health workers must organize themselves to take on these new problems as part of their activities, which include:
o the running of the health centre or local hospital and provision of routine care,
o the disease-monitoring system,
o health education,
o the resumption of health programmes in progress before the disaster (vaccinations, maternal and child health, control of tuberculosis, malaria, diarrhoeal diseases. malnutrition and other health problems, depending on the circumstances),
o activities to alleviate psychological suffering and disquiet.
Most of these activities require intimate involvement with the community. This can be ensured only by the local personnel organizing their work on the basis of support from volunteers and the persons in charge of the family groupings. In this context the local branches of the Red Cross can make a contribution by providing well-organized volunteers, already trained. In all their activities the local health personnel should try to obtain help from the community while reserving for themselves tasks that specifically require professional skills. This requires considerable efforts to coordinate and train volunteers. The local personnel must keep in touch with the intermediate-level authorities, from whom, on the basis of the estimated number of people to be cared for and the types of intervention needed, they can request the assistance and the supplies they require:
o medicaments,
o articles of medical consumption,
o visits to the disaster area by specialists (surgeons, orthopaedists, rehabilitation experts, etc.),
o liaison with suitably equipped hospitals to which they can send cases which cannot be dealt with on the spot,
o means of communication and transport,
o general supplies for the health centre or hospital (blankets, linen, food, fuel, tools. cleaning products. etc.).
<section>Monitoring the community's health status</section>
The system for monitoring the community's health status is based on a few essential elements:
o the basic network made up of voluntary workers and those in charge of the family groupings,
o the instructions issued at national or intermediate level on the diseases that must be kept under special scrutiny,
o the possibility for the local health personnel to send specimens to an intermediate-level laboratory for examination to confirm diagnoses,
o the drafting of regular reports.^1
See Periodic reports by the local health personnel
Disease monitoring must be particularly meticulous when one or more of the following conditions exist:
o presence of endemic foci,
o people living in shelters,^2
o concentrations of displaced persons in camps or on sites without services,
o precarious or unsatisfactory nutritional status,
o difficulties in drinking-water supply,
o difficulties in disposal of refuse and waste water,
o unfavourable climatic conditions.
See Annex 1.
Monitoring should not be based merely on the data concerning patients who attend the local health establishment. It should also take into account the activities carried out by the local health personnel in people's homes or in the community. An important means of monitoring is to use the network of persons in charge of the family groupings. All such persons, possibly with assistance from voluntary workers trained by the local health personnel, should do the rounds (daily to begin with) of the shelters in their charge, noting information on a card.^3 This also provides an opportunity for them to discuss health problems. They can act as health education workers if the local health personnel give them clear and simple information on the essential subjects and teach them how to conduct meetings and organize educational activities. Cases of disease detected or suspected will be indicated in the local health personnel's report. Information received from the local personnel will
enable the intermediate-level authorities to summarize the data obtained, pinpoint disease foci and trends and take the necessary steps.
See Annex 2.
The epidemiological study of recent disasters shows that epidemics resulting from disasters are the exception. However, the possibility must be borne in mind that the precarious hygienic situation after a disaster may encourage the spread of diseases that already existed in the area beforehand. The worse the situation before, the more real will the danger be. Often, alarming rumours on the appearance of foci of infectious diseases are spread and sometimes the press, the other media and even medical circles end up by confirming and amplifying the rumours. If faced with such a situation. characterized by the existence of a potential risk and irrational reactions, the local health personnel must intensify their monitoring of communicable diseases in order to obtain objective information the situation so as to be able to reassure the authorities and the public.
<section>Vaccinations</section>
The fact that. in general. disasters do not give rise to epidemics means that on the face of it there is no reason to improvise special vaccination campaigns after a disaster. However, the public, the authorities or the newspapers press for the launching of mass vaccinations. This is an attitude that has no valid basis in fact or experience. Indeed, experience seems to show that diverting precious energies to performing unnecessary vaccinations (for instance, against cholera or typhoid), acts to the detriment of important programmes (e.g. malaria control) and of more urgent tasks.
It is essential, therefore, to continue and strengthen the vaccinations routinely practiced in the country concerned and not to launch special campaigns after a disaster. Epidemiological monitoring and objective information should reassure the people and their political leaders.
<section>Nutrition</section>
Nutritional problems arise above all following prolonged drought but may also occur after certain other types of disaster involving damage to crops, to stock and to food distribution systems and thus leading to difficulties in maintaining supplies.
The countries where these problems are the most likely to occur are those in which even in normal times the nutritional status of the population is unsatisfactory. The most vulnerable groups are:
o infants (particularly those not breast-fed),
o children,
o pregnant women,
o nursing mothers,
o the sick.
Children have very high nutritional requirements compared with adults. A table in Annex 3 provides information on energy and protein requirements.
Nutritional status is monitored on the basis of the clinical signs of malnutrition and measurements of the following values:
o Weight for height. It is considered that children with a weight of under 70 % of the normal weight for their height are suffering from a serious degree of malnutrition and those with a weight between 70 % and 80 % of normal from a moderate degree of malnutrition. Annex 3 summarizes the percentage deviations from normal weight for height.
o Arm circumference (a more rapid but less reliable measurement). The circumference is measured on the left arm half way between the tip of the shoulder (acromion) and the tip of the elbow (olecranon). A child with an arm circumference of under 70 % of the standard value is considered to be in a state of serious malnutrition. Annex 3 summarizes from normal in arm circumference.
Education on nutrition should be based on using foodstuffs available on the spot to prepare balanced meals. In general a balanced meal should contain at least 20 g of protein and fats should contribute between 20 % and 40 % of total calories. It should contain carbohydrates (sugar, cereals, edible tubers), vitamins and mineral salts.
<section>Health education and sanitation</section>
When people are living in temporary shelters, and particularly where there are concentrators of displaced persons, health education is very important. A few of the subjects on which informational and educational activities are developed are:
o the utilization of water, cleanliness and protection of drinking-water containers. making water fit to drink (boiling. filtration), disposal of waste water,
o the utilization and cleaning of latrines,
o waste disposal. education on keeping public areas clean by using supervised tips.
o cleanliness of the temporary dwellings,
o control of lice and other parasites,
o control of flies, insect disease vectors and rodents: keeping everywhere clean, protection of food, minor cleaning work.
The local health workers should obtain the assistance of health volunteers. who must be trained in a few days (unless they have already had training) and given guidance in their work. It is important that people do not merely participate but are committed to their work. As far as possible, members of the community should be given the tasks of organization, information and assistance. The objectives and methods used must be discussed, shared and felt by the population.
<section>Mental health</section>
The psychological reactions in most disasters can be divided into three phases.
In the first few minutes after a disaster strikes. panic rarely occurs but may arise when the event surprises a crowd indoors in an enclosed space (cinema. place of worship, etc.). In some cases fear is accompanied by a dazed reaction; people lose their bearings and cannot do anything. In general, this is a short-lived phenomenon.
In the hours that follow. a psychological reaction can be observed in most cases that is characterized by an urge to act. to seek contact with others and to participate spontaneously in rescue work. Bureaucratic and political barriers are swept away and suddenly psychological barriers and defences characteristic of private reserved behaviour also disappear. Their place is taken on the instant by types of behaviour marked by spontaneity, solidarity and outpourings of emotion. Whatever the reason for this positive psychological reaction, it should be known to the local health personnel (who experience it themselves in any case) and considered as the most valuable resource for coping with the situation.
In some instances, subsequent days witness the gradual onset of less active. The state of excitement dies down and its place may be taken first of all by a feeling of mental disquiet, which moves towards an attitude approaching slight depression, lack of confidence, fatigue, sadness and passivity. Gradually the reality of hard, competitive, sometimes pitiless relationships and the restoration of the barriers, stratification and conflicts of ordinary social life gain the upper hand. The reactions of disappointment and depression are aggravated by suspicion of favouritism and preferential treatment in the distribution of relief supplies. When confronted by this situation, the local health personnel must try to maintain and strengthen all the initiatives taken by the community.
Numerous experiments conducted after disasters either by local health workers or by volunteers have shown that community action influences the state of mind of the population and represents an effective means of preventing and controlling reactions of disquiet and depression. In fact, activities to maintain the community's mental well-being largely coincide for the local health personnel with the capacity to stimulate and encourage the association of groups with projects aimed at achieving concrete objectives, i.e. a capacity to spur the community on to act for itself, which is moreover essential to the success of any programme of health education.
So far as psychological disorders are concerned, depression remains the main danger to be prevented and controlled. On the other hand, it does not seem as though pre-existing mental disorders get particularly worse. Spontaneous improvements may even be observed. In any event an attempt must be made to avoid shutting out or interning the mentally ill and the handicapped: the atmosphere of solidarity and the web of intense emotional relationships which develop after a disaster may make it easier to integrate them into the community and may have a real psychotherapeutic effect.
In many cases there are reports of insomnia, bed-wetting among children, anxiety states or psychosomatic disorders (palpitations, sweating, shortness of breath, feelings of giddiness, etc.), often accompanying slight depression. One very frequent phenomenon is worth mentioning: in the weeks and sometimes months following a particularly violent earthquake which has caused great damage, it is possible to detect instability and confusion, such as those that afflict people with head injuries. They generally disappear without treatment after a few months.
<section>Vulnerable groups</section>
Among the various members of the community it is possible to single out groups which, having been exposed to specific risks before the disaster, may find themselves facing increased difficulties. The risk is determined by the potentially harmful effect on these groups that the environment may exert after the disaster. Two aspects of the risk should be considered:
o the biological aspect. i.e. the specific relative weakness of certain individuals in relation to the difficulties that may arise after the disaster,
o the social aspect. i.e. the specific cultural and socio-political factors that may place certain groups in difficulty.
The biological risks threaten expectant and nursing mothers, children during the first few years of life and those suffering from chronic diseases. For all these groups the following factors represent supplementary risks:
o exposure to climatic changes (cold. humidity. sudden changes in weather, winds).
o the difficulty of keeping to the diet prescribed (shortage of certain foods, difficulty of preparing meals),
o the fact that everyday life causes stress and a greater expenditure of energy (travel. transport of objects. repair work. etc.),
o the increased frequency of minor accidents (cuts. injuries. burns) that may disturb a precarious balance,
o the lack of objects that make life easier (spectacles, hearing-aid batteries. etc.).
o possible difficulties. delays or irregularities in the supply of particular medicaments (hypotensive agents. insulin, etc.).
The social aspect of the risks varies greatly from society to society. In certain cases superstitions, religious beliefs and rumours tend to try to point the finger at the "guilty" in the disaster. There may be ostracism of, or aggressiveness towards, particular social groups or individuals. In other cases, once the initial phase of solidarity and mutual assistance is over, the disaster may reinforce the ostracizing or marginalizing tendencies already present in social life. Certain social groups or individuals are exposed to these risks: immigrants, the mentally ill, the handicapped and socially weaker or "different" groups in general. All the social risks are accentuated and accelerated by the occurrence of corruption, crime and degradation of political life.
The local health personnel should organize specific programmes for the vulnerable groups. Every programme should encourage meetings between people with the same problems, mutual assistance and community solidarity. The periodic reports submitted by the local health workers should take into consideration the special supplies needed for the vulnerable groups.
<section>Periodic reports by the local health personnel</section>
As soon as possible the local health personnel should prepare periodic reports (weekly at the outset, then monthly) summarizing the information collected daily on a large sheet of paper or in an exercise book. The reports should be sent to the intermediate level, which will thus have available a supplementary source of information essential for getting to know and evaluating the local situation.
The record sheets normally provided for health reports can be used, but it should be borne in mind that under emergency conditions the following items of information take on particular importance:
o The composition of the community: in a disaster considerable variations may occur not only because of deaths and the evacuated but also because a certain number of families or individuals may decide to leave the disaster area either temporarily or for good. On the other hand persons originally from the area but living elsewhere may turn up, or else, after weeks or months. those who left the area in the first few days after the disaster may come back. It is important to know the age-structure of the local population in order to adapt health activity programmes accordingly and to assess requirements in the way of vaccines' medicaments. foodstuffs and other supplies.
o The number and type of health personnel, among whom should also be counted local volunteers and volunteers from elsewhere.
o The causes of death, which constitute a universally used indicator for assessing the health situation.
o The cases it has not been possible to deal with on the spot, and the reasons behind the decision to evacuate. This makes it possible to define realistically the sphere of action of the local health team.
o The establishments to which people have been evacuated: this makes it possible to adapt the data received from the intermediate level so as to make rational use of support structures and specialized centres.
o The symptoms and diseases seen by the local health team: this indicates the disease pattern that is developing and the number of people affected.
o The programmes and activities under way: this enables the intermediate level to take into account what the local team has already undertaken and to give the team indications on how to adapt its activities to the epidemiological forecasts made at intermediate level and in accordance with the evolution of the health situation in the whole of the disaster area.
<section>Part III : Preventing and alleviating the consequences of disasters</section>
Part III suggests a number of activities that the community and local health personnel can undertake in order to be ready to deal with disaster situations. disaster plan, if one exists, will also define the tasks of the communities and the local health personnel. In this case the activities are indicated in the plan.
If a community needs assistance to carry out disaster- preparedness activities, it may contact:
o the Government (the ministry responsible for civil protection),
o international cooperation agencies (through the ministry of foreign affairs and cooperation),
o the WHO office in the country concerned.
<section>Chapter 5 : Action by the community</section>
<section>Analysis of past experience</section>
If the area has already been the scene of disasters, any activity concerned with the disaster-preparedness of the community and the local health personnel must take analysis of past experience as its point of departure. Questions should be asked such as the following:
o What caused the victims and the damage ?
o What were the main difficulties in the relief work?
o What were the problems in the subsequent hours and days?
o Would it have been possible to foresee the disaster?
o What preparedness would have limited the number of victims damage ?
o What errors were made which must not be repeated ?
o What actions did the most good ?
As concerns the local health personnel in particular, it may be asked, for example:
o What types of emergency case occurred and what was it possible to do for them ?
o What problems were encountered in the reception of the injured ?
o What supplies were lacking ?
o What difficulties arose in sending the injured to properly equipped hospitals?
o Would it have been possible to obtain better cooperation from the volunteers ?
o What were the difficulties of coordination with the authorities and the other community groups?
o How would it have been possible to obtain more effective outside assistance?
o What health problems arose after the disaster and what were the difficulties in coping with them ?
<section>Information on disasters</section>
Information is the basis for preparing the community and the local health personnel for emergency situations. Consideration must be given to:
o selecting the types of information content that should be disseminated to attain the degree of preparedness wished for,
o the sources of the information.
o the best means of reaching the intended recipients, capturing their attention and obtaining their participation.
Five essential features can be envisaged to which it is possible to relate the main types of information that will be useful locally if a disaster occurs:
o Knowledge of the envisaged danger. It is a matter of supplying, in the simplest and clearest manner possible, information on the causes and dynamics of the type of disaster that may occur in the area.
o Forecasting the disaster and giving warning of it. Where possible, indications must be given of the means of forecasting the moment at which disaster may strike and of the warning systems used.
o Prevention and alleviation of the consequences. The means must be indicated by which the risks to survival and health in the envisaged disaster can be prevented or alleviated.
o The emergency. The acts and behaviour that are essential for saving lives and reducing risks when the envisaged disaster strikes must be indicated.^ 1
See, for example, Annex 4.
o The actions to be taken in the hours that follow the disaster. Indications must be given of the types of behaviour best adapted to the situation that will arise after the envisaged disaster takes place and the points of reference that must be used in organizing relief, survival and the management of the various problems.
Two types of information source must be envisaged:
A.
Documentary sources. Among these must be classified:
o First and foremost the official documents prepared by the national. regional or local authorities--generally laws on civil protection, circulars, emergency plans. safety regulations to cover different types of risk (fire. electricity, gas, built-up areas. land occupancy, communities. etc.). These documents can be obtained from the authorities and distributed.
o Then come books, journals and other publications dealing with the various aspects of prevention and action in the event of disasters. A list is given in Annex 12. It is valuable for the local health personnel. depending on the local risks and previous initiatives, to have access to publications which will help them tackle the subject in the most up-to-date and rigorously correct way.
o Finally. films and audiovisual material which can be useful not only in the internal task of ensuring the preparedness of the local health personnel but also for information and discussion with the venous members of the community. II will thus be possible to use commercial films or State and private television programmes dealing with disasters.
B.
Direct sources. Those available on the spot include:
o Eye-witness accounts. photographs. recordings and any other contributions coming directly from persons who have lived through a disaster. Analysis and discussion of first-hand experience of both disaster victims and relief workers (and, of course, the local health personnel) are indispensable.
o Contributions from all those who can help define the content of the information available: local authorities. local health workers, teachers of geography. the natural sciences. physics. chemistry and other subjects in the schools, public utility personnel (electricity. gas. water, town and country planning. transport. communications. etc.) and safety personnel. Where they are available, use should be made of contributions from experts and specialists in geology. economics. sociology. town planning and architecture as well as, naturally, specialists in various branches of public health and in the subjects most directly connected with disasters. such as vulcanologists. meteorologists and seismologists, and experts from bodies and associations that intervene in the case of disasters.
Every culture has its preferred methods for circulating information. Some of the methods that can be used are listed in Table 1.
<section>Some information on natural disasters</section>
Earthquakes result from continuous geological transformations in our planet. According to the latest theories, the tectonic plates of which the world's surface consists are in constant movement. It is near the sites of friction between these plates that earthquakes occur.
A particularly dangerous phenomenon is the tsunami (maremoto), a great wave as much as several metres high which crashes down on the coasts as the result of an earthquake on the ocean bed. Sometimes it engulfs people who have fled towards the beaches. A tsunami may cross the ocean and crash down on to beaches thousands of kilometres away.
Table 1. Media for information and communication at local level^1
Adapted from: OFFICE OF THE UNITED NATIONS DISASTER RELIEF COORDINATOR, GENEVA. Disaster prevention and mitigation: a compendium of current knowledge. Vol. 10. Information aspects. New York, United Nations, 1979.
--arrangements for listening to national radio or television broadcasts
--local broadcasting, news him. radio forum or newspaper column
-- newspapers, weekly magazines
--audiovisual media: photographs, transparencies, audiotapes, audiocassettes, 8-mm films, videocassettes, documentary films
--exhibits and displays. information racks, travelling exhibits. wall posters, designs
--speeches, letters to the newspapers, questions raised in the local political assembly, community discussion groups
--internal communications to administrators and employees in disaster-related jobs
(circulars, bulletin boards, publications)
-- leaflets, books, manuals, strip cartoons
--wall-sheets, posters, wall-newspapers
-- inserts and enclosures in other forms of communication, such as magazines. news papers, books
-- meetings. seminars. conferences, working groups
-- eye-witness accounts. discussions in schools. vocational training centres. clubs. public places
-- telephone answering service with recorded messages
--public address systems
--special events: disaster simulations, exchanges of visits between communities on aspects of prevention, visiting days at early warning centres. civil protection centres, seismological observatories. dams, etc.
-- folk media: story-telling, dance, song, poetry, puppet shows, music, street entertainment, posters
The effects of earthquakes are simply and effectively epitomized in scales of intensity.^ 1
See Annex 5.
It is very difficult to foretell the date and intensity of an earthquake but a few recent successes in that regard provide some hope.^2 At the present time, however, no reliable and generally accepted method of forecasting is available. An earthquake takes place after gradual accumulation of energy connected with subterranean stresses accompanied by important geological changes that may be noted over a period of a few weeks, months or even years before the actual quake. Some phenomena can be observed by the public:
On 4 February 1975 at Haicheng in China 400 000 people were successfully evacuated 5(1/2) hours before shocks of magnitude 7.3 on the Richter scale destroyed 90% of the dwellings. In May 1977 in Yunnan Province, China, two earthquakes of magnitude 7.6 and 7.5 respectively were predicted. enabling the alarm to be given 8 minutes before the first shock.
o The water level in wells is subject to sudden fluctuations and there are variations in the temperature, level and turbidity of deep underground water.
o Premonitory shocks (foreshocks) may precede the main shock by anything from a few minutes to hundreds of days.
Other premonitory signs can be detected by means of scientific instruments.
Among disasters, floods are by far the most serious in terms of human lives and property. Plains liable to flooding always attract settlement: ease of tillage. water supply, transport and waste disposal. It is because of the concentration of the population on alluvial plains that floods are one of the most deadly natural phenomena. The Yangtse floods of 1931 killed over 3 million people by drowning or famine. WHO was called upon more recently still--in 1982--to intervene in the same region. The causes of floods are:
o rises in stream levels resulting from abundant rainfall or the melting of the snows,
o ice barrages (the piling-up of large masses of ice coming from upstream) that cause stream levels to rise, and the sudden break-up of the masses of ice, which is responsible for flood waves,
o flash floods caused by intense rainfall and sometimes tomadoes.
o tidal bores.
o storm waves, caused by a combination of lunar tides and very high winds.
Hydrologists and meteorologists can forecast floods with a high degree of accuracy. In every zone exposed to flood risks it is possible to know in general terms the time of year, frequency, rate of flow, duration and depth of a rise in the water level. More specifically a flood can be predicted from a few hours to a few weeks in advance. Various methods of observation make it possible to give warning in various ways: radio, television, newspapers, telephone messages, megaphones, sirens, flags. Continuity of information and keeping the public in areas at risk constantly aware of the danger are very important.
Volcanic activity may range from fumaroles or moderate lava flows up to violent explosions which project various types of material to a great height. The nature of the activity depends on the viscosity of the magma (molten rock) which reaches the surface and on the volume of gases involved:
o Streams of lava vary greatly in volume, spread, thickness and speed of progression. Their path depends on the topography; while they are very impressive, they represent very little risk.
o Explosions of volcanic domes eject volcanic materials: volcanic bombs, blocks, lapilli, ash and scone.
o Ignimbrite flows, consisting of a mixture of lava, ash and gas, form a cloud that moves at ground level at great speed.
o Nuées ardentes or hot avalanches: mixtures of volcanic materials and gases hurtle down the slopes at over 100 km/h. A nuée ardente killed some 30 000 people at Saint-Pierre in Martinique during the eruption of Mont Pelée.
o Mud streams, a mixture of debris and water, arising, for example, from the sudden melting of glaciers (23 000 dead in Colombia in 1985) or bursting of the banks of artificial lakes in the crater. flow down the slopes at speeds of up to 100 km/in and may cover stretches of hundreds of kilometres; they are very deadly.
o Clouds of volcanic gases, (sulfuric, carbonic or fluoric acid) may contaminate water and crops, inflict burns and suffocate human beings and animals.
Volcanic eruptions leave a trail of destruction and death on the path of lava and mud streams and nuées ardentes and in areas on which volcanic matter falls. Fires break out; roofs collapse under the weight of the ash; water and plants are contaminated. Sometimes eruptions are preceded or accompanied by earthquakes.
To envisage the type and intensity of a future eruption. the best approach is to proceed by analogy with previous eruptions of the same volcano. A map of the volcano may make it possible to predict the paths of lava flows. The previous periodicity of the eruptions of a volcano, if any, can serve as a very general guide for predicting a new eruption. Some eruptions are preceded by changes in behaviour of the fumaroles or hot springs on the mountain: the appearance of new features, an increase in temperature, changes in the composition of the gases. In other cases there are magnetic changes before an eruption. Some agitation can often be seen among animals. Scientific monitoring of the deformations (upswellings) of the ground and the shocks that accompany volcanic activity is very important. By combining these observations the specialist can predict eruptions, sometimes with astonishing accuracy (the eruption of Mauna Loa in Hawaii in 1942).
Tropical cyclones or hurricanes show a regular seasonal tendency. Every year they claim numerous victims and cause great damage. For example, in November 1970 a cyclone laid waste Eastern Pakistan (now Bangladesh). with a death toll of over 300 000. Cyclones originate over the sea in the tropics, particularly towards the end of summer. A cyclone has a central zone, its 'eye', with a diameter varying from 20 to 150 km. Around this calm centre the violent winds move clockwise in the southern hemisphere and anticlockwise in the northern.
The winds generated and accelerated by the difference in pressure between the centre and the periphery may blow at up to 300 km/in. The destructive power of cyclones is due to the force of the winds, to the intense and prolonged rainfall, which may also cause watercourses to flood, and to the tidal waves driven along by the winds to hurl themselves on to the coasts. Cyclones move westwards and die out when they reach land or colder sea surfaces.
Cyclone detection is based on weather radar, satellite data and even messages from airliners. Meteorologists can predict their intensity and path, often with a high degree of accuracy. However, allowance must be made for the possibility of error, since cyclones may follow a very irregular path. In countries liable to cyclones, warning is given by the authorities, generally in radio or television broadcasts. The warnings are followed by bulletins confirming. refining or cancelling them.
Drought and its fearsome consequences, desertification and famine, result from a combination of several factors:
o a reduction in rainfall causing a shortage of water,
o a reduction in vegetation, erosion of the soil, surface evaporation,
o an increase in human and animal populations,
o political and technological decisions at national and international levels.
In rural communities, economic factors (type of agriculture) and social elements (nomadism, semi-nomadism, drift of population towards the towns, etc.) affect the health and survival of families and moreover have an impact on the desertification process.
It is generally accepted that the struggle against desertification must be waged in two complementary ways: on the one hand appropriate political and technical measures must be taken at national and international level and on the other there must be a continuous process of information, education in the local communities. As part of this process the role of the local health personnel is to develop programmes of prevention and adopt methods of health action based on community participation and self-organization. Voluntary workers and the Red Cross can make an important contribution here.
<section>Knowledge of the risks and the resources</section>
Knowledge of the risks to life and health to which the community is exposed can be acquired in various ways and to different degrees of detail. As part of national plans, local plans can be prepared by the community to deal with emergency situations. These plans can make use of special risk maps (e.g. earthquake, hydrogeological or volcanic zoning). In most cases, however, in the absence of plans, the community can ascertain the risks by periodically enlisting the support of various social groups. Even if this does not result in real plans, it is a valid means of preparing for emergency situations, for during these risk-ascertaining activities the problem is also tackled of what would have to be done and what resources would have to be utilized if the emergency actually arose.
Knowledge of hazards in the neighborhood
Knowledge of hazards in the schools
A local health worker goes into a school. He speaks of recent experience of hurricanes and floods
The health worker and the children go out to study particular risks.
Here, landslides. The teaching staff participate in the visit and the discussion.
A great deal of damage is caused by falling objects and by materials dragged along by the wind. It is essential to get to know and prevent such damage. Here the group studies a big tree with its roots exposed that could easily fall.
Fallen high-voltage cables cause electrocutions, short circuits and fires.
The visit is an opportunity to recall to attention the safety instructions in the case of cyclones and to study the parts of houses that need strengthening.
After the visit the children produce drawings on the risks studied. as their contribution to the community's risk map.
Who carries out the activities?
o the personnel of the public services,
o the police and fire brigade,
o first-aid associations,
o associations, professional people, organized groups in the community,
o the schools.
What risks are envisaged ? Each group can consider the risks with which it is most closely concerned, such as:
o the collapse of flimsily built buildings,
o the irruption of water in cases of floods, prolonged and heavy rainfall, tidal waves, cyclones, the failure of dams,
o fires (stocks of inflammable materials, electrical short-circuits),
o contamination of the soil, water and air by toxic products (what products?) which may spread in the event of an accident or disaster,
o explosions (stocks of gas. petrol or explosives),
o landslides the case of an earthquake or prolonged rainfall),
o damage from a volcanic eruption (examination of past experience),
o breakdown of communications (telephone lines, lack of electricity),
o isolation of the community because of roads becoming impassable.
Knowledge of risks to buildings
The local health personnel can cooperate in ascertaining the risks, particularly by helping the groups mentioned above to recognize certain dangers already present in normal times but which a disaster may make more acute:
o utilization of contaminated water and food,
o presence of insect disease vectors and rodents,
o poor environmental hygiene (disposal of refuse, sewage, etc.),
o absence of latrines,
o lack of hygiene [personal. domestic. in markets),
o harmful eating habits (meals poor in protein),
o other.
These activities to determine the risks and resources are carried out in the following stages:
o the organizing group meets and discusses the risks it wishes to concern itself with,
o visits to the sites exposed to risk and information meetings are arranged,
o the risks noted are discussed and possibly indicated on a map of the area visited (see risk maps in Annex 6),
o the resources available to the community in case of disaster are listed,
o initiatives to reduce the risks envisaged are proposed and efforts are made to put them into effect with the cooperation of other community bodies.
The figures give examples of these activities.
Who coordinates the various activities? The local authority and, where one exists, the community's emergency committee coordinate the activities and gather and summarize information on risks and resources. The simplest method is to organize an "Annual Day" on which each group submits the results of the work done, there is a discussion on general preparedness for emergency situations, and the steps to be taken are considered. One or more risk and resource maps can possibly be drawn up (see Annexes 6, 7 and 8). In this framework, the local health personnel describe their preparedness activities (see below).
<section>Evacuation of the population</section>
When an area is under an imminent threat of disaster (flood, cyclone, tidal wave, volcanic eruption), the competent authorities may order the evacuation of the population. The community's emergency committee will be able to cooperate in the evacuation if it knows the details of how it will be carried out:
o the evacuation routes and the other routes that could be used if one or more of the planned routes became impracticable,
o the means of transport by land, water or air,
o the sites to which the evacuees can be taken and given shelter,
o arrangements to supply water, food and other necessities.
In the case of evacuation the local health personnel must concern themselves with ensuring, under the best possible conditions and with the collaboration of the families, the marshalling and transport of the sick, the disabled, the handicapped and other vulnerable persons. They will collaborate in providing the population with accurate information regarding the reasons for the evacuation and the ways in which it is to be carried out. They will help to reunite families. They will organize a health post on the site chosen for providing temporary shelter and from that post busy themselves with every aspect of managing the health problems that follow a disaster.
<section>Twinning</section>
The twinning of local communities for the prevention and alleviation of the consequences of a disaster is a very valuable means of assistance.^1 Twinning involves the conclusion of an agreement between communities. providing for various types of activity such as:
o collaboration, Joint initiatives and exchanges for preventive activities: organization of a health information networks mapping resources. training of staff, education of the population. sanitation plans, strengthening or recuperation of the building stock. study seminars. volcanic. seismic or hydrological zoning, etc.:
o determination and preparation of the resources to be sent in the event of a disaster: equipment and machines for clearing rubble, specialized personnel, health equipment and personnel, communications equipment and personnel;
o provision for means of transport and temporary accommodation in the event of evacuation;
o organization of joint exercises.
For example, following the 1980 earthquake in Italy, which took a toll of over 3000 lives in the Naples region the assistance sent by Italian towns situated at various distances from the scene of the disaster proved in many cases speedier and more effective than other forms of assistance. In most cases teams were sent who had their own means of shelter and survival and brought with them the necessary machines, equipment or, particularly, specialized staff. A few hours after the earthquake each of the local communities stricken by the disaster was twinned with an Italian town (or sometimes more than one) for immediate assistance. These twinnings in some cases lasted several months and provided very important help in the reorganization of community life and the return to normality.
The local health personnel of the twinned communities work periodically together on types of action to be taken in an emergency, for example:
o training schemes on how to behave in different types of emergency,
o equipping and preparing the local health establishment to receive a large number of injured and sick people,
o previous agreement on evacuating cases that cannot be dealt with on the spot to a properly equipped hospital,
o joint initiatives for public health action in the event of a disaster disease monitoring, sanitation, health education, rehabilitation, mental health and its community management, etc.
Twinning should be reported to and agreed by the regional and national authorities, to avoid duplications and gaps.^2 Twinnings are very important: they make it possible to prepare disaster relief plans which can be rapidly put into effect. They presuppose educational activities that commit the two communities in a broad and systematic way; they develop a feeling of cooperation and solidarity; they encourage community actions and the assumption of responsibilities; they prevent the development of a feeling of dependence in regard to assistance, and the twinned communities often share the heavy burdens resulting from disasters.
Various criteria for twinning can be adopted. In some countries certain areas are much more liable to disasters than others. In such cases towns in high-risk areas may be twinned with low-risk towns. In other cases, however. the fact of being exposed to the same dangers in two different areas may encourage the conclusion of twinning agreements. In yet other cases emotional, economic, cultural or political reasons provide a basis for twinning.
<section>Exercises and activities to promote community preparedness</section>
The community's emergency committee, in collaboration with the schools, local associations (such as the local branches of the Red Cross) and community services. can organize simulation and other exercises and disaster-preparedness activities.. This work should make allowance for the local culture and habits and if it is to be effective must not be of an artificial nature. Each potentially real situation must engender appropriate activities arising from discussion and the participation of the members of families from the community.
Work on ascertaining risks and resources lends itself very well to creating a series of opportunities for carrying out activities that will be useful for community life and at the same time function as exercises in disaster preparedness. Further examples of preparedness activities include:
o exercises in first aid: how to extricate. give first aid to, and transport injured persons. etc..
o exercises in providing temporary shelter: organization of camps for temporary shelter in event of a disaster,
o sanitation exercises: installation and management of water-supply points and latrines, controlled refuse disposal, etc.,
o guided visits to volcanoes, seismological observatories. dykes, civil protection centres (fire stations, forest warden posts. etc.), factories. stores of dangerous materials, sites exposed to risk,
o dummy runs and practice alerts organized by the local authority,
o strengthening of flimsy structures in accordance with the programmes of the local administration: groups of dwellings can be strengthened with the help of voluntary workers, schoolchildren, etc.,
o flood protection (various means of ensuring that a watercourse does not overflow its banks);
o information (exhibitions of drawings. lectures, photographs. films on disaster preparedness);
o training of groups of volunteers available to help the community emergency committee in activities when a disaster strikes and afterwards.
<section>Basic education</section>
Experience shows that even in the absence of specific disaster-preparedness activities, the population and the staff of public services respond much better if beforehand the community develops activities and initiatives based on:
o encounters, exchanges, the expression of needs, information and communication,
o community discussion and action to gain an understanding of the causes of disasters and associated problems, plan the most appropriate measures and put them jointly into effect,
o a feeling of belonging to the community by making proper use of local cultural values, forms of social life, resources and products,
o combating the rejection or exclusion of the disabled. the mentally ill. the handicapped and other persons in difficulty,
o the development of assistance and mutual aid,
o meetings with local authorities and collective discussions to resolve community problems.
<section>Chapter 6 : Action by the local health personnel</section>
<section>Essential professional qualities of local health personnel for coping with disasters</section>
In the event of a disaster, the local health personnel must immediately become an active. reassuring and organizing force to which the community can refer. They will be more effective their families have suffered in the disaster) if they have been previously trained to play this role. They will be able to contribute not only by displaying a positive psychological and emotional attitude of readiness to help and solidarity but above all by reason of their professional qualities and methods of work. Some of those qualities are particularly useful at the time of the emergency and during the days that follow.
Experience has shown what professional qualities are important in the event of a disaster. The ability to estimate requirements and resources is the essential means of avoiding bewilderment and confusion. It serves to:
o select priorities for direct action by local staff in the emergency relief work and later in the management of health problems,
o determine the real and accessible resources available in the way of personnel, premises, medicaments, equipment and materials,
o ascertain what is missing and what must be obtained as a priority from outside assistance.
The evaluation of needs and resources is not a bureaucratic process: it is effective only if it results in good mental and operational organization of the local health personnel. Evaluation must seek to establish in every instance what must be done, who should do it, in what way and by what means. Obviously it is a tool that could be validly used in normal times, since it makes it possible to give clear answers to questions of fundamental importance for the health of the population in the event of a disaster.
In the situation following a disaster, even more than in normal times, health cannot be separated from the material, social and cultural conditions obtaining in a community: versatility is precisely the ability to take into consideration all the factors that have repercussions on the health of the persons or groups receiving care. This does not mean that local health workers must know how to do everything; but it means they must know how to bring into play the other technical or community resources needed to supplement health activities, while still performing their own specific professional tasks. This is not easy, for when confronted with the practical complexity and emotional tension involved in multisectoral work, health personnel often end up by confining themselves to repetitive sector, regardless of other community services.
A good knowledge of the area for which the local health personnel are responsible is essential in the event of a disaster and forms part of their professional qualifications. Some aspects are of fundamental importance:
o knowledge of the risks to health,^1
o knowledge of resources useful in normal times and above all in the event of disaster.
See the knowledge of the risks and the resources and Annex 6.
It is important in disasters to have a knowledge of several aspects of the life and moving forces of the community, for example:
o the composition of the population by age, sex and family nuclei,
o the community's institutions, services and administration,
o its social structure,
o its economic and productive activities.
o the forms of local political management, influential groups and persons, current conflicts, the influence of political factors on health,
o traditions, eating habits. the venous aspects of the local culture.
Disasters often give rise to a sudden change in the strata and motive forces of society. The local health workers can expect everyone to be ready to cooperate and to show solidarity: it is knowledge of the community that will make it possible to bring about the participation and joint initiatives essential for managing health problems.
In the event of a disaster the local health personnel must become the focus for obtaining and imparting information on emergency relief, reuniting families, and evaluating needs and resources. They will be able to do this all the more effectively if they have developed and established a system for circulating and managing information on the community's health problems. Among important professional qualities must be counted the ability of the local health personnel to select useful information, put it into circulation among the community in a constructive way, and dismiss false rumours. Information and communication form the basis of an ability to develop community participation and community activities.. In the event of a disaster it becomes essential to coordinate health activities with:
o rescue work and the restoration of links with the outside,
o the local authorities.
o means of information and communication,
o public utilities (electricity, water, etc.),
o the social services,
o the transport services,
o the nearest health services to which the injured and sick who cannot be cared for on the spot will be evacuated,
o voluntary workers,
o outside assistance.
In fact, coordination implies paying close attention to the requirements of others and an ability to direct others towards the needs one is trying to satisfy. It will succeed all the better if clear information is available and if needs and resources can be correctly assessed. Coordination is dependent on two major conditions being met:
o clarity of the objectives.
o ability to deal intelligently and constructively with the conflicts that are often unavoidable in a community.
In all health activities methods of action should be chosen that interest and move people, encourage them to assume responsibilities, entrust them with clear and simple tasks, and promote cooperation. solidarity and mutual assistance. At the outset these methods involve more intense, difficult and prolonged work for the local health personnel but they produce better and more lasting results.
<section>Improving certain professional skills</section>
A useful means of preparing for emergency situations is to launch training and further training activities on aspects of professional work that become particularly important in the event of a disaster. For example, national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies organize first-aid courses designed to train volunteers who can intervene in emergencies. In these activities allowance must also be made for the situation of isolation and overload that may arise. Experts from specialized centres can help the local personnel improve their skills. Training that should be considered includes:
A.
How to deal with venous types of emergency:
o haemorrhages.
o cardiovascular failure,
o respiratory distress.
o states of shock,
o skull injuries,
o bums
o fractures. dislocations, sprains,
o wounds.
o exposure to cold.
o drownings.
o electrocutions,
o poisoning,
o bites from venomous snakes.
B.
Development of working methods to deal with various aspects of public health:
o health information network, use of record cards, notebooks and registers, drafting reports,
o disease-monitoring system,
o action to promote mental health and deal with psychological difficulties,
o psychological and physical rehabilitation, use of prostheses,
o education for health, hygiene and a clean environment,
o control of endemic diseases (diarrhoea, tuberculosis, malaria, parasite diseases. vaccinable diseases),
o monitoring of nutritional status, remedial diets, education on nutrition (in famine areas).
<section>Preparation of the health centre or hospital</section>
When a disaster occurs the health centre or hospital in the stricken area may for some time be the only health resource available. For that reason it is essential in risk areas to prepare it for the emergency that may occur.
In particular, provision must be made in the health centre or hospital for:
o premises for receiving and sorting the injured,
o a reserve stock of emergency medicaments, ^1
o a stock of medical supplies for use in emergencies (see Annex 9),
o essential medical equipment, bearing in mind the level of professional skill of the local health personnel (sterilization, minor surgery, resuscitation. etc.),
o ensuring the availability of the water, electricity, fuel and supplies needed for the health facility to function,
o means of transport (ambulances, other vehicles),
o means of communication (telephone, radio, etc.).
See WHO emergency health fat: standard chugs and clinic equipment for 10 000 persons for 3 months. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1984 (new edition in preparation).
When the local health personnel include several professionnals, a plan for emergencies must be prepared which assigns to each of them precise tasks, such as:
o coordination of reception of cases,
o screening and emergency care,
o organization of the voluntary health workers in the health facility,
o organization of the voluntary health workers in the community,
o supplies,
o communications.
The local hospital may suffer serious damage in a disaster. To deal with that possibility, a plan^2 must be available which makes provision for:
o the tasks and responsibilities of the staff,
o instructions for using the disaster warning systems,
o explanation of firefighting techniques and the points at which extinguishing equipment is kept,
o ways and means of evacuating hospitalized patients,
o periodic exercises and dummy runs.
See also: Health services organization in the event of disaster. Washington DC, Pan American Health Organization. 1983 (Scientific Publication No. 443).
<section>The training of voluntary health workers</section>
The training of voluntary health workers is important for any programme directed at the general public. It should include initiatives specifically concerned with disaster-preparedness. Below are a few examples of the tasks which voluntary health workers can be trained to take over in an emergency:
o collaboration in first aid,
o reception of cases at the health facility,
o liaison with the family groupings,
o operation of the health information
o collaboration in carrying out programmes of vaccinations, health education, environmental sanitation, nutrition, mental health, groups at risk, etc.
<section>Preparedness activities for the population</section>
In communities particularly exposed to the risk of disaster, local health personnel can include disaster-preparedness activities in the ordinary health programmes. For example, ordinary hygiene programmes can also deal with the problems of, and the way to behave in, the particular hygienic situation that arises as the result of an earthquake or a flood.
Disaster-preparedness activities are included in programmes focused on certain population groups:
o schools, occupational training centres,
o workplaces,
o neighbourhood groups,
o associations, groups of volunteers, etc.
Below are a few examples of the content of disaster-preparedness initiatives:
A.
Training in first aid
o how to lift and transport an injured person,
o how to clear the airways and carry out artificial respiration,
o how to stop a haemorrhage,
o what to do in the case of bums, drowning, electrocution, snakebite, poisoning, etc.
B.
Activities to ascertain health risks. The compilation of risk maps.
C.
Exercises in sanitation and hygiene.
o utilization of safe water,
o fly control.
o vector control,
o rodent control,
o the protection of foodstuffs,
o use of latrines,
o ensuring a clean environment. controlled refuse disposal,
o measures against lice, scabies, parasites, etc.
D.
Activities concerned with the health education of groups at risk.
E.
Health activities as part of twinning arrangements.
<section>Annexes</section>
<section>Annex 1 : Diseases to be monitored when people are housed in temporary shelters</section>
Disease^1
Main Causes
Diarrhoeal diseases
Overcrowding. Contaminated water and food.
Measles
Overcrowding.
Respiratory complaints
Poor housing conditions. Shortage of blankets and clothing.
Malaria
A new environment with a type of malaria against which the refugees have no protection. Stagnant water becoming a mosquito breeding ground.
Meningococcal meningitis
Overcrowding in a region where the disease is endemic (it is often seasonal in certain places).
Tuberculosis
Overcrowding.
Helminths, particularly hookworm
Overcrowding. Poor sanitation.
Scabies (a skin disease caused by mites)
Overcrowding. Poor bodily hygiene.
Xerophthalmia (infant blindness)
Vitamin A deficiency (xerophthalmia is often provoked by measles or some other acute infection).
Anaemia
Malaria, hookworm, shortage or poor assimilation of iron and folate.
Tetanus
Injuries in an unvaccinated population. Poor obstetrical practice may cause tetanus of the newborn.
People suffering from malnutrition are particularly at risk of serious attacks of all these diseases. Good nutrition therefore constitutes an effective preventive measure.
<section>Annex 2 : Specimen record card for use by person in charge of family grouping in preparing health report in collaboration with local health personnel</section>
Date
Grouping
Prepared by
SHELTER No.
FEVER Name and age of person concerned
DIARRHOEA Name and age of person concerned
DOES NOT FEEL WELL Name and aye of person concerned and description of complaint
<section>Annex 3 : Nutrition</section>
<section>Recommended daily energy and protein intakes for healthy individuals</section>
Adapted from DE VILLE DE GOYET. C.. SEAMAN. J. & GEUER. U. The management of nutritional emergencies in large populations. Geneva. World Health Organization, 1978.
Group
Energy in MJ (kcal[th])
Proteins (g)
Approximate proportion of the population in a developing country %
Mixed diet with some animal protein
Cereals, possibly with legumes
0-l year
14 (breast-feeding, supplemented after 6 mths by weaning foods)
1-3 years
4-6 years
7-9 years
10-14 years: boys
10-14 years: girls
Male adult (moderately active)
Female adult (moderately active)
Pregnancy (latter half)
Lactation
Adapted from DE VILLE GOYET, C., SEAMAN, J. & GEIJER, U., The management of nutritional emergencies in large populations. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1978.
If an adequate energy supply is not provided, some protein will be burnt to provide energy and not used for body growth or repair, i.e. it will be used in the same way as carbohydrate or fat, which are much less expensive.
A part (20-40%) of the energy requirement should be supplied from fats or oils, which greatly enhance the palatability of the diet, diminish its bulk (important for younger children) and reduce transport requirements.
Energy requirements vary widely even in normal individuals. They are also increased by physical activity. For example, a 65-kg man requires daily:
6.3 MJ (1500 kcal[th]) when resting in bed day and night.
11.3 MJ (2700 kcal[th]) if lightly active in the daytime (clerk. office worker).
12.6 MJ (3000 kcal[th]) if moderately active 8 hours a day.
14.6 MJ (3500 kcal[th]) if doing heavy work 3 hours a day (labourer).
Much higher intakes are required for the treatment of malnutrition.
<section>Weight-for-height</section>
From DE VILLE DE GOYET, C., SEAMAN. J. & GEUER, U., The management of nutritional emergencies in large populations Geneva, World Health Organization, 1978.
A. Young children (both sexes)
Weight (kg)
Height
(cm)
Standard
standard
standard
standard
standard
B. Adults
Males (weight in kg)
Female (weight in kg)
Height
Standard
Standard
(cm)
weight
standard
standard
standard
standard
standard
standard
<section>Arm-circumference-for-height, young children (both sexes)</section>
This method is not used by the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies for its assessment of nutritional status because it is more reliable as a means of measuring malnutrition.
Height
Standard arm circumference
(cm)
(cm)
standard
standard
standard
standard
standard
standard
<section>Indicators of likely need for a supplementary feeding programme (SFP)</section>
Major indicator
Other factors
Type of SFP
General ration less than 1500 kcal per person/day
None
For all vulnerable groups, as soon as possible
Over 20 % children malnourished
10-20% children malnourished
General ration averaging less than 2000 kcal per person/day
Severe public health hazards
Significant diseases (esp. measles) prevalent or imminent
None
Selective within vulnerable groups : at least for all malnourished
5-10% children malnourished
Any of above
None
No SFP : individual attention to malnourished. (Whatever the other factors, available resources are probably better used correcting/minimizing them)
Under 5% children malnourished
Any of above
<section>Annex 4 : What to do in an earthquake</section>
When an earthquake surprises people indoors, the spontaneous reaction is often to rush outside, but be careful... If your house is built of adobe, banco, cob or similar materials, and if the street is wide enough--wider than the buildings are high--go out and make your way along the middle of the street towards a square.
If your house is of concrete or steel and you are on the ground floor, go out and walk along the middle of the street towards a square.
The ground floor collapses first. The higher floors offer greater resistance.
If you live on a higher floor, remain indoors near an internal pillar.
If your house is of stone, brick or the like and you are above the ground floor, do not go into the stairwells but position yourself under a doorway in a load-bearing wall.
If you are on the ground floor and the street is wide enough--wider than the buildings are high--go out and walk along the middle of the street towards a square.
<section>Annex 5 : Mercalli scale of earthquake intensities (ms)</section>
Some countries use the Rossi-Forel scale of one to ten. The Richter scale measures the magnitude of an eartquake, i.e. the energy released. Above Richter magnitude 5.5 damages is generally caused.
Intensity
I Only detected by seismographs, not felt by persons.
II Detected indoors by a few persons, particularly on the upper floors of buildings.
III Detected indoors by several persons: windows may vibrate and objects swing.
IV Detected out of doors by a few persons and indoors by many; crockery rattles and floors and ceilings creak as they would if a heavily laden lorry were passing along a cobbled street.
V Detected by the whole population of a locality. Awakens many sleepers. Causes liquids to spill. Makes suspended objects swing considerably and small objects move. Some bells ring.
VI Awakens all sleepers. Frightened people leave their homes. The shock makes all bells ring and lighting fitments swing. Clocks stop. Trees shake, books and small objects fall off shelves and furniture. In badly built dwellings roughcast surfaces crack and plasterwork falls.
VII General alarm, but well-built structures suffer no damage. Church bells ring. Cracks appear in some buildings. Chimneys in a poor state of repair fall and may damage roofs, Windows are broken. The mud in ponds is stirred up. Waves form on some watercourses. Variations occur in the level and width of sources of water. There are landslips on river banks and cracks appear in roads. Dwellings in tropical areas made of interwoven leaves and branches and the wooden houses of Japan remain intact.
VIII General alarm and panic. Gaping cracks appear in well-built structures. Tree branches break off. Furniture moves about or is overturned, lighting fitments are damaged. Fissures several centimetres wide appear in the ground. Lake water becomes muddy. New lakes may be formed. Springs may disappear or appear and their level and capacity may change several times. Church belfries and factory chimneys are most damaged. Rocks fall from mountain slopes. Driving is made difficult. Statues twist round on their pedestals or fall.
IX General panic. Partial or total destruction of about 50% of buildings. Numerous cases of damage to furniture and objects in houses. Animals flee. Monuments and statues fall. Reservoirs are damaged. Some underground pipes are broken.
X Most stone buildings are destroyed. Solid wooden buildings and bridges suffer damage and some are destroyed. Water and gas mains are broken. Cracks appear in the streets. Fissures are formed in loose ground and landslides occur along slopes and river banks. The water of lakes and watercourses is thrown up on to the banks.
XI Stone buildings completely destroyed. Solid structures of timber and branches only survive in isolated cases. Even the best-built bridges are destroyed. Railway rails are twisted. Dykes disintegrate.
XII No manmade structures survive. Changes in topography occur: fault slips, important horizontal displacements, mountain landslides, lake formation, the appearance of new watercourses, etc.
<section>Annex 6 : Community risk maps</section>
Risk maps drawn up by the community and local health personnel are not professional cartographic productions. rather to underpin the community activity of discussing and assessing the risks.
The essential point in drawing up risk maps is precisely the work of community education and preparation on which they are based. It is during meetings to compile risk maps that it is possible to tackle the subject of the kinds of preventive action to take in each particular situation in the event of disaster.
Thus, as each risk is catalogued in the course of these meetings indications can be given on how to reduce it. Examples are the strengthening of flimsy dwellings, sanitation, the listing of places of refuge in the event of floods, etc.
It is useful to encourage the establishment of a group of volunteers ready to work more intensively with the local health personnel. In the event of a disaster, this group, which will have taken part in drawing up the risk map, can help to monitor the situation at all the points at risk. This will give a rapid idea of what has happened on the basis of the points considered to be most exposed to risk, so that relief priorities can be organized in the most effective way. If the area to be covered has been shared out beforehand, the damage and the requirements can be assessed more easily and quickly.
<section>Annex 7 : The signs of danger in disaster-damaged buildings</section>
After an earthquake or any other happening that damages houses, the inhabitants:
... feel insecure and anxious because of the danger, the cracks, doors that will no longer shut, etc.
... suddenly rediscover signs of damage, even those that existed before,
... always have the feeling that the dam- age, the cracks and the subsidences are getting worse day after day.
It is essential to be ready to reply to such questions as:
Is there a risk of my house collapsing?
What if there is another earthquake shock ?
What can be done to strengthen the house?
NB: almost always an earthquake has several linked effect-c so that a mixture of different types of damage and cracks is found.
Floods
reduce the cohesion of soils; there is therefore a risk that foundations may collapse.
Cyclones cause damage above all to roofs and windows and sometimes also to load-bearing elements that are not sufficiently rigid.
Landslides
cause the subsidence of foundations or smash down outer walls; this damage is similar to that caused by floods or cyclones.
Whatever the cause of the damage, it is essential to be able to recognize dangerous situations:
--cracks that weaken load-bearing structural elements,
--cracks that show that load-bearing elements have been broken.
Other sorts of crack, even though they may seem important, are not dangerous.
What can be done right now to avoid the damage increasing and enable people to live in safety ?
<section>Annex 8 : Resource maps</section>
Drawing up maps of the resources available in the event of a disaster is a good way of preventing or alleviating the consequences of such a disaster. Resource maps complement risk maps.
The local health personnel collaborate in preparing them with the community's technical services and the local authorities. The aim is to determine beforehand the resources that could be used in the event of a disaster and to indicate the places where they can be obtained. Various types of resources are distinguished:
A. Those used to reach victims:
o four-wheel-drive vehicles, boats, lorries, cars, bicycles, other means of transport. petrol stocks.
o emergency lighting equipment. means of signalling to the victims.
B. Those used to extricate the victims:
o spades. picks. ropes, pulleys. buckets. ladders, chain saws. shears, saws, toolboxes, pocket torches, blankets,
o power shovels, earthmoving equipment, cranes.
C. Those needed for giving emergency care:
o general supplies for the health facility.
o emergency health equipment, medicaments,
o ambulances or other means of transport.
D. Those needed for providing temporary shelter:
o buildings considered to be disaster-proof and which can serve as rallying points (schools, public buildings),
o stores of tents, camping equipment. caravans and other structures and materials that can be used to provide shelter,
o the site chosen for the first temporary shelters,
o shelters for animals.
E. Those needed for survival:
o foodstuffs,
o clothing, boots and other footwear,
o blankets, means of heating,
o means of lighting,
o products for personal hygiene, cleaning and disinfection,
o means of waste disposal,
o simple sanitary engineering equipment.
F. Those needed for transport:
o base point for transport (buses, lorries, cars, three-wheeled vehicles, other means of transport).
G. Those needed for communications:
o centre for coordinating information. with megaphones, dispatch riders, battenes. generating plant, priority telephone lines, other means of communications.
o local radio stations,
o amateur radio operators ('radio hams').
H. Those needed for evacuating the population:
o preferred routes,
o ways and means.
o rallying points and sites for temporary shelters.
I. Those needed for the transport and burial of the dead:
o means of transport.
o sheets. stretchers. leather gloves, rubber gloves, boots, disinfectants, quicklime.
o spades, power shovels. earth-moving equipment.
Maps of the resources available in the event of a disaster are discussed at meetings attended by the various senior officials of the public services and local authorities. The meetings are open to other bodies interested (associations voluntary groups, etc.). A resource map is not a professional cartographic product but merely a graphic summary of what has been agreed. The ideal would be for the maps to be accompanied by one or more leaflets or notices summarizing instructions to the population on what to do if disaster should strike the area.
<section>Annex 9 : Medical equipment of the health centre or hospital for coping with a disaster</section>
The following is a model list of medical equipment and supplies that would be useful in the event of a disaster. The items selected will depend on the professional skills available in the team.
Syringes, sterile disposable. Luer 2 ml
Syringes, sterile disposable. Luer 10 ml
Needles, sterile disposable, 0.8 x 40 mm/G21 x 1 1/2" (0.8 x 38 mm)
Needles, sterile disposable. 0.5 x 16 mm/G25 x 5/8"(0.5 x 15 mm)
Interchangeable glass syringes, Luer 2 ml
Interchangeable glass syringes. Luer 10 ml
Interchangeable needles, Luer. 144 assorted
Sterile swabs
Suture set
Needle-holder
Scalpel handle
Artery forceps
Dissecting forceps
Disposable blades
Scissors, straight
Scissors, suture
Thermometer, clinical
Stethoscopes. standard and fetal
Sphygmomanometer, aneroid
Vaginal speculum, Graves
Tongue depressor, metal
Urethral sounds, Foley type Nos 10-18
Drains or tubes for thoracic drainage with ancillary equipment and bottles
Tourniquets
Assorted tips
Tracheal cannulae
Kit for intravenous injections in children
Laryngoscopes for neonates, children and adults (complete)
Endotracheal tubes
Oxygen masks for children and adults + oxygen supply
Nasogastric tubes, infant No. 5 (premature baby) polyethylene
Nasogastric tubes, infant No. 8 (newborn) polyethylene
Nasogastric tubes No. 12 polyethylene
Needles, epicranial
Gloves, re-usable
Gloves, sterile disposable
Dressing trays with lid, stainless steel
Basins, kidney, 350 ml. stainless steel
Basins, round with lid. 240 ml. stainless steel
Basins, round, 600 ml., stainless steel
Gauze swabs, 5 x 5 cm, packets of 100
Gauze swabs, sterile 10 x 10 cm, packets of 5
Eye pads (sterile)
Paraffin gauze dressing, 10 x 10 cm, tins of 36
Sanitary towels
White cotton wool, 500 g roll
Zinc oxide plaster, roll 25 mm x 0.9 m
Gauze bandages, 25 mm x 9 m
Gauze bandages, 50 mm x 9 m
Gauze bandages, 75 mm x 9 m
Plaster of Paris bandages, 3 inches by 3 yards (75 mm x 2.7 m) packets of 1 dozen
Pneumatic splints, a selection
Safety pins, 40 mm
Hand towels
Soap, disinfectant
Plastic sheets
<section>Annex 10 : Outline schedules for self-evaluation in the event of disaster</section>
Self-evaluation schedules comprise a series of questions which the community's emergency committee and the local health personnel put to themselves in order to adjust and evaluate the action taken in the event of a disaster.
The questions in the schedule should be adapted to the specific situation in which action is being taken.
The schedules presented here are models intended to help the communities and the local health personnel to prepare their own self-evaluation. Drawing up self-evaluation schedules in normal times is a useful way of preparing for emergencies.
<section>Self-evaluation schedule for action taken by the community</section>
1. Self-evaluation questions for the situation immediately following the disaster
1.1 Has a community emergency committee been set up?
1.2 Have relief teams been organized?
1.3 Is anything being done for isolated families?
1.4 Have arrangements been made to pick up the injured and take them to the health centre or hospital ?
1.5 Have dangerous buildings been evacuated ?
1.6 Have steps been taken to solve the problems that are most urgent for the survival of the victims:
1.6.1 Water
1.6.2 Food
1.6.3 Shelter?
1.7 Has a place been assigned for the dead to be kept while awaiting burial ?
1.8 Are steps being taken to identify the dead ?
1.9 Has an information coordination centre been established?
1.10 Have communications been established with the central (regional, national) authorities ?
1.11 Have the most urgent requirements to be met from outside assistance been evaluated, taking into account the number of people needing assistance, the type of assistance necessary and the resources avail able on the spot?
1.12 Are steps being taken to reunite families?
1.13 Have safety instructions been issued ?
1.14 Are steps being taken to circulate information on:
1.14. 1 the consequences of the disaster,
1.14.2 the dangers that subsist
1.14.3 factors that may reassure people?
2. Questions for self-evaluation in the poet-disaster period
2.1 Are communications being maintained with the central authorities ?
2.2 Is information on requirements being coordinated ?
2.3 Are local voluntary workers being coordinated ?
2.4 Are voluntary workers from outside being coordinated?
2.5 Is inappropriate aid being successfully prevented and avoided?
2.6 Are relief supplies being fairly distributed?
2.7 Is contact being maintained with all family groupings?
2.8 Have families been reassured who are living in buildings that are damaged but not dangerous?
2.9 Has an appropriate site been chosen for temporary shelters?
2.10 In setting up shelters for disaster victims have family and neighbourhood relationships and socio-economic and cultural needs been taken into account?
2.11 Have the victims been organized in family groupings?
2.12 Have the essential problems been dealt with:
2.12. 1 water supply,
2.12.2 the provision of clothing, footwear and blankets,
2.12.3 food supply,
2.12.4 facilities for preparing hot meals,
2.12.5 the installation of latrines,
2.12.6 facilities for washing clothes and pots and pans,
2.12.7 collection and disposal of waste ?
2.13 Have short meetings been arranged in the community to discuss the various problems and find solutions them ?
2.14 Have steps been taken to encourage solidarity, mutual assistance, and constructive efforts among people ?
2.15 Have school activities started up again?
2.16 Have initiatives been taken for community action by children ?
2.17 Have steps been taken to combat false rumours?
2.18 Have measures been adopted to ensure that there is no favouritism in the distribution of relief supplies ?
2.19 Is care being taken to ensure that voluntary workers from the outside do not take the place of local manpower but help to take the situation in hand again ?
2.20 Have victims been encouraged and helped to resume their activities ?
2.21 Have initiatives been taken to facilitate economic recovery on the basis of putting local resources to good use ?
2.22 Have steps been taken to ensure that people participate in drawing up plans of reconstruction, rehabilitation and development and that those plans are in line with needs and the local culture ?
2.23 Are arrangements in force to avoid: 2.23.1 delays 2.23.2 crippling disputes, 2.23.3 favouritism, 2.23.4 speculation, 2.23.5 dishonesty, 2.23.6 violence?
3. Self-evaluation questions on disaster preparedness
3.1 Has an emergency committee been set up ?
3.2 Is the committee active?
3.3 Have steps been taken to:
3.3.1 analyse past experience of emergencies,
3.3.2 ascertain the risks of a disaster in the area and its foreseeable consequences,
3.3.3 determine what resources the community has available to deal with the consequences of a disaster,
3.3.4 train voluntary workers for rescue and first-aid work,
3.3.5 inform and educate the public on the hazards and on how to behave in the event of a disaster:
3.3.5.1 in the schools,
3.3.5.2 at place of work,
3.3.5.3 in the community,
3.3.5.4 in associations?
3.4 Has a community plan been drawn up to deal with an emergency, organizing activities in essential fields:
3.4.1 rescue work,
3.4.2 emergency care,
3.4.3 communications,
3.4.4 the supply of:
3.4.4. 1 water,
3.4.4.2 food,
3.4.4.3 power
3.4.5 temporary shelter if required,
3.4.6 transport,
3.4.7 sanitation,
3.4.8 dissemination of information and instructions?
3.5 Have emergency-preparedness exercises been organized?
3.6 Has twinning been arranged with one or more communities for action in the event of a disaster?
<section>Self-evaluation schedule for action by the local health personnel</section>
1. Self-evaluation questions for the situation immediately following the disaster
1.1 Has the health centre or hospital been organized to take in the injured ?
1.2 Have arrangements been made for sorting the victims into categories?
1.3 Has the help of voluntary workers been en listed for the reception of victims?
1.4 Have arrangements been made for evacuating to properly equipped centres patients who cannot be dealt with on the spot?
1.5 Have the type and quantity of drugs and medical supplies needed been estimated ?
1.6 Has their provision been ensured?
1.7 Has the cooperation been obtained of local private and contract health staff?
1.8 Has liaison been established with the community's information centre?
2. Questions for self-evaluation in the poet-disaster period
2.1 Are the injured and sick being provided with routine care ?
2.2 Has the disease-monitoring and health information system been activated by using voluntary workers and those in charge of the family groupings ?
2.3 Are health education activities being con ducted on:
2.3.1 using safe water,
2.3.2 individual and family hygiene,
2.3.3 cleanliness of the temporary shelters and the environment,
2.3.4 using the latrines
2.3.5 control of flies, disease vectors and rodents,
2.3.6 control of lice, fleas and other para sites (avoiding methods that give offence or involve discrimination against people) ?
2.4 Are vulnerable groups being looked after?
2.5 Has the continuation been ensured of the vaccination and health protection programmes being conducted before the disaster?
2.6 Are steps being taken to give psychological support to the victims and to deal with mental health problems?
2.7 Has the assistance of specialists from the intermediate level been obtained ?
2.8 Has liaison been established with suitably equipped centres so that patients can be sent to them who cannot be dealt with on the spot ?
2.9 Has liaison been established with laboratories suitably equipped for the necessary diagnostic activities?
2.10 Are periodic reports on the health situation being drawn up ?
2.11 In organizing health work, has allowance been made for the territorial distribution of clusters of victims?
2.12 Are health activities being organized in such a way as to make it easy for people to participate and take responsibility ?
2.13 Are the activities of voluntary health workers from elsewhere being coordinated ?
3. Questions for self-evaluation in regard to emergency preparedness
3.1 Has a plan of action up for the utilization of the health centre or hospital in the event of a disaster?
3.2 Are the supplies available that would be needed in the event of a disaster:
3.2. 1 drugs,
3.2.2 consumable health supplies,
3.2.3 items of health equipment,
3.2.4 water,
3.2.5 basic supplies for running the health facility?
3.3 Do the local health personnel know their tasks in the event of a disaster ?
3.4 Have steps been taken to give professional training on dealing with emergency cases?
3.5 Have activities been organized to train voluntary health workers to cope with emergency situations ?
3.6 Are emergency preparedness activities or exercises being carried out with the popula tion:
3.6.1 in the schools,
3.6.2 in workplaces,
3.6.3 in associations,
3.6.4 in the community,
3.6.5 as part of twinning schemes?
3.7 Have preparations been made for liaison with centres equipped to deal with emergency requirements ?
3.8 Has a plan of action been drawn up to cope with the eventuality of the health facility being badly damaged in a disaster?
3.9 Is there collaboration with the community emergency committee ?
3.10 Is an assessment periodically made of the community's health status, indicating potential risks in the event of a disaster?
<section>Annex 11 : The league of red cross and red crescent societies (LORCS)</section>
There are national Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in 144 countries, bringing together large numbers of voluntary workers trained in emergency care and other health activities. In the event of a disaster and in emergency-preparedness activities these voluntary workers can provide the local and national authorities with considerable assistance.
All the national societies are federated in the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (LORCS). In the event of a disaster LORCS coordinates the international assistance given by its national societies and channelled to the victims through the Red Cross (or Red Crescent) Society of the stricken country.
For further information on the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and for the address of the nearest Red Cross or Red Crescent Society, please write to LORCS, P.O. Box 372, 1211 Geneva 19, Switzerland.
<section>Annex 12 : A short reading list for local health personnel</section>
To obtain publications, slides, films or videocassettes on disasters and the role of health personnel, please write to WHO, Emergency Preparedness and Response, CH-1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland; PAHO. Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Relief Program. 525 Twentythird Street NW. Washington DC 20037. United States of America: Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Palais des Nations. CH-1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland.
Alma-Ata 1978: Primary health care. Report of the International on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 6-12 September 1978.
Geneva, World Health Organization, 1978 ("Health for All" Series, No. 1).
ASSAR, M. Guide to sanitation in natural disasters. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1971.
CAROLINE, N. L. Life supporting resuscitation and first aid. Geneva, League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 1984.
The community health worker: working guide, guidelines for training, guidelines for adaptation
. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1987.
DE VILLE DE GOYET, C., SEAMAN, J. & GEUER, U. The management of nutritional emergencies in large populations. Geneva. World Health Organization, 1978.
Emergency health management after natural disaster.
Washington DC, Pan American Health Organization, 1981 (Scientific Publication No. 407).
Environmental health management after natural disasters
. Washington DC, Pan American Health Organization, 1982 (Scientific Publication No. 430).
Guidelines for nurses in disaster preparedness and relief
. Geneva. League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 1985.
GUNN, S. W., MURCIA, C. & PARAKATIL, F. Dictionnaire des secours d'urgence en cas de catastrophe. Paris, Conseil International de la Langue Française, 1984.
Handbook for emergencies
. Geneva, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 1982.
Health services organization in the event of disaster
. Washington DC, Pan American Healt Organization, 1983 (Scientific Publication No. 443).
OFFICE OF THE UNITED NATIONS DISASTER RELIEF COORDINATOR, GENEVA. Disaster prevention and mitigation: a compendium of current knowledge: Volume 8. Sanitation aspects. New York, United Nations, 1982.
On being in charge: a guide for middle-level management in primary health care
. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1980.
PROTEIN-CALORIE ADVISORY GROUP OF THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM. A guide to food and health relief operations for disasters. New York, United Nations, 1977.
The Red Cross in emergency medical actions
. Geneva, International Committee of the Red Cross/League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 1983.
The treatment and management of severe protein-energy malnutrition
. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1981.
WESTERN, K. A. Epidemiologic surveillance after a natural disaster. Washington DC, Pan American Health Organization, 1982 (Scientific Publication No. 420).
WHO emergency health kit: standard drugs and clinic equipment for 10 000 persons for 3 months
. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1984 (new edition in preparation).
WHO publications may be obtained, direct or through booksellers, from:
ALGERIA:
Entreprise rationale du Livre (ENAL), 3 bd Zirout Youcef. ALGIERS
ARGENTINA:
Carlos Hirsch. SRL, Florida 165, Galerias Güemes, Escrilorio 453/465. BUENOS AIRES
AUSTRALIA:
Hunter Publications, 58A Gipps Street. COLLINGWOOD. VIC 3066.
AUSTRIA:
Gerold & Co.. Graben 31.1011 VIENNA I
BAHRAIN:
United Schools International. Arab Region Office. P.O. Box 726. BAHRAIN
BANGLADESH:
The WHO Representative. G.P.O. Box 250, DHAKA 5
BELGIUM:
For books: Office International de Librairie s.a., avenue Marnix 30, 1050 BRUSSELS. For periodicals and subscriptions: Office International des Périodiques. avenue Louise 485.1050 BRUSSELS.
BHUTAN:
see India. WHO Regional Office
BOTSWANA:
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd.. P.O. Box 1532. GABORONE
BRAZIL:
Centro Latinoamericano de Informação em Ciencias de Saúde (BIREME). Organização Panamericana de Saude. Sector de Publicaçòes. C.P. 20381,- Rua Botucatu 862.04023 SÃO PAULO. SP
BURMA:
sec India. WHO Regional Office
CAMEROON:
Cameroon Book Centre, P.O. Box 123. South West Province. VICTORIA
CANADA:
Canadian Public Health Association. 1565 Carling Avenue. Suite 400. OTTAWA. Ont. KIZ 8RI. (Tel: (613) 725-3769. Telex: :1-053-3841)
CHINA:
China National Publications Import & Export Corporation. P.O. Box 88. BEIJING (PEKING)
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA:
see India, WHO Regional Office
DENMARK:
Munksgaard Book and Subscription Service. P.O. Box 2148. 1610 COPENHAGEN K (Tel: + 45 1 12 85 70)
FIJI:
The WHO Representative, P.O. Box 113, SUVA
FINLAND:
Akateeminen Kirjakaupa, Keskuskatu 2.00101 HELSINKI 10
FRANCE:
Arnette. 2 rue Casimir-Delavigne, 75006 PARIS
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC:
Buchhaus Leipzig. Postfach 140.701 LEIPZIG
GERMANY FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF:
Govi-Verlag GmbH. Ginnheimerstrasse 20. Postfach 5360. 6236 ESCHBORN--Buchhandlung Alexander Horn, Kirchgasse 22. Postfach 3340. 6200 WIESBADEN
GREECE:
G.C. Eleftheroudakis S.A.. Librairie internationale, rue Nikis 4. 105-63 ATHENS
HONG KONG:
Hong Kong Government Information Services. Publication (Sales) Office. Information Services Department. No. 1. Battery Path. Central. HONG KONG.
HUNGARY:
Kultura, P.O.B. 149. BUDAPEST 62
ICELAND:
Snaebjorn Jonsson & Co., Hafnarstraeti 9. P.O. Box 1131, IS-101 REYKJAVIK
INDIA:
WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia, World Health House. Indraprastha Estate, Mahatma Gandhi Road. NEW DELHI 110002
IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF):
Iran University Press, 85 Park Avenue. P.O. Box 541551, TEHRAN
IRELAND:
TDC Publishers, 12 North Frederick Street, DUBLIN I (Tel: 744835-749677)
ISRAEL:
Heiliger & Co., 3 Nathan Strauss Street. JERUSALEM 94227
ITALY:
Edizioni Minerva Medica, Corso Bramante 83-85, 10126 TURIN: Via Lamarmora 3, 20100 MILAN, Via Spallanzani 9. 00161 ROME
JAPAN:
Maruzen Co. Ltd., P.O. Box 5050, TOKYO International, 100-31
JORDAN:
Jordan Book Centre Co. Ltd., University Street, P.O. Box 301 (Al-Jubeiha), AMMAN
KENYA:
Text Book Centre Ltd. P.O. Box 47540, NAIROBI
KUWAIT:
The Kuwait Bookshops Co. Ltd., Thunayan Al-Ghanem Bldg, P.O. Box 2942, KUWAIT
LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC:
The WHO Representative, P.O. Box 343, VIENTIANE
LUXEMBOURG:
Librairie du Centre, 49 bd Royal, LUXEMBOURG
MALAYSIA:
The WHO Representative. Room 1004,10th Floor, Wisma Lim Foo Yong (formerly Fitzpatrick's Building). Jalan Raja Chulan. KUALA LUMPUR 05-10: P.O. Box 2550, KUALA LUMPUR 01-02: Parry's Book Center, 124-1 Jalan Tun Sambanthan, P.O. Box 10960, 50730 KUALA LUMPUR
MALDIVES:
see India. WHO Regional Office
MEXICO:
Libreria Interacademica S.A.. Av. Sonora 206. 06100-MEXICO. D,F.
MONGOLIA:
see India. WHO Regional Office
MOROCCO:
Editions La Porte. 281 avenue Mohammed V. RABAT
NEPAL:
see India. WHO Regional Office
NETHERLANDS:
InOr-Publikaties, P.O. Box 14. 7240 BA LOCHEM
NEW ZEALAND:
New Zealand Government Printing Office. Publishing Administration, Private Bag. WELLINGTON: Walter Street. WELLINGTON, World Trade Building. Cubacade. Cuba Street. WELLINGTON, Government Book-shops at: Hannaford Burton Building. Rutland Street. Private Bag. AUCKLAND :159 Hereford Street. Private Bag. CHRISTCHURCH. Alexandra Street. P.O. Box 857. HAMILTON : T & G Building. Princes Street. P.O. Box 1104, DUNEDIN--R. Hill & Son Ltd. Ideal House. Cnr Gillies Avenue & Eden Street. Newmarket. AUCKLAND I
NORWAY:
Tanum--Karl Johan A.S.. P.O. Box 1177. Sentrum. N-0107 OSLO I
PAKISTAN:
Mirza Book Agency. 65 Shahrah-E-Quaid-E-Azam. P.O. Box 729, LAHORE 3
PAPUA NEW GUINEA:
The WHO Representative. P.O. Box 646, KONEDOBU
PHILIPPINES:
World Health Organization. Regional Office for the Western Pacific. P.O. Box 2932. MANILA: National Book Store Inc.. 701 Rizal Avenue. P.O. Box 1934. MANILA
PORTUGAL:
Livraria Rodrigues. 186 Rua do Ouro, LISBON 2
REPUBLIC OF KOREA:
The WHO Representative. Central P.O. Box 540. SEOUL
SAUDI ARABIA:
World of Knowledge for Publishing and Distribution. P.O. Box 576, JEDDAH
SINGAPORE:
The WHO Representative. 144 Moulmein Road. SINGAPORE 1)30: Newton P.O. Box 31,
SINGAPORE 9122
SOUTH AFRICA:
Contact major hook stores
SPAIN:
Comercial Atheneum S.A.. Consejo de Ciento 130-136. 08015 BARCELONA: General Moscardo 29. MADRID 20-- Libreria Diaz de Santos. P.O. Box 6050. 28006 MADRID: Balmes 417 y 419. 08022 BARCELONA
SRI LANKA:
see India. WHO Regional Office
SWEDEN:
For books. Aktiebolaget C.E. Fritzes Kungl. Hovbokhandel. Regeringsgatan 12. 103 27 STOCKHOLM.
For periodicals
: Wennergren-Williams AB. Box 30004.104 25 STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND:
Medizinischer Verlag Hans Huber. Länggassstrasse 76, 3012 BERN 9
THAILAND:
see India. WHO Regional Office
UNITED KINGDOM:
H.M. Stationery Office: 49 High Holborn. LONDON WCIV 6HB: 71 Lothian Road. EDINBURGH EH3 9AZ. 80 Chichester Street. BELFAST BTI 4JY: Brazennose Street. MANCHESTER M60 8AS: 258 Broad Street. BIRMINGHAM B1 2HE: Southey House. Wine Street. BRISTOL BSl2BQ All mail orders should be sent to: HMSO Publications centre, Nine Elms Lane, LONDON SW8 5DR
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:
Copies of individual publications (not subscriptions) WHO Publications Center USA. 49 Sheridan Avenue. ALBANY . NY 12210. Subscription orders and correspondence concerning subscriptions should be addressed to the World Health Organization. Distribution and Sales, 1211 GENEVA 27, Switzerland. Publications are also available from the United Nations Bookshop. NEW YORK. NY 10017 (retail only)
USSR:
For readers in the USSR requiring Russian editions: Komsomolskij prospect 18, Medicinskaja Kniga, MOSCOW-- For, readers outside the USSR requiring Russian editions: Kuzneckij most 18. Mezdunarodnaja Kniga, MOSCOW' G-200
VENEZUELA:
Libreria Medica Paris. Apanado 60.681. CARACAS 106
YUGOSLAVIA:
Jugoslovenska Knjiga. Terazije 27/11. 11000 BELGRADE
ZIMBABWE:
Textbook Sales (PVT) Ltd. 1 Norwich Union Centre. MUTARE
Special terms for developing countries are obtainable on application to the WHO Representatives or WHO Regional Offices listes above or to the World Health Organization, Distribution and Sales Service, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland. Orders from countries where sales agents have not yet been appointed may also be sent to the Geneva address, but must be paid for in pounds sterling, US dollars, or Swiss francs. Unesco book coupons may also be used. Prices are subject to change without notice.
The purpose of this Guide is to help communities and local health personnel cope with natural disasters such as earthquakes, cyclones and floods. External relief (from governments or international organizations) is essential for solving many of the problems, but if those affected do not rely upon it entirely, and if they organize themselves properly, they will help to improve the quality of the relief.
The Guide sets out clearly what should be done by the community and by local health personnel at the time of the disaster to organize rescue work and emergency care, and later on to solve the many survival and health problems resulting from the disaster.
Finally the Guide describes the various emergencies to which natural disasters can give rise and the steps that communities and local health personnel can take to prepare for the eventuality of a disaster and to prevent and mitigate its consequences.
The text is liberally illustrated.
