<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.3</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo EDITORIAL
Forest Energy Forum is really flying high! The critical phase is over and here we are now with the third issue. The good news is that Forest Energy Forum is also available electronically through our FEF home page [see Box below]. Thus, the number of contacts, which grew rapidly with issues 1 and 2, is increasing even more. We are happy with this small success and are starting to see that our first objectives are being accomplished. Having a forum where we can discuss with readers (from forestry, energy and environment sectors as well as different disciplines and backgrounds) the subject of wood energy for traditional use, and woodfuel as a modern energy carrier, is making FEF unique.
This issue covers many different themes - from a project using improved ovens for fish smoking in Guinea to the efforts of car manufacturers and oil companies to combat climate change. In order to contribute to a better understanding of the role of wood energy, it is important to show its multiple dimensions.
The Kyoto Protocol, agreed in November 1997, has contributed to our success, and will help especially to revamp forest energy as a modern energy carrier to combat the adverse effects of climate change. This agreement and the changes in energy policies initiated some years ago, the increasing advantage of woodfuel over other fuel options, and its largely untapped potential as a modern energy carrier, bring new opportunities for the utilization of cheap fuel sources.
The role assigned to bioenergy by the White Paper adopted by the European Union is a relevant initiative to fight greenhouse gas emissions. This document identifies a campaign for the "take-off of renewables" for large-scale penetration by 2010, assuming that bioenergy will generate 10 000 MW of real "green energy" using combined heat and power plants. Similar schemes have been adopted in other industrialized countries (e.g. Canada, Australia and New Zealand) and in some developing countries (e.g. Nicaragua and Honduras). This is really good news, not only for the energy and forestry sectors, but also for the many policy-makers, energy planners and experts who have been waiting a long time for the chance to show the immense potential of forest biomass for energy purposes.
The number of events and activities held monthly worldwide is increasing, as are the level and number of participants at those meetings - all indications of the interest in this "new-old" subject. I have participated in some extremely useful and informative events. I represented FAO at the Eighth Session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) which was held in Bonn, Germany in June. As a result of this participation, two meetings, organized by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and SBSTA, were held in Rome in September. The IPCC meeting discussed the outline of a Special Report on Land-Use Change and Forestry, and the SBSTA meeting discussed the definitions for land-use change and forestry activities included in the Kyoto Protocol [see under Special Features]. I also participated in the meeting of the International Energy Agency (IEA) Bioenergy Task 25 in Nokia, Finland [see under Events of Interest] where I was able to make
a field trip in the area of forest biomass for energy use. I was impressed by the technological development of the companies involved in the production, preparation, supply and use of woodfuels, and the level of integration of the new forest energy activities within the traditional forestry ones. This multidisciplinary integration is making wood energy an increasingly cost-effective source of energy.
FAO's Forestry Department has established a Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration which we hope will permit a better coordination of our activities with technical units both within and outside FAO [see under Special Features]. We are continuing to work on the collection of available information and data to upgrade and update our wood energy information systems and have started with Wood Energy Today for Tomorrow (WETT) Africa within the framework of the EC/FAO project on Data Collection and Analysis for Sustainable Forest Management: Linking National and International Efforts.
We have also begun preparations for a new Wood Energy Programme with the assistance of Prof. David Hall [see his article under Special Features] and Frank Rosillo-Calle of King's College London. I will share their ideas with you in the next issue, and look forward to your comments and views.
Finally, we have had to say goodbye to Prof. Luiz A. Horta Nogueira, who spent 11 months with us in Rome while on his sabbatical year and has now returned to his duties at the University of Itajuba in Brazil [see his contribution in Focus on ... Brazil]. Luiz has left a considerable number of technical papers as well as other material which help to make our life easier.
Miguel A. Trossero
FOR INFORMATION ON ANY ASPECT OF WOOD ENERGY OR WOODFUEL, PLEASE CONTACT:
M.A. Trossero
Senior Forestry Officer (Wood Energy)
Wood and Non-Wood Products
Utilization Branch
Forest Products Division
Forestry Department
Tel.: (+39) 06 57054175
Fax: (+39) 06 52255618
E-mail: miguel.trossero@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/
forestry/energy/feforum.htm
<section>2</section>
Logo SPECIAL FEATURES
Unified wood energy terminology (UWET)
At the international level, FAO collects and disseminates annual data on fuelwood and charcoal. FAO's Wood Energy Programme in conjunction with other relevant agencies has initiated action for a progressive improvement of our Wood Energy Information System (WEIS).
The existing information on biofuels in general, and woodfuels in particular, is highly aggregated and focused on the consumption of few biofuels (commodities or products) without giving due attention and recognition to other related aspects on the demand side and supply sources.
The main problems commonly encountered in the compilation and presentation of current bioenergy databases can be categorized in the following main general areas.
PROPOSED WOOD ENERGY TERMINOLOGY
supply sources
commodity
users
Direct woodfuels
Fuelwood
Woodfuels
Household
-Solid
-Liquid
-Gaseous
Indirect woodfuels
Charcoal
Commercial
Recovered woodfuels
Black liquor
Industrial
Other
Heat and power
Coverage. Currently FAOSTAT includes data and information only on fuelwood and charcoal, omitting other important kinds of fuel produced from wood. For instance, data on black liquor (the most important form of wood energy in many developed countries) are not included.
Disaggregation. Regardless of the importance of non-forest supply sources of wood energy and the large use of recycled products, the supply side is not disaggregated in FAO's wood energy database. On the other hand, although there is a clear shift in wood energy demand from traditional to modern uses, with a considerable impact on whole wood energy systems, this demand information is not presented in the current FAO database.
Definitions and units incompatibility. The absence of a comprehensive framework and clear set of definitions limits the possibility of comparison between other data sources on wood energy. Therefore, properly disaggregated biofuel data, with their respective units of measure and conversion factors clearly described and defined, are crucial for the collection, compilation and presentation of statistical data and information on bioenergy.
The proposed terms presented in the Table above follow as much as possible the existing definitions currently used in FAO Forest Products Yearbook (and available in FAO Forestry Paper No. 32, Classification and definitions of forest products), but they also include woodfuel categories and their respective terminology in line with the International Standard Industrial Classification of all Economic Activities (ISIC), Revision 3, developed and widely used for all conventional fuels and forest products.
The proposed terminology is organized following the different woodfuel types (fuelwood, charcoal, black liquor and other) as major commodities/products for all the data collection, compilation and presentation, while data for woodfuel supply sources and woodfuel end users have been categorized following the multiple interrelations between commodities, supply sources and end users as shown in the scheme presented in the Figure below.
In this way, the main woodfuel supply sources can be classified into three major groups: Direct woodfuels, Indirect woodfuels and Recovered woodfuels and data on the demand side are disaggregated by main users as shown in the Table.
The full electronic version of UWET will shortly be posted on our Web page for your comments.
Forestry department task force on the role of forestry in carbon sequestration
In order to coordinate the multiple activities to be undertaken by different technical units on climate change, FAO has set up the Ad hoc Group on Climate in Relation to Agriculture and Food Security in its Sustainable Development Department. The group is composed of representatives, at the technical level, from the departments, divisions and services interested in climate, its variability and changes.
Its main functions are to:
* ensure that climate resources and their fluctuations (variability and change) are given due attention in FAO's normative work;
* provide a coordination mechanism and exchange function for climate-related data and work within FAO;
* provide a forum for assessing internal and external work, data, knowledge and information on climate and their implications;
* ensure the coordination of inputs to FAO's Programme of Work and Budget for climate-related matters;
and
* assist in the review and preparation of IPCC and other UN documents related to climate and climate change and the potential impact on agriculture, forestry and fisheries.
L.A. HORTA NOGUEIRA & M.A. TROSSERO
In addition, FAO's Forestry Department has created a Task Force on the Role of Forestry in Carbon Sequestration with the aim of:
* providing better coordination and visibility of FAO's work on carbon substitution and carbon sequestration and the reduction of carbon emissions;
* suggesting mechanisms for the mitigation/reduction of carbon emissions through the use of forests, trees and their derived products (woodfuels and timber); and
* assisting member countries by providing them with information on the opportunities available in the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol and its related programmes.
The Task Force's main functions are to:
* exchange information and experience between the main normative activities developed by the Forestry Department in FAO headquarters at the regional and subregional levels and its field projects;
* provide an informal framework for the articulation of the activities developed by the department;
* contribute to the formulation and implementation of policies on the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions through forests, forestry activities and wood energy;
* collect, collate and compile information to assess potential contributions to greenhouse gas mitigation or reduction through wood energy, forests and forestry activities;
and
* liaise with other groups and networks within and outside FAO.
For more information, please contact:
Mr M.A. Trossero at the address given
on the first page.
Comparison of forestry...
L.A. HORTA NOGUEIRA & M.A. TROSSERO
...to curb carbon emissions in power generation
L.A. HORTA NOGUEIRA & M.A. TROSSERO
Biomass as an energy substitute for fossil fuels or a sink for sequestering carbon -implications for the Kyoto Protocol
At first reading the Kyoto Protocol appears only to advocate planting and conserving trees ("afforestation and reforestation") in order to create carbon sinks in the trees themselves and also in soils. Little is said about using the trees' (and other) biomass as an energy source to substitute the use of CO2-emitting fossil fuels.
However, it has been recognized for a decade that growing and using biomass on a continuous basis as a substitute for fossil fuels has clear advantages compared with using the biomass solely as a means to sequester carbon to create a carbon sink. Renewably grown biomass is a CO2-neutral fuel with a low sulphur content and can be converted into electricity, heat and liquid and gaseous fuels. The biomass is grown perennially to generate energy so that environmental benefits accrue, e.g. soil, biodiversity, in comparison with annual crops. In addition, rural communities gain jobs rather than taking land out of productive use only to sequester carbon. Thus, there are numerous environmental and social advantages to be gained from growing and producing biomass energy.
The problems with growing biomass as a carbon sink are that: i) once the trees or plants reach maturity, they start losing their stored carbon; and ii) maintenance and protection costs are incurred throughout the lifetime of the trees. However, when growing biomass with defined (short) rotations and using it as a source of fuel, income is generated continuously, thus creating local jobs and other benefits. Indeed, trying to maintain carbon sink forests for long periods may be very difficult unless rigid legal and fire protection systems are enforced. People may need to be excluded in order to prevent damage and loss of carbon sinks. This may not be feasible in many countries unless an effective long-term infrastructure exists.
Naturally, where mature forests exist they should be conserved both as carbon sinks and as deposits of biodiversity. In addition, where biomass energy plantations are grown (probably on excess arable and degraded land) they must follow ecological guidelines so as to improve above- and below-ground biodiversity and carbon sinks. Balancing the short- and long-term carbon and income benefits of these two approaches (substitution versus sequestration) on a given piece of land depends on numerous factors, such as yield and rotation, which can be modelled.
In the European Union (EU) a recent White Paper on Renewable Energy proposed that Europe could double its renewable contribution from the current 6 percent to 12 percent by 2010, which would substantially help meet Kyoto Protocol targets. It was proposed that biomass energy in total could contribute an additional 90 million tonnes oil equivalent (mtoe) per year compared with the present annual contribution of about 47 mtoe. Of this additional energy, "energy crops" (trees, woody grasses, etc.) are proposed in order to provide 45 mtoe per year, which could be grown on about 13 million ha of land (4 percent of total land at a yield of 10 tonnes/ha plus a conversion rate of 75 percent). This additional 45 mtoe per year of renewable, CO2-neutral biomass energy would reduce CO2 emissions by 50 million tonnes of carbon per year compared with the present EU total CO2 emissions of 890 million tonnes of carbon per year. The contribution of all forms of biomass (137 mtoe) to reducing
CO2 would total about 150 million tonnes of carbon by 2010, i.e. a reduction of 17 percent, which is double the EU's obligation under the Kyoto Protocol.
A clear point for policy-makers is that trees (and other forms of biomass) can act as carbon sinks but at maturity or at their optimum growth rate there must be plans to use the biomass as a source of fuel to offset fossil energies (or as very long-lived timber products). Otherwise the many years of paying to sequester and protect the carbon in trees will simply be lost as they decay and/or burn uncontrollably. Biomass has many advantages for an environmentally friendly future but, to obtain the maximum benefit, trees (other than in primary forests) must be used as an energy source at the end of their growing life. (Contributed by: Prof. D.O. Hall, King's College London, London W8 7AH, UK. E-mail: david.hall@ kcl.ac.uk)
Outcome and follow-up of the IPPCC/SBSTA meetings hosted by FAO
FAO was glad to have the opportunity of hosting the two meetings related to the Land-Use Change and Forestry (LUCF) aspects of the Kyoto Protocol from 23 to 25 September 1998, and was pleased with the outcome of the meetings. In addition to having had the possibility of meeting more than 100 specialists, together with the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) delegations from more than 20 countries, the most useful outcome was having established a good working relationship with the SBSTA secretariat and with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Considerable progress was made on the discussion of definitions used for LUCF presented in Articles 3.3 and 3.4 of the Kyoto Protocol regarding afforestation, reforestation and deforestation (ARD).
Progress was also made in the preparation of the Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry, and Carbon Emissions and Sequestration. FAO will provide inputs to the report through lead authors and will act as peer reviewer.
For more information, please contact:
Mr M.A. Trossero at the address given
on the first page.
World energy council congress
The 17th World Energy Council (WEC) Congress took place in Houston, Texas, United States from 13 to 18 September 1998. It was attended by 35 Ministers of Energy and by more than 5 000 energy experts from nearly 100 countries. The main presentations and discussions addressed the challenges facing the energy sector in the next decades, when fossil fuels will necessarily be replaced by renewable energy sources because of both supply and environmental reasons. Particular attention was given to the operation of energy systems independent of power grids or fuel pipeline networks, based on the decentralized operation of solar energy, wind and biomass, using modern conversion technologies. FAO's paper, "Wood Energy in Developing Countries" was submitted to the WEC Developing Country Committee; it was highly commended and will be published in conjunction with a paper entitled "Energy in Rural Areas of Developing Countries". These documents will serve as a platform for WEC's future
activities in the field of rural energy. (Contributed by: Mr Gustavo Best, Senior Energy Coordinator, Environment and Natural Resources Service (SDRN), Sustainable Development Department, FAO.)
<section>3</section>
Logo NEWS AND NOTES
Telefood
In 1997, people around the world donated more than US$2 million to TeleFood. One of the first projects funded by TeleFood has enabled local cooperatives in the villages of Temenetaye and Bonfi in Guinea to build fish-smoking ovens. About 150 women in the two villages have replaced their ovens with an improved type, which conserves scarce wood and reduces smoke by concentrating the heat. The processed fish is therefore of a better quality and fetches a higher price. The new fish-smoking ovens have now been built using locally available mud bricks and stone.
The impact of the project has been significant: a reduction in production costs thanks to a more efficient use of wood for smoking; less damage to the environment as a result of the reduced consumption of fuelwood; and, most important of all, an improvement in the health of the women during the smoking process, some of whom are among the poorest in the community.
For more information, please contact:
Ms Karin-Lis Svarre, Director,
Information Division, FAO,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Fax: (+39) 06 57056167;
http://www.fao.org/food
DONATIONS TO TELEFOOD
Just US$1 will buy five baobab saplings for planting in a West African village, thus greatly improving family nutrition.
Household energy, smoke and healt
Heat energy is the fundamental requirement for cooking and space heating. Heat energy in rural homes is obtained by the combustion of fuel in an appropriate device; in addition to heat energy, the combustion process produces smoke and gases which are major causes of health problems. Fuels range from the very basic animal waste, crop residues and wood, which are available at zero or minimal financial cost, to liquid and gaseous fuels, which can be expensive and, in addition, incur transport costs. The emission of hazardous combustion products is closely related to the grade of the fuel used.
Health hazards are associated with a range of activities, from collection of the fuel, processing to make it suitable for burning, to the combustion process itself.
Biomass fuels will continue to be the only source of heat energy for 75 percent of people in the developing countries; the adverse health effects of the products of combustion, and particularly smoke, are evident. The level of awareness must be raised and interventions made at the technical, educational and policy levels in order to improve the household environment. (Source: Boiling Point, No. 40, Spring 1998.)
Forestry, Farm and Community Tree Network (FACT Net)
Fuelwood: agroforestry production and productive use - why multiple-purpose tree species?
As land use worldwide intensifies, and the area of natural forests decreases, a higher percentage of woodfuels are taken and will continue to be taken from plantings on private and public lands. As the pressures on these resources increase, there will be a need to expand and improve tree planting and management activities.
The Forest, Farm and Community Tree Network (FACT Net) is sponsored by the Forestry and Natural Resource Management Program of Winrock International (WI). It is an international network of 2 000 partners in more than 100 countries who share an interest in the use of multiple-purpose tree species (MPTS) - that is, trees which are grown to provide more than one product or service.
Many MPTS have a primary or secondary value as fuel, and can be incorporated into community and private landholder plantings as pure stands, strips or individual trees to help meet family or local energy needs.
Through extension, communications and research FACT Net provides the skills and resources needed to introduce, manage and improve this renewable, agroforestry resource successfully. (Source: REPSource, 3(3), 1998.)
For more information, please contact:
FACT Net, Winrock International, 38
Winrock Drive, Morrilton, Arkansas
72110-9370, USA.
Fax: (+1 501) 7275417;
e-mail: forestry@winrock.org
European Agriculture and Forestry Biomass Network
In January 1995, three networks were established in different sectors of the biomass energy industry. The overall aims of the networks were to coordinate information exchange and to promote coordination and collaboration across Europe. The networks focus on: Agriculture and Forestry Biomass; Liquid Biofuels; and Industrial Waste.
* the transfer of knowledge and experience (particularly in relation to cost reduction and protection of the environment);
* the promotion of collaboration and coordination between national biomass centres and programmes and individual organizations in different countries;
* the detection and promotion of business opportunities;
and
* the assimilation of national and European strategies for the development of the industry. (Source: AFBII Final Report, December 1996.)
Smog-eating trees
Trees which absorb smog are being genetically engineered by Toyota to help fight the war against vehicle pollution. They are being reared to consume amounts of carbon dioxide far in excess of the amount that normal trees would usually take in as part of their natural cycle. Scientists at Toyota believe the special trees will help reduce the so-called "greenhouse gases" emitted by cars which are partly blamed for global warming.
A huge site near Toyota's headquarters in Japan has been planted with the smog-eating trees. The company says it is feasible for similar forests to be planted near its factories in the United Kingdom. Yasuhiko Komatsu, the project's general manager, said "We are focusing on plants' natural ability to cleanse the atmosphere. We are developing plants that have a superior ability to recycle air." (Source: The Daily Mail, 10 August 1998.)
Daimler-benz - Department of Renewable Energies
Daimler-Benz Aerospace AG is responsible for several space division activities. Its centre in Trauen is one of the three test and experiment centres of the Daimler-Benz Aerospace-Space Division (Dasa-RI) in Germany. Several environmental activities are being carried out alongside the propulsion tests for the rocket Ariane; it was in this context that the Department of Renewable Energies was founded in 1995.
This department is involved in the promotion of systems for the utilization of renewable energy sources and the development and management of projects in this field. Its main focus is on the identification, acquisition and development of sites for wind energy utilization, as well as fuel cell technology, autonomous energy supply systems and, increasingly, electricity generation from biomass. Of special interest is the perspective of realizing hybridly operating wind farms and biomass power generation plants.
A project is currently being developed for the biomass-based electricity and process steam supply of a paper factory in northern Germany. The installation of a 70-80 MW gasification system with a gas turbine is being considered for this project.
For more information, please contact:
Mr Scharaf Girges, Daimler-Benz
Aerospace, Center Trauen, 29328
Fassberg, Germany.
Fax: (+49 5055) 598 202;
e-mail: Scharaf.Girges@ri.dasa.deD
FAO´s Young Professionals Programme
The purpose of this programme is to strengthen national capacities in developing countries and countries in transition and to provide young graduates from FAO member countries with an opportunity to acquire experience in an international environment by closely associating them with the implementation of FAO priority programmes.
Candidates should normally be from the developing countries and countries in transition which are in particular need of capacity-building; however, candidates from developed countries may also join the programme provided that their assignment is funded by their government or their employer. Preference will be given to candidates who are currently employed, although candidates who have just graduated and have not yet found employment are eligible on condition that their candidature is supported by their government. While the programme is open to both male and female candidates, the candidatures of qualified women are especially encouraged. Assignments will be for a maximum of one year and will not be renewed.
Young professionals may be assigned to their own or a third country, at field projects, FAO decentralized offices or FAO headquarters. Please note that, although the educational qualification requirement is a university master's degree, preference will be given to candidates holding a Ph.D. degree.
For more information, please contact:
Mr Miguel Trossero at the address
given on the first page.
Wood Energy Textbook
Dendroenergía: fundamentos y aplicaciones
The final draft of the Wood Energy Textbook has now been fully revised and is undergoing its final editing. The main topics of the textbook are: the importance of wood energy; wood energy systems; woodfuel production; woodfuel conversion (basics, technology and examples); and economic and environmental aspects. The textbook is intended to be used by university students at forestry and engineering faculties.
The textbook has been prepared in Spanish but will eventually be translated into English and French.
For more information, please contact:
Mr M.A. Trossero at the address given
on the first page.
Carbonisation: méthode simple et efficace
Un moyen facile d'utiliser les déchets de bois et peut-être d'en tirer un revenu d'appoint dans les pays en développement sans mettre la forêt en péril. Un fût de 200 litres en bon état, par exemple, peut servir de four. Dans un premier temps, on découpe le fond du fût le plus près du rebord et, du côté opposé, on dévisse les deux bouchons du couvercle. Deux ouvertures de 2 cm sur 4 cm sont pratiquées à égale distance des bouchons qui joueront un rôle d'évents. Ces derniers doivent reposer sur deux tiges (tuyaux) afin de permettre une circulation d'air lors de la mise à feu.
On dépose des brindilles et menus bois au fond du fût sur 10 cm de hauteur, et, par la suite, le bois est enfourné à la verticale en deux longueurs de 30 à 40 cm. Moins il y aura de vides, meilleur sera le rendement en charbon.
Durant la carbonisation qui dure normalement de cinq à six heures, il faut remuer le fût de temps à autre pour faire descendre le charbon et y ajouter du bois. Dès l'instant où le fût est rempli de charbon, le fond est attaché à quatre endroits avec un fil de fer et on retourne le fût de haut en bas. Après échappement de la fumée, les évents sont fermés hermétiquement, et sur le pourtour, un talus de terre ou de sable est relevé. Après une période de refroidissement de 15 à 18 heures, la quantité de charbon produit est d'environ 50 kg si le bois est moyennement sec.
Pour plus d'informations, veuillez contacter:
Gaëtan Sirois, 390
D'Anjou St, Longueuil (Québec), Canada J4H 1K8.
Télécopie: (+11 450) 679 2043;
mél.: M276351@nobel.si.uqam.ca
Biomass energy and coffee processing
Coffee is one of the most important agricultural exports of Central America, and has been a key element in the shaping of the economies and societies for the different countries in the region. Central American countries produce about 10 million quintals of coffee (1 quintal = 46 kg of dry coffee). Energy requirements for drying the coffee range from 20 000 to 25 000 kcal/quintal, depending on the net efficiencies of both the dryers and the furnaces. In general, coffee-drying operations use from 18 to 25 kg of biomass to dry 1 quintal of coffee. Coffee husk, a very good biomass fuel, is capable of supplying about 50 percent of this energy requirement, which is normally supplemented by the use of traditional fuelwood. Currently, coffee drying consumes about 15 percent of the total wood supply in the region.
The coffee sector faces several challenges from the sustainable development perspective in Central America. Its processing clearly has major effects on the environment, including the fact that it consumes a large amount of biomass, creating serious pressure on the sustainability of available forest resources.
Green energy update
New terminology discussion group
The International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (IUFRO) Working Unit 6.03.02 is pleased to announce the formation of a new terminology discussion group on reforestation, afforestation and deforestation (RAD).
The purpose of the group is to provide a platform to discuss these key terms for forestry's part in climate change and the Kyoto Protocol in order to make people aware of terminology differences and, wherever relevant, point out the conceptual convergence behind the differences.
The discussions will focus on descriptive rather than prescriptive principles and will not be a form of negotiation. We aim to point out geographical and cultural differences rather than recommending definitions. A report found at http://home.att.net/~gklund/DEFpaper.html will serve as a starting-point for discussions.
We invite people around the world who are interested or involved in the subject to join our discussions. If you are interested in joining the RAD discussion group:
* Address an e-mail to: listproc@nrcan.gc.ac
* Leave the subject line blank
* On the message line, type: subscribe RAD-LIST [your first name] [your last name]
* Make sure nothing else follows (such as your signature block)
* Send
The discussions are expected to terminate in December 1998 when a summary report will be prepared.
Background information on WU 6.03.02 may be found at:
http://iufro.boku.ac.at/iufronet/d6/hp60302.htm; and at
http://www.wsl.ch/wsidb/datenbank/
And have you heard about ...
Renewable Energy for Development - the newsletter published by the Stockholm Environment Institute's Energy Programme with support from the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency?
The Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) is an international research institute focusing on local policy as well as regional and global environmental and development issues. The scientific and administrative work of the institute is coordinated by SEI's headquarters in Stockholm, Sweden, with centres in Boston (USA), York (UK) and Tallinn (Estonia). In addition, SEI works with an international network of independent scientists and research institutes located in many parts of the world.
A substantial part of SEI's Energy Programme is concerned with energy issues in developing countries. Studies are carried out in close cooperation with local institutions.
For further information, please contact:
Ms Solveig Nilsson,
SEI Energy Programme, Box 2142,
103 14 Stockholm, Sweden.
Tel.: (+46 8) 412 14 10;
fax: (+46 8) 7230348;
e-mail: solveig.nilsson@sei.se;
http://www.sei.se
<section>4</section>
Logo FOCUS ON ... BRAZIL
Feixe
Feixe, the ad hoc bulletin of the Brazilian Dendroenergy Network, presents data and studies on wood energy. There have been six issues to date; the next one is scheduled for December 1998.
For more information, please contact:
Prof. Luiz Augusto Horta Nogueira,
Instituto de Mecânica,
Escola Federal de Engenharia de Itajuba,
Campus Universitário 37,
500-000 Itajuba-MG, Brazil.
Fax: (+55 35) 629 1148;
e-mail: horta@poisson.iem.efei.br
Cenbio
The National Bioenergy Reference Center (CENBIO) was created in 1997 to promote the development of sustainable
biomass utilization for energy, mainly using forest fuels and sugar cane. The centre publishes an interesting bulletin (in Portuguese), Cenbio Noticias, presenting news, business opportunities, information on events and some data on bioenergy flows in Brazil. Two numbers of the bulletin have been issued to date.
For more information, please contact:
CENBIO, Av. Prof. Almeida Prado 925,
Cidade Universitária, São Paulo SP,
05508-900 Brazil.
http://www.iee.usp.br/energia/cenbio/cenbio.html
Bioenergy demand in brazil
FEIXE logo
The following tables present the biomass energy scenario in Brazil in terms of its evolution and composition of demand. These data are taken from the 1996 Brazilian National Energy Balance, issued annually by the National Department of Energy Development (DNDE) of the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MME), based on data supplied by state-level agencies which are often public utilities. In the last few decades, most of these former electrical companies have been converted to energy companies, introducing energy planning and market studies departments involved with biomass (the following are considered as biomass: fuelwood [directly used and charcoal], sugar-cane products [alcohol and bagasse], black liquor produced and used in cellulose plants and other industrial biomass residues). It is interesting to observe the progressive transition of biomass demand, from many consumers in the residential sector using low-efficiency stoves, to a significantly lower number of users in the
industrial sector, where the equipment is generally more efficient. It is very important to take into account this new profile of biomass demand when discussing a system of demand and supply information.
TABLE 1
EVOLUTION OF BIOMASS DEMAND IN BRAZIL
(`000 toe)
Total biomass demand
Total fuelwood demand
-Fuelwood consumed in residential sector
-Fuelwood consumed in industrial sector
-Fuelwood converted to charcoal
Total sugar cane demand
-Alcohol consumed (pure or gasohol)
Other biomass demand (industrial by-products)
TABLE 2
RELATIVE PARTICIPATION OF BIOMASS DEMAND PER SECTOR IN BRAZIL
Sector
(percentage)
Residential (urban and rural)
Industrial
Rural activities
Transport
Tertiary
TABLE 3
FUELWOOD DEMAND OF BRAZILIAN INDUSTRY
Industry
(`000 tonnes)
Cement
Mining
Non-ferrous
Chemicals
Food and beverage
Textiles
Pulp and paper
Ceramics
Other
Total
It is also possible to obtain from the Brazilian National Energy Balance the biomass demand in the main industrial sectors (presented in Table 3). It is interesting to observe the importance of the ceramics industry and the food and beverage industry, which corresponds to two-thirds of the total industrial biomass demand. In the food and beverage industry particularly (excluding the sugar industry, where only bagasse is used as fuel), biomass accounts for about 65 percent of thermal energy demand.
Another way to show the importance of biomass energy in the industrial context is by presenting the magnitude of biomass in each sector's energy demand (Table 4).
TABLE 4
RELATIVE SHARE OF FUELWOOD IN TOTAL ENERGY CONSUMPTION FOR SELECTED INDUSTRIES IN 1995
Industry
Fuelwood share of total demand (%)
Main energy vector
Cement
Fuel oil
Mining
Electricity
Non-ferrous
Electricity
Chemicals
Electricity
Food and beverage
Sugar-cane bagasse
Textiles
Electricity
Pulp and paper
Electricity
Ceramics
Fuelwood
Other
Electricity
As can be seen from Table 2, biomass demand in the residential sector is giving way to modern biomass demand in the industrial and transport sectors as alcohol. This tendency is the result of, on the one hand, the large migration of the population from rural areas to cities and, on the other, the fuel substitution policy adopted until 1985 as a consequence of the oil crisis. (Extracted from: Brazilian data on bioenergy: values and methodology by Prof. L.A. Horta Nogueira, Latin American Network on Dendroenergy (LAND), Escola Federal de Engenharia de Itajubá (EFEI), Itajubá MG, Brazil.)
Aracruz
Logotipo de la ARACRUZ
Actualmente ARACRUZ produce el 75 por ciento de la energía que consume. La idea es llegar al 90 por ciento de autosuplimiento de una demanda total de 158 MW. La empresa pretende reducir sus compras externas de energía de 40 MW a 10 MW.
Según el señor Volnei Remor Hilbert, consultor de asuntos energéticos de ARACRUZ, los costos de inversión para expandir la capacidad de generación será de 30 millones de dólares EE.UU., lo cual representará un ahorro anual a la compañía de 12 millones de dólares EE.UU. Este año ARACRUZ invertirá 1,5 millones de dólares EE.UU. en la modernización de los cinco turbogeneradores existentes, el que adicionara 8 MW a la capacidad actual de generación, reduciendo 20 por ciento en costos de energía.
El proceso de cogeneración de ARACRUZ produce energía eléctrica a un costo significativamente menor que la energía comprada a las empresas generadoras públicas. El costo de compra externa es de 55 dólares EE.UU./MW, mientras que para la cogeneración es de aproximadamente la mitad del precio externo.
Una de las características especiales de la cogeneración en ARACRUZ es que el 94 por ciento de la energía cogenerada proviene de la madera de eucaliptos, que es cosechada por la empresa para la producción de pulpa. Los turbogeneradores a vapor STAL (Sueco) y los AKZ (brasileños-alemanes) de contrapresión y condensación son movidos por el vapor producido en calderas que utilizan varias substancias originadas por el procesamiento de la madera del eucalipto, como el licor negro derivado de la fabricación de la pulpa, la corteza del árbol, además de otros residuos del proceso. Otros combustibles utilizados son gases nocondensables como hidrógeno y methanol derivados de varios procesos de la fábrica de pulpa, además de combustibles norenovables como gas natural y aceite combustible. El siguiente cuadro presenta los combustibles utilizados en la cogeneración:
Combustibles renovables
Licor negro
Biomasa (corteza, residuos de madera)
Methanol e hidrógeno
Total
Combustibles norenovables
Gas natural
Aceite combustible (2A)
Total
Según el Señor Hilbert, "Este es un proceso muy limpio y eficiente que depende casi únicamente de las fuentes energéticas existentes en la propia fábrica." (Fuente: Red Latinoamericana Electrónica en Bioenergía; correo electrónico: rmiranda@sdnnic.org.ni)
Para más información,
consulte la página Web de ARACRUZ en:
www.aracruz.com.br
<section>5</section>
Logo COUNTRY COMPASS
Burkina Faso
Natural Forest Management and Woodfuels in Burkina Faso, Project BKF/93/003
Burkina Faso's unplanned use of forest resources has led to the deterioration of all forest areas around Ouagadougou, prompting a government decision to develop effective management techniques.
The project, financed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and executed by FAO, aims to develop a national programme for the sustainable and integrated production of wood and non-wood forest products, particularly fuelwood and charcoal.
In an area extending 150 km around Ouagadougou, 80 000 ha are being managed with the active participation of local people using simple techniques to implement silvicultural operations. Supported by FAO, the Government of Burkina Faso has introduced a planned and more rational approach to forest resources. This has resulted in resource conservation and protection, as well as a 50 percent income increase for local people, who are now able to fulfil urban demand for fuelwood and charcoal.
Mr A. Thiam, the project's Forestry Economist, has prepared a detailed analysis of the progress achieved by the project to date and of the possibilities of self-sustained support of current activities by national and local organizations.
Plans are under way for the management of an additional 570 000 ha in Burkina Faso. Other Sahelian countries have expressed interest in adopting a similar programme.
For more information, please contact:
Mr Mory Keita, Senior Operations Officer,
Regional Office for Africa (RAF),
PO Box 1628, Accra, Ghana.
Fax: (+233 21) 665569.
Cameroun
Impacts environnementaux de la production de combustibles forestiers dans les forêts naturelles autour des grandes villes africaines. Exemple de Yaoundé, capitale du Cameroun
Situation actuelle des forêts périurbaines d'Afrique au sud du Sahara. Yaoundé, capitale politique du Cameroun, enregistre chaque année l'arrivée de nouvelles vagues de personnes venant de l'intérieur comme de l'extérieur du pays. Le nombre actuel de ses administrés représenterait entre 23 et 30 pour cent de l'ensemble des populations camerounaises. Cette migration interne d'individus ou de familles entières est souvent motivée par la recherche des centres disposant d'infrastructures socioculturelles, éducatives et économiques et, parfois, par la poursuite d'un hypothétique emploi plus rémunérateur. Avec cet afflux de nouveaux locataires des espaces urbains, se posent les problèmes de survie et notamment celui de la satisfaction des besoins en énergie, problèmes que les autorités administratives ne sont pas à même de résoudre. Selon les statistiques, dans cette ville, pas moins de 80 pour cent des foyers dépendent strictement du bois de feu comme la principale, voire
l'unique source d'énergie domestique. De plus, le caractère trop informel et très disparate de la filière bois de feu, allant de la chaîne de production jusqu'à la consommation finale, rend l'établissement de statistiques fiables un véritable casse-tête et ne cesse de préoccuper l'administration locale qui a besoin de ces données pour élaborer sa politique en matière de gestion durable des énergies renouvelables.
Place des forêts naturelles autour des grandes villes. Les forêts naturelles périurbaines constituent depuis toujours pour les populations citadines le centre d'approvisionnement par excellence en produits divers vitaux parmi lesquels le bois combustible, les produits alimentaires et les plantes médicinales; elles offrent en outre de nombreux avantages environnementaux. Il va sans dire que les pressions anthropiques qu'elles subissent ne vont pas baisser. A mesure que les terres forestières sont converties, et que la déforestation sauvage se fait plus difficile, le bois combustible lui aussi se fait rare. Il est devenu un bien fortement monétisé que seuls les gens ayant un revenu assuré peuvent s'offrir. C'est ainsi qu'à Yaoundé, entre 7 et 12 pour cent de la population ne parvient pas à satisfaire ses besoins quotidiens en énergie son pouvoir d'achat ne lui permettant pas de se procurer le bois feu, le combustible supposé le moins cher. L'éclatement d'une crise grave
affecterait la vie de beaucoup de personnes, notamment celles les plus démunies de la ville. C'est pourquoi il faut tout mettre en _uvre pour préserver les forêts autour de la ville, centre caritatif naturel pour les pauvres de la cité.
Les avantages d'une bonne planification forestière. Le Cameroun est certes un des grands pays forestiers du bassin du Congo. L'exploitation abusive de ses forêts périurbaines pour le bois de chauffe et le charbon de bois, associée à d'autres formes d'usage, donne, par exemple, à la ville de Yaoundé l'image de zones dénudées autour de lieux d'habitation qui était plutôt caractéristique des régions du Sahel. Le rythme de déforestation ainsi que les causes qui le sous-tendent font planer sur la ville et ses environs la crainte d'une crise imminente en bois combustible. Les efforts déployés pour la plantation d'essences à croissance rapide pour le bois de feu et la promotion et la vulgarisation de techniques modernes d'économie d'énergie ne parviennent pas toujours à désamorcer l'étau de cette menace de crise énergétique. Une mauvaise planification du développement en général et de la gestion des espaces forestiers en particulier expliquerait, sans doute, la raison pour laquelle
Yaoundé serait prédisposée à affronter une crise énergétique dont les premières victimes seraient les familles les plus défavorisées.
A chaque problème sa propre solution. Etant donné la nature des problèmes auxquels sont confrontées quotidiennement les forêts périurbaines, leur gestion ne devrait pas être planifiée et appliquée de la même manière que celle des forêts productives destinées à l'exploitation forestière. Etant donné que les forêts périurbaines sont d'accès facile, et donc très sollicitées pour satisfaire les besoins croissants en produits de première nécessité, parmi lesquels le bois combustible, elles nécessitent une approche d'aménagement mieux adaptée aux enjeux urbains. La prise en compte de ces particularités dans la détermination des objectifs permettrait de mieux cibler les besoins des usagers, et d'élaborer des stratégies visant à maîtriser les difficultés que pose souvent l'aménagement de ce type de forêts.
Conclusion. La déforestation compromet dangereusement la production soutenue et l'approvisionnement régulier de bois de feu, faisant ainsi beaucoup de victimes, surtout parmi les familles les plus défavorisées ayant de faibles revenus. Elle souligne les différents enjeux auxquels sont exposées les forêts naturelles autour des grandes villes, enjeux qui devraient servir de base pour fixer les objectifs d'aménagement et concevoir les stratégies et les plans de gestion nécessaires. Cette approche nouvelle devrait être consensuelle, réduire les obstacles administratifs, économiques, sociaux, culturels et environnementaux qui sont à l'origine des échecs du passé et permettre un partenariat actif et participatif entre tous les utilisateurs des ressources forestières. (Contribution de: M. François Ndeckere-Ziangba, Forestier principal (utilisation et environnement), Sous-Division de l'exploitation et de la commercialisation des produits forestiers, Département des forêts, FAO.)
Croatia
Over the past few years, Croatian scientists and engineers have carried out a considerable amount of research and have developed different technologies for energy production from biomass, including briquetting, where major advances have been made, and in some Croatian regions the briquette market is already well established. Research has been conducted on briquetting wood waste and sawdust as well as straw and maize stalks.
Briquettes made from maize stalks
BIOEN logo
One of the activities of the BIOEN programme in 1998 was estimating the bioenergy potential and further energy production. Three different scenarios were considered. The first (S-421, "low") was based on the gradual introduction of advanced technologies and does not include any governmental support. The second scenario (S-422, "moderate") includes a stronger concerted policy for the introduction of new technologies, use of renewables and increasing energy efficiency. The third (S-423, "high") is a "very environmental" scenario and includes the problem that pollution and greenhouse effects will already significantly affect energy policy in Croatia by 2010. (Source: Biomass and Waste Use Program in Croatia [BIOEN]; http://sunce.eihp.hr/english/bioen/bioen.htm)
Gabon
Sustainable barbecuing in Libreville: charcoal as an industrial by-product
With its modern and contemporary architecture, impressive fleet of cars, roads, electricity, water lines, telephones and television sets, Libreville seems to be closer to the developed North than its rural hinterland 50 km away. A typically African element in this Western-style urban landscape, however, is street food. As elsewhere in the region, street food is a cultural norm and a subsistence necessity in the Congo basin's wealthiest city. From early morning right through the night, the hungry or hurried Librevillois can snack on food prepared barbecue style. It is either fried or grilled over charcoal-burning stoves made out of old wheel rims or contrived out of various pieces of scrap metal.
The charcoal itself is produced from industrial sawmill scraps - particularly relevant from a conservation or resource management point of view.
due to the twofold reason of serious and widespread poverty and the inadequate (and misdirected) state investment in the sector.
The demand for charcoal in Libreville thus emanates largely from street vendors and, despite the city's rapid population growth rate of 8 percent annually, people only rarely cut down trees for fuel. Forest degradation in the Estuary Province where Libreville is located was originally caused by industrial exploitation of timber dating back to the 1880s and more recently by land clearing for agriculture.
The village of Essassa, situated between Libreville and Ntoum, produces much of the charcoal needed to satisfy the demand of street food vendors. Fang women from Makokou settled there when the sawmill at Okala closed. Okala (in the Mondah Reserve) was the area where the charcoal-producing activity first developed in the late 1970s in order to accommodate the eating habits of West African economic migrants. At that time Libreville had approximately 200 000 inhabitants and sawmill scraps were merely piled up and burnt, resulting in considerable calorie loss. Essassa was a logical destination for the migrants because another sawmill was located there: the SOMIVAB which produces lumber and railway ties for the Transgabonaise Railway.
Charcoal production in Essassa has been restructured and has boomed over the past few years. What was formerly a gendered sector (women controlled the entire chain from production to commercialization) is now mixed. Men provide the muscular force needed for this physically taxing activity and, above all, techniques, in the form of the meule casamançaise, which maximizes caloric values and reduces waste. Burying the "raw material" and covering it with mud and leaves is an energy-saving technique which West Africans had to develop in their own seriously deforested countries. The Essassa village chief is involved in the business as it is he who allocates and rents out land. The Gabonese women who market charcoal have thus become largely dependent on West African producers. They are also dependent on West African transporters who supply charcoal-filled rice sacks to Mont Bouet, by far the largest wholesale and retail market. The product is now increasingly being sold at the
Akébé and Nkémbo markets.
This "informal" economic sector also plays a cultural and a social role. Economically, it gives surplus value to what is still considered elsewhere to be waste material. In addition, it is directly and indirectly a major provider of jobs. Culturally, the street barbecue has become an urban way of life which enables the Librevillois to renew the traditional village tastes and smells of the village with nostalgia, even though they have adopted Western-style eating habits to a large extent. Socially, the grill has become a convivial meeting place.
Locally appropriate and elaborated resource management strategies do exist in the Congo basin, in spite of the attitudes still widely held by Western conservationists and development policy-makers to the contrary. Populations spontaneously adopt techniques to cover their basic needs and to maximize cash revenues from available natural resources. Essassa charcoal is just one example of an economic activity based on a natural resource which is not directly environmentally destructive. Sawmill scraps are also recovered at Owendo and provide the massive amount of fuel needed to smoke fish at Pont Nomba and Baracuda.
Although handicapped by short-term economic and institutional constraints, forestry policy-makers of the region are aware of the need to manage their forests sustainably. Moreover, they have unanimously embarked on the struggle for more in-country transformation of timber which is currently very low: in 1995, only 7 percent of Gabon's timber was processed locally. In fact, if increased local transformation were to be achieved, the amount of scrap generated and recyclable could help solve the problems of peri-urban deforestation elsewhere in the region where trees are cut for fuel. Instead of elaborating conservation strategies in the North and applying them in the South, international donors could maximize public development aid by identifying and building on strategies which are initiated locally and which already fulfil social and economic needs. (Contributed by: Theodore Trefon and Claudine Angoué. This research is being carried out in the context of a project financed by
the European Union [DGVIII], Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales [APFT]. Theodore Trefon is an APFT research coordinator; Claudine Angoué is an APFT research associate.)
For more information, please contact:
Dr Theodore Trefon,
Avenir des Peuples des Forêts Tropicales,
Université Libre de Bruxelles,
C.P. 124, 44 avenue Jeanne, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.
Fax: (+32 2) 650 4337.
Honduras
El Fondo de Manejo del Medio Ambiente Honduras-Canadá desembolsó ayer 600 000 lempiras para apoyar a los pequeños y medianos productores de la zona sur del país, en actividades forestales con fines de producción energética.
El dinero para el capital inicial será canalizado a través del Proyecto leña, proleña, que tiene como finalidad convertir en reforestación con la participación de productores rurales, mientras que los productores aportan la tierra y la mano de obra como recurso disponible.
Con esta ayuda, se busca reforestar 400 hectáreas para la producción de leña, con un promedio de 400 productores rurales, la plantación de 80 hectáreas para protección, la generación de empleo para 600 mujeres campesinas y la formación de una Asociación de Reposición Forestal, con la participación de productores e industriales de la zona. (Fuente: el Heraldo, 25 de junio de 1998.)
Cooperativas cultivan más de 1 000 hectáreas de bambú
El movimiento cooperativo agropecuario participa en el proyecto de cultivo de bambú con el propósito de darle otro uso a sus tierras y obtener mejores beneficios para los socios y familias.
La Compañía Hondureña del Bambú (CHB), subsidiaria de la empresa estadounidense International Bamboo Development Company, está promoviendo en el país un proyecto de cultivo de bambú con fines comerciales, al cual se han incorporado alrededor de diez cooperativas que disponen de 1 347 hectáreas y buscan nuevas opciones agrícolas para el bienestar de sus familias.
La CHB brindará la asesoría técnica a los productores que lo requieran y se hará responsable de la compra, comercialización y exportación de la cosecha, garantizando la venta de los productos.
Dentro de los mayores usos del bambú están los siguientes: alimento humano y animal, materia prima para pulpa y papel, aplicaciones en materia de construcción y fuente de biomasa para ser utilizado como combustible en la generación de energía eléctrica.
Para que el proyecto tenga la capacidad de suministrar los requerimientos de materia prima a las industrias identificadas y sea atractivo a los compradores de los productos de bambú, es necesario sembrar 10 000 hectáreas. (Fuente: Tiempo, 12 de junio de 1998.)
India
Overview of the Indian national burden of disease from indoor air pollution
This report by Kirk Smith can be accessed at the Stoves Web site: http://www.ikweb.com/enuff/public_html/Stoves.html
Conferencia internacional sobre estufas de leña
En esta conferencia se analizarán asuntos de interés como por ejemplo diseño de estufas de fogueos, promoción, financiamiento, efectos ambientales en el medio ambiente y en la salud.
Actualmente los organizadores están buscando financiamiento para la conferencia y asegurar principalmente la presencia de participantes de países menos desarrollados.
Como parte de este proceso, necesitan conocer el interés de profesionales de los países menos desarrollados que desean participar en la conferencia, para gestionar apoyo financiero para pasajes aéreas y estadía.
Si usted desea participar a esta conferencia pero necesita apoyo financiero, se puede comunicar con la Sra. Priyadarshini Karve informándole sobre el costo para poder participar en la conferencia, así como una breve descripción de su trabajo relacionado con las estufas de leña (gpk@physics. unipune.ernet.in).
Si además conoce a otras personas interesadas en el tema puede transmitirles esta información.
Hasta el momento no existe ninguna promesa concreta de apoyo, por el momento se trata solamente de una encuesta sobre los posibles interesados. (Fuente: Red Latinoamericana Electrónica en Bioenergia.)
Nota: La conferencia será en inglés sin traducción simultánea.
Nicaragua
Wood Energy Forum
The First National Wood Energy Forum was held in Managua, Nicaragua on 9 and 10 September 1998. This event was an initiative of the Association for Wood Energy Development of Nicaragua (PROLEÑA) and the Tropical Agronomy Center for Research and Education (CATIE). The purpose of this meeting was to gather for the first time more than 140 representatives from the commercial fuelwood sector of Nicaragua in order to evaluate and discuss the main limitations and recommendations for the sustainability of that sector.
In Nicaragua today fuelwood is the major energy source as well as the major forest product. It is estimated that 58 percent of all energy consumed is from fuelwood, and 70 percent of all wood consumed is also as fuelwood. Total annual fuelwood consumption is estimated at 2 million to 2.5 million tonnes, 90 percent of that total being used for home cooking, 60 percent of which through commercial channels. However, it is also estimated that 95 percent of commercial fuelwood is not harvested in a sustainable way, and that 90 percent of all fuelwood-consuming households use open or semi-open fires without a chimney. Therefore, there is a need to modernize fuelwood production and utilization in Nicaragua, and the National Wood Energy Forum was created to address this need.
The final Forum Declaration makes an urgent call for coordination between the government and the private institutions working in the sector to eliminate immediately barriers to fuelwood sector development and to implement policies, strategies, projects and programmes which will facilitate and promote the modernization of this sector, with special emphasis on guaranteeing the sustainable management of forest resources and to increase the efficiency and rational use of fuelwood.
The Declaration also points out that: government agencies lack resources to carry out properly their tasks of regulating, monitoring and supporting the modernization process; land ownership nationwide must be properly secured as a fundamental base to sustainable management of the forest resources; the legal paperwork required for the harvesting and commercialization of fuelwood is burdensome; taxes and other costs are excessively high; there is a tremendous lack of incentives and technical assistance for sustainable forest management and energy efficiency; there are economic and cultural barriers to energy efficiency; and, although there is no substantial evidence of deforestation caused by commercial fuelwood harvesting, there is clear evidence of forest degradation.
Finally the Declaration also recommends that the taxes paid by the commercial fuelwood sector should be reviewed and, as a priority, should be reinvested back into the sector for finance regulation, monitoring, incentives and technical assistance. Additionally, municipal governments should take a more active role in regulating and planning the sector, new market opportunities for fuelwood for power generation should be developed, a massive programme of improved woodstoves and alternative fuels should be implemented, the National Police should change their manner of dealing with fuelwood merchants, and a national fuelwood master plan should be developed.
As a result of this national forum, the Interinstitutional Wood Energy Committee (CDI), comprising representatives from PROLEÑA, the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources, the Ministry of Public Health, the Nicaraguan Forest Institute and the Nicaraguan Energy Institute, will meet regularly and coordinate action to implement the recommendations of the Forum. International cooperating agencies such as FAO, the World Bank and the Interamerican Development Bank will consider these recommendations as input for their projects and programmes which support the wood energy sector of Nicaragua.
For the full Declaration and more information, please contact:
Mr Rogerio Carneiro de Miranda,
Main Technical Adviser, PROLEÑA/Nicaragua,
Apartado Postal C-321, Managua, Nicaragua.
Fax: (+505) 276 2015;
e-mail: rmiranda@sdnnic.org.ni
Pakistan
Pakistan, like most of the developing countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America, depends on woodfuel for domestic energy. The annual demand for woodfuel for this purpose has always remained high and is expected to increase in the future with the expanding population and its per caput consumption. However, as in most developing countries, the woodfuel trade in Pakistan has been conducted in an informal manner and very few records are available on this subject. It is only recently that some systematic studies have been carried out on woodfuel demand and supply in the household energy sector of Pakistan. Such data are essential for planning purposes because Pakistan has a very small forest area and tree growth has to be promoted to meet the woodfuel needs of the people without causing deterioration of the environment.
COURTESY OF BOILING POINT
For more information, please contact:
Mr Wim Hulscher, Chief Technical Adviser,
RWEDP-GCP/RAS/154/NET,
c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road, Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: (+66 2) 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@field.fao.org
Romania
Residential energy use
The Romanian National Commission for Statistics has conducted a study on the energy consumption of individual consumers which shows that 44 percent of energy is provided by wood, while 28.4 percent represents central heating, 14.2 percent is provided by gas, 4.3 percent by liquified petroleum gas and 6.1 percent by electricity. (Source: Energy ... In Demand, 10(2), June 1998.)
Sri Lanka
The Sri Lankan Ministry of Science and Technology has initiated a project with the assistance of the European Community to carry out a feasibility study for the establishment of dendro power generation in Sri Lanka. In this project, short-rotation-coppice (SRC) trial plantations will be established in 12 3-ha sites which have been chosen to represent the varying agroclimatic zones in Sri Lanka. The objective of the trials is to determine the optimum parameters for each agroclimatic zone.
Parameters include species of trees and harvesting intervals, and the trials will also determine the yield and production cost of biomass. This project is a collaborative programme involving the Ministry of Science and Technology, the Forest Department, the Land-Use Planning Division, the Energy Conservation Fund, the Coconut Research Institute, and others.
Key differences between SRC plantations and traditional fuelwood plantations are as follows:
In traditional plantations, trees are widely spaced, typically at 2 x 2 m intervals, and are clear-felled eight to ten years after planting. Thereafter, new trees are planted and the cycle repeated.
In SRC plantations, coppicing types of trees of the leguminous variety are more closely spaced, for instance at 1 x 1 m intervals. Instead of clear-cutting the trees, only the mature branches which are more than 40 mm in diameter are harvested, the tender branches being allowed to mature until they reach this diameter. After every harvest, new shoots sprout from the base, grow and mature in due course. The repeated harvesting of branches can be continued almost indefinitely. Each hectare of SRC plantations is expected to give a yield of 20 tonnes of dry wood and 3.5 tonnes of dry leaves annually on a sustainable basis. The woody biomass will have a market price of around Rs 1 500 (US$25) per tonne; the leaves can be used as animal fodder.
If the trials at these plantations are found to be economically attractive, it is proposed to lease out to the public state land which cannot be used for agricultural purposes, to establish and manage SRC plantations. The study will conclude with a feasibility report on the establishment of dendro power plants with the associated SRC plantations in Sri Lanka.
Any suggestions and comments on this project are most welcome.
For more information, please contact:
Mr P.G. Joseph, General Manager, Energy Conservation Fund,
410/34 Baudhaloka Mawatha, Colombo 7,
Sri Lanka.
E-mail: joseph@slt.lk
Thailand
Several agencies in Thailand are concerned with wood energy data. RWEDP brought them together in a National Working Group and initiated a national seminar/workshop on wood energy data and planning organized by the Department for Energy Development and Promotion (DEDP). The workshop was successful but it appears that there is still a long way to go before effective cooperation among the agencies will materialize. (Source: Back to office report of W.S. Hulscher, CTA, RWEDP.)
<section>6</section>
Logo EVENTS OF INTEREST
Expert consultation on sustainable wood energy programmes in asia:
policy and institutional issues
29-31 July 1998
Hua Hin, Thailand
Several messages emerged from the meeting (organized by the Regional Wood Energy Development Programme), most of which have long been recognized by wood energy specialists, but not by officials in the related sectors:
* Woodfuels will continue to be extremely important in Asia and the Pacific.
* Lands outside natural forests have emerged as the major sources of woodfuels.
* Fuelwood use is not a significant cause of deforestation in Asia and the Pacific.
* Forest lands and communal lands will continue to be important for meeting the energy needs of the poorest people.
* Fuelwood production is a major income-generating sector in many locations.
* Women and children will continue to be the prime actors in the total fuelwood cycle.
* Community involvement in fuelwood development programmes is needed to help ensure long-term sustainability.
* Benefits to the environment (including carbon sequestration and emission avoidance) of wood energy use present new opportunities for promoting efficient application and use.
* Internalizing the environmental costs and benefits of wood energy use would serve to advance the use of woodfuels.
* Most countries have well-established legislative measures aimed at the growth and protection of natural forests, but many of these laws and regulations have a negative impact on the production and trade of fuelwood outside forests.
* Most countries lack effective policies for promoting clean and efficient biomass energy use.
Between cop3 and cop4: the role of bioenergy in achieving the targets stipulated in the kyoto protocol
8-11 September 1998
Nokia, Finland
Following an official invitation by the International Energy Agency Bioenergy Task 25, I represented FAO at the Workshop on Between COP3 and COP4: The Role of Bioenergy in Achieving the Targets Stipulated in the Kyoto Protocol, which was held in Nokia, Finland, from 8 to 11 September 1998 [Note: COP4 = 4th Conference of the Parties on Climate Change, Buenos Aires, 3-12 November 1998]. The workshop was jointly organized by Finland's Technical Research Centre (VTT Energy) and Austria's Institute for Energy Research (Joanneum Research), both institutions being involved in bioenergy research activities.
The main aim of the workshop was to analyse the potential contribution of bioenergy to the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions and to discuss administrative matters regarding the implementation of specific task activities.
In conjunction with the Task 25 meeting, Bioenergy Task 18 also organized a Workshop on Conventional Forestry Systems for Bioenergy. This joint session included the participation of experts from both tasks with the aim of reviewing research findings on the effects of land-use change and conventional forestry on carbon sequestration and substitution balances.
The following are the salient points:
* The expert from Imatra Voima Oy (Finland) described the significant and progressive reduction of wood-based energy prices resulting from the use of increasingly skilled human resources, more efficient infrastructures for the collection, preparation and transportation of woodfuels and a more efficient conversion of woodfuels into energy.
* This was confirmed by the paper prepared by T. Thornquist of Sodra Skogsenergie (Sweden). From 1980 to 1997, the consumer price index doubled, whereas the bioenergy costs per MW remained at the same level and the price of energy-using fossil fuels more than doubled.
* The paper by Bo Hektor from Uppsala also confirmed this. The price of woodfuels has decreased considerably in Sweden in spite of the fact that demand has increased immensely as a result of research and development activities, the existence of a free fuel market and open competition [Note from the traveller: as well as the fact that taxes on fossil fuels are not applied to biofuels].
* Other main concerns among the experts involved in the meeting (which were widely discussed during the field visit) were the problems pertaining to: i) soil compaction, as a result of the extra work required to remove the branches, needles, tops, small trees, etc. for woodfuel; ii) plant nutrients; iii) humus balance; and iv) biodiversity. There are as many points of view as persons involved and interested in this subject, noted the representative of Sodra Skogsenergie, which has 31 000 members owning 1.7 million ha of forests from which woodfuels are extracted. However, following the recommendations of the National Board of Forestry, biodiversity and the long-term production ability of plantations are not affected.
* Since Swedish forestry is a mature industry it has already solved the main problems encountered in this new field (forest energy) using its skilled human resources and infrastructure and by the integration of woodfuel activities into their forestry activities and business, thus becoming much more efficient than if they had kept their woodfuel activities in a "stand-alone" situation [taken from the paper prepared by Bo Hektor]. (Source: Travel report of M.A. Trossero.)
Workshop on methodologies for gathering energy information by international organizations
23-24 September 1998
Quito, Ecuador
The objective of the meeting was to advance towards a normalization of approaches regarding energy data collection. Detailed information will be given in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum.
For more information, please contact:
Mr Gabriel Hernandez, Edificio OLADE,
Av. Occidental, Sector San Carlos, Casilla 17-11-6413,
Quito, Ecuador.
Fax: (+593 2) 539684;
e-mail: oladel@olade.org.ec
Bioenergy ´98 - expanding bioenergy partnerships
4-8 October 1998
Madison, Wisconsin, USA
BioEnergy '98 was a premier conference on energy from biomass (plant-derived renewable energy resources). "Expanding Bioenergy Partnerships" was the theme of the eighth biennial event sponsored by the United States Department of Energy, the Energy Center of Wisconsin, Wisconsin Energy Bureau and many other supporters, and was hosted by the Great Lakes Regional Biomass Energy Program.
BioEnergy '98 logo
The goal of BioEnergy '98 was to create new and powerful partnerships to commercialize bioenergy technologies, promote sustainable and environmentally beneficial energy resources and establish long-term strategic alliances. The bioenergy industry is entering an integral period of growth as lower cost and more efficient bioenergy technologies are becoming increasingly competitive in the global energy market. BioEnergy '98 thus brought together private industry, leading developers and researchers, agricultural industry and others to define and develop these opportunities.
For more information, please contact:
Mr Fred Kuzel, Great Lakes Regional Biomass Energy Program,
35 E. Wacker Drive 1850, Chicago, IL 60601, USA.
Fax: (+1 312) 407 0038;
e-mail: fkuzel@cglg.org;
http://www.cglg.org/bioenergy98
Crops for a green industry ´98 - european conference
6-8 October 1998
Gmunden, Austria
For more information, please contact:
Ms Sonja Mayer, Manager, Crops for Industry '98, CFI, Wasagasse 6,
A-1090 Vienna, Austria.
Fax: (+43 1) 31 2009;
e-mail: cfi@eunet.at;
http://cfi.austrian.org
Fourth european symposium on industrial crops and products and
Sixth symposium on renewable resources for the chemical industry
23-25 March 1999
Bonn, Germany
For more information, please contact:
Ms Sarah Wilkinson,
Fourth European Symposium on Industrial Crops and Products,
Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, UK.
Fax: (+44 1865) 843958;
e-mail: sm.wilkinson@elsevier.co.uk;
http://www.elsevier.nl/locate/icp99
International conference on wood stoves
January 2000
Pune, India
For more information, please contact:
Mrs Priyadarshini Karve,
Appropriate Rural Technology Institute (ARTI).
E-mail: gpk@physics.unipune.ernet.in
(See also under India, p. 18.)
<section>7</section>
Logo PUBLICATIONS
Publications prepared by the regional wood energy development programme (rwedp), project gcp/ras/154/net
PART 2
WOOD ENERGY CONVERSION AND USE
- National Conference on Conservation and Sustainability of Wood Based Energy Systems in Rural Industries and Village Applications - India, Proceedings of a conference (RM 15), 1991
- Sub-regional Expert Consultation on Improved Cookstove Development Programme in South Asian Countries (RM 16), 1991
- Mangrove for charcoal, a vanishing sustainable woodfuel resource system - the case of Yeesarn (FD 30), 1992
- Wood/biomass-based energy systems in rural industries and village applications - Nepal (RM 19), 1992
- Status and development issues of the brick industry in Asia (FD 35), 1993
- Charcoal production and marketing in Gujarat (FD 36), 1993
- Chinese fuel-saving stoves: a compendium (FD 40), 1993
- Indian improved cookstoves: a compendium (FD 41), 1993
- Patterns of commercial woodfuel supply, distribution and use in the City and Province of Cebu, Philippines (FD 42), 1993
- Improved solid biomass-burning cookstoves: a development manual (FD 44), 1993
- Biomass briquetting: technology and practices (FD 46), 1996
- Proceedings of the International Workshop on Biomass Briquetting, New Delhi, India, 3-6 April 1995 (RM 23), 1996
- Report of the Regional Course on Trade in Wood Fuel-Related Products, Peshawar, Pakistan, 1-6 October 1995 (RM 25), 1996
- Regional Workshop on Stoves Used for Space Heating and Cooking at Different Altitudes and/by Ethnic Groups (RM 28), 1997
- Proceedings of the National Workshop on Wood-Based Energy Systems for Rural Industries and Village Applications, Peshawar, Pakistan, 3-5 March 1996 (RM 31), 1997
- Proceedings of the Regional Expert Consultation on Selection Criteria and Priority Rating for Assistance to Traditional Biomass Energy-Using Industries, Penang, Malaysia, 15-18 January 1996 (RM 32), 1997
TREE AND WASTELAND DEVELOPMENT
- Oak, production, management and use in the Himalayas (FD 27), 1991
- Small-scale multipurpose tree production systems in a mountainous region of India (FD 28), 1991
- Prosopis cineraria (L.) Druce: its production, management and use - Pakistan (FD 29), 1991
- Mangrove for production and protection, a changing resource system: case study in Can Gio district, southern Viet Nam (FD 43), 1993
COMMUNITY FORESTRY AND EXTENSION
- Local organizations in community forestry extension in Asia, Report of a Regional Consultation (FD 34), 1992
- Report of the Training Workshop on Integrating Woodfuel Production into the Implementation of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Extension Programs in South Asia, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 24-30 October 1995 (RM 26), 1996
GENDER AND WOOD ENERGY
- Women's role in forest resource management, a reader (RM 13), 1989
- Report of the Regional Expert Consultation on Gender and Wood Energy in Asia (RM 22), 1995
- Report of the Sub-Regional Training Course on Women in Wood Energy Development, Bangkok, 27 November - 1 December (RM 24), 1996
- Wood Energy News (RWEDP newsletter), Vols 1-12 (30 issues)
Copublications and publications of other organizations
ASIA-PACIFIC AGROFORESTRY NETWORK (APAN)
- Report of the Regional Expert Consultation on Farmer-to-Farmer Adaptive Agroforestry Research, Cebu, Philippines, 1992
- Report of the Agroforestry Information and Technologies Exchange Visit between Thailand and the Lao People's Democratic Republic, 1992
- Woodfuel productivity of agroforestry systems in Asia: a review of current knowledge (FD 45), 1995
- Integrating woodfuel production into agroforestry extension programmes in Southeast Asia (RM 21), 1995
SAVE THE CHILDREN
- Collection, storage and treatment of tree seeds, a handbook for small farm tree planters (RM 18), 1992
For copies of any of these publications, please contact:
Mr Wim Hulscher,
Chief Technical Adviser, GCP/RAS/154/NET,
c/o RAP, Maliwan Mansion, Phra Atit Road,
Bangkok 10200, Thailand.
Fax: (+66 2) 280 0760;
e-mail: RWEDP@field.fao.org;
http://www.rwedp.org
<section>8</section>
Logo WEB SITES
Carbon Offset Glossary
http://www.climateservices.com/glossary.htm
ENERGIA News (featured in Forest Energy Forum No. 2)
http://www.energia.org
Glossary: Carbon Dioxide and Climate
http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/cdiac/glossary.html
Regional Wood Energy Development Programme
http://www.rwedp.org
FAO's Regional Wood Energy Development Programme in Asia has a site packed with information.
Stoves Web site
http://www.ikweb.com/enuff/public_html/Stoves.html
The first image of an improved stove, from Priyadarshini Karve, can be viewed at this Web address. Check the link under the NEW heading.
Wood energy (in German)
http://www.holz.de/holzenergie.htm
The German home page of wood has a special Web site for wood energy.
Networks
Red Mundial en Bioenergía/Rede Mundial em Bioenergía
La Red Latinoamericana de Discusión en Bioenergia vía Internet en lenguas portuguesa y española pasa ahora a ser una red de carácter mundial, ya que 40 por ciento de sus miembros son de países fuera de la región latino americana. El objetivo de esta red es facilitar el intercambio de información en las dichas idiomas sobre bioenergía, promoviendo así un mejor conocimiento y desarrollo del tema.
Por lo tanto si usted desea participar en discusiones y enviar y recibir información sobre bioenergía, sin ninguna restricción geográfica, por favor incluya su dirección electrónica en esta red contactando a Rogerio Carneiro de Miranda, administrador de la red: rmiranda@sdnnic.org.ni o directamente a la red: bioenergia@sdnnic.org.ni
Financing for Development Forum
The International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), publisher of Earth Negotiations Bulletin announces a new e-mail distribution list to facilitate information exchange on the high-level intergovernmental Forum on Financing for Development (FFD). This list has been established in cooperation with the UN Development Policy Analysis Division. The Second Committee of the UN General Assembly is expected to establish an open-ended ad hoc working group to begin formal preparations for FFD, which is to be held before the end of 2001.
FFD-L is a moderated list for the dissemination of news, information on past and upcoming meetings related to FFD, position papers and pointers to on-line resources such as Web sites and longer documents. It is intended to be a very focused list with short messages and links to other on-line documents. Funding for the establishment, moderation and maintenance of the list has been provided by USAID.
To subscribe send a message to listproc@mbnet.mb.ca with the following in the body of the message: subscribe FFD-L. For assistance in subscribing, contact: enb@iisd.org
For more information, please contact:
Mr Ian C. Kinniburgh,
Director, Development Policy Analysis Division,
Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations, Room DC2 2170,
New York, NY 10017, USA.
Fax: (+1 212) 963 1061;
e-mail: ffd@un.org;
http://www.un.org/esa/analysis/ffd/ffd.htm
A RECENT EXCHANGE ON THE STOVES WEB PAGE CONCERNING NON-EDIBLE OILS AS FUEL
I am helping a small rainforest area in southwestern Ethiopia called Kafa
(the original home of coffee). I imagine that all your species will grow extremely well there (I've never seen a better climate - with 2 m of rainfall annually and some rain every month). I will look into ways to get them transferred into Kafa for tests. Could you say a bit more about the economics of growing these non-edible seed-oils? What are the preferred uses in India? Stoves? Lamps? (Ronald Larson)
We would certainly like to try for these plants in other regions. As for the economics and other details, I will first get my information confirmed from my agricultural scientist colleagues before passing it on to you. Right now these oils have not found as much use as they should in India. In some regions the tribal people make a garland of the seeds of jatropha to use as an improvised candle. As a child, I tried this out myself. I took a few fully ripened seeds and skewered them on a nail. I then lit one seed at the end of the row and it burnt quite well giving a slightly smoky bright yellow flame. I still remember that the seeds burnt one after the other and the string lasted much longer than I had expected.
In our Institute, we have so far not worked on ways of using the non-edible oils as fuel, but the discussion in this group on jatropha oil has certainly started us in that direction. So I will definitely have something to report in this context in a few months' time.
I will come back with more information on the oilseed species sometime next week. (Priyadarshini Karve)
Source: stoves@crest.org
<section>9</section>
Logo POINTS OF VIEW
Slogan for forest energy
A thank you to everybody who answered our question [see Forest Energy Forum No. 2] regarding our slogan "Need Energy? - Plug a Tree" to promote forest energy. A selection of the replies/alternative suggestions received follows:
"Need Energy?- Plant a Tree" (Raj Gujral, India)
"Need energy? Plant a tree" (Rogerio Carneiro de Miranda, Nicaragua)
In my view, the slogan "Need Energy? - Plug a Tree" is not appropriate, for the following reason: it might be misunderstood as PLUCK a Tree instead of PLUG a Tree. A simpler slogan could be "Need Energy? - Plant a Tree" (P.G. Joseph, Energy Conservation Fund, Sri Lanka)
"Need Energy - Plug a Tree": I am afraid this is not OK from a native (English) speaker's point of view. To plug may mean to block up a hole, to hit, or to promote but not to "obtain energy from". You presumably mean "plug into a tree" as in "the toaster was plugged into the wall socket", but even then there is a problem, to my ears at least, as "plugging in" seems to me a metaphor directly linked with: a) electricity; and b) urban, non-vital uses. Most wood energy is: a) in developing countries; and b) used for heat, not electricity. I don't really have another option. What about "Wood for Warmth"? (Christopher Prins, UNECE, Switzerland)
Ed. note: We had in fact considered all of Mr Prins' points - but wanted to be provocative! However, the concept we wish to disseminate here is a new one in which forest biomass can be used for both traditional (mainly heat) and modern energy (electricity, mechanical power from liquid biofuels derived from woody biomass and, of course, heat). This is why we adopted forest energy instead of wood energy. It includes all types of fuel derived from forests and trees: solid, gases and liquid such as bioethanol from woody residues for internal combustion engines produced in an environmentally friendly way. Our concept was "You need energy, plug into a tree".
Please continue sending your suggestions; a final decision will be taken in the next issue.
Hedon paper - lessons learned by rwedp
I wish to share with all of you (and look forward to your comments and views) the following notes from Prof. W.S. Hulscher, RWEDP, which he prepared for the Household Energy Donor Organisations Network (HEDON) meeting, held at the Intermediate Technology Development Group, Rugby (United Kingdom) in September 1997. These notes summarize the issues and lessons learned about the state of the art of wood energy for traditional uses in Asia. M.A.Trossero
Some misconceptions
1. There is no such thing as a "dirty fuel". However, "dirty technologies" do exist. This holds true for any fuel, e.g. traditional wood stoves, poor kerosene stoves, old diesel engines, many coal stoves, boilers and furnaces, etc.
2. Wood and other biomass are not per se traditional fuels. In Europe and North America woodfuel is considered modern. Worldwide wood and other biomass can be clean and convenient fuels on a small scale (households, commerce) or a large scale (industries, power sector), provided the users avail themselves of a proper technology.
3. Most of the woodfuels in Asia are used on a sustainable basis, contrary to common belief. Woodfuel use is not a main or major cause of deforestation. About two-thirds of all woodfuels originate from non-forest land. Areas where woodfuel use degrades forest land are the exceptions. Such exceptions require special attention, but do not form a basis for general policies towards woodfuel.
4. The so-called process of fuel transition is, in fact, a process of fuel complementation. The "modern" fuels come on top of the biomass fuels. There is no evidence for a net transition from woodfuel to modern fuels with rising incomes.^1 There is no point in "helping people to make the transition"; on the contrary!
Some lessons
5. The main paradigm for successful improved cook stove (ICS) programmes has always been and will always remain "understanding users' needs". Lack of appreciation of this paradigm among fieldworkers is still faltering in many ICS programmes.
6. Improved health and greater convenience are the main and foremost benefits of ICS. Such benefits matter for both the individual and the country. Achieving these benefits justifies considerable costs.
7. There is no evidence whatsoever that more efficient stoves would help save forests and, indeed, that would be very unlikely. However, fuelwood saving by increased efficiency may add to users' convenience.
8. Acceptance of ICS is closely related to women's opportunities for paid labour. This linkage is not yet fully appreciated by designers of ICS programmes.
9. Failures of ICS programmes so far are largely due to incorrect starting points such as forest saving, village woodlots per se rather than women's income-earning opportunities, isolated micro-projects, inadequate understanding of users' needs and amateurism. Better starting points are health, kitchen design, convenience, income generation and strategic design of programmes/policies.
Current views
10. Sustainable use of wood/biomass fuels is carbon neutral, unlike the use of fossil fuels (for complete combustion). The current savings of greenhouse gases by sustainable wood/biomass fuel can be estimated. Results show that substantial benefits for the global atmosphere are thanks to poor households using wood/biomass fuels rather than coal or oil.
11. The sustainable potential of woodfuel in Asia is much larger than present consumption. Therefore, the use of wood/biomass fuels should be encouraged, and users should be discouraged from abandoning woodfuel.
12. Encouraging woodfuel use implies helping people to avail themselves of proper technologies, which are clean and convenient. Such technologies do exist and can be introduced at reasonable cost.
13. The health benefits fully justify the cost of improved stoves. These benefits go in parallel with greenhouse benefits.
Call for action
14. Introducing ICS is still to be undertaken on a massive scale. As yet, only a small percentage of poor countries' households have improved stoves.
15. ICS programmes should focus on improving health and convenience aspects, rather than efficiency per se.
16. Large-scale ICS programmes are justified by health and greenhouse benefits, and can be guided by current improved understanding.
17. Priority for technical stove research is in improved combustion of (loose) biomass under various conditions and for various types of biomass. This should result in better options for poor users in regions of wood scarcity.
FEF
Forest Energy Forum?
Forest Energy Fellowship?
Forest Energy Forever?
Fuelwood gap theory
I am most interested in learning more about any recent work on fuelwood supply and demand issues. Adrian Whiteman of FAO headquarters in Rome referred me to FAO's RWEDP Web site, which is full of useful information. Their most recent data point to the rejection of the "fuelwood gap" theory, at least as it pertains to the Asian member countries of RWEDP. I would like to know, however, whether this same analysis is true for the fuelwood situation in Africa, especially in the drier regions. Is there any person, or recent research data from FAO or elsewhere, you could refer me to regarding this question? I am particularly interested in determining the legitimacy of the fuelwood gap theory in different world regions, and in finding recent data on fuelwood availability and sources of supply, as well as any reports discussing the impacts of population growth on future fuelwood availability? Any information you could provide would be most appreciated. (Tom Gardner-Outlaw, Population
and Environment Program, Washington, DC, USA)
In fact, the misconception that deforestation is caused mainly by woodfuel demand has been widely diffused since the 1970s, but many case studies and later evaluations have shown a different reality. Most of the forest biomass used for woodfuels is from dead trees, prunings and other woody wastes collected from forests, woodlands and trees in farming lands. In many other areas, a substantial amount of woodfuel originates from the biomass produced by land clearing operations to transform forests and woodlands into agricultural farms, where the use of this biomass as woodfuel is better than simply burning it as slash. Moreover, a considerable amount of woodfuel is obtained from trees planted in marginal and farming lands through agroforestry schemes.
Therefore, the old perception that fuelwood and charcoal are a major cause of deforestation needs to be revised. The major causes of deforestation are: i) conversion of forests to cropland and grazing areas for livestock; and ii) forest activities (where subsidies are widely and massively distributed). In addition, subsidies provided to the conventional energy sectors are directly and indirectly hampering the proper development of more sustainable wood energy systems. As a good example of non-energy forest uses, in Botswana, the fencing of fields alone to keep out livestock consumes one and a half times more wood than is used for cooking by farming households (Tietema, 1991. Quoted by Chidumayo in Renewable Energy for Development, July 1997).
However, in many places, woodfuel consumption is so great that it exceeds its sustainable production from available and accessible supply sources and thus many areas are facing fuelwood and charcoal shortages and depleting wood stocks. While in general fuelwood utilization as a household cooking fuel does not seem to face supply constraints, it is important to mention situations, such as Haiti, the Andean highlands and the Sahelian countries, where there is a clear and worrying pressure on forest resources. Unfortunately, the data available on woodfuel demand and supply in these regions are scarce and very aggregated. In FAO/FOPW, our current efforts are directed mainly to tackling this data and information problem which could lead to identifying areas and projects for the development of more sustainable wood energy systems.
Correspondence between fao's wood energy programme and pierre boileau, oecd
Regarding the main scientific and technical issues for further action related to the treatment in inventories, what is the position of IPCC so far for woodfuels (mainly fuelwood and charcoal) for traditional use: are they considered environmentally sound or not? How are woodfuels derived from land clearance operations considered? I have seen a particular inclination to consider the role of forests for carbon sequestration, but what about carbon substitution? (M.A. Trossero, FAO)
I can only speak for the IPCC Inventories Programme and not for IPCC as a whole. There are no judgements in the guidelines for preparing national inventories about whether biomass energy for traditional use is environmentally sound. The CO[2] emissions are not included in totals of emissions if the biomass is produced sustainably. If it is not produced sustainably then the source of CO[2] emissions will be calculated in the Land-use Change and Forestry sector.
There is much discussion about the methodologies for estimating CO[2] sequestration from forests. At present there is great uncertainty in these methods because, as you know, the quality of the statistics can be a problem. If you could, please define your understanding of carbon substitution. My understanding in the realm of inventories is as follows: if there is substitution from fossil fuels to biomass use, then the CO[2] emissions from that biomass use would not be included in emissions totals if the biomass was produced sustainably.
(Pierre Boileau, OECD)
A recent exchange of ideas consequent to the nairobi stovers forum
It was expressed that because of variations in diet and available fuel resources, the concept of a "perfect stove" is unrealistic. Rather, stove design is driven by the environment within which it is used. This fact is of particular importance when considering stove demand and distribution.
This certainly has some truth in it. However, in the United States, where we could have any number of variations of stove, there are essentially only two stoves: the four-burner plus oven electric stove and the gas variation of the same. There are a few speciality variations for small quarters, etc. but 95 percent of United States housewives have given over to these two - really only one - choices.
I have presumed that if one made a sufficiently advanced, low-cost, high-efficiency, low-pollution, high heat rate biomass stove, it would wash away a few hundred lesser stoves and eventually be accepted by the housewives of China, India and Africa who simply want to cook a good meal quickly. It might take a while to get them all to accept, but the key is "sufficiently advanced". On this basis I and others have been working on the "Wood-Gas Stove" for the last decade. Wood-gas adds the missing new dimension to biomass cooking.
I would value your opinion on this philosophy. (Tom Reed, Biomass Energy Foundation, Golden, Colorado, USA)
In Europe nobody will accept that Italian food is the same as British. If you get more excited you can go on listing thirty-odd countries in Europe which can be considered to eat different foods. But, strangely enough, they are more or less very happy to cook on gas or electric stoves that are mass-produced.
In India, the well-to-do city folk, in spite of the bewildering variety of foods they cook and eat, manage quite well with gas or electric stoves.
Perhaps another example will help.
Human beings can be looked upon as the passport control system does at the port of entry into a country. They can also be considered from the point of view of medical science - anatomy, physiology, etc. The latter even refuses to acknowledge whether we are big or small, white, black, brown or yellow. Thus, I find it difficult to accept statements that make a big issue of the eating habits of people. An improved biomass stove does not dictate to people what they should eat!
In 1983 Piet Verhaart wrote a paper entitled "On designing woodstoves", and he has a list of cooking tasks. They are less than the number of fingers on one human hand. If you are pernickety the number creeps up to eight! Never mind all those hundreds of thousands of recipes crammed into cookbooks that adorn the section called "cooking" in an average bookstore. That probably represents just 1 percent or so of the foods cooked and eaten by people.
I am sure almost every Indian and Mexican will swear by whatever god(s) they believe in that rotis and tortillas are worlds apart. But, as far as a cookstove design is concerned, they can be handled in a very similar manner. I find it a bit strange that this discussion has not graduated much farther from when we started on our stove project in 1980. Never mind that we are using a "state-of-the-art" communication medium.
I hope there will be some discussion on Tom Reed's and my thoughts so that we can leave the thoughts of a bygone era behind. (K.K. Prasad, e-mail: K.K.Prasad@phys.tue.nl)
Source: Stoves Web page, http://www.ikweb.com/enuff/public_html/Stoves.html
^1 Many international and national agencies involved in wood energy suggest an overall shift away from woodfuel when incomes rise; this is misleading. North America consumes as much woodfuel per caput as South Asia, whereas the income per caput of the former is 40 times that of the latter. In Thailand, in the period 1980-1996, per caput gross national product increased threefold, whereas in the same period woodfuel consumption per caput increased by 68 percent. The 16 RWEDP member countries, in which the vast majority of the world's woodfuel users happen to live, exhibit no relationship between income per caput and woodfuel consumption per caput. Note that we refer to overall national consumption and not to case studies among selected user groups. (Source: Wood Energy News, 12(2): 20, October 1997.)
<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.3</title>
Logo READERS' CORNER
This page is for our readers to air their views and make their comments. So, please write to us with your ideas/views/comments and suggestions for items that you feel should be covered in future issues, at the address given on the first page.
The smallest event can become a story if you tell it in the right way.
David Hockney
We believe we know how to make different types of kiln but our main problem is to know when the charcoal is ready, and also to find out when and how to regulate the oxygen. In one place we saw three to ten days of cooking time, which is a great variation.
We have the possibility of obtaining a large petrol tank which could perhaps be adapted - but how?
Looking forward to hearing from you. (Bjorn Brandberg, For the LightHouse Foundation, PO Box 131, Eveni-Mbabane, Swaziland. Fax: +(268) 40067; e-mail: b.brandberg@mail.com)
A copy of FAO Forestry Paper No. 41 - Simple technologies for charcoal making - was sent to Mr Brandberg, together with other information.
I look forward to following the Forest Energy Forum discussions, and contributing to whatever extent possible. (John T. McCloskey, President, Process Evaluation and Development Corporation [PEADCO], Dallas-Richardson, Texas, USA. E-mail: peadcojm@swbell.net; fax: (+972) 238-9411)
Yes, it is open to all the biofuels and your contributions are welcome. The following are some good reasons to include bamboo and sugar-cane bagasse in FEF articles and discussions:
* the conversion technology (boilers, chippers, conveying/transportation systems, etc.) is quite similar;
* other non-woody plants, such as palms, are already considered as forest matter;
* bamboo and bagasse are frequently used as substitutes/alternatives to "regular" wood (also for pulping, boards, etc.). (Miguel Trossero/Luiz Horta-Nogueira)
My interest is based on graduate research that I began in 1998. We want to study the process of carbonization and the heat transfer in the kiln to make the charcoal production more efficient and to reduce costs. We are going to experiment using the wood-tar from the furnace to make heat or using the heat of one furnace in the cooling state for drying the wood in another furnace. These tests are made in collaboration with the University of Minas Gerais.
As you can see, there is a lot of work to be done. What I need first is a good literature base and an overview of what is going on in the world in research activities concerning industrial charcoal making. If anyone can help me I would be very pleased. I think this discussion forum is a very good opportunity to make contact with the right persons all over the world. (Ansgar Pinkowski, Mannesmann S.A., Superintendence of Energy, Usina Barreiro, Av. Olinto Meireles 65, Belo Horizonte-MG 30640-010, Brazil.
Tel.: (+55 31) 328 2985;
fax: (+55 31) 328 2695;
e-mail: msaiet@mannesmann.com.br)
<title>Forest Energy Forum - Newsletter No.3</title>
<section>1</section>
Logo INFORMATION
FOREST ENERGY FORUM
No. 3
December 1998
has been compiled by Miguel A. Trossero and Tina Etherington, Wood and Non-Wood Products Utilization Branch (FOPW) of the FAO Forest Products Division. If you have any material that could be included in the next issue of Forest Energy Forum for the benefit of other readers, kindly send it before 15 March 1999 to:
Forest Energy Forum - FOPW
FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy.
E-mail: Forest-Energy-Forum@fao.org
http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/
forestry/energy/feforum.htm
The designations employed and the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
IN OUR NEXT ISSUE:
* Forest Energy or Wood Energy?
* UWET - final version for comments
* Wood Energy Textbook
* The role of wood energy in displacing fossil carbons
* News from Buenos Aires COP4
* New publications from RWEDP
* WETT Africa
<section>2</section>
Logo FORESTS BRANCH OFF...
Not available in this issue
[Contents]
