Acck n owledgements k n ow.
FAO expresses sincere appreciation and gratitude to all who contributed to the Global Fibre Supply Model (GFSM). The contributions have been far wider than the list provided here and appreciation is extended to all these people and agencies. The support of government forest services, universities, research institutes, industry associations and ECE/FAO are also gratefully acknowledged. The governments who helped organise the regional workshops in Brazil, Ghana and Malaysia were particularly helpful. Lakehead University, University of Toronto and University of Umeå provided valuable information and assistance as did the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, the Instituto Florestal em São Paulo, the Forest Research Institute of Malaysia and the European Forest Institute. The various industry associations in Brazil, Malaysia, Ghana and Canada all contributed to the process with important inputs. The Forest Products Division in the Forestry Department and the members of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products undertook study management. The overall management team included Karl-Hermann Schmincke, Olman Serrano from FAO; David Barron, Celso Foelkel, Claes Hall; and Lise Lachapelle (chair), Mario Leonel, J.K. Lyden (vice-chair), Irene Meister, M'Hammed Mezzour, Jan Remröd, Kiyoshi Sakai, Maureen Smith, from the Steering Committee of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. Gary Bull served as Project Manager. Various supporting reports and working papers were submitted by Warren Mabee, Musyoka Ngusya, Devendra Pandey, Peter Duinker, Reino Pulkki, Robert Scharpenberg, Roberto Scoz, Klara Vichnevetskaia and Jeremy W illiams. The FAO academic programme was used to gain the insights and experiences of colleagues in the academic community. Peter Duinker, Warren Mabee, Reino Pulkki, all have made significant contributions to the various projects undertaken in this study. The following individuals served as focal points or participants in the review process: Mike Apsey, Darcie Booth, David Barron, Magnus Berg, David Boulter, David Brooks, Joseph Buongiorno, Mafa Chipeta, Ralph Colberg, Marc de Montalembert, Celso Foelkel, Claes Hall, Catrinus J. Jepma, Sulaeman Kusumanegara, Michael Martin, Benny Nasendi, Sten Nilsson, Heiner Ollmann, Harshad Pande, Tim Peck, Kit Prins, Les Reed, Antti R ytkönen. The support of colleagues in FAO who provided guidance, data and critical review is also gratefully acknowledged. Without their cooperation the development of the statistics and models would have not been possible. Michael Martin and Chris Brown provided very useful advice and Patrick Durst, Torsten Frisk and Pape Kone facilitated the regional workshops.
Global Fibre Supply Model Global.
Ms Franca Monti, deserves special mention for her superior library skills and her continual assistance in helping all the project team find the data. The core draft system development included Gary Bull, Warren Mabee and Robert Scharpenberg. Robert was involved with the project from the beginning helping to shape the initial project, build prototypes, provide data quality control and data management. Warren served as the principal computer programmer and designer of the information system. Gary Bull served as Project Manager and main author of this document. The core team for data collection included Josef Engelbertz, Andreas Kress, Patrick So, Bjorn Vikinger. Both Elisa Rubini and Liana Micotti provided outstanding help in editing, layout and formatting. Final design of the report was done by Ronald Nixon.
At the 1995 meeting of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products, a need was expressed for more reliable data, information, forecasts and preliminary analysis of industrial fibre sources. As a consequence the Global Fibre Supply Model was designed and constructed to collect and compile the latest available forest inventory data, including recovered and non-wood fibre, focusing primarily on the sources of industrial fibre as raw material for the sawmilling, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper industries. The FAO Forestry Department designated Mr Karl-Hermann Schmincke, former Director of the Forest Products Division, and Mr O. Serrano, Chief, Wood and Non-wood Products Utilization Branch, to lead and guide the study. They undertook to provide strategic management advice in carrying this project to completion. The project has provided useful information for both the ongoing outlook studies and the upcoming forest resources assessment. It also serves as a prototype system to guide departmental discussions on the development of a more comprehensive information system. The success of the study is attributed to the excellent work of a strong statistical team drawn from many countries. It is also due to the willing participation of governments, industry and universities in the regional workshops. The enthusiasm of governments and industry for our work was demonstrated at the workshops held in Asia, Latin America and Africa in 1997 as well as in discussions with the United States and Canadian forest services. The sincerity shown by the participants revitalized interest and enthusiasm in statisitics. The regional workshop process did indeed help in creating, as one colleague put it, "a genuine thirst for statistics". Conducting a study of this nature and magnitude has many challenges since it addresses several audience classes with different points of view. The focus of any review of this work should therefore be on the efforts to collect and organize statistics for use in discussions of sustainable forest management. The development of simple models and the examination of possible policy factors should be considered secondary efforts which were built to show policy makers the value of having organized forestry statistics for planning and policy purposes. This work has generated a great deal of interest both internally in the FAO forestry community and certainly outside the Organization. The FAO Forestry Department hopes that with constructive comments from you, as critical readers of this document, FAO can further contribute to the ongoing international dialogue on sustainable forest management.
M. Hosny El-Lakany Assistant Director-General Forestry Department.
E xecutive Summary.
FAO Forestry Department initiated the Global Fibre Supply Model (GFSM) in late 1995 upon the recommendation of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. The study was intended to respond to several important policy questions: What sources of wood fibre exist today and where could we go in the future to find wood fibre to meet the growing demand for forest products? How much productive forest is needed to supply sustainably expected future fibre demand? This study does not make claims to address all the dimensions to these questions; rather, the work undertaken should be viewed as a `'first step'' in the FAO's more extensive and ongoing efforts to address these issues particularly through regional and global outlook studies. This first step is certainly an important one and can be viewed as a significant contribution to progress in the development of supply and demand forecasting models. In general terms the study contributes to forest policy development by highlighting and underscoring the pressing need for reliable data, information and analysis on industrial fibre sources and their utilization. The study includes a compilation of the recent forest inventory statistics along with recovered and non-wood fibre data. The focus is primarily on the sources of industrial fibre as raw material for the sawmilling, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper industries. A simple model was constructed and linked to the statistics to begin to reveal some of the issues affecting future developments in fibre supply. This modelling provides a first look at some of the major factors affecting supply for important producer countries in Asia/Oceania, Latin America and Africa. It is worth emphasizing that the model does not provide sufficient information to analyse supply and demand balances and users must be very cautious in interpreting the outcome in order to avoid drawing inappropriate conclusions. The resource statistics were reviewed and received close scrutiny in a series of workshops in Africa, Asia and Latin America regions to verify the statistics and estimates developed by FAO. "Ground-truthing" will ensure that important data sources have not been missed for any country and that all points of view have been considered. This is particularly critical for estimating future industrial fibre supply. It is important to note that these regions have traditionally been the greatest challenge from a statistical point of view and so they were a major focus of the work completed in the study. The lessons learned from the GFSM work include:.
t The statistical structure developed in the GFSM can be improved.
over time and can also be modified for use by the countries themselves for forest statistical reporting. t Emphasis could be placed on the development of national inventory systems within most countries and on a more cooperative process for statistical reporting.
t FAO should consider allocating more resources to the further t.
development of an information system for reporting on various aspects of forest resources and forest related products. More information could be collected on log prices and harvesting and manufacturing costs in cooperation with the multistakeholder processes in countries. This information will improve our analysis of global and regional trends. Further attention could be paid to develop methodologies for additional forest resources, such as trees outside of forests, for the purpose of collecting statistical information. Since plantation resources are playing an increasing role in fibre supply, more attention could be paid to forest plantations statistics and models. Additional emphasis could be placed on cost-effective capacity building which will provide a better foundation for country participation in the data collection and standardization process.
1 INTRODUCTION Overview Report objectives Uniqueness FAO approach Report structure METHODOLO GY Study design Definitions Classification of fibre resources Describing the current situation Constructing alternative futures Tool for accessing and displaying the current situation and forecasts Scope and validation Major assumptions Base data F orecasting Data and statistical issues Data quality and resolution Statistical inconsistencies BACKGROUND Introduction Recent global fibre studies Industrial fibre production trends Asia-Pacific Africa Latin America & Caribbean North America Europe Russia Production Trend Analysis CURRENT FIBRE SUPPLY SITUAT I O N SUPPLY SITUA Classifying Fibre Sources Selected Summary of Regional Statistics Selected Summary of a Country Statistic 1 1 2 2 3 4 5 5 7 7 9 9 11 16 16 17 19 23 23 23 25 25 25 25 29 30 30 31 32 32 33 35 35 35 39.
I M PACT OF MAJOR SUPPLY FA C T O R S SUPPLY FACTORS Identifying some of the major factors Sustainable forest management on natural forest Land use change­Deforestation Land use change­Protected area Industrial Plantations­Afforestation rate Industrial Plantations­Development gains Non-wood and recovered fibre SUPPLY A LT E R N ATIVE FUTURES FOR FIBRE SUPPLY Defining the future Asia/Oceania South America Africa Russia Europe North and Central America Comparative analysis (selected regions) CONCLUSIONS D I S C U S SION AND CONCLU S I O N S Statistics ­ Land and Forest Statistics ­ Non-wood and recovered fibres Forecast model Prices, costs and technology Policy direction for sustaining or increasing future fibre supply REFERENCES.
41 41 42 45 45 47 47 50 53 53 54 54 55 57 58 58 60 63 63 65 65 66 67 61 AI AII.
STA ANNEX I STATISTICAL SUMMARY ANNEX II MAJOR DEFINITIONS.
LIST OF FIGURES Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 Figure 5 Figure 6 Figure 7 Figure 8 Figure 9 Figure 10 Figure 11 Figure 12 Figure 13 Figure 14 Figure 15 Figure 16 Figure 17 Figure 18 Figure 19 Figure 20 Figure 21 Figure 22 Figure 23 Figure 24 Forestry statistics and outlook studies processes Land classification for the Global Fibre Supply Model Forest volume and growth classification Formulae for calculating fibre supply futures Front page of global fibre supply database and model Global industrial roundwood production 1970-1995 Global industrial roundwood production by product group 1970-1995 Global industrial roundwood production by region 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in Asia 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in Oceania 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in Africa 1970-1995 by region Industrial roundwood production in Latin America and Caribbean 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in North America 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in Europe 1970-1995 Industrial roundwood production in former USSR 1970-1990 Cumulative growth of the world's protected Non-cumulative growth of the world's protected areas Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for Asia Future 1 (million m3) Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for Oceania Future 1 (million m3). Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for South America Future 1 (million m3). Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for Africa Future 1 (million m3) Potential fibre availability 1996-2050 for Africa Future 2 (million m3) Potential fibre availability 1996­2050 for Africa Future 3 (million m3) Potential fibre availability by source 1996-2050­ North and Central America - Future 1 (million m3). 3 8 8 9 11 27 27 28 29 29 30 31 31 32 33 46 46 54 54 54 56 56 56 58.
TABLES LIST OF TA B L E S Table 1 Table 2 Table 3 Table 4 Table 5 Table 6 Table 7 Table 8 Table 9 Table 10 Table 11 Table 12 Table 13 Table 14 Table 15 Table 16 Table 17 Table 18 Table 19 List of countries included in the GFSM assessment Summary of recent fibre supply analyses by thematic area Natural forest area ('000 ha) by region­ global summary Average standardized forest volume by region (m3/ha)­summary Total standardized volume by region ('000 000 m3)­summary Total potential growth and harvest intensity by region ('000 000 m3)­summary Industrial plantation area and growth by region (1995)­global summary Alternative fibre­recovered and non-wood fibre by region­global summary Summary of major country statistics for Republic of Congo, an example Selected major factors to influence fibre supply Summary of cost and volume impacts of implementing SFM by region Contrast of sustained yield and sustainable forest management for temperate forests Average annual change of forest area by region as reported in 1995 Afforestation rate by country (1995) Potential increases from development (genetic & silvicultural) gains Non-wood pulping capacities by region Wastepaper recovery levels by region Selected major factors to influence fibre supply in Africa Estimated long-term sustainable economic industrial wood supply respectively commercial wood supply (industrial wood + fuelwood). in million m3 per year. European forecast of removals, residues & recovered fibre net of fuelwood consumption in million m3 per year US Projections of roundwood harvest on forestland in the United States 2000-2040, by species group in million m3 Canadian industrial roundwood production, actual and projected, and estimates of allowable annual cut (AACs) in million m3 Total potential fibre availability (all sources) by region reporting 1996, 2010, 2050 in '000 000 m3 6 26 36 36 37 38 38 39 40 41 43 44 44 47 48 50 51 55.
Introduction.
O V E R VI E W.
In late 1995, on the recommendation of the FAO Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products, the FAO Forestry Department initiated the Global Fibre1 Supply2 Model (GFSM). The study was intended to respond to several important policy questions: What sources of wood fibre exist today and where could we go in the future to find wood fibre to meet the growing demand for forest products? How much productive forest is needed to supply sustainably expected future fibre demand? These challenging questions have important biological, economic, social, cultural and political aspects. This study does not make claims to address all these dimensions; rather, the work undertaken should be viewed as a `'first step'' in the FAO's more extensive and ongoing efforts to address these issues particularly through regional and global outlook studies. This first step is certainly an important one and is intended to make a significant contribution to progress in the development of supply and demand forecasting models3 . In general terms the study contributes to forest policy development by highlighting and underscoring the pressing need for reliable data, information and analysis on industrial fibre sources and their utilization. The study includes a compilation of the recent forest inventory statistics along with recovered and non-wood fibre data. The focus is primarily on the sources of industrial fibre as raw material for the sawmilling, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper industries.
Fibre is defined broadly as fibrous wood and non-wood raw material for primary industries producing sawn timber, wood-based panels, and pulp and paper products. While the majority of this fibre is harvested from forests and plantations, other kinds of fibre considered in this report include recovered paper, and non-wood fibres. 2 Economists define supply in terms of a price-quantity relationship. Foresters also use the word supply to describe the physical capability of the forest to produce wood coupled with recognition of some constraints on availability imposed due to physical barriers, transport distance and legislation. Supply in this report means the wood production capacity of the forest adjusted for current and reasonable future limitations on availability. 3 Binkley (1987) said: `'The quality of extant data severely constrains further empirical work on timber supply models. A unit of effort spent on improving the data series available for timber supply analysis will have a greater return than the same unit of effort spent on estimation techniques or the inclusion of additional explanatory variables.'' Brooks (1987) said `'The most serious difficulty encountered in assembling a model of forest resource dynamics is not, however, the choice of an appropriate methodology, but the lack of consistent, comparable data for many regions.".
Global Fibre Supply Model.
A simple model was constructed and linked to the statistics to begin to reveal some of the issues affecting future developments in fibre supply. This modelling provides a first look at some of the major factors affecting supply for important producer countries in Asia/Oceania, Latin America and Africa.
R E P O R T OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this report are to:.
q Present current statistics useful in analysing fibre supply by region.
and a sample of what is available by country from the statistical database. q Describe a simple model that could identify some of the potential sources of fibre supply and illustrates many of the major factors which have an impact on supply as we look to the future. q Display some preliminary forecasts for Africa, Asia-Oceania and Latin America. These forecasts are offered to both invite further discussions on methodology and promote a discussion of the key factors influencing fibre availability. q Summarize some lessons learned in the GFSM exercise and give direction for future development of the work. This report summarizes a larger body of work completed in the GFSM efforts. Complementing this work is a series of working papers, a special edition of Unasylva, and a user-friendly database and computer model.
The GFSM builds a bridge between two existing priority programmes in the FAO Forestry Department ­ the Outlook Studies and the Forest Resources Assessment 2000 (see Figure 1). It does this by focussing on statistics currently weak or missing such as the collection and compilation of commercial forest volume inventory, forest growth and potential removal data for the developing regions ­ Africa, Asia-Pacific, and Latin America and the Caribbean. It will strengthen FAO's Outlook Studies in these rapidly developing regions by improving our statistics on wood fibre potential and complement existing econometric modelling of demand for forest products. The GFSM is being monitored by representatives from the forest products industry, governments and research institutes. A special Steering Committee is providing guidance on the scope of the project and feedback on the information generated. Participation is encouraged through regional workshops, four of which have already been held. The study was deliberately designed to avoid duplication of effort with other agencies working in the area of fibre supply. Therefore, to meet the terms of reference and for the sake of completeness, it incorporates statistics and forecasts from the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (Russia), the Economic Commission for Europe and FAO Geneva (Europe), and the Canadian and United States Forest Services (North America).
F A O APPROACH.
FAO has adopted a multiple-pronged approach in preparing outlook studies. The Forest Resources Assessment (FRA) provides foundation data on forest area and key characteristics of the forest resource. A Global Fibre Supply Model (GFSM) is providing a simulation model to forecast fibre supply potentials under different scenarios. Likely developments in the consumption, production and trade of forest products are provided through a Global Forest Products Model (GFPM). These three components provide the analytical foundation necessary to support a set of scenarios to be presented as the FAO global Outlook for Forests and Forest Products. The scenarios developed will describe the adjustments required in forest management, wood products production, Figure 1 consumption and trade in Forestry statistics and outlook studies processes order to achieve certain desired future conditions for the forestry sector. Current Forest Policy Environment The global Outlook for Forests and Forest FRA Products will be developed after consultation with GFPM GFSM governments, industry Resources availability Econometric modeling 1997 and non-governmental 1998 organizations. The implications for policy will be summarized in the Outlook scenarios 1998 State of the World's Forests 1999 (FAO's SOFO biennial review). The approach described above is an iterative process, which will be carried out on a periodic basis, with FRA2000 being the beginning of the cycle once again. Through it, the FAO Forestry Department hopes to contribute more effectively to the global forest policy debate on issues such as sustainable forest management, biological diversity and climatic change. In addition, it will assist in addressing questions such as: How will we meet the growing demand for wood products? Will technological advances offset changes in wood availability? What role can recycling and non-wood fibres play?.
Policy implications 1999.
R E P O R T STRUCTURE.
The report is organized as follows: Section 2 Section 3 Section 4 Section 5 Section 6 Section 7 Annex 1 Description of methodology Background for the study Current fibre supply situation Impact of major supply factors Alternative futures Discussion and conclusions Statistical summary of forest area, growth, volume, harvesting intensity (potential removals) and alternative fibres and plantations plus summary of possible futures for some regions Major definitions and classification.
Methodology.
S T U D Y DESIGN.
The initial task was to construct an appropriate database for data compilation and information management. A pre-test was conducted, definitions were developed, and input tables for data compilation were completed. A team of experts worked on a country-by-country basis through the latest available inventory reports to extract the data necessary to complete the country profiles in terms of forest area, growing stock volume, growth and removals, for the major industrial roundwood producers in Africa, Asia-Pacific, and Latin America and the Caribbean. The analysts used Microsoft Access as the relational database management programme and Visual Basic as the programming language for supply forecasting. (Another forecast model was developed in FORTRAN, later converted to VBASIC, and it is described in more detail in GFSM Working Paper No. 5.) In order to forecast to the year 2050, it is necessary to place the fibre supply projections into an appropriate policy context. Based on a thorough review of the policy issues addressed in previous supply studies, the major policy factors identified for consideration at this time are:.
sustainable forest management; land-use change ­ deforestation; land-use change ­ protected area; plantation afforestation rate; plantation development gains; non-wood and recovered fibre; and material efficiency and technological change.
The implications of these factors are described in more detail in Section.
The study team recognizes that prices and costs are also important determinants in defining the economic supply but, due to the limited financial resources available for the project, these factors were not explicitly included. In particular, the definitions and classification were chosen to match those of the Forest Resources Assessment 2000. This will help the reader to follow upcoming FAO reports, assist the FRA and Outlook Studies teams with some of their information requirements and also improve the linkage of the GFSM study to some important current forest policy issues.
Table 1 List of countries included in the GFSM assessment Africa (26) Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Rep. Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Tanzania, United Rep. Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe South America (13) Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela O ce ani a (6) Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu U S SR, former area (1) Russian Federation Central America (9) Belize Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama North America (3) Canada Mexico United States of America A s i a (22) Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China India Indonesia Iran Japan Korea,DPR Korea, Rep. of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Guyana Albania Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Eur ope (28).
Definitions.
In conducting a study of this nature it is critical to have a clear set of terms for forest resources. The definitions must have at least the following characteristics to be useful for both consistency of the various statistical reports and for outlook work: The definitions must be in general agreement with new terminology negotiated in international forums. For example, the definitions used must be compatible with the FAO Forest Resources Assessment 2000. Where definitions did not exist the terms used draw heavily on the forestry literature for description. The terms must be flexible enough to utilize old data sets. For example, the FAO Forest Resources Assessment 1980 contains very important data on forest volume utilized in building a country profile. The major terms must be able to accommodate the country level data collected. For example, each country has its own unique way of classifying forest area and volumes and the standard definitions must be able to accommodate these differences. The terms must be readily understandable to a wide audience of users. This ensures greater transparency in the presentation of data. It is imperative for any long-term planning to establish standards that can be applied to a wide variety of circumstances. Annex 2 contains a complete list of definitions used in the study.
Classification of fibre resources.
To t a l L a n d.
F o re s t a n d O t h e r W o o d e d Lan d.
O th e r L a n d *.
O th e r W o o d e d L an d *.
Pl an tati o n s.
N a t u ra l F o re s t.
P ri v a t e.
P u b li c *.
D is t u rb e d.
U n d is t u r b e d *.
C o n i fe r o u s.
N o n - C on if . *.
A v a i la b le f o r W o o d Su p p l y *.
N o t A v a i la b l e fo r W o o d Su p p l y *.
D i s tu r b e d.
P r iv a t e P u b li c *.
U n d i s t u rb e d *.
D is t u r b e d *.
I n a c c e s s ib le *.
L e g a ll y P ro t e c t e d.
C o n if e r o u s.
No n C o n if e r o u s *.
I [P h ys i c a l ].
II [ T r a n s p o r t].
I II [ O t h e r].
W o od Fibre f r om Forest Ava ila b l for W oo d Supp l e y.
G r o w in g Sto c k m 3/h a.
Comm er cial Species G ro w in g Sto ck m 3 /h a.
H a rv e stin g I nte n si ty m 3/ ha.
Cu t t ing C y c le ye ar s.
f o r: Di s tu r b e d F or e st.
f o r: Un d i s t u r b e d F or est.
f o r: Di s tu rb ed Fo re s t.
f or : Un di st u rb e d Fo re s t.
f or : Di s tu rb ed Fo re s t.
f o r: U nd i s t u rb ed Fo re s t.
Gro s s Annu al I nc re me nt m 3/h a /y.
G ross Annual In cre m e nt m 3 /h a/ y.
Describing the current situation.
The statistics chosen for collection are important because they serve as a basis for examining both the current and future conditions of the forests. The creation of possible futures requires the manipulation of critical variables in a set of equations that forecast changes in fibre sources over time. The critical statistics in the case of the GFSM are:.
q area ­ i.e. current forest area available for wood supply; q area ­ area change for natural and plantation forest; q volume ­ both growing stock and commercial species growing.
stock; q growth ­ gross annual increment and mortality; q fellings/removals ­ harvesting intensity and cutting cycle; q recovered and non-wood fibre ­ production capacity.
Constructing alternative futures.
Modelling the future in today's forest policy context also requires the use of equations to manipulate the statistics or variables just described and which have at least some ability to express the sustainability of supply. Figure 4 Figure 4 is a summary of the formulae Formulae for calculating fibre supply futures considered for use in the analysis of natural forests. Currently equations Gud I: + (i  Ad ) III and IV are being used in the c modelling efforts and once better conversion factors are developed Gud equations I, II and V will also be II: + (0.5  i  Ad ) included to improve our analytical c abilities.
Hi  Aud + (i  Ad ) c Hi  Aud + (0.5  i  Ad ) c 2.
(Gud + Gd ).
Explanation Commercial Species Growing Stock ­ Forest undisturbed by man Commercial Species Growing Stock ­ Forest disturbed by man.
There are a wide range of equations used to calculate area of forest undisturbed by man and forest disturbed by man. Based on an extensive review of the literature on yield regulations, particularly as applied to tropical forest conditions4, the GFSM identified five equations as useful. Equations I and II rely on the growing stock statistics of.
Symbol Gud Gd Aud Ad Hi i c r.
Area available for wood supply ­ Forest undisturbed by man Area available for wood supply ­ Forest disturbed by man Harvest intensity Increment Cutting cycle Rotation period.
Since the yield regulation formulae were originally developed in temperate and boreal forest conditions, a modification of the formulae presented can make them applicable to these forests as well. For example, in some forests the cutting cycle would be replaced with a rotation age and the harvest intensity replaced with merchantable volume.
commercial species in the forest undisturbed by man and allow for the gradual transition over time from an undisturbed forest to a disturbed forest. Equation II allows for the application of a reduction factor to the increment statistics. Since in many countries the increment statistics are very difficult to obtain, the ability to reduce increment because of uncertainty, mortality, bark and other factors is very important. The primary disadvantage of the use of these formulae relates directly to the inadequacy of forest inventory data which only report volumes for large-diameter trees, usually above 50 cm diameter at breast height (dbh). In calculating future potential supply this is simply not appropriate since all trees, and certainly all those above 10 cm dbh, are of significance and should be reported. Unfortunately, the needed conversion factors have not yet been developed, particularly to convert the inventories from, for example, a 50 cm class to a 20 cm class. Equations III and IV focus on harvesting intensity statistics for the gradual conversion of the undisturbed forest to disturbed forest. Once the conversion has occurred, the formulae use the growth in the forest as the driving variable in calculating supply. A reduction factor to the growth of 0.5 is applied in the case of equation IV and this reflects the uncertainty over the growth statistics. For example, it is often unclear in the source of information if the growth includes a mortality factor or not. Equation V is a barometer against which one can compare the results of the other four equations. It is useful to have a reasonable range of formulae for analysts to compare results and select the most appropriate equation for projecting futures. Normally it is most appropriate to calculate the amount of fibre to be removed on the basis of the standing commercial forest and the growth of the forest, i.e. using equations I and II. However, since volumes are so difficult to determine from a supply point of view, the harvesting intensity applied to the area available for wood supply is a suitable surrogate for supply forecasting calculations. In determining the supply levels for industrial plantations, non-wood fibres and recovered fibres, the array of options are narrower than with forest undisturbed by man and forest disturbed by man. This is either because the data or information currently available are limited or the data can be handled in a more straightforward manner. The GFSM model identifies a single formula for the calculation of each of these components (see Working Paper No. 1 for details).
To o l f o r a c c e s s i n g a n d d i s p l a y i n g the current situation and forecasts.
In order to access readily available statistical information and to assist in quickly displaying possible scenarios a database and model that is directly linked were constructed. Figure 5 shows the front page of the database and.
model. For each of the items mentioned in the right-hand column there are a number of activities that can be explored by the user. The first button Enter New Data allows the analyst to enter new data and reference material. It will only be accessible to designated analysts in charge of data entry and standardization.
The second button Review the Data provides a quick snapshot view of the most important country statistics on forest area, volume, alternative fibres and plantation data. Other relevant statistics are provided along with a list of major assumptions made in creating the basic data (Section 2 ­ Base data).
The third button Create Country Reports allows Reports database users to generate reports which are automatically formatted and updated with the latest statistical information.
The fourth button C r e a t e Create Regionall Reports allows users to Regiona generate a variety of regional reports to meet specific needs. For example, there are reports on forest area, volume, growth and removals by country at the forest type level or aggregated at the country level. There are also reports describing possible futures using the GFSM forecast model. Currently, the user has the ability to choose one of some 14 reports.
The fifth button GFSM Data GFSM Projections facilitates the exploration of three possible futures for each country and, most importantly, it describes the role each source of fibre could play in those futures. A list of major assumptions made in creating the futures is included (Section 2 ­ Forecasting).
The sixth button User Defined User Projections allows the user to explore a different future by manipulating variables as described in Section 5 and compare with the standard futures as set by the G F S M GFSM analyst. This is particularly useful for exploring countryspecific policy issues affecting industrial wood supply. Instructions on how to use this feature are provided.
The seventh button D e f i n e Define Futures G F S M Fu t u r e s allows the analyst to set the standard variables as described in Section 5 for all countries. These variables can be reset at any time to help public policy makers, industry analysts and NGOs explore alternative futures.
The eighth button R e v i e w Review GFSM Definitions contains a complete summary of the terms used in the database and model.
The emphasis of the database and model is transparency, flexibility and simplicity. In practical terms this means ease of access to forest standardized and unstandardized data, and ease of use of a simulation model which is relevant to some current forest policy issues.
VALIDA S C O P E AND VALID A T I O N.
Due to limited resources, and in order to keep the project to a more manageable size, it was decided that this project could not include at this time:.
fuelwood; trees outside of forests; non-industrial forest plantations; price and cost data; the geographic area of the Middle East; the geographic area of the republics of the former USSR; countries where industrial roundwood production is less than 100 000 m3, unless the information was readily available.
In the future it will be necessary to collect the additional statistics to cover the fibre source of the regions/countries mentioned in order to present a more complete global picture of fibre supply for industrial and non-industrial uses (see Table 1). The price and cost information needs will also have to be addressed in order to bring market forces to bear on the supply analysis. It is important in an exercise of this manner to validate the data used on basic area and volume of fibre available. Due to time and budgetary limitations and at the instruction of the Steering Committee, the data compiled was screened in two ways: First, it was examined by forestry experts and consultants who have knowledge of the particular country. Second, it was taken to regional workshops in Malaysia, Ghana and Brazil for an examination by government, private sector and non-governmental representatives.
M A J O R AS S U M P T I O N S.
A project of this nature requires the analysts to make key assumptions in data collection, interpretation, organization and manipulation. In addition, for any fibre supply modelling exercise, it is necessary to make a set of assumptions in model construction and development in order to describe possible futures. To gain more widespread acceptance of the information and the forecasts it is imperative that assumptions are made transparent and therefore considerable effort is made below to describe them fully. It should be noted that the assumptions described below are generic in nature and therefore used in the countries to which they apply. Naturally, the data collected from each country requires that additional unique assumptions are applied in order to standardize the data fully. In a report of this nature it is not appropriate to present an exhaustive description but the intention is to establish a continual dialogue with country analysts whereby all assumptions will be developed through a workshop participation process, a process which has already been initiated with over 25 countries for this report and now is still ongoing in the outlook study and FRA processes.
Most countries have incomplete data sets for natural and plantation forests. In order to fill in the essential information needed various assumptions were made in developing the base data. These are described below for the forest undisturbed and disturbed by man, the industrial plantation forest and the non-wood and recovered fibre.
Forest Undisturbed and Disturbed by Man.
Area Fo re s t Are a.
Area estimates contain three major assumptions.
The collection of total forest area statistics has a long history. It is now possible to calculate forest area with remote sensing information along with ground checks and it is assumed that this is the best possible method for area statistics for many countries in the absence of detailed inventory reports. The FAO Forest Resources Assessment 1990 forms an important part of the G F S M area assessment in developing GFSM countries.
It is also assumed that other wooded land will not yield a significant amount of industrial roundwood. Thus it is excluded from the current G F S M assessment.
There are distinctly different points of view on the issue of what area is available for fibre supply at a point in time and these are legitimate differences since our knowledge is imperfect5. While the precise boundary of the area available for wood supply cannot be defined, it is necessary for an industrial fibre outlook study to assess the area which is available under current market conditions, with current technology and infrastructure. Therefore assumptions were made using country experts and other data sources to deduct the forest area not available for wood supply. Forest area not available for wood supply was placed into the following classes and subclasses: a) legally protected according to IUCN classes 1 and 2; b) economically inaccessible; i) physically inaccessible due to factors such as steepness of terrain. ii) far from industrial sites due to transportation distance or lack of infrastructure. iii) too low in commercial volume, degraded forest or some other legitimate reason specific to each country. It is worth noting that a similar evaluation procedure was used in the 1980 Forest Resources Assessment for the tropical forest.
For example, there is sometimes a different view between governments and industry over area available for wood supply. From a government's point of view an area could be available for wood supply if there is no official policy, regulation or legislation which precludes its inclusion in a concession agreement. Industry may take a different view since it will assess the likelihood of an area of the concession being included in, say, protected area, or an area being physically inaccessible due to restrictions on permissible harvesting systems. This naturally leads to a divergence of opinion but neither policy actor can be considered unreasonable.
Volume Growth Fo re s t Volume and Gro w t h.
Growing stock volume in cubic metres per hectare (m3/ha)is reported at the diameter class which is standardized to 10 cm. It is also possible to indicate the unstandardized volumes if the information is requested. It is important to note that these statistics are not necessarily a reflection of the forest volume available for future wood supply. Commercial species volumes are based on the tree species considered commercial under current market conditions for a particular country. The commercial or potentially commercial volume in the natural forest of tropical countries is normally far lower than the total growing stock. It is very important to pay special attention to the reported diameter class of the growing stock. In many cases the statistics are not a reflection of the commercial growing stock available today for industrial uses but of all age classes of commercial species greater than 10 cm. Forest undisturbed by man in the tropical forest areas will not, in general, have any net growth since mortality is an offsetting factor to any annual growth. This is not the case in the forest disturbed by man and estimates of increment by forest type are included. There is a paucity of good data in this area. For the temperate and boreal forests the study relies on the estimation procedures already made in statistical reports from the countries, research institutes or the ECE/FAO reports, all of which are mentioned in Section.
Naturally the assumptions are different and the reader should refer to the relevant documentation.
Fo rest Removals.
Harvesting intensity estimates for the tropics will change with the transition from forest undisturbed by man to forest disturbed by man under the historical and future forms of management. Working Paper No. 6, which is an annotated bibliography on this subject, strongly supports this assumption. Under sustainable forest management practices harvesting intensity should remain fairly constant in a forest disturbed by man with each cutting cycle. The cutting cycles' statistics attempt to reflect the common silvicultural and harvesting prescriptions used most commonly in a country by each forest type. In boreal and temperate regions the removal is expressed on an annual basis since the harvesting systems are generally different from the tropical regions and it is the total volume divided by the rotation age for each forest type.
Industrial Plantations.
The plantation area includes all plantations whose primary objective is to produce industrial roundwood ­ that is sawlogs, veneer logs, pulpwood and other industrial wood. They include areas of "non-forest" species, such as rubber and coconut and, to a lesser extent, oil palm. Presently relatively few countries are using these species for forest products but more use is anticipated in the future. They exclude all plantation areas where it was.
possible to identify, or in some cases infer, that the objective was nonindustrial ­ that is mainly fuelwood but also poles, tan-bark and areas managed exclusively for other non-timber products. If, however, an area is managed for a non-timber product such as naval stores (e.g. some of the pines in Sri Lanka) they are included since they will eventually produce industrial roundwood. The gross annual increment is an estimate by species and by country of the increment in m3/ha/a continued over the commercial rotation of the crop. Once more is known about mortality, reduction factors can be applied to yield a net annual increment.
Recovered Fibres.
The percentage of wastepaper recovered is a fraction of total paper and paperboard production. For a few countries, particularly those with political turmoil, figures were either unreliable or unavailable. In such cases estimated values were used to fill data gaps. Working Paper No. 4 describes the background of wastepaper statistics in detail. All available recovered fibre is provided by wastepaper recovery. While this is not always the case, as there are viable operations concerned with recovering solid timber and engineered wood products, the use of recovered fibre is still predominantly in the pulp and paper industry with the recovery and recycling of wastepaper.
Non-wood Fibres.
Most non-wood fibre produced is used towards the production of pulp for paper. Non-wood fibre usage is significant in a limited number of countries. In some cases estimates were made to fill data gaps and these are also described more fully in Working Paper No. 4.
Forecasting.
Forests Undisturbed and Disturbed by Man.
forests. Conversion forests These forests (i.e. forest area targeted for conversion to other land use) may or may not have a cutting cycle attached. In the instance that no cutting cycle is assigned, the forests are assumed to be harvested over the 55 years that the model runs. Adjusting the legally protected forest areas. Targets for legally protected forest areas are expressed as a percentage of the current legally protected area (i.e. 1995 base year). Therefore, the total legally protected area can be said to increase or decrease by the target percentage. The target date is fixed at 2010. It is also assumed that increases or decreases in the legally protected forest area will be applied evenly over forests both undisturbed and disturbed by man. Transformation from undisturbed forest. All undisturbed forests are assumed to transform to disturbed forests after a single harvest.
Transformed areas are assumed to still contribute to the overall productive capability although in many forest types the sustainable productivity will be at a lower level under existing management. Deforestation. The annual deforestation is applied to a percentage of the area available for wood supply. The original rate is provided by the State of the World's Forests (FAO 1997). One year of deforestation reduces the overall area available for wood supply, which is reflected in the next year's calculation. Thus, the actual area being deforested and, as a result, the area available changes from year to year. The deforestation rate itself is applied evenly over every year of the cutting cycle. The deforestation rate is applied evenly over the entire undisturbed and disturbed forest area available for supply. Adjusting the deforestation rate. Changes to the overall deforestation rate rate. are expressed as a percentage of the current deforestation rate. Thus, the deforestation rate can be said to increase or decrease by the target percentage. This target percentage is applied as an even reduction or gain in the overall deforestation rate over each year of the cutting cycle. Changes in the deforestation rate are applied evenly to both the disturbed and undisturbed forest areas.
Volume Fo re s t Vo l u m e.
P otential commercial growing stock. It is the portion of the actual commercial growing stock that will be potentially utilized and includes all age classes of commercial value. class. Inventory diameter class. One of the most critical factors in compiling forest inventory data is establishing the diameter class of the inventory. Each country compiles data at different classes and the challenge is to find the forest volume at the 10 cm class. Crude conversions, described in Working Paper No. 1, have been used for reporting purposes.
Growth Fo re s t Growth and Removals.
G r o w t h. It is assumed that the forest undisturbed by man has little or no growth in terms of a net increase in the potential commercial growing stock. R e m o v a l s. For the undisturbed forest the removals are assumed to be the forest volume distributed over the cutting cycle for a particular forest type. Removals should not exceed the net growth of forest once the forest is disturbed.
Y ield Calculations.
supply. Sustainable supply Sustainable supply as a concept has now been broadened in many regions expanding from the traditional tenets of sustained yield6 to include the concepts of biological diversity and ecosystem management (see Working Paper No. 3). This means broadening the analysis to include spatial as well as aspatial possibilities in forest yield regulation and, despite the increased complexity, quantify the long-term supply. Several formulae are used in an attempt to reflect supply levels which might be deemed `'sustainable", at least from a productive capacity point of view (one criterion in the Montreal and other processes).
Y ield regulation diameter class. Supply calculations require the specification of the diameter class. Since different countries choose different diameter classes for yield regulation calculations, it is important to compare the diameter classes used before comparing modelling results. Adjusting the cutting cycle. Increased reliance on practices regarded as contributing to forest sustainability is reflected in an increase in the cutting cycle. Conversely, abandoning the principles of SFM is reflected by a decrease in the cutting cycle. Target changes in the cutting cycle are applied at the beginning of the cycle. Therefore, implementing a management plan which entails improved SFM would have an immediate effect upon the model output.
Afforestation rate. The afforestation rate is derived from various government sources and other published information. Where no information is available the estimates are made by plantation experts with knowledge of the region. It is assumed to be an annual planting rate. However, to offset the effects of replanting a currently existing plantation or changes in government initiatives, the afforestation rate is reduced by 7 percent annually and thus is brought to 0 percent by the year 2010. Adjusting the afforestation rate. Changes to the afforestation rate are expressed as a percentage of the overall afforestation rate. Thus, the rate may be increased or decreased by a target percentage. This rate only refers to additional area planted. supply. Industrial plantation area available for supply. The plantation area that is available for supply is variable. It is assumed that 5 percent of a country's industrial plantation area was available in 1995. (Notable exceptions are countries with long-standing plantation programmes where the area available for current wood supply is assumed to be 50 percent.) This percentage rises linearly until the year 2015, when it is assumed that 80 percent of a country's plantation area is available for supply. However, where reliable information on the area currently available exists, it will be used in the simulations. gains. Development gains There is provision in the model for gains from improved plantation development, such as better silvicultural practices or improved genetic stock. The development gains factor is expressed as a target percentage. Essentially, it represents a percent increase in the production capacity of industrial plantations. The target percentage is evenly applied over 55 years until the year 2050. The default is set at 30 percent but Working Paper No. 2 gives a more detailed review of other percentages that could be used for simulation modelling purposes.
This report does not review the merits and shortcomings of sustained yield or any modification of the concept. However, as a well respected forest economist once said: The concept of sustained yield should not have followed the crosscut saw into oblivion, nor is it likely to. Divergence between industrial and social rate of time preferences, different attitudes towards risk, and the implications of forest ownership patterns all seem likely to inhibit experimentation with other objectives. Also sustained yield management does create benefits which are not always noted (Nautiyal 1988).
Actual increment. The industrial plantation increment values are commonly very high. The model reduces the increment value by 25 percent in order to take into account bark, age class distribution, inadequate management practices, environmental restrictions, losses incurred in harvesting and transport or possible over-estimations of plantation growth.
Conversion of metric tons to cubic metres. The conversion factor to convert metric tons to cubic metres is assumed to be 2.5 m3/t. This factor is an estimate taken from an amalgamation of various sources. Existing recovered paper usage rate of change. The rate of change in recovered fibre use as estimated (see Working Paper No. 4) is applied on a linear basis over the 55 years of the model run. The existing rate of change is derived from historic wastepaper recovery statistics and paper and paperboard production figures, as published by FAO (FAOStat 1997). Maximum recovered paper. The wastepaper recovered will not exceed paper. twice the 1995 level (i.e. if they recovered 100 tons in 1995, nowhere in the forecast will they recover more than 200 tons). rate. Maximum recovered paper usage rate The wastepaper recovered will not exceed 70 percent of the overall paper production, based on current trends of paper production. This prevents any unreasonable amounts of wastepaper recovery. Adjusting the recovered fibre usage rate of change. The rate of change in wastepaper recovery can be adjusted by setting a target percentage and then adjusting the rate of change up or down by this percentage. The target date is 2010. This allows the pattern of wastepaper recovery usage to be adjusted over the course of the model run.
Conversion of metric tons to cubic metres. The conversion factor to convert metric tons to cubic metres is assumed to be 2.5 m3/t. This factor is a rough figure taken from an amalgamation of various figures compiled by different sources. Existing non-wood fibre usage rate of change. The rate of change in nonwood fibre use is estimated (see Working Paper No. 4) and applied on a linear basis over the 55 years of the model run. The existing rate of change is derived from historic non-wood fibre usage statistics and pulp production figures as published by FAO (FAOStat 1997). Adjusting the non-wood fibre usage rate of change. This adjustment is made by establishing a target percentage (i.e. non-wood fibre use might increase or decrease by a percentage over the next 15 years) and then applying this change to the existing non-wood fibre usage rate of change. Thus, the pattern of non-wood fibre usage could change over the course of the model. The target date for this factor is 2010 (15 years into the model).
STA D AT A AND STA T I S T I C A L IS S U E S Data quality and resolution.
Data quality is very mixed, inconsistent or missing altogether. For example, in a few countries there is recent forest inventory data of outstanding quality while in most countries inventory information is poor or is very old. Data resolution means the spatial scale at which the forest inventory data was collected and the intensity of the survey conducted. It is difficult to aggregate data from the field level to the country level. Often forest inventory projects are small scale with a much narrower purpose and it is difficult to take the information and apply it to the country level. For example, the field project may estimate that the average growth of the forest in a particular forest type is 1.8 m3/ha/a. Given that there is no other information on other forest types in the country, does it mean we should apply it? Experts had to make judgement calls and then the data was reviewed by people in the most important countries.
Statistical inconsistencies.
Many countries do not declare their statistical assumptions in defining their forest inventories. The critical factors include definition of commercial species, appropriate volume expansion factors to standardize forest volumes, definition of accessible forest area, and tree growth increments in both open and closed forest formations. It is also difficult to get a standard definition of land area, forest area, and protected areas. In many cases there are different numbers for the same area or volume from different reports for the same country. Deciphering the best estimate required extensive effort by our country assessment team.
INTRODUCTION.
This section provides a brief review of recent global fibre studies and the themes they highlighted, and an overview and analysis of industrial roundwood production by region since 1970. Taken together this material provides the necessary contextual backdrop for the material presented in the subsequent sections of this report.
R E C E N T GLO B A L FIBRE GLOBAL STUDIES.
The interest in fibre supply studies which examine the resources needed for the production of wood products is significant and it is increasing. There is less forest undisturbed by man, the dynamics of the forest disturbed by man are frequently unknown and the area of plantations is increasing significantly. In addition, there are significant new fibre sources emerging in the form of non-wood and recovered fibre. Finally, there are emerging new fibre sources, such as trees outside of forest, non-forest land and other lands, which play a very significant role in some regions. Given this complex matrix of fibre sources and the many variables which play upon them, it is necessary to persevere with the challenging task of developing and maintaining the basic forest and fibre statistics since they provide a key foundation for forest and forest product planning. In addition to the statistics, it is necessary to identify some of the critical factors that will have an impact on future fibre supply. Table 2 summarizes a review of recent literature which identifies some of the major supply themes. The selected reference list included in this table is not meant to be exhaustive but to serve as a quick overview of some major issues that are being raised by researchers and analysts. The GFSM attempted to include some of these issues in the factors which influence supply and these are described more fully in Section.
It is worth bearing in mind that the outlook studies process, as described in Figure 1, will address a much broader and complex range of factors than those discussed here.
I N D U S T R I A L FIBRE P R O D U C T I O N TRENDS.
In analysing fibre supply it is useful to have an overview of the historic and current developments in the use of different types of forest products in various regions since it helps to place in context the current reported utilization of forest resources. There are at least three possible benefits to such a comparison:.
Major Industrial Ro u n d w o o d Supply Issues Level of investment in silviculture & countries investment stimulation policies Land use change (deforestation, afforestation, protected area) Better ecosystem management Material efficiency & technology change Higher prices expanding supply Land ownership (nonindustrial landowner, fragmented ownership, privatization trends) Higher management or harvesting costs Poor wood quality or poor forest condition Poor industrial and institutional infrastructure Natural forest depleted Emergence of recovered and non-wood fibres Plantations Re-classification of the growing stock Sustainable forestry with broader social objectives Financial abilities of the wood industry Product substitution Air pollution & global warming Difficult operating terrain Competition for roundwood supply Age class imbalances & lower yields on subsequent rotations Data uncertainty and error K ey to authors 1 Boulter & Darr 1996 2 Margules, Groome & Poyry 1996 3 Waggener & Lane 1996 4 Reid Collins 1995 5 Apsey & Reed 1995 6 7 8 9 10 Reed 1995 Nilsson 1995 Wall 1995 Nilsson 1996 McNutt 1996 11 12 13 14 Sedjo & Lyons 1990 Sedjo & Lyons 1995 Arnold 1993 Zhang & Buongiorno 1996 # of Citations 10 GFSM Factor or other Element (n/a = not addre s s e d ) addressed) SFM R e f e re n c e 1 US 2 AF AS GL GL GL 3 4 GL 5 GL 6 7 RU 8 EU 9 10 GL 11 GL 12 GL 13 GL 14.
Forest area & accessibility.
TE BO TR GL GL GL GL GL GL.
SFM Material efficiency Accessibility Forest ownership.
US CA US US US.
GL GL GL GL.
GL RU GL GL.
Accessibility Accessibility & harvest intensity Accessibility SFM Non-wood & recovered fibre Afforestation & development gains Forest area & volume SFM n/a n/a SFM Accessibility n/a Harvest intensity CA US CA CA CA.
GL GL RU AS GL.
GL GL EU GL GL GL GL GL GL TE BO.
GL GL GL GL GL RU GL GL GL.
Simulation modelling.
region K e y to re g i o n G L Global U S United States C A Canada A F Africa A S Asia E U Europe R U Former USSR T R Tropical T E Temperate B O Boreal.
The difference between the total fibre forecast and the historic trends in production may provide some guidance to assessing the economics of the future timber supply under a given set of conditions.
In the longer term, the relationship between industrial roundwood production and potential fibre availability, which is linked to the growth/ drain ratio or a growth/removal ratio, is a very useful one to monitor since it is one of the indicators of the available country's forest resources to meet production targets (see Section 4, Tables 6-8 for discussion on potential removals for industrial production).
The difference also helps to highlight errors in the statistics, particularly at the country level. For example, the reported production statistics in Cambodia and Angola are very much lower than potential fibre availability calculations. This indicates that the reported statistics from the countries are not including the illegal fellings that are sometimes 300 percent higher than the reported production in some countries. Industrial roundwood is still the major source of fibre for the woodprocessing industries. Industrial roundwood comprises "sawlogs and veneer logs", "pulpwood and particles" and "other industrial roundwood". Other industrial roundwood consists of roundwood used for such applications as tanning, distillation, match blocks, poles, Figure 6 Global industrial roundwood production posts, and pitprops.
Demand for forest products is driven by many factors and one of the most important 3 Mill m ones is population growth. Between 1970 1 800 and 1994, world population increased by 1 600 more than 50 percent. In the South 1 400 American and African regions, it increased 1 200 1 000 by more than 60 percent and 90 percent, 800 respectively (FAO 1997). Global production 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 of industrial roundwood has, until recently, Source: FAO Year shown sustained increases that parallel population growth. Total reported industrial roundwood production in 1990 was about Figure 7 1.7 billion m3 (Figure 6). Global industrial roundwood production by product group Since 1990, however, 1970-1995 reported world production has declined to about 1.5 billion m3 in 3 Mill m 1995.
Source: FAO Total Industr. Roundwood Sawlogs & Veneerlogs Pulpwood & Particles Other IRW.
An analysis of industrial roundwood production by product group (see Figure 7) demonstrates that the decline of world production between 1990 and 1995 results mainly from a decline in the production of sawlogs and veneer logs.
and other industrial roundwood. Pulpwood production has continued to grow between 1990 and 1995, but at a reduced rate. There are several possible reasons behind the decline in sawlog production. An obvious one is increased substitution by wood-based panels in traditional sawn timber applications, for example the use of veneered fibreboard or particle board in traditional sawn timber applications such as furniture and joinery. It can also be postulated that the leading consumer countries in North America, Scandinavia and Europe are approaching saturation levels for per caput requirements. Similarly the current group of rapidly developing countries may not have the same timber construction traditions that drove the high demand in developed countries when they were at the same income levels. In the main producing countries there might also be a preference for higher value-added products being made directly from sawnwood so that an increasing share of sawnwood output is not produced as a commodity for sale but for input into secondary products (FAO 1997). On the supply side, increasing scarcity of large-diameter logs suitable for cost-competitive sawing may be promoting the use of engineered wood products and other non-wood alternatives. Figure 8 shows the regional distribution of industrial roundwood production. Major producers are North America, Europe, the former USSR and Asia. The world's five largest producer countries are United States, Canada, the Russian Federation, China and Brazil. A steadily increasing portion of the world production comes from Latin America. Figure 8 also suggests that the decline in world roundwood production between 1990 and 1995 was primarily triggered by a sharp production decline in the former USSR and by moderate reductions in Europe and Asia. All other regions maintained or increased their production level.
Asia-Pacific.
The Asia-Pacific region currently produces about 20 percent of the world's industrial roundwood (Figures 9 and 10). Industrial roundwood production increased steadily in the two decades preceding Figure 9 1990 but has declined Industrial roundwood production in Asia 1970-1995 slightly between 1990 and 1995. The Pacific 3 subregion, however, has Mill m continued to increase 300 production. Leading Total Industr. Roundwood producers of industrial 200 Sawlogs & roundwood in Asia are Veneerlogs Pulpwood & 100 China, India, Malaysia, Particles Indonesia and Japan. In Other IRW 0 Oceania the major 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 producers are Australia, Asia Year Source: FAO New Zealand and Papua New Guinea. The AsiaPacific forestry sector provides a good example Figure 10 of a demand-driven Industrial roundwood production in Oceania 1970-1995 expansion of industrial roundwood production. Concerns continue to 3 Mill m exist, however, over the 50 Total Industr. long-term sustainability of 40 Roundwood wood supplies.
Sawlogs & Veneerlogs Pulpwood & Particles.
The production decline in Asia is mainly due to Other IRW 0 declines in sawlog and 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 veneer log production. Oceania These represent the Year Source: FAO higher quality logs coming mainly from natural forests. Decreases in log production in Malaysia and Indonesia are responsible for most of this decline. Potentially the most significant response to shortfalls in industrial wood supplies has been the establishment of plantation forests. In the future, plantation-grown wood is likely to supplement significantly natural forest production in the Asia-Pacific region, particularly as a source of pulpwood; as a raw material for reconstituted wood-based panels; and for "other industrial roundwood" applications. Furthermore, roundwood production might be influenced by higher processing efficiency through the use of more residues, the adoption of better technologies, increased recycling and reduction in wastes (FAO Asia-Pacific Forestry Sector Outlook Study 1998). The proportion of logs processed domestically in Asia is continuing to increase and is expected to exceed soon 90 percent from the current 88 percent. This reflects increasing populations, growing economies and the emphasis on exporting value-added products in this region (ITTO 1996). The major exporters of unprocessed logs are currently Malaysia, New.
Zealand and Papua New Guinea. Australia also exports a large amount of industrial roundwood as wood chips.
Africa's industrial roundwood production increased by 65 percent from 40 million m3 in 1970 to 66 million m3 in 1995. Its global share of production increased from 3.2 percent to approximately 4.5 percent in the same period. Several countries have, however, reduced production during this period, mainly for forest management reasons. The largest producers of industrial roundwood in Africa are South Africa, Nigeria, Democratic Republic of Congo, Côte d'Ivoire and Cameroon. The proportion of log production processed domestically in Africa is declining and is currently estimated at about 60 percent (ITTO 1996). This is mainly due to increasing volumes of logs being exported to Asian markets. Asian companies are reported to be harvesting in Cameroon, Gabon, the Republic of Congo and the Central African Republic. A recently reported establishment of new forest industries in connection with concession rights in the Democratic Republic of Congo may contribute to an overall production increase in the future, although production from this initiative could be Figure 11 Industrial roundwood production in Africa 1970-1995 by limited by the economic region accessibility of the forests. Figure 11 shows that in Africa production volumes of sawlogs and veneer logs are approximately equal to production volumes of other industrial roundwood. Very recently the production of pulpwood and particles has increased. This is mainly influenced by increasing plantation production in South Africa.
Mill m 80 60 40 20 0 1970.
Total Industr. Roundwood Sawlogs & Veneerlogs Pulpwood & Particles Other IRW.
Source: FAO.
Latin America & Caribbean.
Industrial roundwood production in Latin America and the Caribbean increased rapidly between 1970 and 1995. Production grew by 186 percent, from 49 million m3 to 140 million m3 annually. This increase was largely a result of increasing production of sawlogs and veneer logs and pulpwood. The region's production accounts for about one-tenth of the world total. Currently Brazil is the world's fifth largest producer of industrial roundwood and by far the largest single producer in the region. Brazil accounts for about 55 percent of the region's industrial roundwood production. Other major producers are Chile, Argentina and Colombia. Almost all logs produced in the region are processed domestically (ITTO 1996).
Mill m 150 100 50 0.
Latin Am. & Car.
Industrial roundwood production in this region is expected to continue to increase. It is possible, however, that large areas of natural forest in South America may be withdrawn from industrial production for policy reasons. The economic accessibility of wood in the Amazon region may also prove to be a constraint. A considerable portion of future production growth, however, is expected to originate from fast-growing plantations.
North America.
Aside from a brief downturn in the early 1970s, production in North America increased steadily until 1990 when the rate of growth again began to slow down (Figure 13). This is the world's largest industrial roundwood producing region with the United States and Canada together accounting for almost 40 percent of total global production. In the United States industrial roundwood production may be constrained in the short term by an unprecedented age class Figure 13 situation for softwood Industrial roundwood production in North America 19701995 inventories during the decade beyond 2000. By 2000 or thereabouts, large-diameter 3 Mill m softwood timber will have 600 been harvested on private Total Industr. 500 Roundwood lands and the harvest on Sawlogs & 400 Veneerlogs public lands will be 300 Pulpwood & Particles constrained by non-market 200 Other IRW forces. After the year 2010, 100 plantations initiated in the last 0 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 two decades will reach NA Source: FAO merchantable size in the Year South and Pacific Northwest (ECE/FAO 1996b). In Canada there are still physical stocks of mature and overmature timber available for harvest. However, there is considerable variation in the quality and condition of this timber, and the rate of harvest is constrained, to a greater or lesser extent, by public sustainable forest management policies and a growing demand for other values on the forest land base. Prospects for timber supply vary considerably on a regional basis. Most of the available timber is hardwood, while most demand is for softwood. Even with these constraints there appear to be some further surpluses available to facilitate further expansion of the Canadian harvest which means industrial roundwood production increases are possible (ECE/FAO 1996b).
Since peaking in 1990, industrial roundwood production in Europe has declined to about 295 million m3 in 1995. As Figure 14 shows, this decline is mainly due to a reduced production of sawlogs and veneer logs. For the Nordic countries (Sweden, Finland, Norway) it is estimated that harvest levels are currently well below the estimated net annual increment. Theoretically these countries have considerable potential for expansion of production. In Western Europe the main producers are Germany, France, Austria, Spain and Portugal. Industrial roundwood production in these countries has increased only modestly since 1970. In 1990 a number of European countries markedly increased production as a result of windthrow salvage harvests. For example, Germany doubled its annual production in that year. This explains partly the production Figure 14 peak in 1990 and also Industrial roundwood production in Europe 1970-1995 the reduced production in 3 subsequent years. Mill m Production levels in 350 most Eastern 300 Total Industr. European countries 250 Roundwood Sawlogs & have also declined 200 Veneerlogs since 1990. Changes 150 Pulpwood & Particles 100 in political structures Other IRW 50 and related efforts in 0 transition to market 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 economies have resulted in some Year Europe Source: FAO dislocation in the forest and forest industry sector.
Since 1990 the reported industrial roundwood production in the former USSR has declined by about 50 percent (Figure 15). Significant uncertainty exists, however, as to the proportion of the observed decline that is real, and the proportion that originates from severe disruption to statistical systems. This is especially the case with respect to "other industrial roundwood", which accounted for about one-third of the 1990 production volume and contributes heavily to the production decline since 1990. Despite the decline, the Russian Federation is still the world's third largest producer of industrial roundwood behind the United States and Canada. A significant proportion of the former USSR's production came from Siberian forests that were made accessible by the development of infrastructure in the region, principally the trans-Siberian railway. This enabled export to Western Europe from Baltic ports. In 1990, Siberian sawlogs travelled, on average, more than 1 000 km from forest to mill. Sawnwood was also transported over very long distances.
A major factor in the production decline since 1990 was the imposition of market driven freight charges on the trans-Siberian railways. This new charging mechanism made huge areas of central Siberia economically inaccessible overnight.
Mill m 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 1970.
The former USSR is therefore a "wild card" in all future developments in the forest sector. Russia, in particular, contains some of the world's largest potentially usable forests. It also spans the East and the West, being able, therefore, to influence events in both the Pacific Rim basin and in Western Europe (FAO 1997).
ANALYSIS P R O D U C T I O N TREND ANALY S I S.
It can be reasonably postulated from examining these production trends that:.
t the level of industrial roundwood production varies widely from.
region to region;.
t there are conflicting trends between regions (although they may be.
temporary in nature);.
t the product types are changing significantly over time in most.
t the historic trends provide no strong evidence of a decline in the.
future production of industrial wood products. Indeed the latest econometric forecasts indicate an average annual increase in production of 1.3 percent per annum. In some past studies it has been frequently assumed that, if demand for forest products is to be met, market forces will make the necessary raw material available to meet demand. However, this approach to forecasting industrial production does not identify the source of raw material for industrial production. Earlier it has been argued that this is a critical analytical issue, and so, the remainder of this report attempts to describe the most recent efforts to improve our basis for analysis.
Current Fibre Supply Situation.
C L A S S I F Y I N G FIBRE SOURCES.
The major sources of fibre for industrial production can be divided into the following categories:.
Forest undisturbed Forest disturbed by man Plantations Non-wood Recovered.
These terms are fully described in our definitions, which are found in Annex.
Essentially the forest undisturbed and disturbed by man is natural forest and represents the traditional major sources of fibre supply for industrial purposes. Industrial plantations, recovered fibre and non-wood fibre represent newer sources of industrial fibre and their capacity to meet future industrial needs will be important to address in the future. As mentioned in Section 2 there are also additional sources of fibre such as trees outside of forest, non-forest land and `'other'' land which will have to be examined in the future as these will also play a more prominent role in some regions.
S E L E C T E D SUMMARY OF STA R E G I O N A L STA T I S T I C S.
This section summarizes the types of statistics collected by region in the GFSM process. Annex 1 contains a more detailed analysis by country and the upcoming CD-ROM will feature information on each country by forest type. These statistics are the core of the project. They represent FAO's latest attempts to assemble industry-relevant fibre supply information which provides an essential basis for the implementation of sustainable forest management. Table 3 presents a global summary of natural forest area available and not available for wood supply. The area available for wood supply under current market conditions is approximately 48 percent of the total natural forest area. Of the area available for wood supply at least 44 percent is estimated to be undisturbed. The North American region did not provide statistics on the area of forest undisturbed so it is not possible to offer a better assessment. The total natural forest area varies slightly from the number reported in the FAO State of the World's Forests 1997 report (3.454 million ha) because the GFSM did not attempt to assess countries with very minor forest cover.
Ta b l e 3 Natural forest area (`000 ha) by region ­ Global summary Region A f r i c a (26) A s i a (22) Oc eania (6) Eu rope (28) Ru ssia (1) North America (2) Central America (10) South America (13) T O TA L Total 399 618 408 605 87 867 140 713 694 139 542 700 78 168 869 097 3 220 907 Available N O T Av a i l a b l e fo r Supply 233 157 177 338 61 593 20 960 166 597 238 940 49 760 709 105 1 657 450 A vailable Wood f o r Wood Supply 166 461 231 267 26 274 119 753 527 542 303 760 28 408 159 992 1 563 457 Undisturbed 59 469 48 729 8 415 0 514 090 0 0 34 850 6 6 5 553 Disturbed 106 992 182 538 17 859 119 753 13 452 303 760 28 408 125 142 8 9 7 904.
* Number of countries currently included in database.
Table 4 presents the total growing stock and the commercial species growing stock expressed in m3/ha. In general the disturbed forest has a lower average volume because research reports have indicated a lower standing volume after logging. The differences are more dramatic in regions such as Africa and South America where harvesting may not have been appropriate from a silvicultural point of view thus leading to lower volumes, but this may be changing.
Ta b l e 4 A verage standardized forest volume by region (m3/ha)­summary Gro win g Stock** Region A f r i c a (26)* A s i a (22) Oc eania (6) Eu rope (28) Ru ss ia (1) North America (2) Central America (10) South America (13) Undisturbed 227 151 139 0 111 n.a. n.a.*** 158 Disturbed 124 84 103 142 133 205 100 116 Commercial Species Growing Stock Undisturbed 105 62 87 0 165 0 0 70 Disturbed 53 65 84 142 195 199 96 48.
* Number of countries currently included in database. ** Volumes pertain to the forest available for supply; the reference diameter is 10 cm. *** n.a. indicates not currently available.
36 Current Fibre Suppply Situation 36.
In the Forest Resources Assessment 1990 the total reported growing stock volume was reported to be 383 727 million m3 for forest and other wooded lands. Table 5, which represents a summary of a much more detailed assessment of volume, indicates a total growing stock volume on forest area of 182 005 million m3. For all regions, with the exception of Russia, the commercial species growing stock is lower than the total growing stock. South America and Africa show the greatest difference and this is likely due to the fact that many tropical tree species in these regions are not commercialized. The total difference between the growing stock and commercial growing stock is not important because of the significant increase in volumes calculated for Russia.
Ta b l e 5 Total standardized volume by region (`000 000 m3) ­ Summary Gro win g Stock** T O TA L Region A f r i c a (26)* A s i a (22) Oce ania (6) E urope (28) R ussia (1) North America (2) Central America (10) South America (13) T O TA L 26 796 22 670 3 013 17 029 59 112 30 926 2 339 20 120 1 8 2 005 Undisturbed Fo r e s t 13 519 7 160 1 166 0 57 319 0 0 5 602 Disturbed Forest 13 277 15 510 1 847 17 029 1 794 30 926 2 339 14 518 9 7 240 Commercial Species Growing Stock** T O TA L 11 927 15 089 2 226 17 029 87 371 30 018 1 845 7 995 1 7 3 499 Undisturbed Forest 6 274 2 942 729 0 84 744 0 0 2 241 9 6 931 Disturbed Fo r e s t 5 653 12 147 1 496 17 029 2 627 30 018 1 845 5 753 7 6 567.
* Number of countries currently included in database ** Volumes pertain to the forest available for supply; the reference diameter is 10 cm.
Table 6 indicates that the total growth is 3.2 billion m3 in the forest available for wood supply of which 2.7 billion m3 is potentially commercial. This growth has not been adjusted for mortality in the forest. It is useful to draw this kind of comparison since what is referred to as the growth/drain or growth/removal ratio is an indicator of the change in forest volume one can expect in the future. Harvesting intensity is normally expressed on the basis of a cutting cycle, a periodic basis, but it could also be expressed on an annual basis in regions where the harvesting system is based on clearfelling. Based on historic management practices the Asian, South American and African regions indicate a significantly lower harvesting intensity once the forest is disturbed. In the boreal regions, such as Russia, and the northern part of North America the harvesting volumes per unit area could increase with each rotation. The critical factor is the type of silvicultural or harvesting system chosen for management purposes.
Ta b l e 6 Total potential growth and harvesting intensity by region (`000 000 m3) ­ Summary Gross annual increment** Harvesting intensity** T ime periodic To t al (1 000 000 m3) All species Region A f r i c a (26) A s i a (22)* Oc e ania (6) E u rope (28) R u ss ia (1) North America (2) Central America (10) South America (13) T O TA L 146.3 328.3 42.1 622.5 946.0 659 49.0 473.1 3 266 Commercial species 56.9 273.7 34.7 562.9 946.0 659 38.3 147.7 2 719 A v e r a g e (m3/ h a ) All species 1.4 1.8 2.4 5.2 5.0 6 1.5 3.7 n.a. Commercial species 0.5 1.5 1.9 4.7 3.5 6 1.1 1.1 n.a. ( m3 / h a ) Undisturbed Forest.
Cutting cycle.
Disturbed Forest 4.4 17.3 36.8 3.3 166.4 n.a. 12.8 11.2 n.a.
Annual n.a. Rotation 122.3.
* Number of countries currently included in database ** Volumes pertain to the forest available for supply. See Annex 1, Table 2 for harvesting intensity by country.
The total plantation area is approximately 58 million ha in the southern regions and has a potential annual growth of approximately 84 million m3. It is generally agreed that plantations will play an ever-increasing role in meeting the needs of industrial roundwood. The growth represents about 5 percent of the growth estimate for the natural forest but with a reclassification of some of the boreal and temperate forests this would increase significantly.
Ta b l e 7 Industrial plantation area and growth by region (1995) ­ Global summary Total Plantation Area 1995 (1000 ha) Region A f r i c a (20) A s i a (15) Oc e ania (4) Europe Russia North America Central America (5) South America (9) T O TA L Reported Industrial Plantations 3 381 54 665 2 709 n.a. n.a. n.a. 490 8 516 6 9 761 Net Industrial Plantations 3 173 44 068 2 709 n.a. n.a. n.a. 428 8 320 5 8 698 Total Annual Growth 1 000 000 m3 1.0 16. 61 19. 46 n..a. n.a. n.a. 0.01 47. 02 84.09.
38 Current Fibre Suppply Situation 38.
Ta b l e 8 Alternative fibres ­ recovered and non-wood fibres by region ­ Global summary Recovered fibres P aper and Paperboard Production Region 1 000 000 MT A f r i c a (26)* A s i a (22) Oce ania (6) E urope (28) R us sia (1) North America (2) Central America (10) South America (13) T O TA L 2.27 72.95 3.13 77.99 4.07 107.98 3.21 9.18 280.78 0.70 27.52 1.20 31.58 1.09 34.89 1.07 2.64 100.69 Wastepaper Recovery Fibre A vailability (equivalent volume) 1 000 000 m3 1.76 68.79 2.99 78.96 2.73 87.22 2.69 6.61 251.74 1 000 000 MT 1.84 36.49 2.42 36.75 4.89 91.39 0.48 9.42 183.67 P ulp Production Non-wood fibres % Nonwood Us e d in Total To t a l Capacity % 0.10 18.76 0.00 0.52 0.00 0.19 0.43 1.05 21.05 Fibre Availability Availability (equivalent volume) 1 000 000 m3 0.25 46.90 0.00 1.29 0.00 0.47 1.08 2.64 52.62.
* Number of countries included in database.
S E L E C T E D SUMMARY OF A STA C O U N T R Y STA T I S T I C S.
Table 9 provides an example of a series of country statistical reports that are currently available in the GFSM database. The country chosen for demonstration purposes is the Republic of Congo. The report contains a summary of information on forest area, volume, plantations and reference material examined in assessing the state of the forest resources (the sample report is titled: GFSM estimate ­ Table 1). There is also an optional feature in the reporting features which allows the user to examine detailed statistics by reference (sample report is titled: GFSM background information ­ Table 2). The primary advantage of this additional report is exposing all the data to interested analysts to cross-check and validate conflicting data. Finally, there is the possibility to produce alternative futures for each country using the modelling tool fully explained in GFSM Working Paper No. 1 (see sample report titled: Data projection).
Ta b l e 9 Summary of major country statistics for Republic of Congo, an example.
40 Current Fibre Suppply Situation 40.
Impact of Major Supply Factors.
I D E N T I F Y I N G SOME OF FACTORS T H E MAJOR FA C T O R S.
The initial phases of the GFSM project developed a quantitative approach to policy analysis (the model as fully described in GFSM Working Paper No. 1) and established a set of base data. The addition of a modelling capability enabled alternative futures to be predicted for each country by varying critical factors that have an impact on wood supply1. The variable factors presently incorporated in the model are not an exhaustive collection. Rather they are a subset of a larger set of variables that have been identified as affecting wood supplies, in various studies within the last decade (Table 2). Table 10 lists some of the major factors identified as having the potential to have significant impact on the futures for selected regions. These factors were selected according to their relative importance, their feasibility in modelling and their links with statistics available. In the future a wider range of factors will be incorporated in the modelling framework. A sustainable forest management (SFM) variable is included in the model because implementation of SFM principles has the potential to affect future.
A suite of additional models are already being developed or under way to assist with the Outlook Study process. All of these models will interact in some manner with the data compiled in the GFSM.
Ta b l e 10 Selected major factors that influence fibre supply Future 1 F orests disturbed/undisturbed by man Sustainable management (as expressed by cutting cycle- periodic or annual) Land use ­ deforestation Land use ­ legally protected area change Industrial Plantations Affo r e st a t i o n rate Development gains Non-wood Fibres Non-wood fibre pulping capacity Recovered Fibres Wa st e p a p e r recovery rate Future 2 Future 3.
wood supplies and because SFM is a central global forest policy issue. (It is also a major theme of the new strategic plan of the FAO Forestry Department). Similarly, land-use change has had probably the most significant impact on forestry production potential in the past 30 years. Land-use change takes place in many forms. In the natural forest, deforestation and the establishment of protected and semi-protected areas have had, and are likely to continue to have, significant impact on the forest available for industrial wood supply. For plantation forests, the rate at which countries establish plantation programmes (afforestation rates), the duration of those programmes and the extent of efforts put into silvicultural and genetic treatments, i.e. development gains, will also have a significant impact on future fibre supply. Non-wood and recovered fibres are also seen as important new sources of fibre. These already play a very significant role in meeting fibre demand and this role will undoubtedly increase in the future. Finally, there is a very active discussion in the literature on material efficiency and technological change. A variable that explores improvements in material conversion factors and different forest product output per input of standing tree is yet to be incorporated in the modelling capability and is thus not included in Table 10.
S U S TA I N A B L E FOREST NATURAL M A N A G E M E N T IN NAT U R A L FORESTS.
The impact of sustainable forest management on global fibre supply is frequently mentioned in forest policy discussion. In attempting to address this theme, the GFSM model allows the user to adjust the cutting cycle. Adjusting the rate of harvest through this key variable provides a means of simulating SFM from a fibre supply perspective. In the real world, the general expectation is that SFM will necessitate changes in forest rotation ages, particularly in the case of boreal forests, or changes in cutting cycles in the case of tropical and temperate forests. Reviews of the literature in GFSM Working Papers No. 5 and No. 6 support this assertion for the tropical forests. To demonstrate the impact of SFM on global fibre supply a range of examples and evidence was examined in GFSM Working Paper No.
The concept of SFM has been broadened in recent years and, as a result, the objectives of management are shifting emphasis away from predominantly timber production towards a balance with ecological and social sustainability. Conceptualization of SFM has outpaced the development of specific on-the-ground practices that will achieve sustainability, and there are many knowledge gaps to be filled. Yet there are many active efforts, throughout the world, to develop and implement SFM approaches. Table 11 summarizes a number of examples of volume and cost impacts in applying SFM. In many cases, impact magnitude is based on a single study, so great caution should be exercised in accepting the magnitude of the impacts as being representative. The studies reviewed here, however, consistently showed that there will be reductions in harvest volume, particularly in the short term, and costs can be expected to rise by between 5 percent and 25 percent, on average. There is, however, an expectation.
42 Impact of Major Supply Factors supply 42.
that long-term supply will increase through application of SFM (see Working Papers No. 5 and No. 6). In the tropics, the maintenance of site productivity and the retention and prevention of damage to immature stems drive much of this increase. In temperate forests, the longer term increase is expected to be less pronounced and may not be captured without intensified silviculture. Instead, the value of the harvest may rise as more large and high-value products are harvested.
Ta b l e 11 Summary of cost and volume impacts of implementing SFM by region Region North America North America North America Europe Asia Asia Asia Asia Asia Latin America Latin America Latin America Country W e s t Coast Canada Canada Sweden Malaysia Malaysia Malaysia Indonesia Indonesia Bolivia Eastern Amazonia, Brazil Brazil Cas e study Clayoquot Sound White River Seine River A. Barklund Sarawak Innoprise Corporation Dermakot Indonesian Plan STREK Project Chimanes Paragominas Region Precious Woods S h o r t- te r m volume reductions 30-40% 10-25% 24% 6-8% 50% 6-8% up to 100% 18.4% 9 - 15% 24 - 57% up to 100% 24-57% Increase 35-67% loss in profits to logging contractors $ 72/ha increase 0% cost increase but assumes more trees as commercial species 10-20% cost savings Increase NA Increase 5% cost increase Cos t impacts 8-25% cost increase Increase.
Latin America Latin America.
Suriname Co st a Rica.
SFM is primarily a systematic approach to sustaining each component of the forest ecosystem and sustaining interactions between the components. In forests available for wood supply, this means combining wood production with other management objectives, above all, and maintaining ecological capacity through the conservation of plant and animal biological diversity and soil and water conservation. Similar intentions were not specified as clearly in the classic management concept of sustained yield. It is now, however, generally agreed that forest management must systematically address a fuller range of environmental, social and economic issues. Table 12 presents a summary of major differences in management approaches between the two concepts.
SFM Maintain the productivity of the forest, by avoiding erosion, soil degradation, and impoverishment of the soil ecosystem. Use practices that mimic natural disturbances to the extent that is feasible.
Forestry Sustained Yield Fo r e s t r y Emphasizes productivity but the tendency is to use agricultural techniques to establish plantations or to use the least-cost regeneration technique. No emphasis on the mimicking of natural disturbances. Aesthetic impacts are considered, as well as silvicultural characteristics of species and economics. Where feasible, convert stands of species with low commercial value to high-valued species. Increasing utilization and reducing costs are the primary motivators, subject to social constraints on clear-cut size.
Seek harvesting methods that reduce the level of disturbance in the forest. This has primarily meant that the size of clear-cut areas is being reduced and partial harvesting systems are being used more widely. Maintain wildlife populations and maintain species.
Maintaining wildlife and non-timber species was generally considered outside the purview of forest managers and applied biologists were primarily concerned about maintaining populations of game species. The agro-industrial ideal was to have uniform rows of same sized, single species trees. Aesthetic considerations and economic costs were primary constraints.
Maintain structural and biological diversity in managed forests.
Source: Bull, Williams and Duinker 1996.
In practical terms, SFM has to be incorporated into timber yield regulations2. The many formulae for yield calculation contain three basic elements: the biological rotation period or the felling cycle, the forest volume increment or growth, and existing growing stock of the forest. Changing management techniques to SFM means a change in the yield calculated. The first change is sometimes applied to the rotation age or felling cycle; it is frequently being made longer. This means that the interventions in the forest are less and the total volume removed from the total forest will change in each felling cycle. So, for example, if the felling cycle is extended from 30 to 50 years for the same forest area then the total average removal per year will also change. The sustainable harvesting volumes to be removed depend on the management strategy. Growth and growing stock variables have also been given some prominence in the model through the provision of an array of equations. In the case of growth, two equations allow the introduction of a mortality factor of 0.5 and for the growing stock considerable effort was expended to identify the commercial growing stock by forest type which, in the case of the tropical region, is significantly lower than the total growing stock. In future developments of the model there will be more flexibility to allow the simulation of different assumptions with respect to mortality and the volume attributable to commercial species.
It is a value judgement of the authors that yield regulation other than by market forces is necessary. This position is strongly supported in the forestry literature since there are many substantive externalities which a market approach does not deal with in an effective manner.
44 Impact of Major Supply Factors supply 44.
L A N D - U S E CHANGE ­ D E F O R E S TA T I O N.
Deforestation remains a serious policy issue for some forest regions. Table 13 summarizes the deforestation/afforestation rate on a regional basis. There is considerable variation between regions with Central America and the Caribbean reporting the greatest deforestation and Europe the highest afforestation. Given that the forest area change is negative in five out of eight regions, deforestation can be expected to remain a prominent issue in the public policy debate over forests.
Ta b l e 13 A verage annual change of forest area by region as reported in 1995 Region F or e s t area 1 000 ha A s i a (39) O cean ia (16) A f r i c a (55) South America Central America & Caribbean (31) North America (2) E u ro p e (31) Former USSR Area of the Fo rm er US S R (15) T O TAL (all countries).
Source: FAO 1997.
Annual change 1 000 ha -3 328 -91 -3 748 -4 774 -1 037 763 389 557 - 1 1 269 % -0.7 -0.1 -0.7 -0.5 -1.3 0.2 0.3 0.1 -0.3.
A meaningful analysis of changes in the world's forests requires a differentiation between increases or decreases of forest area and the changes in forest condition. That is, both deforestation and forest degradation need to be observed and measured. The most frequently reported parameter is forest cover change. Forest condition, although equally important for wood supply, is less intensively observed and monitored. Future work by FAO will address this issue.
L A N D - U S E CHANGE ­ P R O T E C T E D AREA.
Figure 16 indicates growth in the total area of forests under legal protection and growth in the number of areas designated Protected Forests between 1900 and 1990. From 1970 to 1990 the increase in area under protection is nearly 140 percent. Figure 17 indicates that the average area of protected sites is increasing in size. These figures do not indicate how much of the total area under protection is forested. The rapid rise in the area under protection is a clear indication of the importance of conservation and preservation issues in forest policy.
Total area designated (x 1000 km²).
Number of sites designated.
Five year period beginning...
Total area designated (x 1,000 km²) Number of sites designated.
46 Impact of Major Supply Factors supply 46.
Ta b l e 14 Afforestation rate by country (1995).
Country Name.
Average Annual Change in Plantation Area (000 ha) (% total area) 0 3 2 26 2 4 1 7 20 7 2 8 1 7 7 5 0 1 0 0 2 1 3 4 8 9 5 2 1 0 19 7 0 0.
Angola Argentina Australia Bangladesh Bhutan Brazil Myanmar Cameroon Sri Lanka Chile People's Republic of China Benin Fiji Ghana India Indonesia Japan Kenya Korea, Republic of Malawi Malaysia Morocco New Zealand Nicaragua Pakistan Philippines Zimbabwe South Africa Tanzania, United Republic Uganda Burkina Faso Uruguay Viet Nam Zambia.
Policy makers will continue to debate the appropriate proportion of forest resources to be reserved under legally protected status. Increases in the area under reservation will obviously remove fibre production potential. Consequently, the ability to simulate changes in protected areas for natural forests has been included in the GFSM model.
INDUSTRIAL P L A N TA T I O N S ­ A F F O R E S TA T I O N R AT E.
Table 14 summarizes the planned afforestation rates reported by country in terms of area and percent. There is frequently a significant difference between planned and actual afforestation rates but for the purposes of this study the planned rates are used as a starting point. Recent performance of countries should be reviewed to determine the reliability of these rates for modelling purposes. Table 14 also indicates the countries where plantation programmes are established but where active afforestation is not yet reported. These appear as having low to no afforestation rates. So, for example, Japan has significant areas in plantations but they are not expanding at the present time. Since the growth on plantations is so much higher than on natural forests policy developments which promote the use of plantations will have a significant impact on the plantation rate.
INDUSTRIAL P L A N TA T I O N S ­ D E V E LO P M E N T GAINS.
Development gains, particularly in industrial plantations, are another key factor in analysing potential fibre supply. These development gains include both silvicultural.
and genetic gains. Naturally biotechnology will also play an important role in the future but a proper evaluation of biotechnology's role in the future is presently beyond the resources of the GFSM project. GFSM Working Paper No. 2 provides a partial survey of studies published on factors affecting productivity in tropical forest plantations. The paper provides only a start to what would be a long and complicated process of database construction to identify reference material on the subject. In general, it can be concluded that a good tree improvement programme (starting with species/provenance matching to site) can usually result in considerable gain in wood yields from tropical forest plantations. Optimal nursery and silvicultural practices (including those discussed in GFSM Working Paper No 2: seed pre-treatment, application of nitrogen-fixing soil micro-organisms, optimal spacing for defined end use, selection of adequate site, fertilization, and irrigation) can considerably increase such gains further. Quantification of possible increases in plantation yield for a particular site, species or provenance is difficult. The data presented in Table 15 should be treated very carefully. The gains reported cannot be expected to be reproduced within the same range at a different geographic location and under different climatic and edaphic conditions. Moreover, it is nearly impossible to predict the interrelations of different factors involved that can affect plantation productivity. Percentage gains as a result of silviculture and tree improvement operations, as reviewed in this study, are widely variable. Incorporating the wide range of such data into a model for prediction of future gains is a challenging task. Despite these cautions it is, nonetheless, worthwhile considering the results in a forecasting exercise. The statistics presented in Table 15 indicate the range of increases expected in development gains and this range could be used as a rough guide to determine the variable to apply in simulating alternative futures.
Ta b l e 15 Potential increases from development (genetic & silvicultural) gains Genus Treatment Acacia.
Spp./Prov. Matching PR. China . Thailand Fiji Indonesia Pakistan Sri Lanka Malaysia Thailand Senegal Philippines 8-728 229-1107 157 59-242 41-257 56-247 222 11-52 192 8-50 70-210 107-129.
Country DBH MAI.
G a i n (%) BA V H Y.
Spacing Symbiotic Associations.
48 Impact of Major Supply Factors supply 48.
Genus Treatment Eucalyptus.
Spp./Prov. Matching.
Genetic Improvement.
PR. China . Thailand Sri Lanka Israel Nigeria Australia/Tasm. Brazil PNG India Australia Thailand Ethiopia Brazil South Africa India India India PNG Puer to Rico India El Salvador et al. Liberia Benin Bangladesh Thailand India Kenya India Thailand Malawi Tanzania Zimbabwe Nigeria Zimbabwe Nigeria Rep. Korea New Zealand various tropical various Korea Australia Zimbabwe var. East Africa Indonesia New Zealand Australia PNG PR.China . New Zealand Madagascar Swaziland.
Spp./Prov. Matching Genetic Improvement Fer tilization/Irrigation.
Site Quality.
F e r tilization.
Note: Spp./Prov. matching means matching species/provenances to site. See also note on next page. Note: The percentage of volume (V) or VUB (volume under bark), or VOB (volume over bark)), MAI (mean annual increment), DBH (diameter at breast height), BA (basal area), H (height) or yield (Y) gain is calculated by comparing the additional volume of wood (or other parameter) resulting from the genetic or silvicultural improvement (e.g. fertilization, provenance selection, site selection, spacing selection) with a base value. For example, an additional 1 m3/ha of wood under a tree improvement programme, as compared to a volume yield of 10 m3/ha from an unimproved source, would be a 10% gain. The basis for comparison can be either an unimproved situation (e.g. unfertilized plantation, local seed source), or the poorest performer in the study.
N O N -W O O D AND RECOVERED FIBRE.
Currently, wood is the major raw material input to the global pulp and paper industry. Significant levels of non-wood fibres are used in a handful of countries, most notably in the People's Republic of China, India, and several other Asian countries, but there are also stronger indications of interest in the fibre, particularly in North America. At present, the most common nonwood fibre is straw (Table 16). This material accounts for 46 percent of total non-wood fibre consumption, followed by bagasse (14%) and bamboo (6%) (Atchison 1995). Other non-wood fibres, such as cotton, hemp, sisal, and kenaf, are also becoming more important in the manufacture of pulp and paper. Non-wood species currently used only sporadically in the pulp and paper industry are likely to become more important, as collection and targeted production of non-wood fibre expand beyond the present focus in East Asia, to a more global scale.
Ta b l e 16 Non-wood pulping capacities by region Total papermaking pulp capacities (thousand metric tons) Raw materials Straw Bagasse Bamboo Miscellaneous (cotton, reeds, sisal, kenaf, jute, hemp, abaca, kenaf, flax) Total papermaking non-wood capacity Total paper and paperboard production Percentage non-wood.
Source: GFSM Working Paper No. 4.
Table 17 indicates that currently all regions except North America are consuming more wastepaper than they are recovering. The North American region has consistently been the largest supplier of this material, and maintains a dominant player status in world exports of wastepaper. Of the other regions, the Asia-Pacific has the largest demand for wastepaper. Europe, Africa, Latin America and the former USSR each have a lower level of demand that probably could be serviced through reserves of wastepaper from previous years or from slight increases in national recovery levels in the countries of these regions.
50 Impact of Major Supply Factors supply 50.
Ta b l e 17 W astepaper recovery levels by region Region Wastepaper recovery ( ` 0 0 0 tons) Europe A s i a - Pa c i f i c North America Latin America Africa USSR F o r m e r US S R Total 31 923 35 603 41 999 4354 901 40 1 1 4 820 Recovery of total production (%) 46 40 45 31 23 2 Wa s t e p a p e r consumption ( ` 0 0 0 tons) 32 297 40 946 34 427 5853 924 629 1 1 5 076 R a t i o of Recovery:consumption (x:1) 0.99 0.87 1.22 0.74 0.98 0.06.
Source: GFSM Working Paper No. 4.
52 Impact of Major Supply Factors supply 52.
Alternative F u t u r e s fo r Fibre Supply.
D E F I N I N G THE FUTURE.
One of the main objectives in collecting, compiling and analysing forest resource statistics is to provide a better foundation for predicting or simulating possible future events. A difficult step is establishing a starting point or baseline ­ a rough indicator of immediate supply levels based on current growing stock, forest increments, harvesting intensity and forest losses. In the GFSM, the baseline was established by making a separate calculation for each major source of fibre (forest disturbed and undisturbed by man, industrial plantations, non-wood and recovered fibres) and then combining them. Details on the methodology and assumptions to carry out this task were reviewed in Section 2 ­ Constructing alternative futures. There are significant limitations to keep in mind when reviewing the preliminary forecasts reported in this section and these are described at the end of this section. The emphasis of the work in the GFSM thus far is to create a "starting point" from a statistical point of view and to provide some modelling tools to help structure the discussion. The project does not attempt to find the right answer but to provide a vehicle to assist in exploring alternatives, in other words, a planning tool. A set of preliminary futures for the Asia/Oceania, South America and Africa regions is described in Section.
These will be adjusted as policy makers and analysts provide greater clarity as to what the future might hold. For South America and Asia/Oceania only one possible future is described; for Africa, three futures are presented to demonstrate the flexibility of the GFSM model to work with different assumptions. For Europe, United States, Canada and Russia the forecasts were developed using a different methodology by the government agency, the research institute or the agency responsible for "official" forecasting; therefore, it is not possible to aggregate the forecasts for these regions merely by adding them together. Details of the reference materials used in compiling these forecasts are highlighted in the respective sections. Until there is a consensus on an appropriate and consistent methodology to be employed across all countries for global analysis it is not possible to give a definitive global picture.
ASIA/OCEANIA.
Figure 18 describes one possible supply future for the Asian region. In this example, the increase in supply is primarily driven by assumptions made with respect to the role of plantations. The example simulates a future in which all undisturbed forest available for wood supply is transformed into disturbed forest by the year 2030. The deforestation rate is set sufficiently high that for many Asian countries the portion of the wood supply to come from natural forests continues to decline. Recovered fibre and non-wood fibre partially offset these declines. Since the role of trees outside of forests is quantitatively unknown in industrial fibre supply, estimates of the impact of this variable have not been made. Figure 19 provides a brief summary of potential fibre availability for Oceania. The stability of the future described here is due to the continued significant role of plantations and the management of disturbed forests to provide a stable, even increasing, fibre supply. The undisturbed forests available for wood supply are assumed to be unlikely to play a significant production role beyond 2040.
Mill m 800 600 400 200 0 1996.
Total Disturbed Undisturbed Plantations Non-Wood Recovered.
Source: GFSS (As).
Disturbed Undisturbed Plantations.
Non-Wood Recovered.
0 1996 2000 2010 2020 Year 2030 2040 2050.
Source: GFSS (Oc).
SOUTH AMERICA.
U nd is t ur be d T o t al D i s tur b e d.
P l a nta ti o n s N on -W oo d R ec o v er ed.
S o u r c e : G F S S (SA ).
Alternative Futures ...
addition, changes in government policy in the important producer countries are also likely to change the future in South America and consequently the shape of the curves presented here. The GFSM model offers a capability to model the fibre supply impacts of some of these potential policy changes.
Table 18 lists the major factors identified in the GFSM futures for Africa. The list of factors is not an exhaustive set but rather a subset of a larger set of variables that have been raised in various studies within the last decade. The factors included in the GFSM modelling capability were selected based on their relative importance and the feasibility of obtaining information for each. In the future a wider range of factors could be added to the modelling framework. Table 18 also indicates the variations introduced in order to produce three potential futures that are displayed graphically. The modelling in this example uses equation IV, as described in Section 2 ­ Constructing alternative futures.
Ta b l e 18 Selected major factors influencing fibre supply in Africa Future 1 F orests disturbed/undisturbed by man Sustainable management (as expressed by cutting cycle ­ periodic or annual) Land use ­ deforestation Land use ­ legally protected area change Industrial Plantations Afforestation rate Development gains Non-wood Fibres Non-wood fibre pulping capacity Recovered Fibres Wastepaper recovery rate.
Note: percentage increases are applied in the model only to 2010.
The graphic representations shown in Figure 21, Figure 22 and Figure 23 are, of course, only summary data. The more detailed forecasts are generated by country forest type. Figure 21 describes a future where all factors are held constant (set to zero) with the deforestation rate being that which is reported in the Forest Resources Assessment 1990. The figure suggests that if fibre supply is to remain stable it will be necessary to increase the role of plantations in order to supplement the losses with the conversion from undisturbed forest to disturbed forest.
D i s tu r b e d U n d i s tu r b e d P l a n ta ti o n s.
N on - W o od R ec o v er e d.
S ou r c e: GF S S (Af/ 1).
U nd i s tu r b ed T o t al D i s t ur b ed.
P l a nt a t i on s N on - W o o d R ec o v e r e d.
Source: GFSS (Af/3).
comprehensible articulation of some fibre supply aspects of sustainable forest management policies suitable for presentation to decision-makers.
Table 19 shows estimates based on an even and an increasing harvesting level in Russia during the next 200 years. Because large areas of the Russian forests comprise mature and overmature forests, a different (but still sustainable) harvesting profile (to those employed elsewhere) could be undertaken. These overmature forests have a high risk of being affected by large-scale disturbances such as fires, insects and diseases; they have a low productivity, and are subject to significant degeneration in the form of wood rot. Thus, much could be gained by a more rapid liquidation of fibre volume. The model results presented in Table 19 applies an accelerated harvest during the next 40-50 years in the regions with overmature forests. The model calculations indicate that Russian wood supply capacity could be significantly enhanced by applying an uneven harvesting profile in overmature forests. Although not indicated in Table 19, for European Russia, this would result in an additional 40 million m3 per year of roundwood during the next 40 years (28 million m3 of industrial roundwood). For Asian Russia, the result would be an additional 100 million m3 per year of roundwood (65 million m3 per year of industrial wood) for this period. It should be noted that this scenario does not require the liquidation of all overmature forests. Up to 80 percent of Russia's overmature forests have uneven-age structures and, as such, a forest management regime that works towards a more balanced profile is one of the crucial components of a sustainable landscape.
Ta b l e 19 Estimated long-term sustainable economic industrial wood supply and commercial wood supply respectively, (industrial wood + fuelwood), respectively, in million m3 per year European Russia Official Russian AAC Base Scenario Economic Supply (with existing infrastructure and relative prices) W ith 10% increase in relative prices in forest products Investments in infrastructure W ith relative price increase of 10% + investment in infrastructure 133 (187) 90 (135) Asian Russia 219 (325) 70 (100) Total 352 (512) 160 (235).
Source: Nilsson, S. and Shvidenko, A. 1998.
The European Timber Trends Study (ETTS V) developed 14 scenarios of timber supply. Table 20 is a summary of the base low scenario statistics, considered by the Secretariat as the most likely scenario. The removals statistics are based on the official Ta b l e 20 forecasts of European forecast of removals, residues & recovered fibre net of individual countries fuelwood consumption in million m3 in Europe. The 2000 2010 2020 domestic supply, residues and 422 222 452 288 479 896 Total roundwood removals wastepaper Residues 54 582 64 441 74 051 forecasts were 33 672 45 628 59 376 Recovered fibre derived through complex model Less fuelwood - 8 3 514 - 8 9 519 - 9 4 861 projections with 477 470 541 280 607 526 Net many assumptions Source: ECE/FAO 1996c regarding GDP growth, competitiveness of products and suppliers, trade patterns, policies, recovery rates, etc. These assumptions are presented and discussed in the source documents cited below. The recovered fibre data below is converted from the ETTS V scenarios (which are in metric tons for this parameter) with the assumption that each ton of recovered fibre replaces pulp (including fillers, etc.) that would have required the consumption of 2.5 m3 of industrial roundwood. Fuelwood is subtracted from the ETTS V removal scenarios to reflect the industrial roundwood supply forecasts. This makes the statistics presented more comparable with those for the other regions presented in this report. The net total estimates the potential availability of industrial fibre supply from domestic markets under the assumptions described. A more detailed description of ETTS V is provided in the source document: FAO UN Economic Commission for Europe and FA O. 1996. European forests and timber: into the 21st century. Geneva Timber and Forest Discussion Papers. ECE/TIM/SP/11. Geneva.
N O R T H AND CENTRAL AMERICA Excluding USA and Canada.
GFSM modelling for North and Central America (excluding United States and Canada) is presented in Figure 24 and indicates a continual decline in fibre availability due to continuation of current deforestation trends and no significant role for industrial.
U n di s tu rb e d T o tal D i s tu rb ed.
P la nt ati o ns N o n- W o o d R e c o v e re d.
S ou rc e : G F S S (N C A ).
plantations in this future. The disturbed forest decline is partly offset by the fibre supply from non-wood and recovered fibre.
United States of America and Canada.
Table 21 presents the most recent published information available on projected roundwood harvests from USA timberlands. From the base year 1995 to 2040 roundwood harvests are projected to increase by some 41 percent. The USA South is expected to supply 56 percent of the total required supply by the year 2000 Ta b l e 21 USA Projections of roundwood harvest on forestland in the United States and will be the 2000-2040, by species group in million m3 major source of supply for the Species Group 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 next 50 years. The roundwood 314.13 322.62 353.75 384.88 413.18 Softwoods harvest includes 237.72 263.19 280.17 288.66 302.81 Hardwoods industrial All species 551.85 585.81 633.92 673.54 715.99 roundwood and fuelwood. Conversion factor used: 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 cubic meters.
Roundwood harvest equals production Source: Haynes et al 1995.
roundwood projection Industrial roundwood projection for Canada.
Canadian wood supply data and descriptive text for the GFSM were provided by the Canadian Forest Service: The forecast shown in Table 22 is a projection of industrial roundwood production. It embeds assumptions about future demand, prices and changes in technology over time. In particular, it assumes that increased demands will result in increased product prices, which will result in some expansion of the economically accessible forest land base in Canada. It also assumes that there will be improved wood utilization as a result of adoption of new and existing technologies. This means that forest products production will increase proportionately more than industrial roundwood production, as more product is produced from the same volume of roundwood.
Ta b l e 22 Canadian industrial roundwood production, actual and projected, and estimates of allowable annual cut (AACs) in million m3 Year Industrial Roundwood Production Allowable annual cut 1970 117 228 1980 151 228 1990 156 253 1995 183 233 2000 194 na 2005 202 na 2010 213 na 2015 227 na.
na=not available Sources: ECE/FAO 1996b and CCFM 1997.
The forecast is for coniferous and deciduous species combined. The increased use of deciduous species is already apparent. Deciduous roundwood production (i.e. both industrial roundwood and fuelwood) has more than doubled in the last ten years, increasing from 14 million m3 in 1985 to over 30 million m3 in 1990. This trend is expected to continue, reflecting both the relative availability and cost of hardwoods compared to softwoods, as well as the development of new products using hardwood such as oriented strand board that provide good structural performance. Table 22 also shows the historical allowable annual cuts in Canada; but a forecast is not available at this time. The provinces own the majority of forest lands, and control the rate of timber harvesting on them; the harvest rate on provincial Crown land is regulated through an Allowable Annual Cut (AAC). AACs are a measure of how much timber volume forest companies are permitted to harvest annually, for a specified area over a certain time period (Pers. Comm. Dr. Darcie Booth, Canadian Forest Service, March 1998).
C O M PA R AT I V E ANALYSIS ( S E L E C T E D REGIONS).
Table 23 provides the most optimistic assumptions of future commercial fibre availability for five regions. The remaining regions have not been assessed using the model developed for the Global Fibre Supply Model. There is a need to view these upper limits with a great deal of caution. The estimates should be viewed as starting points for a discussion of how to bring the fibre availability to more realistic levels.
Ta b l e 23 Total potential fibre availability (all sources) by selected region 1996, 2010, 2050 in 000 000 m3 1996 Future 1 Africa Asia Oceania Central America South America Total 62.95 482.65 66.81 41.92 182.76 837.09 79.38 675.65 78.18 36.02 220.01 1 089.24 2010 Future 2 94.38 702.42 86.26 34.44 247.18 1 164.68 Future 3 92.87 716.36 82.03 37.65 234.78 1 163.69 Future 1 58.22 690.87 76.18 25.01 201.35 1 051.62 2050 Future 2 55.62 714.89 88.98 14.13 217.67 1 091.29 Future 3 71.83 844.92 82.78 38.00 242.99 1 280.52.
Changes to the factors need to be applied to these calculations based on an assessment and quantification of at least the following:.
t Harvesting residues losses are significant, often between 20 to 30.
percent in tropical countries.
t Afforestation rate can be significantly lower than the officially.
reported statistics in some countries.
t Unreported forest harvesting is often significant in many developing.
countries and this could mean much more of the forest is already disturbed than the GFSM model records. This would lead to significantly lower yields in the future. Recovered fibre will almost certainly increase as a supply source in the future. Industrial plantation investment in genetics and silvicultural programmes leads to significant (but difficult to quantify) gains in fibre supply. Trees outside of forests are important fibre sources in some regions and they are frequently not taken into account in wood supply forecasts. Non-wood usage could significantly increase in developed and developing countries. Improvement in technology has allowed engineered wood products to be produced using much lower quality wood fibre. Sustainable forest management could lead to increasing fibre availability in all regions over the longer term.
It should be restated that it was only possible in this project to quantify some of these factors. Others are not yet integrated into the simulation tool developed for the GFSM. Future upgrades of the model can incorporate these capabilities. It should also be reiterated that, given the incompatibility of methodology used in the different regional analyses of Europe, North America and Russia, it is not possible to present a forecast or global picture at this time. Hopefully this problem can be rectified in the future.
Discussion and Conclusions.
S TA T I S T I C S ­ L A N D AND FOREST.
The most significant contribution this study has made is the systematic collection, electronic storage, standardization and reporting of forest resources statistics which are directly relevant to the discussion of sustainable forest management, particularly for three regions: Africa, Asia and Oceania, and South and Central America. This process started with, and built on, the extensive efforts of the 1980 and 1990 Forest Resources Assessments.
t The GFSM has produced a statistical structure, which can be greatly.
improved over time to be a permanent forest reporting system at the global level. The statistical framework can also be modified to meet forest statistical reporting needs at the country level, thereby helping individual countries to meet their specific reporting requirements. Obtaining good quality data requires extensive cooperation. Many countries have scattered subnational (frequently outdated) inventories as well as various field and research studies related to essential data needs. The data collected thus far conforms to the internationally agreed-upon definitions developed for the Forest Resources Assessment 2000 and for the sake of completeness includes comparable statistical data provided for Russia, Europe, Canada and the United States. Any inconsistency is due to the formidable challenges faced in translating data developed with a country's set of definitions and standards to internationally agreed-upon definitions and standards.
t More emphasis should be placed on the development of national.
forest inventories and appropriate linkages with many subnational forest inventories. t Governments, NGOs, industry, research institutes, universities, and international agencies could benefit from a renewed commitment to a vastly improved process for sharing data and information on forests and their related resources. Once a forest related statistical structure has been developed it needs improvement to include additional relevant statistics, input of new data as it is provided by countries and other sources and a constant analysis of data to ensure that the information is reflecting the situation in the country. The database also needs more input from other institutions that collect part of the data set used to conduct global studies.
t FAO could allocate more resources to the maintenance and.
continual improvement of the statistical database and models produced in the GFSM and related exercises. Even the best forest statistics require extensive interpretation by analysts at virtually any spatial scale from the field level to the country level. The interpretation process could be greatly improved by more effective dialogue between analysts and major policy stakeholders.
t For FAO the credibility of the forest statistics would be improved by.
countries placing more emphasis on improving the interpretation process using a multistakeholder/expert review. Forest available for fibre supply will eventually be converted, in most countries, from undisturbed to disturbed forest. The big proviso, of course, is whether the forest in question is likely to be economically accessible. Maintaining the same fibre supply from these forests, with the same fibre quality, will depend to a large extent on the prevailing types of the harvesting/silvicultural systems employed.
t To promote more concrete discussions over sustainable forest.
management it is necessary to start an expansion of the statistical system for the monitoring of prevailing harvesting/silvicultural systems and related price and cost information in order to better assess the amount of fibre available from natural forests and plantations. Research conducted in the course of this project indicates that a serious issue in forest management globally is not deforestation but degradation which in the long run means the lack of higher quality fibres for use particularly in the sawmilling and veneer industry. Forest degradation is also related to issues such as biodiversity and the argument could be made that managing forest for higher quality fibres is likely very compatible with managing forest for biodiversity and a host of other ecological and social benefits.
t Special studies on low impact harvesting, improvement cutting and.
prevailing harvesting/silvicultural practices could be conducted in order to help with the assessment of forest degradation and to help propose solutions which will ameliorate negative forest conditions. These studies would provide valuable material for a multi-objective analysis of forest. Industrial plantation fibre will play an increasingly significant role in the future in most regions as indicated by the current global afforestation rate and the significant increases in development gains being produced in plantations.
t The available plantation statistics and related models need to be.
developed further to allow for a description of forest plantations by more species groups and by age class. For trees outside of forests, other wooded land and "other land" the statistics are far less clear. The data is simply not available to assess the role of these fibre sources in the future. These fibre sources are, and will continue to be, very significant in some regions.
Discussions and Conclusions Discussions.
t More attention could be paid to developing standardized definitions,.
methodologies for sampling, and data collection systems for trees outside of forests, other wooded land and other lands on which forests grow. Overall, the statistics to assess potential fibre availability from natural and semi-natural forests, plantation forests and trees outside of forests and other land are inadequate in most countries. Many, including developed countries, still do not have adequate inventories at the national scale to reflect the dynamics of forest management.
t Continuous forest inventory systems would substantially improve the.
possibility to plan the management of forests, particularly the sustainable management of forests. FAO could work with its member countries to develop and maintain such systems. Developing sustainable data collection and analysis systems requires that appropriate training capability be incorporated. With emerging communication tools there is an opportunity for far more effective interaction with country representatives at a comparatively low cost. The insights gained from having access to local expert knowledge are invaluable to the forest statistician.
t There is an urgent need for more capacity building in the area of.
forest statistics and to maintain a stronger network of contacts in all countries for the collection and review of data.
NON-WOOD S TA T I S T I C S ­ NON-W O O D AND R E C O V E R E D FIBRES.
Non-wood fibre is likely to play an increasing role in the future as a product in itself and as a complementary fibre source for pulping. Utilization of non wood-fibre is not just a phenomenon of developing countries. Recent activities in developed countries suggest they are examining its potential as a major source of supply. The GFSM analysis of non-wood fibre is still very preliminary. A major concern relates to the environmental consequences of processing non-wood fibres. Utilization of recovered fibre has technical limitations but there exists great opportunity to further utilize it as a major source of supply in some developing regions. Changes in public policies linked to the collection of recovered fibre could ameliorate shortfalls from other fibre sources. On the other hand, technological progress means these fibres are now also beginning to find uses in engineered wood products such as medium density fibreboard.
t Given the dynamics of change in fibre sources it is useful and.
necessary to monitor, on a more frequent and continual basis, recovered and non-wood material as a source of fibre.
F O R E C A S T MODEL.
A decision made in the GFSM project was to keep the modelling component relatively simple, readily transparent, flexible and user friendly. The study team also tried to build links between the model and some of the.
critical factors that are directly related to supply. The primary reason for this strategy is that the team did not want the modelling portion of the exercise to detract from the main focus of the work ­ the systematic collection and storage of forest inventory data. When the forest statistics are of sufficient quality, then more complex models can be developed and utilized. Forecasting for different regions and countries with different methodologies, assumptions, definitions and forecasting tools leads to different results. Unfortunately, there was not time to build a complex forecasting model that could be applied to all regions. More effective communication mechanisms with governments and their industry counterparts will be essential if global presentations are to be made in the future; otherwise it is legitimate to say we are comparing apples and oranges as far as forecasting is concerned since we do not have a common basis from which to start the modelling exercise. It is also important that the forecasting or simulation tools be made even more flexible so that all critical variables can be easily manipulated to explore the impact of their change. For example, it is useful to have the ability to manipulate variables related to forest growth and mortality and the commercialization of species since these types of factors can have a huge impact on sustainable forest management.
t The modelling component of the GFSM could include more.
variables to help with the manipulation of the factors that influence fibre supply. The plantation model used in this exercise was inadequate given the critical role plantations will play as a source of fibre since it should include more detailed age class and species group information to improve our forecasts. The assumptions used were developed by a group of plantation experts and translated by modellers into a framework that was compatible with our work.
t FAO could undertake a more extensive modelling exercise with.
plantation forests since the statistics warrant a more complex approach than for the natural forest.
P R I C E S , COSTS AND T E C H N O LO G Y.
Throughout the text it has been noted that this is not an economic supply study and the focus of the efforts thus far has not been on price and cost information. This is a shortfall of the study but it became quickly obvious that the inclusion of such data was simply beyond the timeline and budget for the project. The challenges in collecting this type of information in a credible way at a global scale are formidable for a number of reasons including: forest operations and governments are often very reluctant to release cost information since for competitive reasons it is a secret; log market prices are seriously distorted by policy-driven decisions such as export bans; transfer pricing in private operations is often driven by efforts to save on taxes; and, finally, there are no competitive markets for the forest fibre so prices are artificially established.
t Collecting price and cost information will require a substantial effort.
in order to develop a credible statistical system with this type of information. Despite the challenges it remains one of the logical next steps in the development of a comprehensive forest and forest products information system. The role of technology has been highlighted in the study as a serious issue. Assumptions with respect to the role material efficiency will play are frequently unsubstantiated, from a statistical point of view.
t Material efficiency studies by major forest products group could be.
conducted in order to assess better the historic developments and future trends. These studies could include extensive research on conversion factors used to build links between forest products, raw material and forest resources.
P O L I C Y DIRECTION FOR S U S TA I N I N G OR INCREASING F U T U R E FIBRE SUPPLY SUPPLY.
Most analysts agree that demand for forest products will continue to increase. The potential availability of fibre to meet demand is the central question the GFSM starts to address. Countries can and do make policy choices that will either maintain, or increase their fibre supplies. These include:.
t Increase in the use of recovered and non-wood fibre; t Expansion of the industrial forest plantation area; t Intensification of investment in development (genetic and.
silvicultural) gain;.
t Improved utilization of the natural forest fibre resource through better.
forest management planning and manufacturing processes; t Changing or modification of harvesting/silvicultural practices to improve the long-term sustainable yield of the forest and at the same time protect the multitude of other forest values; t Technological improvement to better utilize species and volumes. There are, of course, many more policy levers that can be manipulated but they are beyond the terms of reference for this particular study. The movement of the levers is dependent on the decisions made by governments, industry, NGOs and the investment community and these agencies all depend on reliable statistical information as a starting point in the development of appropriate forest policies. Despite the shortcomings, it is hoped that the process developed and the statistics presented here can encourage a vigorous debate over the next steps the international community will take to encourage sustainable forest management.
R e fe r e n c e s.
Apsey, M. & Reed, L. 1995. World timber resources outlook. Current perceptions. A discussion paper (second edition). Vancouver, Council of Forest Industries. Vancouver. Arnold, J.E.M. 1993. Long-term trends in global demand for and supply of industrial roundwood. In Simon Rietbergen, ed. The earthscan reader in tropical forestry. Binkley, C. 1987. Economic model of timber supply. In M. Kallio, D. Dykstra & C. Binkley, eds. The global forest sector: An analytical perspective, pp. 109-136. Toronto, John Wiley & Sons. Boulter, D. & Darr, D. 1996. North American timber trends study. Geneva Timber and Forest Study Papers No.
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Timber Section, Geneva. Brooks, D. 1987. Modelling forest dynamics. In M. Kallio, D. Dykstra & C. Binkley, eds. The global forest sector: An analytical perspective, pp. 91-108. Toronto, John Wiley & Sons. Bull, G., Williams, J. & Duinker, P. 1996. Northern temperate and boreal forests. Towards a sustainable paper cycle: Sub-study series No.
International Institute for Environment and Development. CCFM (Canadian Council of Forest Ministers). 1997. Compendium of Canadian Forestry Statistics. Ottawa. Canada. ECE/FAO. 1996a. European timber trends and prospects: Into the 21st century. Geneva Timber and Forest Study Papers No. 11. ECE/TIM/ SP/11. Geneva. ECE/FAO. 1996b. European forests and timber: Scenarios into the 21st century. Geneva Timber and Forest Discussion Papers. ECE/TIM/ DP/10. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Timber Section, Geneva. ECE/FAO. 1996b. North American timber trends study. Geneva Timber and Forest Study Papers., No.
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Timber Section, Geneva. FAO. 1996. Forest products yearbook 1995. Rome. FAO. 1997a. FAO provisional outlook for global forest products consumption, production and trade to 2010. Rome. FAO. 1997b. State of the world's forests 1997. Rome. FAO. 1997c. Estimating biomass and biomass change of tropical forests: A primer, by S. Brown. FAO Forestry Paper No. 134. Rome.
FAO. 1998. Asia-Pacific forestry sector outlook study: Draft main report. Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok and Forestry Policy and Planning Division, Rome. Haynes, R.W., Adams, D.M. & Mills, J.R. 1995. The 1993 RPA timber assessment update. General technical report RM-GTR-259. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins. Ince, P., Howard, J., Nicholson, G., & Darr, D. 1997. Production, imports, exports, and consumption of timber products in the United States: Roundwood wood equivalents, 1900 to 1995. Presentation made at the 1996 Forest Products Society Convention, Minneapolis, MN. Copies of Overheads available from Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, WI. ITTO. 1995. Analysis of macroeconomic trends in the supply and demand of sustainably produced tropical timber from the Asia-Pacific Region ­ Phase II by Reid Collins Forest Resource Consultants. Margules, Groome & Pöyry. 1996. World wood ­ Supply, demand & value and market-oriented reforms in the forestry sector. Meynink, Rod. Presentation to Project Advisory Committee Meeting, Kunming, Yunnan Province, China, 29-30 April. McNutt, J.A. 1996. Wood fibre: Will there be enough? PIMA Magazine Jan. 1996. Nautiyal, J.C. 1988. Forest economics: Principles and applications. Toronto, Canadian Scholars' Press Inc. Nilsson, S. & Shvidenko, A. 1998. Is sustainable development of the Russian forest sector possible? Forthcoming Occasional Paper by IUFRO. Nilsson, S. & Shvidenko, A. 1998. Is sustainable development of the Russian forest sector possible? Forthcoming Occasional Paper by IUFRO. Nilsson, S. 1995. Global supply outlook ­ Russia. In TAPPI Global Fibre Symposium Proceedings. Chicago, IL. 5-6 Oct. 1995. Atlanta, Georgia, Tappi Press. Nilsson, S. 1996. Do we have enough forests? International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. IUFRO Occasional Paper No.
ISSN 1024-414X. Pajuoja, H. 1995 . The outlook for the European forest resources and roundwood supply. ETTSV Working Paper, ECE/TIM/DP/4. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Timber Section, Geneva. Reed, L. 1995. Fibre supply outlook for North America. In TAPPI Global Fibre Symposium Proceedings. Chicago, IL. 5-6 Oct. 1995. Atlanta, Georgia, Tappi Press Sedjo, R.A. & Lyon, K.S. 1990. The long-term adequacy of world timber supply. Washington, DC, Resources for the Future. Sedjo, R.A. & Lyon, K.S. 1995. A global pulpwood supply model and some implications. Review draft.
Sommers, A. 1976. Attempt at an assessment of the world's tropical moist forest. Unasylva, 28(112-113): 5-25. Waggener, T. & Lane, C. 1997. Pacific rim demand and supply situation, trends and prospects: Implications for forest products trade in the Asia-Pacific Region. Working Paper No. APFSOS/WP/02. Rome. Zhang, D. & Buongiorno, J. 1996. Trends and outlook for forest products consumption, production and trade in the Asia-Pacific Region. FAO Asia Pacific Forest Sectory Outlook Study. Working Paper Draft.
SUPPLY G L O B A L FIBRE SUPPLY MODEL PAPER W O R K I N G PA P E R SERIES.
GFSM/WP/01 GFSM/WP/02 GFSM/WP/03 GFSM/WP/04 GFSM/WP/05 GFSM/WP/06 The FAO Global Fibre Supply Study ­ Assumptions, Methods, Models and Definitions Factors Affecting Productivity of Tropical Forest Plantations: Acacia, Eucalypt, Teak, Pine Implications of Sustainable Forest Management for Global Fibre Supply Recovered and Non-wood Fibre: Effects of Alternative Fibres on Global Fibre Supply Modelling Future Availability of Non-coniferous Veneer Logs and Sawlogs in Tropical Forests Literature Synthesis on Logging Impacts in Moist Tropical Forests.
The Global Fibre Supply Study (GFSM) of the FAO Forestry Department operates under the guidance of an Advisory Committee on Paper and Wood Products. The GFSM has produced a number of publications. To obtain a list, or to order a single copy of this publication free of charge, please contact:.
Forest Products Division Forestry Department Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome Italy e-mail: global-fibre-supply@fao.org WWW: http://www.fao.org.
St a t i s t i c a l Summary.
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF NATURAL FOREST AREA BY REGION AND COUNTRY ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 2 TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF AVERAGE VOLUME, GROWTH AND HARVESTING INTENSITY BY REGION AND COUNTRY ------------------------- 8 TABLE 3: SUMMARY OF TOTAL VOLUME AND GROWTH BY REGION AND COUNTRY ----------------------------------------------------------- 14 TABLE 4: SUMMARY OF INDUSTRIAL PLANTATIONS AREA AND GROWTH BY REGION AND COUNTRY ------------------------------------------- 18 TABLE 5: SUMMARY OF ALTERNATIVE FIBRES - RECOVERED AND NON-WOOD BY REGION AND COUNTRY ---------------------------------------- 22 TABLE 6: SUMMARY OF POTENTIAL FIBRE AVAILABILITY BY SELECTED REGION AND COUNTRY ----------------------------------------------------------- 26.
Table1: Summary of natural forest area by region and country.
Forest Area Total Natural Fore s t Are a.
Forest Wood Natural Forest Available for Wood Supply.
(1 000 ha) Total Forest 11 780 1 000 5 876 2 355 29 459 4 400 1 286 1 000 8 500 3 367 959 346 450 2 399 1 170 1 000 150 4 984 7 899 333 0 0 9 035 1 444 7 300 500 1 0 6 992.
Country and Region Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Tanzania, United Republic Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Africa.
(1 000 ha) Total Forest 300 0 800 234 3 940 65 160 21 762 35 979 0 6 468 2 800 2 200 2 000 8 495 17 140 2 236 1 175 2 202 0 0 6 595 3 052 1 8 2 538.
Country and Region Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China (Mainland) India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Japan Korea, DPR Korea, Republic of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Asia.
Forest Wood Natural Forest Not Available for Wood Supply.
Country and Region Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone So m a l i a South Africa Tanzania, United Republic Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Africa.
(1000 ha) Inaccessible Area Undisturbed Forest 24 150 856 7 4 123 17 000 5 462 37 884 0 2 380 800 50 6 936 3 879 4 333 1 670 117 2 107 157 1 101 0 0 8 9 036 Disturbed Forest 630 550 650 0 1 425 17 292 22 988 8 550 0 4 532 1 700 1 950 3 000 1 191 2 100 290 643 1 489 1 500 10 000 2 261 5 561 8 8 302 Total Forest 654 700 1 506 7 5 548 3 4 292 2 8 450 4 6 434 0 6 912 2 500 2 000 9 936 5 070 6 433 1 960 760 3 596 1 657 1 1 101 2 261 5 561 1 7 7 338 I 404 0 500 3 0 4 991 4 750 990 0 1 500 800 700 4 500 790 5 740 380 220 0 0 2 000 0 1 020 2 9 288 II 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 288 0 0 0 0 1 000 0 0 900 260 10 0 0 0 0 5 458 III 250 613 650 0 2 000 16 297 15 000 2 298 0 4 500 800 700 4 436 1 496 400 330 235 2 896 1 092 6 801 2 261 3 878 6 6 933 Legally protected areas 0 87 356 4 3 548 13 004 8 700 39 858 0 912 900 600 0 2 784 293 350 45 690 565 2 300 0 663 7 5 659.
Table1: Summary of natural forest area by region and country (continued).
Total Natural Forest Area.
(1 000 ha) Undisturbed Forest 4 0 719 757 6 228 3 6 909 2 361 893 8 7 867 Disturbed Forest 3 814 557 2 028 33 409 2 111 653 4 2 572 Total Forest 36 905 200 4 200 3 500 250 240 4 5 295 Undisturbed Forest 1 5 905 307 268 9 000 601 193 2 6 274 Disturbed Forest 0 207 68 7 500 497 143 8 415.
Natural Forest Available for Wood Supply.
(1 000 ha) Total Forest 15 905 100 200 1 500 104 50 1 7 859.
Country and Region Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Oceania.
(1 000 ha) Total Forest 909 3 128 567 3 162 1 837 1 947 400 1 812 18 652 12 703 7 826 2 289 1 626 312 4 390 2 248 1 610 273 6 638 7 450 2 309 5 413 1 284 1 077 4 927 22 048 1 068 1 848 1 1 9 753.
Country and Region Albania Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Europe.
USSR F O R M E R US S R.
(1 000 ha) Undisturbed Forest 6 9 4 139 6 9 4 139 Disturbed Forest 680 687 6 8 0 687 Total Forest 13 452 1 3 452 Undisturbed Forest 5 2 7 542 5 2 7 542 Disturbed Forest 514 090 5 1 4 090.
(1 000 ha) Total Forest 13 452 1 3 452.
Country and Region Russian Federation USSR, former area of.
(1000 ha) Inaccessible Area Undisturbed Forest 3 814 350 1 960 25 909 1 614 510 3 4 157 Disturbed Forest 21 000 100 4 000 2 000 146 190 2 7 436 Total Forest 2 4 814 450 5 960 2 7 909 1 760 700 6 1 593 I 9 700 90 0 17 625 1 500 200 2 9 115 II 0 0 0 4 000 0 0 4 000 III 8 500 330 545 4 500 260 493 1 4 628 Legally protected areas 6 614 30 5 415 1 784 0 7 1 3 850.
(1000 ha) Inaccessible Area Undisturbed Forest 166 597 1 6 6 597 Disturbed Forest 0 0 Total Forest 1 6 6 597 1 6 6 597 I 0 0 II 0 0 III 101 286 1 0 1 286 Legally protected areas 65 311 6 5 311.
NORTH AND CENTRAL AMERICA.
(1 000 ha) Undisturbed Forest 1 960 2 4 4 571 1 200 1 591 1 575 101 3 813 4 112 5 5 476 5 546 2 794 2 9 8 129 6 2 0 868 Disturbed Forest 0 96 987 600 0 0 0 1 100 1 200 0 1 600 794 61 095 1 6 3 376 Total Forest 1 960 147 584 600 1 591 1 575 101 2 713 2 912 55 476 3 946 2 000 237 034 4 5 7 492 Undisturbed Forest 1 215 1 4 7 584 230 660 715 0 1 683 2 269 1 8 000 2 786 850 1 5 6 176 3 3 2 168 Disturbed Forest 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.
(1 000 ha) Total Forest 1 215 147 584 230 660 715 0 1 683 2 269 18 000 2 786 850 156 176 3 3 2 168.
Country and Region Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama United States of America North and Central America.
(1 000 ha) Undisturbed Forest 3 3 000 4 8 200 5 4 6 000 1 3 443 5 2 862 1 1 092 8 000 1 8 500 1 1 500 6 7 400 1 4 700 658 4 3 742 8 6 9 097 3 220 907 Disturbed Forest 1 000 10 800 374 000 4 000 41 362 5 142 7 000 13 500 7 500 44 300 13 600 0 28 742 5 5 0 946 1 726 093 Total Forest 32 000 37 400 172 000 9 443 11 500 5 950 1 000 5 000 4 000 23 100 1 100 658 15 000 3 1 8 151 1 494 814 Undisturbed Forest 1 0 000 1 8 200 6 8 000 3 900 6 000 3 000 2 150 6 000 1 500 1 7 300 2 200 0 2 1 742 1 5 9 992 1 563 457 Disturbed Forest 0 3 500 14 000 200 1 500 708 1 150 1 000 650 4 300 1 100 0 6 742 3 4 850 6 6 5 553.
(1 000 ha) Total Forest 10 000 14 700 54 000 3 700 4 500 2 292 1 000 5 000 850 13 000 1 100 0 15 000 1 2 5 142 8 9 7 904.
Country and Region Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela South America Grand Total:.
(1000 ha) Inaccessible Area Undisturbed Forest 0 96 982 600 0 0 0 1 100 1 200 0 1 600 794 61 095 1 6 3 371 Disturbed Forest 745 0 370 931 860 101 1 030 643 37 476 1 160 1 150 80 858 1 2 5 324 Total Forest 745 9 6 987 970 931 860 101 2 130 1 843 3 7 476 2 760 1 944 1 4 1 953 2 8 8 700 I 0 0 0 400 60 0 0 800 0 0 644 41 817 4 3 721 II 0 88 004 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 8 004 III 500 0 0 241 400 96 1 300 400 37 476 2 000 0 80 925 1 2 3 338 Legally protected areas 245 8 983 970 290 400 5 830 643 0 760 1 300 19 211 3 3 637.
S O UT H AMERICA.
(1000 ha) Inaccessible Area Undisturbed Forest 1 000 7 300 360 000 3 800 39 862 4 434 5 850 12 500 6 850 40 000 12 500 0 22 000 5 1 6 096 1 060 535 Disturbed Forest 22 000 22 700 118 000 5 743 7 000 3 658 0 0 3 150 10 100 0 658 0 1 9 3 009 5 9 6 910 Total Forest 2 3 000 3 0 000 4 7 8 000 9 543 4 6 862 8 092 5 850 1 2 500 1 0 000 5 0 100 1 2 500 658 2 2 000 7 0 9 105 1 657 450 I 000 000 800 643 000 000 300 000 800 15 000 1 700 0 4 000 1 0 7 243 7 4 56 1 7 3 1 5 2 5 6 087 II 0 8 000 168 000 0 24 862 2 500 4 400 7 440 0 20 000 9 500 0 6 000 2 5 0 702 3 6 5 109 III 200 500 570 000 000 612 150 0 9 100 12 950 500 658 2 000 2 9 7 240 14 13 229 4 10 7 4 6 270 Legally protected areas 1 800 4 500 23 630 3 900 5 000 1 980 0 60 100 2 150 800 0 10 000 5 3 920 2 8 9 984.
(Volumes pertain to the Forest Available for Wood Supply in m3/ha).
Growing S t a n d a rd i z e d Growing Stock.
Country and Region Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Tanzania, United Republic Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Africa Undisturbed 0 0 262 63 250 345 0 205 250 0 0 109 0 170 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 30 0 0 0 227 Disturbed 30 18 258 518 167 224 126 160 210 122 55 34 43 155 80 15 60 40 44 45 0 0 8 13 70 15 124 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Commercial Growing S t a n d a rdized Commercial Species Growing Stock.
Undisturbed 0 0 97 20 133 128 0 65 85 0 0 82 0 85 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 15 0 0 0 105 Disturbed 11 3 85 193 69 172 74 40 45 111 31 30 29 77 40 2 60 11 39 31 0 0 4 6 24 2 53 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Country and Region Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China (Mainland) India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Japan Korea, DPR Korea, Republic of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Asia Undisturbed 0 0 260 260 153 0 23 144 0 0 0 0 200 244 146 92 209 0 0 0 0 0 151 Disturbed 140 0 103 130 87 73 68 75 0 119 80 65 130 145 110 38 127 128 0 0 114 102 84 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Undisturbed 0 0 202 200 89 0 19 48 0 0 0 0 140 169 89 56 209 0 0 0 0 0 62 Disturbed 130 0 76 60 86 70 49 37 0 110 50 40 90 118 72 23 124 100 0 0 114 70 65 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Increment G ross Annual Incre m e n t.
All Species 0.4 0.2 1.8 2.5 1.9 2.5 1.6 2.5 2.5 1.4 2.0 0.5 0.3 2.5 2.5 0.2 1.0 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.2 1.4 Commercial Species 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.8 0.6 1.9 1.5 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.2 1.3 1.6 0.0 1.0 0.4 0.5 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.5 Undisturbed forest 0.0 0.0 7.0 3.4 15.0 7.8 0.0 25.0 25.0 0.0 0.0 4.5 0.0 7.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0.
Harvesting Intensity.
Disturbed Forest 1.2 0.5 2.5 7.0 6.0 4.6 9.4 12.0 12.0 5.3 1.8 0.8 3.0 3.0 10.0 0.2 2.0 3.8 3.8 2.2 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.7 0.8 0.5 Cutting Cycle Annual or Periodic (years) 45-60 60 30-50 25-50 25-50 40 25-50 25 30 40-60 25-50 25-50 35-50 25 30 60 50 45-60 30-50 25-50 Country and Region Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone So m al i a South Africa Tanzania, United Republic Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Africa.
All Species 0.8 0.0 2.1 3.0 0.5 2.7 0.7 1.4 2.0 1.7 1.3 0.5 1.7 1.7 0.8 1.9 2.1 0.0 0.0 3.8 1.9 1.8 Commercial Species 0.6 0.0 1.7 2.0 0.3 2.5 0.4 1.0 1.7 1.4 1.0 0.4 1.3 1.0 0.5 1.8 1.7 0.0 0.0 3.8 1.3 1.5 Undisturbed forest 0.0 0.0 77.4 60.0 21.6 0.0 2.1 33.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 20.0 63.0 17.6 20.9 71.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0.
Disturbed Forest 10.0 0.0 26.5 45.0 14.4 15.0 19.4 15.2 0.0 30.0 30.0 15.0 15.0 32.3 12.0 8.8 34.4 34.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 17.6 Cutting Cycle Annual or Periodic (years) 70 44105 40-50 45 35-40 20-50 25-35 40 70 50 40 25-60 11232 50-60 20-25 35-50 30 30 30 22-40 Country and Region Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China (Mainland) India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Japan Korea, DPR Korea, Republic of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Asia.
Country and Region Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Oceania Undisturbed 0 300 250 130 190 120 139 Disturbed 105 120 150 80 110 70 103 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Undisturbed 0 220 165 80 120 90 87 Disturbed 88 100 100 40 45 40 84 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Country and Region Albania Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Europe Undisturbed 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Disturbed 79 290 145 126 151 235 132 126 92 133 275 65 172 98 169 156 179 175 95 164 65 222 194 221 72 116 305 106 142 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Undisturbed 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Disturbed 79 290 145 126 151 235 132 126 92 133 275 65 172 98 169 156 179 175 95 164 65 222 194 205 72 116 305 106 142 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Country and Region Russian Federation USSR ,former area of Undisturbed 111 111 Disturbed 133 133 Diameter Class (cm) 10.
Undisturbed 165 165 Disturbed 195 195 Diameter Class (cm) 10.
All Species 2.5 2.0 2.5 1.0 1.0 0.8 2.4 Commercial Species 2.1 1.0 2.0 0.5 0.6 0.6 1.9 Undisturbed forest 0.0 40.0 45.0 30.0 35.0 20.0.
Disturbed Forest 40.0 12.0 20.0 10.0 5.0 5.0 Cutting Cycle Annual or Periodic (years) 40 35 30 35 35 35 Country and Region Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Oceania.
All Species 1.4 9.1 7.2 3.3 4.4 8.4 8.0 4.4 4.3 5.3 8.3 1.9 6.6 10.8 3.1 3.1 4.8 8.3 3.3 4.7 4.9 5.9 5.8 5.9 4.9 5.8 5.1 5.3 5.2 Commercial Species 1.4 9.1 7.2 3.3 4.4 7.2 7.6 4.4 4.2 5.0 8.2 1.5 5.9 10.8 3.1 3.1 4.8 7.9 3.1 3.6 4.9 5.8 5.8 5.9 4.5 4.1 4.9 5.3 4.7 Undisturbed forest 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0.
Disturbed Forest 2.0 6.0 5.0 1.0 2.0 5.0 5.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 7.0 1.0 4.0 5.0 2.0 3.0 2.0 5.0 2.0 3.0 5.0 3.0 3.0 0.0 2.0 3.0 6.0 3.0 Cutting Cycle Annual or Periodic (years) 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Country and Region Albania Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Europe.
All Species 5.0 5.0 Commercial Species 3.5 3.5 Undisturbed forest 122.3.
Disturbed Forest 166.4 Cutting Cycle Annual or Periodic (years) 95-124 Country and Region Russian Federation USSR ,former area of.
Growing Standardized Growing Stock.
Country and Region Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama United States of America North and Central America Undisturbed 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Disturbed 60 115 125 50 30 0 110 100 74 115 130 90 100 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Commercial Growing Standardized Commercial Species Growing Stock.
Undisturbed 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Disturbed 40 115 100 50 20 0 60 60 63 105 80 84 96 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Country and Region Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela South America Undisturbed 0 150 147 0 130 160 210 210 140 190 192 0 160 158 Disturbed 108 117 101 122 80 109 170 170 110 160 210 0 120 116 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Undisturbed 0 85 50 0 69 82 72 72 60 100 48 0 70 70 Disturbed 75 101 27 122 50 89 95 63 75 85 21 0 30 48 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
All Species 1.0 2.4 2.0 1.5 1.5 0.0 2.5 2.5 1.5 2.5 2.5 3.2 1.9 Commercial Species 0.7 2.4 1.5 1.2 1.2 0.0 1.8 1.8 1.2 1.8 1.5 3.2 1.5 Undisturbed forest 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0.
Disturbed Forest 10.0 151.4 50.0 15.0 10.0 0.0 10.0 10.0 13.5 10.0 15.0 2.4 Cutting Cycle Annual or Periodic (years) 40 50-90 35 40 40 35 25 25 40-60 30 25 1 Country and Region Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama United States of America North and Central America.
All Species 1.7 4.6 4.8 4.0 3.0 3.0 5.0 5.0 4.0 2.0 5.0 0.0 2.0 3.7 Commercial Species 1.2 1.4 1.1 4.0 1.0 0.8 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.0 1.2 0.0 0.8 1.1 Undisturbed forest 0.0 14.3 20.7 0.0 25.0 24.9 7.0 15.0 20.0 15.0 20.0 0.0 20.0.
Disturbed Forest 18.0 13.6 8.7 121.9 5.0 15.0 3.0 7.0 5.0 15.0 5.0 0.0 5.0 Cutting Cycle Annual or Periodic (years) 40 40-50 30-50 60 30 30 40 25 40 30 40 Country and Region Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela South America.
Volumes pertain to the Forest Available for Wood Supply in 1 000 000 m3.
Standardized Growing Stock.
Standardized Commercial Species Growing Stock.
Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 124 0 3 0 1 174 672 639 184 6 314 4 283 1 640 883 95 0 50 10 580 197 375 0 29 0 13 3 13 0 202 17 47 0 2 0 9 0 55 0 305 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 64 26 8 0 176 0 1 0 1 1 927 6 274 Disturbed Forest 124 3 502 455 2 031 757 95 40 383 375 29 10 13 185 47 2 9 55 305 10 0 0 38 8 176 1 5 653 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Total Annual Growth.
All Commercial Species Species 4.8 1.0 0.2 0.1 10.4 3.2 5.9 1.9 56.5 17.7 11.0 8.2 2.1 2.0 2.5 0.8 21.3 6.8 4.9 1.5 1.9 0.6 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 6.0 3.0 2.9 1.9 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 3.4 1.8 4.5 4.1 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.9 0.4 0.4 0.2 3.8 1.3 0.1 0.0 146.3 56.9.
Country and Region Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China (Mainland) India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Japan Korea, DPR Korea, Republic of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Asia Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 42 0 0 0 198 115 81 50 504 160 4 757 0 1 477 4 8 182 5 502 0 0 770 0 224 0 143 0 359 99 1 905 675 2 376 482 137 53 171 22 282 0 0 0 0 0 752 0 312 0 2 2 670 7 160 Disturbed Forest 42 0 83 30 344 4 757 1 473 2 681 0 770 224 143 260 1 230 1 894 85 149 282 0 0 752 312 1 5 510 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
All Commercial Species Species 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 1.7 1.3 0.7 0.5 1.9 1.1 175.9 162.9 15.0 8.8 49.9 37.4 12.9 4.8 2.9 1.0 14.6 28.6 1.8 2.3 4.6 0.0 0.0 3.8 5.7 328.3 11.0 3.9 2.2 0.8 10.9 17.9 1.2 2.1 3.8 0.0 0.0 3.8 4.1 273.7.
Country and Region Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Oceania Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 1 670 0 74 62 47 17 1 095 975 106 94 21 17 3 013 1 166 Disturbed Forest 1 670 12 30 120 11 4 1 847 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 1400 0 56 46 31 11 660 600 64 60 15 13 2 226 729 Disturbed Forest 1 400 10 20 60 5 2 1 496 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10.
All Commercial Species Species 39.8 33.4 0.2 0.1 0.5 0.4 1.5 0.8 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 42.1 34.7.
All Commercial Species Species 1.3 1.3 28.6 28.6 4.1 4.1 10.4 10.4 8.2 8.2 16.3 14.0 3.2 3.1 8.0 8.0 79.5 78.0 66.9 63.8 64.7 64.1 4.3 3.3 10.7 9.7 3.4 3.4 13.6 13.6 7.0 7.0 7.7 7.7 2.3 2.2 22.2 20.7 35.0 26.7 11.4 11.3 31.9 31.6 7.4 7.4 6.4 6.4 24.1 22.3 128.8 91.3 5.4 5.3 9.8 9.7 622.5 562.9.
Country and Region Russian Federation USSR, former area of Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 59 112 57 319 5 9 112 5 7 319 Disturbed Forest 1 794 1 794 Diameter Class (cm) 10.
Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 87 371 84 744 8 7 371 8 4 744 Disturbed Forest 2 627 2 627 Diameter Class (cm) 10.
All Commercial Species Species 946.0 946.0 946.0 946.0.
Country and Region Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama United States of America North and Central America Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 73 0 16 946 0 29 0 33 0 21 0 0 0 185 0 227 0 1 340 0 320 0 111 0 13 980 0 3 3 265 0 Disturbed Forest 73 16 946 29 33 21 0 185 227 1340 320 111 13 980 3 3 265 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 49 0 16 946 0 23 0 26 0 14 0 0 0 101 0 136 0 1 135 0 293 0 68 0 13 072 0 3 1 863 0 Disturbed Forest 49 16 946 23 26 14 0 101 136 1 135 293 68 13 072 3 1 863 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
All Commercial Species Species 1.2 0.9 349.2 349.2 0.5 0.3 1.0 0.8 1.1 0.9 0.0 0.0 4.2 3.0 5.7 4.1 26.3 22.1 7.0 5.0 2.1 1.3 309.7 309.7 707.9 697.1.
Country and Region Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela South America Grand Total Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 1080 0 2278 560 7495 2060 476 24 555 195 362 113 412 242 1060 210 185 91 2897 817 442 211 0 0 2879 1079 2 0 120 5 602 1 8 2 005 8 4 766 Disturbed Forest 1080 1718 5435 451 360 249 170 850 94 2080 231 0 1800 1 4 518 9 7 240 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
Total Undisturbed Forest Forest 750 0 812 211 2166 696 476 24 329 104 263 58 177 83 387 72 103 39 1535 430 76 53 0 0 922 472 7 995 2 241 1 7 3 499 9 6 931 Disturbed Forest 750 601 1470 451 225 204 95 315 64 1105 23 0 450 5 753 7 6 567 Diameter Class (cm) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10.
All Commercial Species Species 17.0 12.0 69.1 20.0 257.0 60.1 14.8 14.8 13.5 4.5 6.8 1.8 5.0 1.2 25.0 6.0 3.4 1.0 26.0 13.0 5.5 1.3 0.0 0.0 30.0 12.0 473.1 147.7 3 266 2 719.
Area Total Plantation Area 1995.
Growth Estimated Annual Growth.
m 3/ h a Gross Annual Increment (Delivered to the mill) 7.5 2.3 0.0 0.4 7.5 3.8 15.0 3.8 0.0 1.7 2.3 15.0 2.3 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.0 3.8 0.0 3.8 15.0 11.3 1.1 3.8 7.5 15.0 3.8 0.0 15.0 3.8 11.3 2.3 11.3 10.5 3.8 13.5 15.0 3.8 11.3 7.5 0.0 0.0 5.3 5.3 11.3 3.8 11.3 11.2 1 000 000 m3 Total Annual Growth 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.04 0.15 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.04 0.43 0.00 0.31 0.74 1.0.
Country Burkina Faso Burkina Faso Senegal West Sahelian Africa Kenya Kenya Kenya Kenya Sudan East Sahelian Africa Benin Ghana Ghana Ghana Nigeria Nigeria West Moist Africa Burundi Cameroon Rwanda Uganda Uganda Uganda Central Africa Angola Malawi Malawi Malawi Mozambique Tanzania, United Republic Tanzania, United Republic Tanzania, United Republic Tanzania, United Republic Tanzania, United Republic Zambia Zambia Zambia Zimbabwe Zimbabwe Zimbabwe Africa-T Southern Africa-Tropical Madagascar Insular East Africa Morocco North Africa.
Pinus Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Non-Conifers (Other) All Species.
Tectona Populus Tectona Non-Conifers (Other) Tectona Non-Conifers (Other).
All Species Non-Conifers (Other) All Species Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Pinus.
Eucalyptus Pinus Eucalyptus Conifers (Other) All Species Eucalyptus Non-Conifers (Other) Pinus Tectona Conifers (Other) Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Eucalyptus Non-Conifers (Other) Pinus.
All Species.
South Africa Pinus South Africa Non-Conifers (Other) South Africa Eucalyptus Non-tropical southern Africa Total Africa- Total.
(plantation estimates ­ November 1997).
A S IA AND OCEANIA.
m 3/ h a Gross Annual Increment (Delivered to the mill) 3.8 2.3 2.3 11.3 7.5 7.5 3.8 7.5 15.0 2.3 0.0 3.8 3.8 7.5 15.0 3.8 11.3 2.3 11.3 8.4 3.8 12.8 3.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 2.3 15.0 7.5 2.3 15.0 15.0 3.8 7.5 2.3 3.8 15.0 11.3 15.0 5.8 7.5 15.0 7.5 11.3 11.3 7.5 2.3 7.5 3.8 7.5 7.5 8.5 1 000 000 m3 Total Annual Growth 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.51 0.01 2.00 0.06 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.02 0.13 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 2.80 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.12 1.06 0.22 0.50 0.57 0.13 0.43 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.05 0.04 0.08 3.23 1.81 0.21 0.76 3.00 0.97 2.62 0.02 0.30 0.15 0.24 0.46 10.54.
Country Bangladesh Bangladesh Bhutan Bhutan Bhutan Bhutan India India India India Nepal Pakistan Pakistan Pakistan Pakistan Sri Lanka Sri Lanka Sri Lanka Sri Lanka South Asia Myanmar Myanmar Myanmar Thailand Viet Nam Viet Nam Continental Southeast Asia Indonesia Indonesia Indonesia Indonesia Indonesia Malaysia Malaysia Malaysia Malaysia Philippines Philippines Philippines Philippines Insular Southeast Asia China (Mainland) China (Mainland) China (Mainland) China (Mainland) China (Mainland) Japan Japan Japan Korea, Republic of Korea, Republic of Korea, Republic of East Asia.
Tectona Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) All Species Eucalyptus Pinus.
Tectona Populus Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) Acacia Acacia Non-Conifers (Other) Pinus Tectona Non-Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Pinus Acacia.
Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Non-Conifers (Other) Pinus Populus Conifers (Other) Non-Conifers (Other) Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) Pinus Conifers (Other).
ASIA AND OCEANIA (continued).
1 000 ha Species Group Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) All Species Reported Industrial Plantations 42 46 43 131 297 743 60 1 338 41 99 2 578 57 374 Net Industrial Plantations 42 46 43 131 297 743 60 1 338 41 99 2 578 46 777 Currently Available for Wood Supply 2.1 2.3 2.2 6.6 148.5 371.5 30.0 669.0 20.5 49.5 1 289.0 3 499.0.
m 3/ h a Gross Annual Increment (Delivered to the mill) 11.3 3.8 0.0 4.9 7.5 13.5 12.0 18.0 7.5 15.0 15.1 1 000 000 m3 Total Annual Growth 0.02 0.01 0.00 0.03 1.11 5.02 0.36 12.04 0.15 0.74 19.43 36.07.
Country Fiji Fiji Papua New Guinea Tr o p i cal Oceania Australia Australia Australia New Zealand New Zealand New Zealand Temperate Oceania Asia and Oceania.
Eucalyptus Pinus Conifers (Other) Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) Conifers (Other).
1 000 ha Species Country Group Costa Rica All Species Guatemala All Species Mexico Conifers (Other) Mexico Eucalyptus Mexico Pinus Nicaragua Pinus Nicaragua Eucalyptus Nicaragua Non-Conifers (Other) Central America and Mexico Cuba Cuba Caribbean North and Central America Pinus Eucalyptus Reported Industrial Plantations 40 40 18 44 72 15 6 2 237 183 70 253 490 Net Industrial Plantations 40 40 15 37 60 15 6 2 215 154 59 213 428 Currently Available for Wood Supply 2.0 2.0 0.8 1.9 3.0 0.8 0.3 0.1 10.8 7.7 3.0 10.7 21.4.
m 3/ h a Gross Annual Increment (Delivered to the mill) 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.5 11.3 3.8 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.9 1 000 000 m3 Total Annual Growth 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01.
SO UTH AMERICA.
1 000 ha Species Group All Species Acacia Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Pinus Conifers (Other) All Species Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Pinus Reported Industrial Plantations 40 124 1 690 119 2 921 110 42 118 27 64 14 139 325 5 733 152 384 28 242 300 1 380 44 251 2 2 783 8 516 69 761 Net Industrial Plantations 40 124 1 690 119 2 921 110 35 99 22 64 12 117 273 5 626 152 384 28 242 300 1 380 31 176 1 2 694 8 320 58 698 Currently Available for Wood Supply 2.0 62.0 845.0 59.5 1 460.5 55.0 1.8 5.0 1.1 3.2 0.6 0.0 5.9 13.7 2 515.1 7.6 19.2 1.4 12.1 150.0 690.0 1.6 8.8 0.1 890.7 3 405.8 7 085.
m 3/ h a Gross Annual Increment (Delivered to the mill) 0.0 11.3 11.3 3.8 15.0 11.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 15.8 0.0 0.0 13.1 15.0 18.8 3.8 22.5 18.8 15.0 11.3 15.0 15.0 15.8 1 000 000 m3 Total Annual Growth 0.00 0.70 9.51 0.22 21.91 0.62 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 32.95 0.11 0.36 0.01 0.27 2.81 10.35 0.02 0.13 0.00 14.06 47.02 84.09.
Country Bolivia Brazil Brazil Brazil Brazil Brazil Colombia Colombia Colombia Ecuador Peru Peru Venezuela Venezuela Tropical South America Argentina Argentina Argentina Argentina Chile Chile Uruguay Uruguay Uruguay Temperate South America South America Grand Total Total.
Populus Pinus Non-Conifers (Other) Eucalyptus Eucalyptus Pinus Pinus Eucalyptus Populus.
Fibres Recovered Fibres.
1 000 000 MT Paper and Paperboard Production 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 1.87 0.03 0.00 0.00 0.08 2.27 1 000 000 m3 Pulp Production 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 1.55 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.04 1.84 1 000 000 MT Fibre Wastepaper Availability Recovery (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.59 1.48 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.07 0.70 1.76.
Fibres Nonwood Fibres.
1 000 000 m3 % Nonwood Fibre Used in Availability Total Capacity (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.25.
Country and Subregion Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Tanzania, United Republic Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Total Africa.
1 000 000 MT Paper and Paperboard Production 0.00 0.00 0.16 0.00 0.00 24.00 3.03 3.88 0.21 29.66 0.08 6.88 0.00 0.67 0.00 0.01 0.42 0.61 0.03 1.96 1.24 0.13 72.95 1 000 000 m3 Pulp Production 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.00 0.00 19.14 1.87 2.25 0.25 10.98 0.11 0.55 0.00 0.11 0.00 0.02 0.16 0.15 0.00 0.29 0.35 0.13 36.49 1 000 000 MT Fibre Wastepaper Availability Recovery (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.25 20.62 0.40 1.00 0.34 0.85 0.08 0.20 14.84 37.10 0.00 0.00 2.85 7.13 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.26 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.14 0.05 0.14 0.02 0.05 0.33 0.82 0.06 0.14 0.15 0.37 27.52 68.79.
1 000 000 m3 % Nonwood Fibre Used in Availability Total Capacity (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.88 39.70 1.59 3.96 0.27 0.67 0.09 0.23 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.42 1.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.33 0.82 0.10 0.26 0.09 0.23 18.76 46.90.
Country and Subregion Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China (Mainland) India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Japan Korea, DPR Korea, Republic of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Asia.
1 000 000 MT Paper and Paperboard Production 2.22 0.00 0.90 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.13 1 000 000 m3 Pulp Production 1.01 0.00 1.41 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.42 1 000 000 MT Fibre Wastepaper Availability Recovery (equivalent volume) 1.08 2.70 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.29 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.20 2.99.
Nonwood Fibres.
1 000 000 m3 % Nonwood Fibre Used in Availability Total Capacity (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00.
Country and Subregion Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Oceania.
1 000 000 MT Paper and Paperboard Production 0.04 3.60 1.09 0.15 0.21 0.74 0.35 0.04 10.94 8.62 14.83 0.75 0.32 0.00 6.80 0.01 0.03 2.97 2.26 1.73 0.98 0.36 0.33 0.46 3.68 9.17 1.45 6.10 77.99 1 000 000 m3 Pulp Production 0.02 1.47 0.38 0.11 0.12 0.52 0.18 0.04 10.09 2.82 1.95 0.03 0.03 0.00 0.61 0.01 0.02 0.15 2.42 0.82 1.63 0.29 0.29 0.10 1.58 10.19 0.26 0.64 36.75 1 000 000 MT Fibre Wastepaper Availability Recovery (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.93 2.33 0.69 1.72 0.13 0.32 0.05 0.13 0.27 0.66 0.47 1.17 0.01 0.02 0.49 1.23 3.70 9.25 10.53 26.33 0.18 0.44 0.25 0.63 0.17 0.44 2.35 5.88 0.03 0.06 0.02 0.06 2.31 5.77 0.18 0.45 0.17 0.42 0.30 0.75 0.12 0.29 0.10 0.25 0.06 0.16 2.12 5.29 1.43 3.57 0.88 2.19 3.68 9.19 31.58 78.96.
1 000 000 m3 % Nonwood Fibre Used in Availability Total Capacity (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.15 0.39 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.30 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.26 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.14 0.35 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.52 1.29.
Country and Subregion Albania Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Europe.
1 000 000 MT Paper and Paperboard Production 4.07 4.07 1 000 000 m3 Pulp Production 4.89 4.89 1 000 000 MT Fibre Wastepaper Availability Recovery (equivalent volume) 1.09 2.73 1.09 2.73.
1 000 000 m3 % Nonwood Fibre Used in Availability Total Capacity (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00.
Country and Subregion Russian Federation USSR, Former area of.
1 000 000 MT Paper and Paperboard Production 0.00 18.69 0.02 0.06 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.00 3.05 0.00 0.03 89.29 111.19 1 000 000 m3 Pulp Production 0.00 25.36 0.01 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.42 0.00 0.00 66.03 91.87 1 000 000 MT Fibre Wastepaper Availability Recovery (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 2.69 6.74 0.01 0.03 0.06 0.15 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.05 0.13 0.92 2.30 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.03 32.19 80.48 35.96 89.90.
1 000 000 m3 % Nonwood Fibre Used in Availability Total Capacity (equivalent volume) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.27 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.32 0.81 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.19 0.47 0.62 1.55.
Country and Subregion Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama United States of America North and Central America.
1 000 000 MT Paper and Paperboard Production 1.02 0.00 5.86 0.57 0.69 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.14 0.09 0.74 9.18 280.78 1 000 000 m3 Pulp Production 0.84 0.00 5.91 2.11 0.31 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.03 0.17 9.42 183.67 1 000 000 MT Fibre Wastepaper Availability Recovery (equivalent volume) 0.46 1.16 0.00 0.00 1.29 3.22 0.14 0.34 0.31 0.79 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.06 0.16 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.18 0.05 0.11 0.26 0.66 2.64 6.61 100.69 251.74.
1 000 000 m3 % Nonwood Fibre Used in Availability Total Capacity (equivalent volume) 0.14 0.35 0.00 0.00 0.21 0.53 0.00 0.00 0.22 0.55 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.30 0.74 0.00 0.00 0.19 0.47 1.05 2.64 21.05 52.62.
Country and Subregion Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Ecuador Suriname Peru Uruguay Venezuela South America Grand Totals.
(Volumes pertain to Forest Available for Wood Supply 1 000 000 m3).
Potential Fibre Availability 1996.
Country and Subregion Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Tanzania, United Republic Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Africa Forest Undisturbed by Man 0.00 0.00 1.61 0.92 19.32 1.35 0.00 0.15 1.93 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00 25.38 Forest Disturbed by Man 1.05 0.03 1.71 0.97 9.35 4.29 0.98 0.40 3.43 1.47 0.58 0.10 0.08 3.01 0.94 0.00 0.08 0.92 2.07 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.23 0.15 0.63 0.00 32.54 Industrial Plantations 0.06 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.09 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.26 0.09 0.04 0.07 0.16 3.00 Nonwood Fibres 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.25 Recovered Fibres 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 1.51 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 1.77 Total 1.11 0.03 3.33 1.89 28.67 5.63 0.98 0.55 5.36 1.48 0.58 0.11 0.28 3.07 0.94 0.09 0.26 0.92 2.09 0.08 0.00 4.02 0.35 0.20 0.70 0.23 62.95.
Country and Subregion Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China (Mainland) India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Japan Korea, DPR Korea, Republic of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Asia Forest Undisturbed by Man 0.00 0.00 0.77 0.26 0.65 0.00 0.02 32.10 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.25 6.26 1.94 0.23 0.29 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 42.76 Forest Disturbed by Man 0.18 0.00 1.34 0.48 1.10 162.90 8.77 38.39 0.00 11.00 3.92 2.20 0.80 11.08 17.94 1.16 2.10 3.80 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.11 271.27 Industrial Plantations 0.00 0.06 0.03 0.00 0.00 20.44 8.32 7.50 0.00 8.90 0.00 2.57 0.00 1.70 0.11 0.00 0.59 0.59 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.53 51.40 Nonwood Fibres 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 38.51 4.21 0.59 0.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.04 0.00 0.00 0.88 0.25 0.25 45.98 Recovered Fibres 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 21.68 1.05 0.90 0.21 38.07 0.00 7.48 0.00 0.27 0.00 0.00 0.15 0.14 0.05 0.86 0.15 0.23 71.24 Total 0.18 0.06 2.14 0.73 1.75 243.53 22.36 79.49 0.46 57.96 3.92 12.25 1.05 19.31 19.99 1.39 4.17 4.53 0.11 1.74 0.40 5.12 482.65.
Potential Fibre Availability 2010.
Future 1 1.18 0.02 4.12 2.06 31.38 7.73 0.91 0.53 5.33 1.27 0.49 0.11 0.72 2.95 0.83 0.43 0.69 0.84 1.87 0.05 0.00 13.08 0.68 0.33 0.89 0.86 79.38 Future 2 1.19 0.02 5.77 2.61 39.10 10.48 0.93 0.54 6.42 1.26 0.48 0.12 0.76 3.02 0.82 0.48 0.74 0.82 1.85 0.05 0.00 13.97 0.74 0.36 0.91 0.94 94.38 Future 3 1.22 0.02 4.89 2.49 41.17 8.22 0.89 0.61 6.27 1.28 0.50 0.12 0.76 3.02 0.85 0.45 0.73 0.85 1.89 0.06 0.00 13.75 0.70 0.34 0.91 0.90 92.87 Future 1 0.90 0.02 2.75 1.28 13.66 9.24 0.73 0.34 3.19 0.78 0.31 0.09 0.81 2.34 0.60 0.47 0.75 0.64 1.34 0.02 0.00 15.28 0.63 0.31 0.76 0.98 58.22.
Potential Fibre Availability 2050.
Future 2 0.80 0.02 2.10 1.04 10.35 8.30 0.57 0.26 2.49 0.46 0.17 0.08 0.98 1.75 0.39 0.70 0.98 0.45 0.86 0.00 0.00 19.56 0.82 0.38 0.79 1.32 55.62 Future 3 1.15 0.02 3.60 1.52 17.68 10.15 0.83 0.39 3.78 1.10 0.44 0.11 1.05 2.80 0.76 0.52 0.91 0.78 1.73 0.04 0.00 19.27 0.72 0.36 0.91 1.19 71.83 Country and Subregion Angola Botswana Cameroon Central African Republic Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Côte d'Ivoire Equatorial Guinea Gabon Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Liberia Madagascar Malawi Morocco Mozambique Nigeria Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Tanzania, United Republic Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Africa.
Future 1 0.07 0.21 2.36 0.77 1.43 303.32 56.81 111.03 1.07 105.70 3.92 27.14 0.94 21.09 17.56 1.24 4.90 5.28 0.35 3.35 0.23 6.90 675.65 Future 2 0.05 0.24 2.76 0.90 1.60 309.41 60.91 133.72 0.97 100.49 3.99 26.12 1.01 19.64 18.15 1.28 5.15 5.35 0.37 3.01 0.23 7.06 702.42 Future 3 0.08 0.22 2.58 0.85 1.66 311.44 58.13 123.33 1.18 117.10 3.85 29.95 1.04 22.40 18.91 1.32 4.97 5.62 0.37 3.68 0.58 7.10 716.36 Future 1 0.00 0.23 1.80 0.53 0.52 312.57 78.81 79.33 3.99 131.93 3.92 29.84 0.48 12.76 9.73 0.70 3.73 3.84 0.39 7.79 0.58 7.39 690.87.
Future 2 0.00 0.35 1.61 0.38 0.24 340.39 94.47 84.03 2.85 113.77 3.99 28.53 0.27 14.71 5.41 0.39 4.68 4.72 0.48 5.97 0.43 7.24 714.89 Future 3 0.03 0.25 2.04 0.69 0.89 363.61 89.98 103.80 5.50 166.34 3.85 41.10 0.73 18.59 14.90 1.03 4.98 5.47 0.43 10.53 0.86 9.28 844.92 Country and Subregion Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Darussalam Cambodia China (Mainland) India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of Japan Korea, DPR Korea, Republic of Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Sri Lanka Thailand Turkey Viet Nam Asia.
Country and Subregion Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Oceania Forest Undisturbed by Man 0.00 0.24 0.10 6.43 0.50 0.08 7.34 Forest Disturbed by Man 33.40 0.11 0.40 0.86 0.07 0.03 34.87 Industrial Plantations 7.01 0.10 14.43 0.00 0.00 0.00 21.54 Nonwood Fibres 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Recovered Fibres 2.76 0.00 0.29 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.06 Total 43.18 0.44 15.23 7.29 0.57 0.11 66.81.
Country and Subregion Russian Federation USSR, former area of Forest Undisturbed by Man 556.90 556.90 Forest Disturbed by Man 116.88 116.88 Industrial Plantations 0.00 0.00 Nonwood Fibres 0.00 0.00 Recovered Fibres 2.73 2.73 Total 676.51 676.51.
Country and Subregion Belize Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama North and Central America (excluding Canada and the United States of America) Forest Undisturbed by Man 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Forest Disturbed by Man 0.85 0.35 0.79 0.86 0.00 3.03 4.08 22.05 5.01 1.28 Industrial Plantations 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 Nonwood Fibres 0.00 0.00 0.27 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.76 0.00 0.00 Recovered Fibres 0.00 0.03 0.10 0.00 0.01 0.05 0.00 2.35 0.00 0.03 Total 0.85 0.37 1.16 0.86 0.01 3.07 4.08 25.16 5.04 1.30.
Future 1 47.30 0.87 21.01 8.22 0.66 0.12 78.18 Future 2 48.33 1.10 23.40 12.25 1.00 0.18 86.26 Future 3 47.72 0.97 21.62 10.71 0.86 0.16 82.03 Future 1 49.94 0.74 21.82 3.32 0.31 0.05 76.18.
Future 2 53.03 0.95 31.86 2.82 0.28 0.04 88.98 Future 3 52.39 0.83 24.42 3.94 0.34 0.86 82.78 Country and Subregion Australia Fiji New Zealand Papua New Guinea Solomon Islands Vanuatu Oceania.
Future 1 928.07 928.07 Future 2 1044.76 1044.76 Future 3 981.26 981.26 Future 1 1646.82 1646.82.
Future 2 1923.41 1923.41 Future 3 1702.49 1702.49 Country and Subregion Russian Federation USSR, former area of.
Future 1 0.81 0.26 1.04 0.69 0.01 2.32 2.94 23.32 3.65 0.98 Future 2 0.81 0.25 1.02 0.67 0.01 2.23 2.80 22.21 3.47 0.96 Future 3 0.81 0.27 1.05 0.70 0.02 2.41 3.09 24.43 3.86 1.00 Future 1 0.71 0.12 0.77 0.36 0.02 1.05 1.15 18.95 1.42 0.45.
Future 2 0.61 0.04 0.55 0.16 0.01 0.37 0.34 11.33 0.56 0.16 Future 3 0.78 0.22 0.95 0.57 0.03 1.88 2.31 27.56 2.87 0.83 Country and Subregion Belize Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama North and Central America (excluding Canada and the United States of America).
Country and Subregion Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela South America Grand Totals (excludes Europe, Canada and United States of America) Forest Undisturbed by Man 0.00 3.84 9.67 0.00 1.25 0.59 0.20 0.60 0.33 2.15 0.73 0.00 3.37 22.72 Forest Disturbed by Man 12.00 7.54 30.32 5.60 4.55 1.82 1.23 6.05 1.04 13.14 1.36 0.00 12.13 96.79 Industrial Plantations 2.30 0.00 36.58 14.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.45 0.00 53.78 Nonwood Fibres 0.33 0.00 0.55 0.00 0.53 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.85 0.00 0.00 0.44 2.70 Recovered Fibres 1.18 0.00 3.31 0.35 0.81 0.15 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.18 0.00 0.12 0.67 6.77 Total 15.81 11.38 80.42 20.40 7.14 2.57 1.44 6.65 1.36 16.32 2.10 0.57 16.62 182.76.
Future 1 24.12 13.35 96.95 26.16 7.34 2.29 1.92 7.27 1.04 18.92 2.67 2.36 15.62 220.01 Future 2 25.13 17.22 109.04 28.42 8.27 2.45 2.50 8.12 1.08 21.51 3.67 2.59 17.18 247.18 Future 3 24.98 14.85 103.91 26.83 8.11 2.55 1.98 7.67 1.20 20.23 3.03 2.45 16.98 234.78 Future 1 25.01 7.98 89.21 26.33 6.18 1.16 2.56 7.01 0.24 20.82 2.49 2.63 9.73 201.35.
Future 2 28.46 4.34 106.30 35.71 4.39 0.53 2.55 6.85 0.06 16.88 2.41 3.70 5.49 217.67 Future 3 28.26 14.39 105.20 29.61 7.80 1.80 2.57 7.11 0.77 24.87 2.57 2.94 15.09 242.99 Country and Subregion Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela South America Grand Totals (excludes Europe, Canada and United States of America).
Major definitions.
LAND CLASSIFICATION .................................................................................... AII.5.
1.1 T O TAL AREA ................................................................................ AII.5 1.1.1 Inland water ..................................................................................... AII.5 1.1.2 Land area ........................................................................................ AII.5 1.2 O T H ER LAND .............................................................................. AII.5 1.3 FOREST AND OTHER WOODED LAND ...................................... . . AII.5 1.3.1 Forest .............................................................................................. AII.5.
1.3.1.1 Natural forest ........................................................................................ AII.5 1.3.1.1.1 Forest undisturbed by man .......................................................... AII.6 1.3.1.1.2 Forest disturbed by man ............................................................... AII.6 1.3.1.2 Plantation(s) ......................................................................................... AII.6.
1.3.2.1 1.3.2.2.
Other wooded land ......................................................................... AII.6.
Other wooded land undisturbed by man ............................................. AII.7 Other wooded land disturbed by man ................................................. AII.7.
FOREST CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM ................................................................. AII.7.
CLASSES 2.1 C O U N T R Y CLAS S E S .................................................................... AII.7 2.1.1 Geographical location ..................................................................... AII.7 2.1.2 Forest type ...................................................................................... AII.7 2.1.3 Closed/open ................................................................................... AII.8.
2.1.3.1 2.1.3.2 Closed forest ........................................................................................ AII.8 Open forest .......................................................................................... AII.8.
2.2 SPECIES GROUPS ....................................................................... AII.8 2.2.1 Predominantly coniferous forest/other wooded land ...................... AII.8 2.2.2 Predominantly broadleaved forest/other wooded land ................... AII.8 2.2.3 Predominantly bamboos, palms, etc. ............................................. AII.9 2.2.4 Mixed forest/other wooded land ..................................................... AII.9.
FOREST FUNCTION .......................................................................................... AII.9.
AV SUPPLY 3.1 F O R E S T AV AILABLE FOR WOOD SUPPLY ................................. . . . AII.9 AV SUPPLY 3.2 F O R E S T NOT AV AILABLE FOR WOOD SUPPLY .......................... . . AII.9 3.2.1 Legal restrictions ............................................................................. AII.9 3.2.2 Economic restrictions ................................................................... AII.10.
3.2.2.1 3.2.2.2 3.2.2.3 Physical reasons (I) ............................................................................ AII.10 Transport distance/lack of infrastructure (II) ....................................... AII.10 Other (III) ............................................................................................ AII.10.
OWNERSHIP .................................................................................................. AII.10.
4.1 PUBLIC ....................................................................................... AII.10 4.1.1 State .............................................................................................. AII.10 4.1.2 Other public .................................................................................. AII.10 4.2 INDIGENOUS AND TRIBAL PEOPLES ....................................... . . AII.10 4.3 PRIVATE ...................................................................................... AII.11 4.3.1 Individuals ..................................................................................... AII.11 4.3.2 Other private institutions ................................................................ AII.11.
DEFORESTATION AND DEGRADATION ............................................................ AII.11.
5.1 5.2 DEFORESTATION ....................................................................... AII.11 D E G R A DAT I O N . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A I I . 1 2.
PLANTATION .................................................................................................. AII.12.
6.1 FOREST PLANTATIONS .............................................................. AII.12 PLANTA 6.1.1 Industrial forest plantations ........................................................... AII.12 6.1.2 Non-industrial plantations ............................................................. AII.12 6.1.3 Indigenous tree species ............................................................... AII.12 6.1.4 Introduced tree species ................................................................ AII.13 TREES OUTSIDE THE FOREST . . . . . . . ............................................ AII.13 6.2 6.3 PLANTATION AREA ..................................................................... AII.13 6.3.1 Reported area ............................................................................... AII.13 6.3.2 Net area ........................................................................................ AII.13.
FOREST VOLUME AND GROWTH ................................................................... AII.13.
7.1 BIOMASS .................................................................................... AII.13 7.1.1 Tree ............................................................................................... AII.14 7.1.2 Shrubs and bushes ....................................................................... AII.14 7.1.3 Woody biomass ............................................................................ AII.14 7.1.4 Above-stump woody biomass (tons/ha) ....................................... AII.14 7.1.5 Stumps and roots .......................................................................... AII.14 7.2 V O LUMES ................................................................................... AII.14 7.2.1 Growing stock (m3/ha) .................................................................. AII.14 7.2.2 Commercial growing stock (m3/ha) .............................................. AII.14 7.2.3 Reference diameter [cm] .............................................................. AII.14 7.3 GROWTH .................................................................................... AII.15 7.3.1 Gross annual increment (mean annual increment) (m3/ha) .......... AII.15 7.3.2 Natural losses (m3/ha) ................................................................... AII.15 7.3.3 Net annual increment (m3/ha) ....................................................... AII.15 7.4 AGE ............................................................................................ AII.15 7.4.1 Cutting cycle (years) ..................................................................... AII.15 7.4.2 Rotation age (years) ...................................................................... AII.15.
VOLUME AND BIOMASS CONVERSION .......................................................... AII.15.
8.1 8.2 GROWING STOCK CONVERSION . . . ............................................ AII.15 B I O M A S S CONVERSION ............................................................ AII.16.
FOREST UTILIZATION .................................................................................... AII.17.
9.1 9.2 A N N UAL FELLINGS (1 000 M3] .................................................... AII.17 U N R E C OVERED FELLINGS (HARVESTING RESIDUES) [ 1 000 M3] ................................................................................... AII.17 REMOV 9.3 A N N UAL REMOV A L S (1 000 M3) . . . . . . ............................................ AII.17 9.4 HARVESTING INTENSITY (M3/ H A ) . . . ............................................ AII.17 9.5 R O U N DWOOD (CONIFEROUS, NON-CONIFEROUS) ( 1 000 M3) ................................................................................... AII.18 9.5.1 Industrial roundwood (1 000 m3) ................................................... AII.18 9.5.2 Fuelwood and charcoal ................................................................ AII.19.
10. ALTERNATIVE FIBRES .................................................................................... AII.19.
10.1 N O N -WOO D FIBRES ................................................................... AII.19 10.1.1 Non-wood fibre usage rate ........................................................... AII.19 10.1.2 Historical non-wood fibre usage rate of change ........................... AII.19 10.1.3 Pulp for paper production ............................................................. AII.19 10.2 R E C OVERED FIBRES .................................................................. AII.19 10.2.1 Wastepaper recovery rate ............................................................. AII.19 10.2.2 Historical wastepaper recovery rate of change ............................. AII.19.
11. GFSS FUTURE PROJECTION TERMS .............................................................. AII.20.
11.1 FUTURES ................................................................................... AII.20 11.2 FACTORS ................................................................................... AII.20 11.2.1 Factors affecting natural forests .................................................... AII.20.
11.2.1.1 11.2.1.2 11.2.1.3 11.2.1.4 Land use (deforestation) .................................................................... AII.20 Land use (conservation) .................................................................... AII.20 Harvest efficiency ............................................................................... AII.20 Sustainable forest management ........................................................ AII.20 Land use (afforestation) ..................................................................... AII.21 Success rate ....................................................................................... AII.21 Research and Development gains ..................................................... AII.21 Non-wood fibre usage rate of change ............................................... AII.21 Non-wood fibre yield .......................................................................... AII.21 Wastepaper recovery rate of change ................................................. AII.21 Wastepaper recovery fibre yield ......................................................... AII.21.
Factors affecting industrial plantations .......................................... AII.21.
Factors affecting alternative fibres ................................................. AII.21.
BASE REFERENCE POINT ........................................................ . . AII.22 SUPPLY S TATIC SUPPLY LEVEL ................................................................ AII.22.
12. IUCN MANAGEMENT CATEGORIES ................................................................ AII.22.
MAJOR DEFINITIONS USED IN THE SUPPLY GLOBAL FIBRE SUPPLY STUDY (GFSS).
1.1 L A N D CLAS S I F I C AT I O N T O TA L AREA.
Total area of country, including area of inland water bodies. Excludes: offshore territorial waters.
1.1.1 Inland water.
Area occupied by major rivers, lakes and reservoirs.
1.1.2 Land area.
Total area, excluding inland water.
O T H E R LAND.
Land not classified as forest or other wooded land as they are defined in this study.
1 . 3 F O R E S T AND OTHER W O O D E D LAND 1.3.1 Forest.
Land with tree crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of more than 10 percent and area of more than 0.5 ha. The trees should be able to reach a minimum height of 5 m at maturity in situ. May consist either of closed forest formations where trees of various storeys and undergrowth cover a high proportion of the ground; or of open forest formations with a continuous vegetation cover in which tree crown cover exceeds 10 percent. Young natural stands and all plantations established for forestry purposes which have yet to reach a crown density of 10 percent or tree height of 5 m are included under forest, as are areas normally forming part of the forest area which are temporarily unstocked as a result of human intervention or natural causes but which are expected to revert to forest. Includes: forest nurseries and seed orchards that constitute an integral part of the forest; forest roads, cleared tracts, firebreaks and other small open areas within the forest; forest in national parks, nature reserves and other protected areas such as those of special environmental, scientific, historical, cultural or spiritual interest; windbreaks and shelterbelts of trees with an area of more than 0.5 ha and width of more than 20 m. Rubberwood.
plantations and cork oak stands are included. Excludes: land predominantly used for agricultural practices. It is worthwhile pointing out that the definition of forest used in the present study has a minimum vegetation cover requirement and is quite different from a legal definition of forest (i.e. an area proclaimed to be forest under a Forest Act or Ordinance).
Natural forest.
Forest which are not plantation(s). Natural forest can be:.
Forest undisturbed by man.
Forest which shows natural forest dynamics, such as natural tree composition, occurrence of dead wood, natural age structure and natural regeneration processes, the area of which is large enough to maintain its natural characteristics and where there has been no known significant human intervention or where the last significant human intervention was long enough ago to have allowed the natural species composition and processes to have become re-established.
Forest disturbed by man (or semi-natural forest).
Forest which is neither "forest undisturbed by man" nor "plantation" as defined separately.
Plantation(s).
Forest stands established by planting or/and seeding in the process of afforestation or reforestation. They are either: of introduced species (all planted stands), or intensively managed stands of indigenous species which meet all the following criteria: one or two species at plantation, even age class, regular spacing. Excludes: Stands which were established as plantations but which have been without intensive management for a significant period of time. These should be considered semi-natural.
1.3.2 Other wooded land.
Land either with a tree crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of 510 percent of trees able to reach a height of at least 5 m at maturity in situ; or crown cover (or equivalent stocking level) of more than 10 percent of trees not able to reach a height of 5 m at maturity in situ (e.g. dwarf or stunted trees) and shrub or bush cover. Excludes: areas having the tree, shrub or bush cover specified above but of less than 0.5 ha and width of 20 m, which are classed under "other land"; land predominantly used for agricultural practices.
Other wooded land undisturbed by man.
Other wooded land which shows natural forest dynamics, such as natural tree composition, occurrence of dead wood, natural age structure and natural regeneration processes, the area of which is large enough to maintain its natural characteristics and where there has been no known significant human intervention or where the last significant human intervention was long enough ago to have allowed the natural species composition and processes to have become re-established.
Other wooded land disturbed by man.
Other wooded land which is neither "other wooded land undisturbed by man" nor "plantation" as defined separately.
F O R E S T CLAS S I F I C AT I O N SYSTEM.
For the purpose of the present study it has been decided to use the country's own forest classes as much as possible. The advantage of this approach is that country experts can readily understand our data description and can readily evaluate our estimates. We also anticipate that many countries will continue to maintain their forest inventories using these classes, or at the very least some link to these classes. . Countries can classify forests by geographic location, by forest type, or some combinations of these elements. However, where no such classes were available, closed and open forest definitions as developed for the 1980 FAO Tropical Forest Resources Assessment were used. Examples of the classification systems used by the countries and in the GFSS are presented in 2.1, Country classes. Each forest class can also be further subdivided in species groups. The definitions of these groups are presented in 2.2, Species Groups.
C O U N T R Y CLAS S E S.
2.1.1 Geographical location.
Geographical systems usually refer to the location or the altitude where the forests occur (montane forest, lowland, etc.). An example for a geographical classification is Colombia. Publications that report forestry related data on a national level usually refer to Pacifico, Andina, Caribe, Orinoquia and Amazonia. Another example is the Republic of Congo, where data is reported according to the major geographical regions: North, Chaillu, Kouilou-Mayombe .
2.1.2 Forest type.
Forest type classification systems used by countries usually refer to the forest formation (high forest, shrubs), to the climatic or edaphic conditions under which the forest is growing, to the species composition, to the quality of the timber and to many other factors (harvesting status, etc.).
Examples for such types are: deciduous thornbush, evergreen bushland and thicket, rainforest, swamp forest, etc. Frequently other factors such as the logging status or the timber density and quality become used in the classes. A typical example for such a system is Malaysia, which uses, for example, mixed dipterocarp forest superior, good, medium, poor, and commercial forest superior, good, poor, etc. Frequently forest types are combined with geographical classes.
2.1.3 Closed/open.
2.1.3.1 Closed forest.
Closed forests are vegetation formations where trees occur in single or multiple stories with crowns interlocking, which, in conjunction with the undergrowth, cover a high proportion of the ground and consequently do not have a continuous dense grass layer at the ground level. They are either managed or unmanaged forests, primary or in advanced state of succession and may have been logged over one or more times, having kept their characteristics of forest stands, possibly with modified structure and composition.
Open forest.
Open forests are vegetation formations where trees occur with discontinuous, non-interlocking crowns, but with a crown coverage of at least 10 percent. Generally there is a continuous grass layer allowing grazing and spreading of fires. Examples are various form of "cerrado" and "chaco" in Latin America, tree and wooded savannas, and wooded lands in Africa, dry dipterocarp forests and "forêts claires" in Asia. The division between closed and open forests is more of ecological than of physiognomic nature, not characterized only by a crown cover percentage. A dense forest after logging may look as open forest from crown cover point of view alone; however, it cannot be classified as open forest unless there are some permanent changes in flora, fauna and soil condition due to repeated fire, grazing, etc., which keep the forest in a sub-climax stage.
S P E C I E S GROUPS.
2.2.1 Predominantly coniferous forest/other wooded land.
Forest land on which more than 75 percent of the tree crown cover consists of species classified botanically as Gymnospermae. They are sometimes referred to as "softwoods".
2.2.2 Predominantly broadleaved forest/other wooded land.
Forest land on which more than 75 percent of the tree crown cover consists of trees classified botanically as Angiospermae. They are sometimes referred to as "non-coniferous" or "hardwoods".
2.2.3 Predominantly bamboos, palms, etc.
Forest/other wooded land on which more than 75 percent of the crown cover consists of tree species other than coniferous or broadleaved species (e.g. tree-form members of the bamboo, palm, fern families).
2.2.4 Mixed forest/other wooded land.
Forest/other wooded land on which neither coniferous, nor broadleaved, nor palms, bamboos, etc., account for more than 75 percent of the tree crown area.
F O R E S T FUNCTION.
Forest function is defined with reference to the forest land capability to support land uses like nature conservation, soil and water protection, wood production, etc. For the present study two main classes are defined:.
AV 3 . 1 F O R E S T A V A I L A B L E FOR SUPPLY W O O D SUPPLY.
Forest where any legal, economic, or specific environmental restrictions (see 3.2.2) do not have a significant impact on the supply of wood Includes: areas where, although there are no such restrictions, harvesting is not taking place, for example areas included in long-term utilization plans or intentions.
AV 3 . 2 F O R E S T NOT A V A I L A B L E SUPPLY F O R WOOD SUPPLY.
Forest where legal or economic restrictions prevent any significant supply of wood. Includes :.
3.2.1 Legal restrictions.
Forest with legal restrictions or restrictions resulting from other political decisions, which totally exclude or severely limit wood supply, inter alia for reasons of environmental or biodiversity conservation, e.g. protection forest, national parks, nature reserves and other protected areas, such as those of special environmental, scientific, historical, cultural or spiritual interest. Area under IUCN management categories I or II is considered as protected from wood harvesting (for IUCN management categories see 12).
3.2.2 Economic restrictions.
Forest with economic restrictions due to environmental, physical or wood quality factors, e.g. environmental regulation on harvesting systems, steep terrain; terrain dominated by swamps and/or rocks interspersed with some commercial trees; deformed growth of individual trees; and fire, insect and/ or disease damaged forests. All restrictions other than legal restrictions can be summarized as economic restrictions. For the purpose of the GFSS, they are subdivided in three classes:.
Physical reasons (I).
Harvesting is economically unfeasible at the current wood price level because the terrain conditions require extraordinary equipment or time.
Transport distance/lack of infrastructure (II).
Remote forests where transport distance for logs or products is too high or where access is currently not provided. The situation can change if, for instance, the government or the industry invests in infrastructure.
Other (III).
E.g. low growing stock volume, wood quality too low, no commercial species.
Three classes of ownership are distinguished:.
Forest/other wooded land belonging to the state or other public bodies.
4.1.1 State.
Forest/other wooded land owned by national, state and regional governments, or by government-owned corporations; crown forest and other wooded land.
4.1.2 Other public.
Forest/other wooded land belonging to cities, municipalities, villages and communes. Includes: any publicly owned forest and other wooded land not classified as being "in state ownership".
4 . 2 I N D I G E N O U S AND TRIBAL PEOPLES.
Indigenous and tribal peoples in independent countries are defined as those who:.
(1) are regarded as indigenous on account of their descent from the populations which inhabited the country, or a geographical region to which the country belongs, at a time of conquest or colonization or the establishment of present state boundaries and who, irrespective of their legal status, retain some or all of their own social, economic, cultural and political institutions; (2) are tribal peoples whose social, cultural and economic conditions distinguish them from other sections of the national community, and whose status is regulated wholly or partly by their own customs or traditions or by special laws and regulations. For both categories (1) and (2) self-identification as indigenous or tribal shall be regarded as the fundamental criterion for determining the groups. (Source: ILO Convention No. 169 on "indigenous and tribal peoples"). For the purpose of the Global Fibre Supply Study this data is collected under "private ownership".
P R I VA T E.
Forest/other wooded land owned by individuals, families, cooperatives and corporations which may be engaged in agriculture or other occupations as well as forestry; private forest enterprises and industries; private corporations and other institutions (religious and educational institutions, pension and investment funds, nature conservation societies, etc.).
4.3.1 Individuals.
Forest and other wooded land owned by individuals or families, including those who have formed themselves into companies. Includes: individuals and families who combine forestry with agriculture (farm forests), those who live in or near their forest holdings, and those who live elsewhere (absentee owners).
4.3.2 Other private institutions.
Forest/other wooded land owned by private corporations, cooperatives or institutions (religious, educational, pension or investment funds, nature conservation societies, etc.).
D E F O R E S TA T I O N AND DEGR A DAT I O N 5.1 D E F O R E S TA T I O N.
Deforestation refers to change of land use with depletion of tree crown cover to less than 10 percent. Changes within the forest class (e.g. from closed to open forest) which negatively affect the stand or site and, in particular, lower the production capacity are termed forest degradation.
AII 1 1 AII.
D E G R A DAT I O N.
Forest degradation takes different forms, particularly in open formations, deriving mainly from human activities such as overgrazing, overexploitation (for firewood in particular), repeated fires, or due to attacks by insects, diseases, plant parasites or other natural sources such as cyclones. In most cases degradation does not show up so much as a decrease in the area of woody vegetation but rather as a gradual reduction of biomass, changes in species composition and soil degradation. The logging of forests for sawlogs and veneer logs without a proper management plan can contribute to degradation if the extraction of mature trees is not accompanied with their regeneration or if the use of heavy machinery causes soil compaction or loss of productive forest area.
P L A N TA T I O N PLANTA F O R E S T PLANTA T I O N S.
Forest stands established by planting or/and seeding in the process of afforestation or reforestation. They are either: of introduced species (all planted stands), or intensively managed stands of indigenous species which meet all the following criteria: one or two species at plantation, even-age class, regular spacing.
6.1.1 Industrial forest plantations.
Forest plantations grown mainly for the production of industrial roundwood (sawtimber, veneer, pulp, reconstituted wood). Note that industrial roundwood may also come from non-forest plantations and trees grown outside the forest.
6.1.2 Non-industrial plantations.
Planted trees established mainly for domestic use or for use in non-forest industries, including fuelwood and poles, non-wood forest products and for service functions such as protection. Non-industrial tree plantations are assumed not to make a significant contribution to industrial roundwood supplies and thus data referring to these plantations (where they can be identified) are not used as inputs to the GFSS.
6.1.3 Indigenous tree species.
Tree species which have evolved in the same area, region or biotope where the forest stand is growing and are adapted to the specific ecological conditions predominant at the time of the establishment of the stand. May also be termed native species or autochthonous species.
6.1.4 Introduced tree species.
Tree species occurring outside their natural vegetation zone, area or region. May also be termed non-indigenous species. Includes: Hybrids.
6 . 2 T R E E S OUTSIDE THE FOREST.
Trees on land other than forest or other wooded land. Includes: Trees on land that meets the definitions of forest and of other wooded land except that the area is less than 0.5 ha and the width is less than 20 m; scattered trees in permanent meadows and pastures; permanent tree crops such as fruit tree orchards and coconut palm plantations; trees in parks and gardens, around buildings, in hedgerows and in lines along streets, roads, railways, rivers, streams and canals; trees in shelterbelts and windbreaks of less than 20 m in width and 0.5 ha in area.
P L A N TA T I O N AREA.
6.3.1 Reported area.
The plantation area reported to be present, either by government, industry, or some outside source. Normally this refers to the area planted or planned, but does not take into account the area actually stocked.
6.3.2 Net area.
The reported area reduced by a factor to allow for plantation area losses due to failed plantation areas, fire, etc. In the absence of any specific information or opinion a default value of 0.7 reduction has been used (taken from FAO Forestry Paper #128).
VOLUME.
F O R E S T VOL U M E AND GROWTH 7.1 BIOMAS S.
7 . 1 . 1 Tr e e.
A woody perennial with a single main stem or, in the case of coppice, with several stems, having a more or less definite crown. Includes: bamboos, palms and other woody plants meeting the above criterion.
7.1.2 Shrubs and bushes.
Woody perennial plants, generally of more than 0.5 m and less than 5 m height, and often without a definite stem and crown.
AII 1 3 AII.
7.1.3 Woody biomass.
The mass of the woody parts (wood, bark, branches, twigs, stumps and roots) of trees, alive and dead, shrubs and bushes, measured to a minimum diameter of 0 mm (dbh). Includes: Above-stump woody biomass, and stumps and roots. Excludes: Foliage.
7.1.4 Above-stump woody biomass (tons/ha).
The mass of the woody part (stem, bark, branches, twigs) of trees, alive or dead, shrubs and bushes, excluding stumps and roots.
7.1.5 Stumps and roots.
Parts of the whole tree volume, which exclude the volume of the abovestump woody biomass. The height of the stump is taken to be that at which the tree would be cut under normal felling practices in that country or region. Excludes: Small roots.
V O LU M E S.
Living volume of standing trees, above-stump measured overbark to top. Includes all trees with diameter over a reported reference diameter (diameter at breast height, dbh). Excludes: branches.
7.2.2 Commercial growing stock ( m 3/ h a ).
Part of the growing stock, that consists of species considered as actually or potentially commercial under current (1995) market conditions, at the reported reference diameter (dbh). Can be identical to the growing stock, but can also be much smaller if only very few species are merchantable or greater if the forest available for supply consists of high volume stands only. Includes: species which are currently not exported, but potentially commercial having appropriate technological properties; species provided to the local market are included.
7.2.3 Reference diameter [cm].
Inventory diameter at breast height used for determining the growing stock and commercial growing stock. Volumes can be converted to different reference diameters, using conversion factors as presented in 8.1.
7.3.1 Gross annual increment (mean a n n u a l i n c r e m e n t ) ( m 3/ h a ).
Average annual volume of increment over the reference period of all trees, measured to a minimum diameter breast height (dbh) of 0 centimetres (cm).
Average annual losses to the growing stock during the given reference period, measured to a minimum diameter of 0 cm (dbh), due to mortality from causes other than cutting by man, e.g. natural mortality, diseases, insect attacks, fire, windthrow or other physical damage.
Average annual volume over the given reference period of gross increment less that of natural losses on all trees to a minimum diameter of 0 cm (dbh).
7.4.1 Cutting cycle (years).
The silvicultural/harvesting cycle chosen for the sustainable harvest of timber. It is dependent on management objectives for the forest.
7.4.2 Rotation age (years).
The planned number of years between the establishment or regeneration of a tree crop or stand and its final cutting at a specified stage of maturity.
V O L U M E AND BIOMAS S CONVERSION 8 . 1 G R O W I N G STOCK CONVERSION.
Where nationwide or local growing stock volumes are not available from the inventory database, or if volume data is reported only for a fraction of species (usually commercial species) special measures will be necessary to obtain standard cubic metre volume estimates. To obtain growing stock volumes for all dbh classes down to 10 cm dbh, use should be made of appropriate conversion tables. Volume conversion factors, dependent on given minimum limits can be found in the table, which was prepared from data given in the following sources: Brown, Sandra (1990): Volume expansion factors for tropical forests. Paper prepared for the FAO Tropical Forest Resources Assessment 1990 Project. University of Illinois, Department of Forestry, 9pp.
AII 1 5 AII.
Brown, Sandra (1997): Estimating biomass and biomass change of tropical forests: A Primer. FAO Forestry Paper No. 134, Rome. The equation used to convert total growing stock (m3/ha) from the reference diameter to the adjusted diameter of 10 cm was as follows: Total Growing Stock (Adjusted = Total Growing Stock * Volume Expansion Factor where the volume expansion factor was dependent upon forest type and diameter class, as indicated below. Undisturbed Forest ( C l o s e d ) Fo r e s t 1 1.2 1.5 2.2 Disturbed Forest ( C l o s e d ) Fo r e s t 1 2.1 2.5 4.1 Diameter Range If 10<d<20 If 25<d<30 If 35<d<40 If 45<d<50.
B I O M A S S CONVERSION.
To convert growing stock (m3/ha) to total forest biomass, the appropriate conversion factor is found using the equation postulated by Brown (1990). This equation is as follows.
Forest Wood To t a l Forest Biomass = Growing Stock (m3/ h a ) Wood Density 3 Factor ( t / m ) Biomass Expansion Fa c t o r.
where wood density is dependent on the region, as shown below: (Africa): (Latin America): (Asia): 0.58 t/m3 0.60 t/m3 0.57 t/m3.
and biomass expansion factor is:.
where {growing stock*wood density} < 190 t/ha or 1.74 where {growing stock*wood density} e 190 t/ha This equation provides the total forest biomass, a number which indicates the entire volume of leaf, branch, and stem of all trees and shrubs within the forest ecosystem.
e { 3.213-0,506*In(GrowingStock(m /ha)*WoodDensity(t/m ).
UTILIZATION F O R E S T UTILIZAT I O N.
9 . 1 A N N U A L FELLINGS ( 1 000 M 3 ).
Average annual standing volume of all trees, living or dead, measured over bark to a minimum diameter of 0 cm (dbh), that are felled during the given reference period, including the volume of trees or parts of trees that are not removed from the forest, other wooded land or other felling site. Includes: silvicultural and pre-commercial thinnings and cleanings left in the forests; and natural losses that are recovered (harvested).
9 . 2 U N R E C O V E R E D FELLINGS ( H A R V E S T I N G RESIDUES) ( 1 000 M 3 ).
Felling residuals, which are left in the forest after felling and not salvaged. Excludes: parts of the tree left in situ after felling, e.g. stumps and roots, and parts of the felled tree not recorded in the volume of fellings (see above). Normally the volume over bark.
REMOVALS 9 . 3 A N N U A L REMOV A L S 3 ( 1 000 M ).
Average annual volume of those fellings that are removed from the forest, other wooded land or other felling site during the given reference period. Includes: removals during the given reference period of trees felled during an earlier period and removal of trees killed or damaged by natural causes (natural losses), e.g. fire, windblow, insects and diseases.
9 . 4 H A R V E S T I N G INTENSITY ( M 3/ H A ).
Volume actually removed from the forest within one cutting cycle. This volume may include wood for industrial purposes (e.g. sawlogs, veneer logs, etc.) and for local domestic use (e.g. rural uses for construction). Use of wood for fuelwood will not be included in this category. May show a significant difference for disturbed and undisturbed forest.
AII 1 7 AII.
9 . 5 R O U N D W O O D (CONIFERO U S , NON-CONIFEROUS) ( 1 000 M 3).
Wood in the rough. Wood in its natural state as felled or otherwise harvested, with or without bark, round, split, roughly squared or in other form. It may also be impregnated or roughly shaped or pointed. It comprises all wood obtained from removals, i.e. the quantities removed from forests and from trees outside the forest, including wood recovered from natural, felling and logging losses during the period, calendar year or forest year. Commodities included are sawlogs and veneer logs, pulpwood, other industrial roundwood (including pitprops) and fuelwood. The FAO statistics include recorded volumes, as well as estimated unrecorded volumes.
9.5.1 Industrial roundwood ( 1 0 0 0 m 3).
The commodities included are: Sawlogs and veneer logs P ulpwood Other industrial roundwood (includes roundwood used for tanning, distillation, match blocks, gazogenes, poles, piling, posts, pitprops, etc.).
9.5.2 Fuelwood and charcoal.
Wood in the rough (from trunks and branches of trees) to be used as fuel for purposes such as cooking, heating or power production. Wood for charcoal, pit kilns and portable ovens is included.
A LT E R N AT I V E FIBRES.
Any fibre source that does not come directly from a tree. These fibre sources include:.
1 0 . 1 N O N -W O O D FIBRES.
Fibres that come from a non-wood species of plant. Non-woods include abaca (Manila hemp), bagasse, bamboo, corn stalk and sorghum, cotton fibre and stalks, Crotalaria (sun Hemp), esparto, flax straw, hemp, jute, kenaf core & bast, rags, reeds, rice straw, sisal and wheat straw. Nonwoods are scientifically defined as non-woody cellulosic plant materials from which papermaking fibres can be extracted. Most nonwoods are annual plants that develop full fibre potential in one growing season or less. Historically, paper was made almost exclusively from non-woods. Today, most non-woods are used in other industries, such as textiles. Other related terms are:.
Non-wood fibre usage rate.
The percentage of pulp for paper production that consists of non-wood fibres.
10.1.2 Historical non-wood fibre usage rate of change.
The annual percent change in the non-wood fibre usage rate. This is calculated by using the past five years worth of data on non-wood fibre usage and pulp for paper production. Not to be confused with the Nonwood Fibre Usage Rate of Change factor (Section 11.2.3.1).
Pulp for paper production.
The total production of pulp that is intended for paper or paperboard products.
1 0 . 2 R E C O V E R E D FIBRES.
Recovered fibre refers to any fibre that is recycled, or used more than once in the manufacture of paper or board products. A recovered fibre may be wood or non-wood in origin. It may be recovered more than once, although the accepted upper limit for recycling is about five times. A recovered fibre is not as strong as a virgin fibre, often possesses less flexibility, and is likely to split along the vertical axis. Most recovered fibre comes from recycled paper sources. Other related terms are:.
Wastepaper recovery rate.
The percent of overall paper and paperboard consumption that is recovered for recycling. This figure is not always related to the consumption of recycled products.
10.2.2 Historical wastepaper recovery rate of change.
The annual percent change in the wastepaper recovery rate. This is calculated by using the past seven years worth of data on wastepaper recovery and paper and paperboard consumption. Not to be confused with the Wastepaper Recovery Rate of Change factor (Section 11.2.3.3).
AII 1 9 AII.
1 1 . G F S M FUTURE PROJEC T I O N TERMS.
Quite a number of terms are used in constructing GFSS future potential supply curves. These include:.
11.1 FUTURES.
This term replaces other misleading or confusing terms such as scenario or outlook. In the context of the GFSM, futures refers to the different potential supply curves that we can construct by adjusting factors and projecting the results over the next half century. The GFSM will produce three such futures, labelled Future , Future , and Future .
11.2 FACTORS.
The variables that are included in the construction of future projections for each component. These variables are listed by component below.
11.2.1 forests.
Factors affecting natural.
11.2.1.1 Land use (deforestation).
The factor which controls the rate of deforestation caused by thinning or conversion of forests to a deforested state, i.e. a permanent crown cover of less than 10%.
11.2.1.2 Land use (conservation).
The factor which controls the amount of forested land with legal restrictions which totally exclude or severely limit wood production, inter alia for reasons of environmental and biodiversity conservation, e.g. national parks, nature reserves and other protected areas such as those of special environmental, scientific, historical, cultural or spiritual interest.
Harvest efficiency.
The factor which controls the efficiency with which timber is removed from the landscape and subsequently utilized. This affects both the amount of unrecovered fellings that one can expect in harvesting, and the yield that individual trees can provide due to better or worse harvesting techniques.
11.2.1.4 Sustainable forest management.
The factor which controls the impact of sustainable forest management programmes. The impacts of such programmes affect total fibre yield to change the harvest scheduling in the area available for wood supply. To express sustainable forest management in quantitative terms means changing the silvicultural/harvesting system which in turn means changing the cutting cycle or increasing the rotation age used for forest utilization. Using this approach gives the forest manager a greater ability to address.
forest management issues such as riparian zone management, wildlife corridors management, appropriate regeneration programmes, biodiversity and appropriate technology for tree harvesting.
11.2.2 Factors affecting industrial plantations.
11.2.2.1 Land use (afforestation).
The factor controlling the rate at which new plantation area is added to the overall reported area.
11.2.2.2 Success rate.
The factor which controls the plantation success rate, allowing for improvements in plantation establishment and management to be included in the model.
Research and Development gains.
R&D gains include improvement in the establishment success rate (i.e. fewer gaps to reduce yields), as well as increases in growth and yield arising from research (especially tree improvement but also establishment techniques, site amelioration, etc.), improved management, and from greater experience of staff and labour.
11.2.3 fibres.
Factors affecting alternative.
11.2.3.1 Non-wood fibre usage rate of change.
The factor which controls the change in percent of non-wood fibres used in the manufacture of pulp for paper. This allows for eventual increases or decreases in the percent used.
11.2.3.2 Non-wood fibre yield.
The factor which controls the yield of non-wood fibres from a hectare of land. Adjusting this factor allows us to model improvements in agricultural and harvesting practices.
11.2.3.3 Wastepaper recovery rate of change.
The factor which controls the change in percent recovery of wastepaper.
11.2.3.4 Wastepaper recovery fibre yield.
The factor which controls the amount of fibres that one can receive from a metric ton of wastepaper.
AII 2 1 AII.
1 1 . 3 B A S E REFERENCE POINT.
The calculated, agreed-upon 1995 figure in the GFSM database that is used as a starting point for all future calculations. Each component of a projected line is somehow constructed from the base reference point.
SUPPLY 1 1 . 4 S T A T I C SUPPLY LEVEL.
A "flat" projection of fibre supply that is extended into the future. The difference between this and the possible futures is that no factor is adjusted and no trends are included. All the future models are built off of this line. All of the factors listed above are held static at the 1995 level for the construction of the static supply level.
1 2 . I U C N MANAGEMENT C AT E G O R I E S.
[I] Wilderness Strict Nature Reserve / W ilderness Area: protected area managed mainly for science or wilderness protection These areas possess some outstanding ecosystems, features and/or species of flora and fauna of national scientific importance, or they are representative of particular natural areas. They often contain fragile ecosystems or life forms, areas of important biological or geological diversity, or areas of particular importance to the conservation of genetic resources. Public access is generally not permitted. Natural processes are allowed to take place in the absence of any direct human interference, tourism and recreation. Ecological processes may include natural acts that alter the ecological system or physiographic features, such as naturally occurring fires, natural succession, insect or disease outbreaks, storms, earthquakes and the like, but necessarily excluding man-induced disturbances. [II] Park: N a t i o n a l Park: protected area managed mainly for ecosystem protection and recreation National parks are relatively large areas, which contain representative samples of major natural regions, features or scenery, where plant and animal species, geomorphological sites and habitats are of special scientific, educational and recreational interest. The area is managed and developed so as to sustain recreation and educational activities on a controlled basis. The area and visitors' use are managed at a level which maintains the area in a natural or semi-natural state. [III] Natural Monument: protected area managed mainly for conservation of specific natural features This category normally contains one or more natural features of outstanding national interest being protected because of their uniqueness or rarity. Size is not of great importance. The areas should be managed to remain relatively free of human disturbance, although they may have recreational and touristic value.
[ I V ] Habitat/Species Management Area: protected area managed mainly for conservation through management intervention The areas covered may consist of nesting areas of colonial bird species, marshes or lakes, estuaries, forest or grassland habitats, or fish spawning or seagrass feeding beds for marine animals. The production of harvestable renewable resources may play a secondary role in the management of the area. The area may require habitat manipulation (mowing, sheep or cattle grazing, etc.). [V] Protected Landscape/Seascape: protected area managed mainly for landscape/seascape conservation and recreation The diversity of areas falling into this category is very large. They include those whose landscapes possess special aesthetic qualities which are a result of the interaction of man and land or water, traditional practices associated with agriculture, grazing and fishing being dominant; and those that are primarily natural areas, such as coastline, lake or river shores, hilly or mountainous terrains, managed intensively by man for recreation and tourism. [VI Managed Resource Protected Area: protected area managed mainly for the sustainable use of natural ecosystems. Normally covers extensive and relatively isolated and uninhabited areas having difficult access, or regions that are relatively sparsely populated but are under considerable pressure for colonization or greater utilization.
AII 2 3 AII.
