<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
This document contains guidelines for planners in inland and small water body fisheries on the type of information they need to ensure that gender issues are taken note of in fisheries planning. How to obtain this information is also indicated.
Draft guidelines on the subject were prepared by ALCOM in 1992 on the basis of a review of available materials and documented experiences, mainly in Eastern and Southern Africa. These guidelines were reviewed and refined at a workshop held in Zimbabwe in January 1993, which was attended by specialists from the SADC region, ALCOM staff and consultants. The guidelines contained in this book represent the consensus of participants at the workshop.
The guidelines will be useful in the SADC (Southern African Development Community) region, and elsewhere, for sectoral planning, project formulation, evaluation and monitoring concerning gender issues in fisheries. Comments and feedback are invited.
The document has been made possible by collaboration between ALCOM and a project funded by Japan: "Enhancement of the role of women in inland fisheries and aquaculture development" (GCP/RAF/273/JPN).
ALCOM (Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme) is a regional aquaculture and fisheries programme of the FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). Based in Harare, Zimbabwe, it covers the member countries of SADC -- Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
ALCOM is funded by Sweden and Belgium. Its preparatory phase began in October 1986, and its first implementation phase in October 1990.
ALCOM Address:
Mail:
P.O. Box 3730, Harare, Zimbabwe
Telex:
260 40 FAO ZW
Tel.:
Fax:
E-mail:
ALCOMC@mango.apc.org
<title>Meeting information needs on gender issues in inland and small water body fisheries</title>
<section>1</section>
Abstract
Abstract
What kind of information do planners in inland and small water body fisheries need to ensure that gender issues are taken care of in their planning? How can such information be collected? This document contains guidelines concerning both questions. The guidelines cover four areas: information needed for sector planning and project formulation at the macro-level; information required at the micro-level (which will be helpful for development interventions in local communities); monitoring and evaluation; and incorporation of gender issues in socio-economic data collection.
These guidelines are contained in four chapters. A more comprehensive set of information needs is found in tabular form in the two Appendices. These detail sources and methods of collecting the needed information, and the uses to which this information can be put.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Draft guidelines were prepared and then discussed and elaborated upon by participants at a regional meeting of experts held in Zimbabwe during 19-22 January 1993. Besides the authors, the following people attended the meeting:
Mr Arne Andreasson, Programme Director, ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Hope Chigudu, Vice Chairperson, Zimbabwe Women's Resources Centre, Harare, Zimbabwe; Mr Steve Donda, Fisheries Economist, Salima, Malawi; Ms Elin Ersdal, Socio-economist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Elizabeth Harrison, Research Fellow Anthropology, University of Sussex, U.K.; Ms Tilleke Kiewied, Advisor Gender Planning Section, Mansa, Zambia; Mr Kees Leendertse, Fisheries Planning Analyst (APO), FAO, Rome, Italy; Ms Rita O. J. Maly, Aquaculturist, Kunduchi Fisheries Institute, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Mr Burton A. S. Mwamoto, Fisheries-economist (Local Consultant), FAO, Bukoba, Tanzania; Mr Saidi Swedi Mwikongi, Programme Officer, TFNC, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Mr Henrik Nilsson, Socio-economist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Synve Fosse Opsahl, Nutritionist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms J. van der Mheen-Sluijer, Consultant Socio-economist, ALCOM; Mr Uwe Tietze, Fishery Industry Officer, FAO,
Rome, Italy.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1. Introduction
Discussion of gender issues in inland and small water body fisheries has led to little change in sectoral planning on the subject or in the formulation of projects or strategies to tackle the issues. This is mainly because little information is available on gender issues; further planners are not certain where or how to obtain such information. The guidelines given in this report address these needs; they discuss the information which is required and the methods to acquire it in order to incorporate gender issues into mainstream inland fisheries development planning and project formulation. 'Rough based primarily on experiences in Eastern and Southern Africa, they are intended for wider application in Africa.
The guidelines are meant for use by inland fisheries planners. As gender is a cross-disciplinary issue, these guidelines encompass many general aspects of inland fisheries and small water body development. For those already involved in the sector, many of the issues raised may seem obvious. The purpose of the guidelines is therefore to present these issues from a gender perspective and ensure that information or data collected does not ignore these important considerations. They therefore assume that the user has a basic understanding of the inland fisheries sector. For fisheries planning, they should complement the FAO "Women in Fisheries" guidelines published in 1989.
The main text of the guidelines is divided into the following four sections:
(1) Information required at the macro-level. This section identifies and details key questions on gender issues which should be answered during sectoral planning and project formulation (macro-level).
(2) Information required for inland and small water bodies fisheries at the micro-level. This section identifies and elaborates on key questions which should be answered for development interventions in specific areas or communities.
(3) Monitoring and evaluation.
(4) Suggestions for incorporating gender issues in socio-economic data collection.
The main text (Chapters 2 to 5) focuses on key information needs related to gender in inland fisheries. Users should consider selecting those issues which are most relevant to their needs. Appendices 1 and 2 contain more detailed lists of all the information required at the macro and micro level and ways in which this information can be collected and used in planning and project formulation.
The guidelines are structured in such a way that they introduce key issues concerning gender in inland fisheries to those less familiar with such issues. Having read these chapters, the user should then proceed to the Appendices for more detailed information.
For those familiar with gender issues, the user can proceed directly to the Appendices and only refer to the main text if a particular topic requires some clarification.
Broadly speaking, macro-level guidelines are intended for sectoral planners and as a first step in project formulation. Micro-level guidelines are intended for project formulation, monitoring and evaluation. However, users should refer to both levels when carrying out a specific task, because many issues manifest themselves at both levels.
Users interested in setting up monitoring and evaluation systems may read Chapter 5 and then refer to the matrices presented in Appendices I and 2 for ideas on useful indicators.
The guidelines assume that users have some basic training in the application of socio-economic methodologies. Users interested in the application of such methodologies to collect gender-specific information are referred to Chapter 5. It presents general information on how to overcome problems associated with official statistics and field work and how to aggregate information once it has been collected.
<section>4</section>
2. Guidelines on gender information for sectoral planning and project formulation: macro-level
Development policies and programmes/projects for fisheries/aquaculture on gender issues
Institutional capacities
Sectoral characteristics
Demographic characteristics
Health and nutrition characteristics
Legal status of women
Credit availability
Extension services structure and training
Biological and technical research
2. Guidelines on gender information for sectoral planning and project formulation: macro-level
Although the need for socio-economic information for inland fisheries planning and project formulation has gained recognition in the recent past, these data have not been included in conventional information collection systems in the fisheries administration of many countries. Neither has there been much consideration for developing operational and systematic approaches or strategies to consider gender concerns. For integration of gender issues into fisheries planning, the starting point is better awareness of gender issues. Such awareness has to come through data.
This section highlights key issues which provide an entry point for planners in analyzing and incorporating gender-related socio-economic issues at the macro-level, including information for sectoral planning and project formulation.
There are several actions that a government department of fisheries or a project could undertake to address gender issues. The areas of action vary from the structure of their own organization, their policies and working methods, to staff training. The effects of actions which do not take gender aspects into account as well as recommendations for courses of action to remedy this situation are discussed in more detail below.
Development policies and programmes/projects for fisheries/aquaculture on gender issues
Key questions: What are the existing national/donor policies and objectives in support of gender issues in inland fisheries? What strategies and programmes in support of gender issues have been undertaken? What are their achievements and constraints which need to be addressed?
Knowing existing government and donor policies and objectives on inland fisheries and on gender issues is the first step in sectoral planning. This provides the basis for future development interventions. Past activities and current programmes in support of gender issues should be reviewed to establish the actions taken to meet national and donor objectives and the level of commitment to meeting these objectives.
Another area of consideration is budgetary allocation to gender issues by the national government and by donors. Special budget allocations for gender issues show a general commitment to implement policies. However, one must be aware that money allocated to gender issues does not necessarily represent actual activities implemented at the practical level on gender issues, unless specified.
Institutional capacities
Key questions: What gender expertise is available within institutions? Which institutions are suitable for cooperation/collaboration on gender issues? Do the relevant institutions require assistance in gender skills?
Gender awareness, and competency in gender analysis in existing institutions, provide the starting point for the development and implementation of gender-sensitive programmes. In some countries, activities related to gender issues arc administered by other ministries (Ministry of Women Affairs, Ministry of Community Development and Social Welfare etc.) with which fisheries staff rarely have contact. Consequently, fisheries officers often have limited access to general socio-economic information and gender-specific information in particular; moreover, when available they find it difficult to incorporate this information in sector and project planning.
One approach is to identify and collaborate with relevant institutions competent in collation, collection and analysis of gender-related information during sector planning and project formulation and for monitoring and evaluation. Where competency in gender analysis is weak or non-existent, another approach would be to strengthen skills in gender analysis by training.
Sectoral characteristics
Key questions: Who and how many men and women are engaged in the fisheries sub-sectors (harvesting, processing, marketing, ancillary activities)? How do men and women benefit from these activities? What changes in the sector are likely to affect men and women, and in what way?
The resource base in capture fisheries is not visible and therefore difficult to quantify. In addition, there are complex variables affecting fish stocks: mobility, seasonality, water quality, currents, weather changes, downstream impact of farming, tourism, industry etc. Thus fisheries activities often involve risks and uncertainties which are beyond the control of those directly involved in the sector.
The fishery system is a dynamic system. It is composed of the catching, processing, marketing and ancillary sub-sectors which inter-relate with each other. It includes men and women engaged in catching, processing, marketing and supporting activities (e.g. catering food and services for fishermen and traders, boat builders, gear suppliers). The motivations and aspirations, knowledge and experiences of these people may differ by age, gender, ethnicity, religion and marital status.
Changes in the inter-relationships between catching, processing, marketing and ancillary subsectors inevitably produce a gender impact. This should be taken into account when management strategic.% or development plans are formulated. Motorization of fishing vessels can increase the quantity of fish caught; large-scale processors, often men, are likely to benefit more from the higher catches since they have access to larger amounts of working capital, and enjoy economics of scale. Changes in species composition and sizes of fish may benefit or disadvantage certain types of processors and traders. Alternatively, the number of small-scale processors might increase, depending on the structure of the catching and processing sub-sectors. The introduction of selective fishing gears may reduce the landings of smaller-sized fish which arc preferred by small-scale women processors and small-scale women traders.
^1 Institutions include governments, research, training and educational institutions, universities and NGOs.
Demographic characteristics
Key questions: How does population growth and density affect resources and its users? How do demographic characteristics affect male and female labour availability in fisheries? What is the dependency ratio for rural and urban areas?
Population growth and density will affect pressure on existing resources and the distribution of limited resources amongst existing and potential users.
In addition, population movements into and out of an area change household composition and the type of households in the area. For example, an increase in the number of female-headed households may mean this group needs special development intervention. The occurrence of female-headed households might also affect gender relationships in decision making and division of labour. However, care should be taken in assuming that female-headed households are a homogeneous group and are all resource-poor.
Health and nutrition characteristics
Key questions: Which areas have a relatively low nutritional and health status? What are the main problems? Who is affected? Will fish help improve the nutritional status of an area?
Improving the nutritional well-being of the population is often an important objective of fisheries development. If the nutritional status of the rural population is generally low, and particularly if there is a shortage of animal protein, an increase in fish supply for local consumption should be considered. Women should be involved in the planning and implementation of projects aimed at improvement of health and nutritional status since they are usually primarily responsible for the nutritional welfare of the family.
Anthropometric measurements such as weight for height and weight for age are general indicators of the symptoms of malnutrition. These require to be analyzed in combination with other related socioeconomic indicators, in order to identify the causes of malnutrition. 'Me gender-disaggregated measurement can be used, whenever available, to identify the relative well-being of men and women. During pregnancy and lactation, women need to eat well. In fish eating areas where the birth weight is low and infant mortality rate is increasing or higher than in other areas, special attention may be needed to augment fish consumption by women. Toward this end, special investigations will be required which clarify the types of fish preferred and allowed to be eaten by women and the intrahousehold distribution of fish.
Legal status of women
Key questions: Can men and women own AND/OR inherit productive resources?
Inheritance law and property ownership rights have gender implications. For example, if women lose their smoking kiln upon the death of their husband because they cannot own property, they may not be encouraged to invest time and/or money in these developments.
Credit availability
Key questions: Do men and women enjoy equal de facto access to institutional credit? Are credit programmes and lending procedures suitable for both men and women? Are there sources of credit which are more suited to either men or women? How can banks and other financial institutions be assisted to cater better to credit requirements of men and women?
Fisheries credit institutions often finance the introduction of new technologies, such as outboard engines, boats and gears. Institutional loans are seldom available for processors and traders or for the introduction of improved processing equipment. Banker-, are rarely convinced by either the needs or the creditworthiness of women in fisheries.
Experiences in field projects show the potential for integrating a specific credit package for women into the banks' lending policies. For example, women entrepreneurs in Kigoma, Tanzania, who received credit for fish processing activities, demonstrated a high economic return on their activities. The scheme was successful because lending policies and repayment schedules were tailored to women's seasonal work schedules and earning capacities. Credit facilities were combined with the production of seedlings for planting of trees, training on energy-saving processing techniques and other community development activities.
There are also a number of other inhibiting factors which prevent women from obtaining credit such as low literacy levels, lack of collateral, and lack of guarantee of a regular salary. As a result, although conditions may be equal for both men and women, women find it more difficult to meet these conditions.
Extension services structure and training
Key questions: What is the number of persons working in the extension service, by position and by sex? Is the extension staff competent and motivated to integrate gender issues into extension work? Are they developing and implementing extension methodologies which are gender sensitive? Are there barriers to the entry of "men in vocational training and higher education? Do the curricula of training institutions incorporate gender issues?
There are few female extension personnel at any level in most extension services. It is male personnel who are the decision makers and arc in a position to affect programmes and policies. The few female extensionists that do exist (3% in Africa) are usually found in the junior ranks because of their lower educational level.
Education is not the only constraint to incorporating women in the extension service. It has been difficult to motivate women to take up field jobs because they might conflict with their household duties.
One remedial approach is to utilize more women trainers in on-going training programmes. They can serve as an example and attract other women to the extension service. At the same time, the ongoing training programmes should be evaluated to determine their accessibility to women (e.g. whether there are structures which cater for both men and women, child care facilities, etc).
Once appointed, women should be given equal opportunities as men to carry out extension and to go on study tours, thus receiving informal on-the-job training. If female extension agents arc marginalized, they will become less professionally competent than their male colleagues so that it becomes increasingly difficult for them to contribute to the extension service, and a vicious circle will operate.
Since there are usually few vacancies within extension services, the recruitment of additional female field workers is not always possible. Nor is it a guarantee that gender issues will be considered. Therefore, another and perhaps more practical approach is to utilize existing male extension agents as much as possible. Although conventional belief is that women prefer advice from female extension agents, experience in agriculture and aquaculture extension has shown that the sex of the extension agent is not necessarily a critical issue in reaching women. Good communication skills and sound technical knowledge are more important.
In some countries, fishery extension focuses primarily on enforcing fisheries regulations and collecting taxes and levies from processors and traders. In other countries, fisheries officers concentrate on the collecting of catch and landing statistics. Thus in many cases extensionists play dual and contradictory roles as both controllers and advisors. This has led to a negligence of the advisory functions of the extension staff and the overlooking of socio-economic inter-relationships between production chains.
The training of fisheries officers and extension agents mainly concentrates on technical and biological aspects. Therefore, extension agents should be trained in extension methods which can effectively reach men and women.
Biological and technical research
Key questions: How relevant is existing research and development (R & D) to the needs of men and women in inland fisheries? How do men and women benefit from the research results? Are there disadvantages? If so, who are affected?
Fisheries research has tended to concentrate on biology (the resource base) and technology (harvesting and processing, for example). More attention must be paid to ensuring that new innovations arc useful to both men and women. Experiences show that when attention is given to the specific needs of men and women, the introduction of improved technology becomes more effective. For example, when the Ivory Coast fish smoking kiln was introduced in Malawi, the design was modified to enable easy reconstruction so that women processors could move their processing sites to accompany fishermen. This made the technology feasible for women fish processors and adoption was therefore easier.
<section>5</section>
3. Guidelines on gender information for sectoral planning and project formulation - the micro level
Introduction
Catching
Processing
Marketing
Ancillary activities
Migration
Activity profile
Access to and control over fisheries-related resources
Socio-cultural factors affecting adoption of new technologies
Community organizations
Conflicts
Access to and quality of extension services
Household decision-making
3. Guidelines on gender information for sectoral planning and project formulation - the micro level
Introduction
At the micro-Ievel, the inland fisheries sectors can be arranged into community and household levels. When formulating plans and/or projects for specific areas, information is needed for both levels. The key issues regarding gender which need to be taken into account at this stage, arc examined in the following sections.
There are many factors at the community level which influence men's and women's activities and their access to and control over resources: the general economic conditions, the nature of government bureaucracies, socio-cultural factors, familial norms and religious beliefs, legal parameters, training and education. Most factors will not he amenable to change by a project. Therefore, an assessment should be, made on whether and how these factors will affect or can be affected by a project.
Generally speaking, activities should focus on the community as a whole, with equal importance accorded to addressing the differing needs of men and women. Special women's projects should be the exception rather than the rule, in order to avoid the isolation and marginalisation of women. Equally important is to tackle the weaknesses in gender-sensitivity within existing institutions and services. Only in cases where a high degree of sexual segregation and separation of productive roles exists or there is a clear case of positive discrimination in a local community, will such components he necessary.
A community is made up of different types of households. However, a "household" is not a homogeneous undifferentiated grouping of people with a production and consumption function, i.e. with shared and equal access to resources for production and benefits from it. In many cases, individual household members may have different production priorities.
The relative bargaining power of the two sexes within the household will influence the allocation of productive resources as much as purely economic considerations do.
The inland fisheries sector is divided into a number of sub-sectors. These include fishing, processing and trading, plus ancillary activities such as net mending, crew accommodation, fuelwood collection etc. Often, these activities are not mutually exclusive and a certain amount of vertical integration exists. Although both men and women take part in most fisheries-related activities, some patterns do emerge in inland fisheries in southern and eastern Africa. Men tend to be harvesters, processors for particular high-value species and traders to distant or cross border markets. In permanent settlements, women tend to be processors and small-scale traders serving local markets.
Women are also more likely to be involved in ancillary activities. However, the smaller and less specialised the fishery, the less likelihood there is of any significant ancillary activities. This differentiation of roles between men and women has emerged largely because of the reproductive activities of women, which by necessity keep them close to their homes. In some areas (e.g. Lake Mweru) there is a socio-cultural stigma attached to women travelling long distances by themselves, This, combined with their lack of access to sufficient working capital to run a large scale operation also strengthen differentiation of roles. There are obviously exceptions to the rule. Women can be large-scale processors and traders. They can own and control fishing units. The planner has to be aware that the common sexual division of labour between the catching, processing and trading subsectors may not necessarily apply in a particular fishery; and that changes in one fisheries sub-sector
will inevitably influence the others.
Catching
Key issues: What are the socio-economic characteristics of craft and gear owners and fisherfolk (by types of craft gear and targeted species)? Are there any conflicts between different groups of participants in the fishery? Are these gender-related? Are there differences between men and women who invest in fishing?
Numbers and types of fishing units (boats, traps, hook and line) provide a general picture of the local fishery. This is essential information for fishery management purposes and care must be taken not to exclude units that would appear to have little impact - such as hook and line or traps. In small water bodies, especially, these units might have a significant impact on fish stocks.
Associated with the type of unit are the socio-economic characteristics of owners and operators. In smaller fisheries, owners also tend to be operators, while in larger, more commercial fisheries, these two roles may be distinct. There may be a number of owners within one catching unit - a boat owner, a net owner and an engine owner. Each of these owners would have some right to the catch in predetermined proportions. Care should be taken to understand the socio-economic characteristics of owners, to differentiate between male and female owners in order to determine the conditions under which a woman or a man is able to become an owner.
While women are usually not allowed to fish from boats because that is supposed to bring bad luck, they can and do become boat/net/engine owners if they have the resources. In some lucrative fisheries, women function as absentee owners -- and their socio-economic characteristics should be known, particularly in situations where women are targeted as a homogeneous group. This is because the differences between women who own assets and those who do not may be substantive. This may have its impact on the processing and trading sub-sectors where access to fish is significantly different for men and women.
Likewise, understanding the socio-economic characteristics of fisherfolk other than boatowners (e.g. crew members, net users, owners of equipment) is important too, in order to understand the implications of changes in catch on the reciprocal arrangements that may exist between husbands and wives, or men and women, and to identify areas of potential conflict. Other such areas of conflict are between different gear users and different types of units targeting the same fish species.
Whether the catching unit is motivated primarily by cash or consumption is an important consideration. Often, units that are interested only in consumption are owned or controlled by women and may be less 'visible'. For instance, hook and line fishing in small water bodies is geographically dispersed and difficult to keep track of, so that they are often ignored by planners.
Processing
Key questions: Are the different types of processing (technology, species, scale, etc.) dominated by men or women? What are the socio-economic characteristics of processors (men/women, age, experiences, residence status)? Are there any reciprocal arrangements (supply of fish/credit) with fish catchers which are gender related? Does labour mobility affect male and female processors differently? Are there situations in which women or men are not remunerated for their labour inputs? Who are most affected by fuelwood shortages?
Types of processing are often gender-differentiated and often related to such factors as access to fish, new technologies, and credit. In a fishery characterised by migrant fishing units, harvesting, processing and trading activities are likely to be integrated; women are less likely to be involved in the processing and marketing of fish, as their reproductive and agriculture activities make it difficult for them to accompany migrant fishermen.
The development of a high-value fishery also has different implications on men and women processors because of gender differences in labour mobility. When fish processing resulting in a highvalue product becomes an economically important activity at a certain location, it often attracts men from other economic activities, as they are more mobile and can more easily switch from one economic activity to the other. For example, when salt-dried Nile perch became popular in areas close to Lake Victoria, many fishermen switched to Nile perch processing. As salt drying needed higher capital costs (for salt, brining tanks, drying racks and storage) and demanded more physical strength, women processors could not take to the new activities as quickly as men. Moreover, the Nile perch fishery led to reduced landings of other fish species traditionally processed by women in some areas, such as tilapia and Haplochromis spp
Reciprocal supply arrangements between harvesters and processors are common, but the assumption that a woman processor will he supplied by her husband (if he catches fish) is not necessarily correct. Often, reciprocal arrangements exist with outsiders; consequently a wife may not have any access to her husband's fish and has to develop her own arrangements.
In some fisheries, cleaning and gutting of fish are considered to be part of woman's household duties, and she does not get paid for this work. In this case, development interventions which increase catches on a local scale may have a negative effect on women.
Fuelwood shortages also affect domestic fuelwood use; they can raise prices and increase the distances women and children have to go to fetch fuelwood.
Marketing
Key questions: What are the socio-economic characteristics of traders? Is there any differentiation between male and female traders (location, species traded types of market, ease of entry and exit)?
Many fish traders are linked to fish catching and processing households, and either live in the community or visit it regularly. Although fish trading is often a highly profitable enterprise, large-scale operations require large amounts of working capital for purchase and transport of fish. In some fisheries, fish trading is dominated by women; in others, by men. Who participates in marketing depends on the location and the type of the market as well as on the scale of operation. In general, the majority of women traders focus on local markets and on low-value fish with a fairly small scale of operation. They may also combine this activity with fish processing. The reason many women fish traders concentrate on local markets is that their domestic duties make it difficult for them to travel long distances; further, their limited access to credit (formal and informal) inhibits the scale of their operation. However, there are exceptions. Some women do engage in large-scale fish
trading to distant markets. An example is the women who trade in fresh water sardines in Zaire and Zambia. Finding out who these people are is important to understanding whether other men and women can also enter the trade.
In many inland fisheries, the high-value fish trade is dominated by men (e.g. Lake Mweru, Lake Victoria). As this fish trade often deals with fresh or frozen fish, it is relatively capital-intensive, relying on ice and refrigerated transport. In many migrant fisheries, male fishermen become processors and sometimes, traders. In small water body fisheries in southern Africa, the majority of the fish traders are men; they are also fish catchers. For example, in Zimbabwe, fishermen are licensed to fish a number of dams and therefore have to travel from dam to dam where they catch, process and sell their Fish.
Some traders combine their fish trading activities with other trading activities. This practice is more common with female traders than male traders perhaps because the economic activities of women tend to be on a smaller scale and more diversified. In Lake Malombe, Malawi, women fish traders also trade in flour and fruits for the hinterland markets. These trader.% concentrate more on non-fishery products during closed seasons. In Lake Mweru, Zambia, many women travel to urban markets. They trade in dried fish, also buy and sell lamps, paraffin and other domestic goods.
Ancillary activities
Key questions: What types of ancillary activities are there? What are the socio-economic characteristics of those involved? How will changes in the harvesting/processing/marketing subsector affect these activities?
Ancillary industries vary from fishery to fishery and include net mending, provision of crew lodging, informal credit, food for fishermen, charcoal burning, fuelwood collection and boat repair. Women take part in many of these activities either full time or part time. These activities can represent an important source of income.
It is important to identify all these activities in order to determine the linkages between them and the effect that changes in the fishery sector may have on them. For example, more fuel-efficient technologies may have a negative impact on the incomes of fuelwood collectors.
Migration
Key questions: What are the different types of migration among rural/fisherfolk populations? How does it affect the roles of men and women in migrant households and communities? How does the practice of migration affect the supply of fish for men and for "men?
Migration among rural populations is related to the seasonal movement of fish, climatic conditions, changes in fish prices and changes in other economic activities. Migration can be temporary or permanent, regular or irregular. Temporary migrant settlements usually comprise migrant Fishermen and sometimes, their families. In many cases, there is a high degree of geographical mobility into and out of the settlement and many economic activities are of a transient nature. Along lakeshores, such settlements may be geographically isolated with little or no community services such as on the Zairean side of Lake Tanganyika and Lake Mweru, in Zambia. Permanent settlements are affected by increasing population, in addition to permanent or temporary migration into and out of their communities.
Migration into or out of a community affects activities, division of labour, and access to or control over resources in the community and in the households. A population influx into a community, triggered by a boom in fisheries, may create income-earning opportunities for both men and women. In fishing villages in Zambia, a number of economic activities such as processing maize flour for sale, food catering and housing and accommodation have been generated by the migration of fishermen and traders.
Migration can also lead to fewer benefits from the fishery for household members such as women and children who remain behind. When men migrate seasonally in search of better prices or catches, women will have increased workloads. Although they may be unable to exercise any influence on the earnings of their husbands, they may exercise a greater influence on household decision making. Where the women travel with men (like fisheries camps in Lake Bangweulu, Zambia), they allocate less time for domestic activities (e.g. cooking, child caring, fetching water and fuelwood etc,). This may have a negative impact on household well-being.
Activity profile
Key questions: What kind of activities are carried out by whom (types, location and seasonality)? Are there differences in opportunities for men and women in fisheries-related activities? What alternative economic opportunities exist for men and women engaged in fisheries-related activities?
The importance of fisheries activities varies between one community and another, depending on the other activities taking place in the adjacent area. Fisheries may contribute little to the overall economy of the community but could help strengthen food security in the community. Other economic activities such as irrigation and livestock watering may take precedence over fisheries, and persons that participate in the fishery for household consumption may not have a strong voice in the community. For example, in Zaire and around small water bodies in Zimbabwe and Zambia, women and children catch fish on an ad hoc basis for household consumption, while simultaneously carrying out other activities such as washing clothes or collecting water.
Often planners fail to recognise the linkages between male and female activities within and between households. In households where both men and women are engaged in fishery-related activities, labour may be hired to carry out agricultural activities, usually under the supervision of a relative. As regards fishery-related activities, women may find it difficult to take part in them if fish-processing equipment or the fish resource is located far away from the household. Women would then be unable to combine their productive and reproductive duties.
The introduction of new technologies may change sexual division of labour within the household, especially in the fish processing sector. As commonly observed in agriculture, technologies which increase the value of a product traditionally produced by women may get taken over by men. Where women cannot find alternative economic activities, they will not benefit from these innovations.
Many activities other than fisheries -- such as agriculture, trading, mining etc. -- exist in a fishing community. These non-fisheries activities offer occupational mobility to men and women engaged in fisheries. Men may concentrate on a limited number of activities, while women may perform many activities on a smaller scale, between which they can shift priorities according to changes in relative profitability.
For instance, in Bukoba, on Lake Victoria, the collapse of producer prices for coffee caused many male farmers to intensify fishing activities. In Lake Mweru, when demersal fisheries declined, a number of women fish smokers of demersal species switched to food production for sales, petty trading and catering which gave them better incomes.
Seasonality of economic activities, especially where a high degree of sexual division of labour prevails, is also important -- busy periods for women may be different from those for men. Seasonality in a fishery may also divert male labour away from agriculture and place heavier workloads on women. This can also occur wherever temporary migration of fishermen takes place.
Access to and control over fisheries-related resources
Key questions: Who has access to and control over fishery resources? Are norms, customary laws and territorial rights disadvantageous to one sex? Are there any direct consultations between men and women in the community? How do fishery-related activities affect other users of the water? Who is most affected?
Fisheries management is usually the responsibility of the state although there might be localized traditional management schemes in place. Often, communities find it difficult to understand state regulations because they see no causal link between them and the productivity of the fishery. Some regulations discourage poorer groups from entering the fishery because a fishing permit is costly and hard to get for someone without either cash or connections. Some regulations discriminate against less regular or visible users -often, women or children Fishing for household consumption. In many fisheries, traditional management systems regulate fishing areas and fishing rights. Therefore, it is important to find out how these traditional systems work, whom they benefit and how. This information is important for planners in order to enable improvements in management systems.
Access to and control over the resources necessary to carry out fishery related activities -- such as fishing craft, gear, credit, processing technologies and transport -- depends on many factors. Kinship systems (e.g. matriliny and patriliny) may affect the allocation and access of productive resources.
Access to the skills needed to catch or process fish is easier in families with a fishing or processing tradition. Depending on the type of method used, these may be available to both men and women, although certain fishing gear (spears, traps, nets) are often considered "male-only" activities. Perceptions that all fishing is a male activity lead to men having better access to formal credit and extension advice for activities such as fish capture.
Resource management schemes which fail to take into account all the users of the fishery resource have little hope of success, because the people who have been overlooked will have little commitment to a sustainable fishery. Less 'visible' users such as women and children using hook and line to catch fish for household consumption, or 'indirect' users such as processors and traders, should also have a say in resource management. Failure to take into account these users has led, in the past, to conflict and marginalisation. For example, in Zimbabwe, unlicenced fishermen ("poachers") because they are illegal have been excluded from management discussions. Around small water bodies, domestic water users may be affected by increased fishery activities. If they are not represented as a resource user, they may lose their access to the small water body and have to travel longer distances to fetch water.
How men and women increase or maintain access to resources can also be different. Men will often reinvest incomes earned in the sector or in agricultural land or livestock, whereas women may build up their processing or trading enterprises as a more diversified enterprise -- using earnings from other economic activities (e.g. agriculture, beer brewing, petty trading). Although this is a more effective way to diversify risk, it can also restrict expansion into the sector and thus affect access to fish.
Socio-cultural factors affecting adoption of new technologies
Key questions: What are the customs and norms that influence adoption of innovations by men and women?
There are many norms and taboos concerning women's active participation in fishing in inland waters. For example, there is an island in Lake Victoria which women are not allowed to go. It is believed that when women go out in fishing boats, catches are poor, equipment gets lost and accidents occur.
Social norms about unrelated men and women working together, can bar women from extension information and new technologies. In some communities, women cannot be contacted by men in the absence of their husbands. This may result in women being left out from extension services and management decision-making. Women processors and traders may also face difficulties in establishing reciprocal arrangements with unrelated fishermen or trading to distant markets.
Therefore, an assessment should be made on whether and how these factors will affect or can be affected by a project.
Community organizations
Key questions: What types of organizations exist in a community and who makes up their membership? Can these organizations be involved in fishery resource management? Do men and women participate in decision- making within these organizations?
Social organizations, (e.g. group of village elders, informal savings groups, mutual support systems) can be an entry point to involve the community in development and management decision-making.
It is important to identify different types of interest groups in a community and find out whose interests are advanced by their decision- making process and whose are not. In Lake Mweru, fishermen's associations exclude women gear and boat owners. Women may he under-represented in the political decision-making structure of the community, or there may be separate systems in which women discuss matters like regulation of fishing. It should not be assumed that women's interests and views are always expressed through their spouses.
Special attention is necessary to include the opinions and aspirations of people who do not belong to any groups. For instance in Kigoma Lake Victoria, there are groups of women processors organized among large-scale fish mongers, who play intermediary roles between women processors and fishermen. The interests of small-scale women processors and traders may not be represented as they are not organised in groups.
Conflicts
Key questions: What are the actual and potential sources of conflict between men and women? Are there any conflict management systems in existence?
Conflicts often arise through multiple uses of the lakeshore, or because of multiple users of these resources. In parts of southern Africa, irrigation and livestock watering are often the main reasons for construction of a small water body; development of a fishery may lead to conflicts with these users, both men and women. In Zambia, for example, women complained that fishermen using seine nets made the water too turbid for use as drinking water. Conflicts can also arise between fish catchers, most frequently between larger and smaller vessels or between different gear users. Infrequently, conflict management systems exist, especially in dynamic or migrant fisheries with few formal structures. However, the potential exists for establishing conflict management systems in new fisheries which include all possible users (male and female), such as around newly constructed small water bodies.
Conflicts may also arise as a result of development interventions which target one particular group within a community, such as women. Providing special credit to women fish processors and traders can create conflicts with those processors and traders who do not have access to the same facilities. It may also create conflicts between husbands and wives within the households. One must be aware that such conflicts can undermine the achievement of intended objectives.
Access to and quality of extension services
Key questions: Do extension workers reach both men and women?
In many countries, fishery extension is considered primarily for the enforcement of fisheries regulations and collection of statistics. Reaching both men and women, understanding the various roles of men and women in fisheries-related activities and reflecting them in development and management planning is important if extension information is to reach all participants. This means fishery extension services should tap not only fish catchers, but also less 'visible' users such as women and children fishing for household consumption, and 'indirect' users such as processors and traders.
Household decision-making
Key questions: Who makes decisions within households regarding production priorities; allocation of resources; distribution of benefits from economic activities? How will the benefits from development interventions be distributed between household members?
Generally, men have the final say on decisions over labour allocation and the movements of household members. In migrant households, the woman can become the decision-maker. In some patrilineal societies, this decision-making role may be transferred to the husband's brother or cousin, rather than the wife.
Women and men often have multiple sources of income, which include fisheries- related activities such as food production and sales, beer brewing etc.. However, the relative importance of various activities for allocating resources between them can be different for men and women. Decision-making on diverse socio-economic activities for men and women will obviously depend on the availability of resources, but also on the ability to withstand changes in the fisheries and to participate in development and management interventions.
The use of income from fisheries activities differs significantly between men and women. This should be kept in mind when estimating the capacity of men and women to increase their financial commitment to fisheries-related activities. Women tend to spend more of their income from productive activities on essential commodities for the household -- any surplus is likely to be invested in productive activities they are able to control. Men are more likely to invest, as a priority, in productive assets for themselves. If they are migrant fishermen this may be land in the area they originate from, or new fishing equipment. This difference has implications for fisheries planning. Increasing the incomes of men does not necessarily increase the well-being of the household. In some cases, it may place greater pressure on women within the household to meet day-to-day expenses, school fees etc and generate a negative impact on household food security. By the same token, increasing the
incomes of women from fisheries-related activities does not necessarily mean that these will expand; they may indeed diversify into other activities or invest the income earned from fisheries into other economic activities.
In less established or new fisheries, it is likely that access to and control of benefits will follow the pattern of existing economic activities. Often these fisheries merely supplement the more important economic activities of the household, such as agriculture and livestock.
<section>6</section>
4. Guidelines on monitoring and evaluation of gender issues
4. Guidelines on monitoring and evaluation of gender issues
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) are ways to ensure that the objectives of development programmes and projects are realized.
Monitoring ^2 is a continuous process during project/programme implementation in order to achieve efficient and effective performance and to provide feedback to management for improving operational plans. This enables managers to take timely and effective action to redirect activities.
^2 Physical and financial monitoring measures a project's delivery of services and inputs. Beneficiary contact monitoring measures whether the project outputs reach intended target groups and beneficiaries.
Evaluation is a process to determine the relevance, effectiveness and impact of project activities in the light of its objectives. It is usually carried out half-way through the lifetime of a project to improve activities still in progress, or after the end of a project when the full benefits and impact., of a project are expected to have been realized.
Design of an M&E system should be included in project formulation for two important reasons:
- It encourages clearer thinking and a refined statement of objectives, assumptions and activities;
- Project budgets will then include the cost of an M&E system
As, few inland fisheries projects have objectives which specifically or directly relate to gender, it is difficult for project implementors to monitor or evaluate gender-specific issues.
However, even if no gender-specific objectives have been set for a project or programme, M&E systems should seek answers to a few key questions in order to establish the effects or impacts of project activities on gender, and to enable reorientation of project activities and future development interventions, wherever negative effects on gender are occurring. Participants and beneficiaries and those not targeted should be included. These questions relate to the degree to which men and women participate and thus contribute to viable activities (effectiveness) and the distribution of project benefits or ill-effects between men and women (balanced development). The questions are formulated as follows:
(1) Who has been involved in decision-making during all stages of the project?
(2) What changes have taken place in the roles, activities and resource allocation among men and women? Which changes can be attributed to development interventions?
a. Who benefits, who loses? How? Why?
b. Who gets the fish and who eats it? Why?
(4) Have new conflicts arisen between men and women?
As a M&E should be included in project formulation and involves the collection and analysis of information, the matrices presented in Appendix 1 can also be used for developing a set of M&E indicator... Choosing indicators will depend on the type of project and can often be a difficult task. For gender, qualitative indicators may also have to be found, as effects and impacts may not be quantitatively measurable. In addition, indicators chosen might have to be replaced during the lifetime of the project, on the basis of the experience and availability of refined data.
<section>7</section>
5. Guidelines on suggestions for incorporating gender issues into socio-economic methodologies
A. Use of official statistics
B. Fieldwork
C. Aggregation
5. Guidelines on suggestions for incorporating gender issues into socio-economic methodologies
A. Use of official statistics
Secondary data used for sectoral planning are often derived from sources such as statistics, surveys and censuses, How these data reflect women's economic contribution is important and will influence development planning.
1. Labour statistics often undervalue women's contribution. The bulk of women's production takes place in the informal and non-monetary sectors which are not included in most national statistics.
Moreover, labour force calculations often define a woman as two-thirds of a man-equivalent and a child as one-third. The result of this manipulation of statistics is that the work done by women and children is reduced to a fraction of a "man-unit". New calculations, using full units for both sexes, must be made by planners and their effects on sector plans demonstrated.
Care should thus be taken when using labour statistics to indicate the contribution and availability of male and female labour. Review of other secondary sources or a special study may be needed to obtain a clear picture on labour availability by sex and season.
2. Population censuses are often conducted during slack periods of agricultural/fishing activity using short reference periods. Therefore, they are likely to omit persons such as migrants and women, who may be active during peak agricultural/rishing seasons, from the economically active population.
3. Numbers of female-headed households are not necessarily a good criterion for target group selection. Some types of female-headed households are likely to have less access to resources. On the other hand, they may be sole decision-makers -- this gives them more flexibility in deciding on allocation and use of resources. Information on female-headed households should he interpreted in conjunction with other data such as income levels, economic activities and household decision making.
4. Fishery statistics are biased towards the harvesting sub-sector. Frame surveys cover fishing units, gears, number of boats, crews, etc. but not processing and trading units. Consequently, information on women involved in the sector is hard to obtain. Sample surveys could be designed on the basis of frame surveys, which take note of the activities of processors and traders.
5. Subsistence production in rural and fishing areas, as well as domestic work, is unpaid and therefore often little valued by statisticians. Thus without taking into account the extent of the informal economy, planners are often inclined to the development of the formal market economy. Generally speaking, men participate more actively in the formal economy than women do. Analysis of other secondary sources, such as labour allocation studies may reveal the relative importance of different formal and informal market activities undertaken by men and women. When no information is available, a special study may have to be carried out on the roles and significance of the subsistence and market sectors.
6. Anthropometric measurements and health and nutrition indicators do not themselves reveal the causes of malnutrition and should therefore be analyzed in combination with other information, such as food availability, intra-household distribution of food, sanitary conditions, health status, etc. Moreover, protein energy malnutrition cannot be solved by increased supply of fish alone, but often requires other interventions such as increasing energy intake and the general improvement of health and sanitation.
7. Enumerators often confine their attention to male household members. Where information is given only by the men of the household, the census might understate the participation of women in economic activities. Data from such censuses should he supplemented with other information from special studies and secondary sources to provide a full picture of household activities.
8. Cost-benefit analyses to assist decision-making on development projects and programs is sometimes concerned only with total costs and total benefits and disregard the distribution of these benefits. For example, an analysis involving 'man-units' might obscure the importance of women to total labour inputs. The reduction of women to a fraction of a man-unit could mean that a project involving more men than women would be given higher ranking than an equivalent or better project involving more women than men.
An alternative is to separately show the costs and benefits of a given set of projects to different groups in society, and let the policy-makers decide on the relative weights to be given to each.
9. Government budgets and past expenditures are not necessarily a good indicator of commitment to gender issues. Often money is spent on buildings or equipment rather than on activities. Therefore, it is necessary to supplement these data with information from progress and annual reports of field staff or to interview key informants for details on activities.
B. Fieldwork
Although the various methodologies used to generate socio-economic and socio-cultural data are qualitatively different (e.g. surveys, PRA, case studies), many contain a 'field work' stage. The design of the field work ascertains whether the data collected will be disaggregated by gender. Furthermore, the perceptions and attitudes of the persons conducting the field work are important. They need to have some knowledge of the local socio-cultural situation and a general understanding of gender issues in order to interpret the answers correctly. Several considerations, which apply to all methodologies, must be taken into account when planning and conducting field work.
1. Seasonal fluctuations in many fisheries activities have implications for field work. When carried out once (e.g. during one season of the year), it will not reach all men and women engaged in fisheries and fisheries related activities, especially if seasonal migration is high. To address this problem it is suggested that:
* Long recall periods extending over the entire year should be used as the reference period (although the accuracy of the data decreases with a longer recall period), or
* If resources permit, collect data several times at different times of the year, or
* If resources do not permit field work to be carried out during different seasons, interview key informants about the activities of the categories of people not present.
2. Questions on women's activities should be put to women rather than men, as they are likely to omit activities. Even when women are interviewed directly, a precise description of the information solicited is needed. If not, women themselves may under-report their activities (e.g. reproductive activities).
3. In order to reach as many men and women as possible during field work, it is important that: both their time schedules are taken into account when planning the interviews; and the interview is conducted in the language of common use.
4. Since a household is not a homogeneous undifferentiated grouping of people with shared and equal access to resources for and benefits from production, it is often necessary to take individuals rather than the household as enumeration units. Whereas data obtained from two or more individuals could probably be combined, there is no way of dividing up household data such as income and expenditure or activities to correspond to individual holdings from household members.
Comparison of information (e.g. access to resources, seasonal calendars) obtained from husband and wife or groups of men and women belonging to the same community, will reveal gender differences. Moreover, a discussion of the differences in views and perceptions between men and women may lead to proposals for solutions. This could thus be used as an important tool in gender-sensitive planning.
C. Aggregation
Collected information has to be aggregated in some way to enable sectoral planning and project formulation. There are various ways to aggregate information, but the reliability of these methods depends on the compatibility of definitions for data collected with different methods. For example, two surveys based on the household as the enumeration unit may use different definitions of the household, making comparison and aggregation of data difficult.
Aggregation of data can be based on fairly simple statistical aggregation methods such as frequency distribution, or more sophisticated social cost-benefit analysis (SCBA) and Geographical Information Systems (GIS).
SCBA is a system designed to ensure that all relevant factors are taken into account to enable decision makers to analyse the costs and benefits of different strategies to achieve set objectives. It allows for weighting of information relating to key issues such as income distribution between sex and class within a community. This means that if gender issues are considered important by decision-makers, weights could be accorded to ensure their relevance when a decision is taken. Thus, a scale of importance of various gender issues needs to be developed so that weights can be accorded each issue when performing a SCBA. This could be an objective scale to consider different aspects of gender, it could be a relative scale which views these aspects in relation to other factors in the appraisal process.
GIS allows the interpreter to identify the geographical distribution of various characteristics of the sector and at different levels. This can apply to natural resources, market mechanisms, household composition or any other type or combination of variables. Mapping this can then assist decision-makers in taking appropriate measures for a given situation and allows for identification of problem areas. The importance accorded to gender by those using GIS will determine whether it plays a significant role in relation to other factors during the decision-making process. It is therefore important to ensure that gender related variables are integrated into information that is transferred to GIS systems.
<section>8</section>
Key references
Key references
FAO, Rome, (1988), Women in Fishing Communities: Guidelines, A special target group of development projects, FAO
FAO, Rome, (1989), Women in Community Forestry: Guidelines A field guide for project design and implementation, FAO
FAO, Rome, (1990), Gender Issues in Fisheries and Aquaculture: including proceedings of the workshop on enhanced women's participation in Fisheries Development, ALCOM, GCP/INT/436/SWE/REP.7, SIDA/FAO
Greboval D., P. Mannini, (1992), The Fisheries of Lake Victoria: Review of basic data, IFIP Project, RAF/871099-WP/16192 (En) FAO
Hoekstra T. M., (1992), The Artisanal Capture Fisheries of Lake Victoria, Kenya: - major socio-economic characteristics of its fishermen and their fishing units, IFIP Project, RAF/87/099-TD/39/92 (En) FAO
Houndekon B. R., D. E. Tempelman, A. M. IJff, (1990), Report of Round Table Meeting on Women's Activities and Community Development in Artisanal Fisheries (projects) in West Africa, Programme for Integrated Development of Artisanal Fisheries in West Africa - IDAF, GCP/RAF/192/DEN, FAO/DANIDA/NORWAY
Kandiyoti D., (1990) Women and Rural Development Policies: 'Me Changing Agenda, SAGE, Vol. 21 (1990), 5-22
Kiewied T., (1994), Socio-economic Study of Fishing Communities along Lake Mweru, Luapula Province, Zambia ALCOM Field Document, No. 21, FAO
Mohai P., (1992), Men. Women, and the Environment: An Examination of the Gender Gap in Environmental Concern and Activism, University of Michigan, Arm Arbor
Ostergaard L., (ed.) (1992), Gender and Development: A Practical Guide Based on a study prepared for the Directorate-General for Development Commission of the European Communities, Routledge
Overholt C., M. B. Anderson, K. Cloud, J. E. Austin, Gender Roles in Development Projects, Kumarian Press, 198-5
Tafilios-Rothschild C., Women as a Motor in Agricultural Development: Lessons Learned from Eastern and Southern Sub-Saharan Africa, Gender Studies in Agriculture, Agricultural University, Wageningen
<section>9</section>
Appendices 1 & 2
Appendix 1
Appendix 2
Appendices 1 & 2
Appendix I & Appendix 2 contain detailed lists of all the information planners need on gender issues in inland fisheries and small water bodies, how this information can be collected, and how it can be used in planning and project formulation.
Appendix 1
Inland and Small Water Body Fisheries (Macro-level):
Matrix of gender Information required and Its use
Information needed
Data to be generated
How to me the Information
Sources/methods to generate the data
Development policies, strategies and programmes/projects, for inland fisheries, and SWB and for gender issues
A - National and donor development objectives
A - Ensure that the plan's objective conforms with national policy; Examine compatibility of national development objectives with gender concerns; Assess whether donor/external objectives compatible with national sector/gender objectives
A-E - National development plans, progress reports and annual reports of government staff
B - Past and future activities/plans.
B,C,F - Adaptation of interventions to past experiences; Coordinate development programme and activities
B - Project/programme documents, key informants
- Evaluation reports
C - Current status of ongoing projects/programmes
A,D,E - Determine government priorities and relative importance accorded to the sector/gender
C - Progress Reports, key informants
D - Government spending and budget
D-G - Government/donor budgets, progress reports and annual reports of government staff, key informants
E - % of total government expenditure(trend)
F - External assistance (type and spending)
F,G - Determine donor priorities and relative importance accorded to the sector/gender and ensure that these conform to national priorities
B,C,F,G - Donor strategy/policy papers
G - % of total external assistance and trend
Institutional capacities
A - List of relevant institutions
A-D - Identify institutions, potential opportunities or constraints and assistance requirements
- Select cooperating institutions
A-D - Annual reports, human resource audit, key informants, civil service commission reports, staff associations/unions
B - Organizational structure of institutions
C - Qualifications of personnel by positions and sex
D - Working conditions by sex
E - Data base on expertise in gender analysis
E,F - Find out location and availability of capacity for gender analysis; assess need for strengthening capacity
E - Key informants in fisheries department, other relevant departments, and institutions
F - Data base on services relevant to women's needs provided by other organizations, departments, institutions
F - Assess collaboration possibilities
F - Annual reports, key informants in Ministry of Home Affairs/planning
Sectoral characteristics: Inland Small Water Body Fisheries
A - Present production levels, species composition and estimates of MEY (Maximum Economic Yield)
A - Compare trends in production over time and future production potential
A - Stock assessment A-D,F - Fisheries statistics
B - Roles of men and women in fisheries
B-E - Generate profile for the sector
B-F - Field reports, studies
C - Trends in number and type of fishing craft and gear in b/w men and women
B-D - Check whether men and women have resources to adopt technology (see also credit availability & extension)
C - Frame surveys
D - Types of processing technology used, changes, scale b/w men and women
D-F - Key informants
E - Major physical and financial flows of fish and fishery products by sex
E,F - National statistics
F - Types of ancillary activities; seasonality by sex
F - Determine whether and how women and men benefit from the development of a particular fishery. Compare production statistics with marketing statistics
G - Consumer preferences
G - Competitive position of fish compared to other protein. Price elasticity as an indication of choice for low or high cost technology
G - Consumer demand survey, special survey reports
H - Roads and transport
H - Indicator for markets which can easily be reached, indicator for accessibility. Frequency and cost of transport indicator.
H - Education statistics. Annual reports, key informants Ministry of planning/transport, maps
Demographic characteristics of rural and urban population
A - Population growth and density
A - Indication for population pressure on resources
A-D - Population census, survey statistics. field reports, key informants
B - Dependency ratio for rural and urban areas
B - Indication for labour availability
C - Sex ratio for rural and urban areas
C - Indication for availability of male and female labour
D - % Female-headed-households
D - Indicator to assist planner to identify labour availability in households
Health and nutrition characteristics
A- Anthropometric measurements of children (weight for age, weight for height)
A-E - Choice of target area
A-E - Health and nutrition statistics, special surveys; key informants, demographic studies/surveys
A - Indicate relative well-being and of nutritional risk
B - Birth weight
B,C - Indicate health of mother, relative well-being and areas of nutritional risk
C - Infant mortality rates
D - Occurrence and types of malnutrition in children and adults
D - Identify potential for fish to reduce malnutrition
E - Prevalence of diseases
E - Indicate general health status of communities; identify need for preventive measures for water borne diseases in conjunction with fisheries/aquaculture development
F - Prevalance of anaemia, fluorisis calcium levels
F - Determine advisability of eating whole small pelagics
F - Rapid eyelid and teeth inspection; Reports
G - Taste preference for different species and attitudes to fish consumption
G - Targeting catches for consumption (e.g. weaning food production)
G - Key informants especially women. Reports
Legal status of women
A - Inheritance law for men and women
A - Identify who inherits productive resources and developments and thus motivated to invest. Identify(im)possibility of providing access to the other category.
A-C - Legislation and customary law.
Credit availability
A - Past experiences with disbursement, utilization and recovery of credit with regard to sex
A-D - Assess whether men and women have de facto access to credit. Identify needs and possibilities for improved procedures for disadvantaged groups (eg. women, migrants). Identify credit sources suitable for men's and women's needs
A - Key informants
A,B - Special studies
B - Lending programmes, credit and loan recovery (by sex); special credit programmes for women
B - Assess whether packages are suitable for men and women. If needed, identify different packages tailored to needs and constraints of women
B-D - Report of financial institutions, NGOs, development agencies, fisheries department special studies
C - Source and recipients (by sex) of credit: institutional and informal
D - Lending policies, norms and procedures, cultural constraints
A,B,D - Assess whether lending norms and procedures are appropriate for men and women and propose changes
Training and education
A - Training institutes and their curricula
A - Assess whether gender concerns are taken into account; if not identify possibilities for integration
A - Brochure of training institutes; key informants
B - Enrolment of students by sex
B,C - Assess whether men and women have equal chances to receive vocational training and higher education; if not, is change in recruitment policy necessary as this will affect staffing
B - Key informants, interviews with students, social studies, arrival reports
C - Barriers preventing women from entering higher education
C - Indication for chances in career development for men and women; may in turn have impact on motivation and work performance
C - Annual reports, key informants
D - Literacy rate and school enrolment by sex
D - Indicator of relative status of men and women
D - Population census, Ministry of education
Extension services
A - Number of persons by occupation and sex employed by extension service
A - Assess whether men and women have equal chances to obtain posts; change in recruitment policy necessary?
A.B - Annual reports Fisheries Department, other relevant extension Departments
B - Training and qualifications of extension officers
B - Existing extension capability and training needs to reach men and women
C - Competence of staff to integrate gender issues
C - Assessment of capacity and willingness to incorporate gender concerns and identification of issues for further training
- Assess what methods were effective in reaching men and women
C - Interview personnel, evaluation reports, impact studies
Biological/technical research and development
A - Research and development on catching, processing, marketing
A - Compare relevance of research results to men and women's needs and resources
A - Reports and or key informants of Fisheries Department, Universities, Research institutes
Appendix 2
Inland and Small Water Body Fisheries (Micro-level):
Matrix of gender information required and Its use
Information needed
Data to be generated
How to use information
Sources/methods to generate the data
Fish capture
A - Socio-economic characteristics of gear and craft owners and fisherfolk by types of craft, gears and targeted species; crew composition
A - Build profile of groups of participants in the fishery to ascertain areas of competition, conflict and potential for cooperation; (ref. access to/control over fishery related resources)
A - Fisheries statistics; timelines historical transects; Venn diagrams; key informants; formal surveys; group discussions with different categories of catchers(including men, women, children); Seasonal calenders for each category of fishing unit
B & C - Fisheries statistics, project and field reports;
B - Costs, earnings and sources of finance of different types of production units operating in the fishery
B - Comparative advantages of different types of production units and linkages with processing and marketing and ancillary sub sectors
- Establish opportunities and constraints for male and female operators
formal surveys; ranking; Venn diagrams; key informants; group discussions
C - Access to catch for consumption, purchase, processing by men, women, children
C - Assess consumption in households-, compare with other dietry information
Processing
A - Types of processing technologies used by men and women; scale of processing operations by socio- economic characteristics of processors; types of product; reciprocal arrangements; renumeration of labour inputs
A - Build profile of the processing sub- sector to establish opportunities and constraints for male and female processors by socio-economic categories; possible cooperation, competition and conflict between male and female processors; possible impact of changes in technology on men and women; linkages with catching and marketing
A - Fisheries statistics, project and field reports; mapping; timelines; seasonal calenders for each group; Venn diagrams; formal surveys; semi structured interviews; group discussions with male and female processors; participatory diagramming
B - Economic performance of different processing units
B - Relative competitiveness of different types of processors (by sex, scale of operation, technology and product)
B - Forestry statistics, project and field reports; mapping; distance charts; historical transects; key informants; Venn diagrams; group discussions
C - Fuelwood availability and costs; socio-economic characteristics of fuelwood collectors; other uses and users of fuelwood
C - Assess pressure on fuelwood resources, competition among processors and possible consequences particularly on processors, fuelwood collectors and other users
C - Fisheries and project statistics; costs and earnings surveys; key informants; ranking; process charts; group discussions
Marketing
A - Socio-economic characteristics of traders ( sex, experience, scale of operation, product, markets supplied etc);
- Reciprocal management with catchers and processors
A - Build profile of the marketing sub- sector and identify areas of conflict and competition; assess probable consequences of changes in other fisheries related sub-sectors; establish opportunities and constraints for male and female traders; establish relationship with catching and processing and ancillary activities
A & C - Fisheries statistics, field and project reports, mapping; timelines, seasonal calenders; process charts, Venn diagrams; formal surveys; semi-structured interviews; key informants; group discussions
B - Characteristics of local and distant markets and retail trading
B - Investigate market segmentation by men/women traders and reasons why; location of markets; characteristics of consumers: Identify areas for market improvement and assess impact on existing categories of traders;
B - Fisheries and trade statistics; special studies, formal surveys; key informants; case studies
C - Purchaser/consumer profiles
C - Target marketing action and/or product development for resource - poorer consumers
Ancillary activities
A - Type of ancillary activities and socio-economic characteristics of those involved; relationship (horizontal/ vertical) with main fisheries sub- sectors)
A - Assess changes in catching/ processing/marketing sub-sectors on those activities; opportunities and constraints of men and women for development activities
A - Fisheries statistics, field and project reports; mapping; timelines; seasonal calenders; process charts; Venn diagrams; formal surveys; semi structured interviews; key informants; group discussions
Migration
A - Migration patterns(temporary/seasonal/ regular/irregular)
A, B - Effects of out-migration on local fish supplies for home consumption
A-C - Fisheries statistics, population census, formal surveys, cam studies, group discussions, other government statistics, key informants
B - Reasons for migration
A, D - Fish/income flows from migrants to permanent/temporary households
C - Socio-economic characteristics of migrant catchers, processors and traders
B-E - Assess impacts of migration on:
* intra HH decision making
* intra HH allocation of resources
* intra HH allocation & distribution of benefits
* impact of migration on access to high value fish resources for men and women
C - Activity and seasonal calenders by different categories of households, group discussions with men and women, mapping, timelines, ranking, key informants interviews
D - Activities of members of migrant households (temporary/permanent) households
A-D - Assess changes in income generating activities
D - Ethnographic literature, case study, semi structured interviews with individual household members to compare answers of household members, Venn diagram rank priorities
Activity profile
A - Activities (types, locations, time spent, seasonality); number of people engaged by sex and by types of HH(e.g. according to major economic activities)
A-C - Build profile of productive and reproductive activities to establish opportunities and constraints (e.g. labour, time, capital) faced by men and women; assess possibility for combining and/or expanding different activities
A,B - Key informants, activity and seasonal calenders by different categories of households, group discussions with men and women, mapping, time lines, ranking; matrix (activities, characteristics, people)
B - Opportunities for involvement in fishery related activities for men and for women
C - Ranking of income from fisheries and other economic activities, by sex and by season
C - Find out alternative employment opportunities by sex; commitment to manage the resources (fish and fuelwood) by sex; assess impact on incomes (men and women) of development/management interventions
C - Ranking incomes by men and women; impact flow diagram
Access to/control over fisheries related resources
A - How is access to/control over fishery related resources regulated(sex, age, occupation, residence status); norms, customary laws, territorial rights restricting women from fisheries activities
A - Assess who has/does not have access to and control over resources required for fisheries related activities
A - Interview key informants; separate group discussions for each category of users; ranking exercise for control over and access to resources
B - Needs and opportunities to improve access and control by disadvantaged groups
B - Assess possibilities for manipulation of the system by men and women
B - Mixed group discussions with users and potential users of resources; separate group discussion with men and women
C - Other uses of resources and users
C - Assess impact of fisheries-related activities on other resources users and areas of actual or potential conflict
C - Key informants; discussions with all user groups; impact flow diagram
Socio-cultural factors affecting adoption of new technologies
A - Norms influencing adoption of innovations by men and women
A - Assess which technology is more easily adopted by men and women
A - Interview key informants, ranking done by different groups
B - Norms affecting contacts between women and men that are not related
B - Assess possibilities for unrelated men and women to undertake economic activities which bring them into close contacts
- Assess possibilities for male extension agents to contact women; in caw of difficulties, identify possibilities for overcoming/bypassing obstacles
B - Interview key informants; group discussions with men and women
Community organizations
A - Occurrence of social organizations; their composition (men and women; criteria for membership; functions and frequency of meeting/working together
A-C - Assess whether they can be involved for development and resource management purposes; Investigate possibility for collaboration between members regarding pooling of resources
A-C - Interview key informants, discussion with members, discussion with non-members who are engaged in fisheries sector
B - Socio-economic characteristics of leaders of organizations
B,C - Assess whether both men's and women's views are reflected in decision making
C - Participation of men and women in decision making
Conflicts
A - Sources of conflict between men and women
A,B - Identify conflicts which have impact on gender relations; assess areas of possible conflict as a result of proposed development interventions (see catching, processing and marketing ancillary activities)
A,B - Key informants, group discussions; Venn diagrams
B - Conflict management systems for men and women; how does it function for which type of conflicts
Access to and quality of extension services
A - Who was reached by extension services (by sex and occupation)
A - Assess whether everyone had equal chances to obtain info on new technology or development/management intervention
A - surveys, semi-structured interviews
B - Awareness of importance and skills of extension personnel to include gender issues
B - Assess need for awareness raising and/or training programmes
B-D - Interview extension personnel at all levels, field observation
C - Gender sensitiveness of extension material
C - Assess need for change in existing or additional extension material
C - Review extension material
D - On-going extension programmes
D - Assess existing extension capability and training needs to reach men and women
E - Coverage and impact of extension programmes
E - Assess what methods were effective in reaching men and women
E - Evaluation reports, cost effectiveness studies, impact studies
Household decision making
A - Decision making pattern within household regarding:
A - Assess whether fisheries activities are common or separate production goals of household members; list priorities of men and women- Assess how bargaining positions within household affect access to necessary resources by members; implications for who can adopt new technologies- Assess potential impact of additional income/fish derived through fisheries development and/or management on individual household members and priorities on expenditures
A - Ethnographic literature, case study, semi structured interviews with individual household members to compare answers of household members, Venn diagrams, rank priorities
 production priorities
 allocation of resources
 distribution of benefits from economic activities
Food security and nutrition
A - Inventory of major health and nutrition problems
A - Assess possible impact of development and management interventions on these problems
A - Health clinic data on anthropometric measurements and statistics on prevalent diseases, survey
B - Nutritional status by household type
B Assess whether certain types of households are disadvantaged; assist in choice of target group
B - Semi-structured interviews, social maps, anthropometric measumments
C - Seasonal food availability
C - Assess seasonal shortages in food supply and impacts of changes in catching, processing and marketing sub- sectors
C - Separate semi-structured interviews by household type, food calendar for different groups and sex
D - Distribution and frequency of fish and other animal protein consumption within household (by age and sex)
D - Assess who benefits and who suffers from changes in fish supply
D - Semi-structured interviews with both sexes, pie chart
E - Description of gender differences in strategies to cope with shortages and contingencies
E - Provides indicator of possible role of fisheries to diversify coping capability and reduce negative impact of these strategies on men and women
E - Semi-structured interviews with both sexes, ranking by sex
