<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
Five conferences of peasant women were organised in South Asia in 1991. The first took place in India, organised by the Centre for Women's Development Studies, New Delhi, and the National Institute for Rural Development, Hyderabad. Three more followed in Pakistan, [organized by the Aurat Foundation], Nepal [Women in Development] and Bangladesh [Nari Pokkho], and the fifth and final conference which was regional, took place in Lahore; peasant women from the four national conferences, agricultural scientists and policy makers came together for a face to face dialogue.
The main financial and moral support came from UNIFEM which showed tremendous farsightedness and made efforts to involve other U.N. and bilateral aid organisations in these initiatives. FAO's Freedom From Hunger Campaign/Action for Development, New Delhi was involved in conceptualising and planning the conferences. FAO provided a consultancy to Dr. Vina Mazumdar of C.W.D.S to participate in the five conferences and to prepare a document about the background, rationale and outcome of the dialogues; Embracing the Earth: An Agenda for Partnership with Peasant Women is a result of that effort.
The conferences brought together peasant women who have been empowered over the years, with the help of NGOs and women's groups, to fight for their rights and improve their situation. They provided them with an opportunity to share their problems, aspirations and struggles; to have a dialogue with scientists, researchers and policy makers, to arrive at strategies for concerted action at the grassroot level to reverse trends which are leading to their marginalisation and ecological destruction; and to initiate processes for the practice of sustainable agriculture.
This document and the four video films that were made to record these national and regional events are testimonies to the knowledge, wisdom, experience and militancy of peasant women. They demonstrate clearly that these women are neither uneducated nor inarticulate. Rather, they are the managers and conservers of our agricultural resource base and are more than capable of understanding their problems and finding solutions for them. They possess excellent organisational and managerial skills, are courageous and commited and are capable of extraordinary militancy if nothing else works.
Subsequent to the regional conference three peasant women, Bibi Sultana from Pakistan, Chandrika from Nepal and Malati Mandi from India, went to the U. N. Conference on Environment and Development in Rio in 1992 to present the main findings and conclusions of their deliberations in South Asia. As a follow-up to the Rio conference several conferences of peasant women have been held in South Asia and several others are planned to pursue the implementation of the relevant suggestions made at Rio and to keep the dialogues going.
Driving Mazumdar, the author of this document, is a social scientist, a leading proponent of women's studies and a feminist activist who has been working with peasant women in West Bengal, India, for over a decade and has been actively engaged in influencing policies and programmes at local, national and international levels. We are grateful to Dr. Mazumdar for taking on the responsibility of writing this document.
It is our hope that this document will help the powerful voices of peasant women to be heard by policy makers in the corridors of power. It should remind us all that because peasant women mother the earth, their interests, knowledge and experience must be at the centre of development policies and programmes. Ignoring or marginalising them can only make the survival of our planet more precarious.
We hope the suggestions made by the women and the concrete areas of cooperation identified by them will guide policy makers and implementers, both in government and non-governmental organisations, at the local, national and international levels. We also hope that this document and the video films will feed into the ongoing preparations in South Asia for the Fourth World Conference on Women to be held in Beijing in 1995.
Kamla Bhasin
South Asian Programme
FAO's Freedom From Hunger Campaign
Action for Development
New Delhi
<title>Embracing the earth - An agenda for partnership with peasant women</title>
<section>1</section>
Prologue
Prologue
Perceptions of the women and natural environment connection are multiple, and have been evolving over the years. Successive studies and conferences, and debates at national, regional or sub-regional and global levels have tried to provide concrete meaning and body to this relationship, which still continues to be elusive for many policy makers.^1
Underlying the debates are questions that are not always clearly articulated in the few dialogues that have been held on policymaking, though WID researchers and advocates have struggled to pose them with some sharpness.
Are all women equally victims of the present environmental crisis as part of the entire population? Or are they specially affected and more vulnerable either because of their biological or their social roles? Although there has been some discussion on the effects of environmental pollution or degradation on women's reproductive health, the debates seeking to locate women in the 'save the environment' discussions appear to have concentrated mainly on the Poverty-Environment-Women connection. The Nairobi Forward Looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women (1985) refers to 'vulnerable groups' in drought-affected areas, those 'deprived of their traditional means of livelihood', destitutes, sole supporters of families and the urban poor, as women whose condition has been adversely affected by environmental degradation.
The general preparations for the World Conference on Environment and Development in 1992 focussed more on 'examining the relationship between poverty and environmental degradation'^2 strengthening the widely prevalent view among the haves of the world that the poor are largely responsible for the present environmental crisis. Stretched to its global logic, this view incorporates a similar charge against the poor but populous countries of the world. Moreover, since centuries of biological research have not helped to eliminate the association of women only with reproduction the tendency to view women as the real population threat remains. This view considerably alters the image of women as victims of the environmental crisis by investing them with an active role in contributing to the world's population explosion.
The current emphasis on 'sustainability' in the development discourse led the Preparatory Committee for UNCED, at its third session, to ask the Secretary General of the Conference that 'women's critical economic, social and environmental contributions to sustainable development be addressed at the Conference as a distinct cross-cutting issue'. A UNICEF/UNFPA/UNCED, symposium on the impact of Environmental Degradation and Poverty on Women and Children (May 27-30, 1991) sought to identify women's real and potential contributions to sustainable development, with a view to their incorporation in Agenda 21 and the Earth Charter. The Symposium's Report^3 is refreshing for some significantly new formulations. Only some of them are presented here as relevant to the main substance of this paper.
1. Historically and in terms of grassroot realities women are managers of natural resources, and dependent on them for their livelihood. Neglect of these roles will therefore adversely affect sustainability of any strategies for environmental development. UNCED, is a high point in a continuing effort to make leaders more accountable and to draw upon the skills, views and experiences of women. (p. 5)
2. The Report rejects the notion that poor people and women's fertility are the primary causes of environmental degradation. Instead, it argues that women's disenfranchisement - resulting in a lack of voice in policy-making - increases their vulnerability. Alternative strategies for environmental conservation or regeneration, therefore, should focus on resource users, recognise women as actors, and not view their legitimate/overriding concerns as 'problems'. (pp. 7-8)
3. Technology transfer needs to be a two-way process. Indigenous/local knowledge and practices may have potential for environmental and other developmental needs, and need to be respected. Case studies presented many examples of women (local and indigenous) who have developed their own ways of managing natural resources. Their perspectives are often multidimensional and multi-functional... Systematic denigration of indigenous knowledge means also the systematic marginalisation of the people from whom that knowledge originated. (p. 13)
These radical reformulations come from over a decade of close observation and experience of working with women at the grassroots, as well as growing disillusionment with existing shibboleths of the development discourse. They were articulated at the symposium by 'experts and resource people involved in grassroots activities and represented a broad spectrum from all geographical areas, the majority being women from developing countries'^4 (p. 3)
Somewhat broader and more sophisticated conclusions have come from the Tribunal of the Miami World Women's Congress for a Healthy Planet (November 8-12, 1991). The Tribunal was constituted with five women jurists-three from developing countries, two from developed ones. After receiving testimony from 15 witnesses on issues ranging from people's (especially women's) rights, to global economic relations, science, technology, population policies and their impact on the natural environment, the Tribunal made the following declaration:
The witnesses showed from their evidence that they and many other women have a wealth of knowledge and experiences in environmental issues. Their expertise should clearly be utilized in planning and implementing the policies necessary to overcome the problems identified.^5
But the hidden question still remains - are we talking about all women, or even all poor women? Is it being suggested that women, by their very nature, are better managers of natural resources even when their livelihood or the survival of their families are not dependent on such resources? Do all women globally, or even within the developing countries share the concerns or the views expressed by the Miami Congress? Or do they all share the special knowledge, skills and aspirations that could improve the conservation, management and regeneration of the natural environment?
A great deal of scholarship and elaborate information-gathering over the last decade by a range of researchers, has informed our general understanding of problems that beset varied ecosystems in the world. Nevertheless, many NGOs who work with poor women to improve their economic or health situation continue to assume, like most policy makers, and scientific/technical experts, that such women must be educated and made aware of environmental problems before they can make any effective contribution to the discussions. A similar assumption characterises many committed environmentalists, who believe that the knowledge they have taken years to acquire is not within the reach of poor, often illiterate women. Historical explorations that identify women as the initiators of productive activity, through their discovery of agriculture, are still known to a very small minority, even among feminists.
It is only in a few cases - where grassroots work results in a mutual understanding and respect for each other's strengths, concerns and specialised knowledge - that the connection is clarified: between poor women's occupational or functional specialisations, the empirical knowledge and skills that come from that specialisation and the markedly distinct attitudes and concerns that such women display regarding the destruction, degradation or disappearance of their forest, land and water resources.
This brings us to the last hidden question - why is there this reluctance to put a name to the particular group of women who demonstrate this collection of characteristics? Why obscure them within abstract generic terms-women, poor women, even rural women? Two decades of DID studies have made some of us alert to the kinds of invisibility that attend dominant discourses and how they hide the actual social, economic and political roles, or direct contributions made by women located at the bottom of the social, economic, power or knowledge hierarchies that characterize most nations of the world. The family, household, community, people-each a collective that is supposed to be all inclusive and gender neutral-acquire monolithic, patriarchal and abstract features in usage. WID lore is replete with the struggles that have been necessary to penetrate this invisibility, to obtain data, to make gender-wise comparisons, to identify the subtle methods through which discrimination
against women is institutionalised and their marginalisation accepted as the natural order of things.
In the stratified societies of South Asia where the social status or prestige of a family is determined to a great extent by the social invisibility or visibility of its women's labour, it is critically important to clearly define the class characteristics of the women we are seeking to project as key actors in the environmental crisis that continues to unfold. The first chapter of this presentation shares the results of four conferences (or Summits, as UNIFEM, the sponsoring agency, designated them) of peasant women- i.e. village women who are experienced and expert cultivators. They work in agriculture and allied fields (livestock rearing, tree planting, sericulture, pisciculture, etc.) They collect water, fuel, fodder and other minor forest produce for the family's consumption, and also for the market. Droughts, floods, landslides, deforestation, desertification, soil erosion, salination - words in newspapers for most of us in urban areas-spell DISASTER to these women.
Whatever the official data systems acknowledge, these women labour from 14-18 hours a day, as against their men's 8-10 hours. The Summits were designed to capture their perspectives, experiences and aspirations, and to try to remove some of the veils of invisibility that prevent policy makers and scientific experts' from seeing and listening to them.
The main purpose of these meetings was to enable women to express solidarity, to enhance the understanding of their struggles for survival and to further the legitimacy of ongoing development programmes. The philosophy of sustainable development was outlined by the women themselves after wide-ranging and in-depth discussions which culminated in the emergence of new concepts.
The initiative in fact went beyond just the philosophy and emerged with a critique of development as seen by the women themselves. It proved to be an enabling mechanism for policy makers and environment specialists for 'engendering' or adapting development to the concerns of women living in poverty.
Despite the massive participation of peasant women in the growing environmental movements and protests in the region, studies undertaken for the SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation) countries on environment in the late Eighties relegate women to one line- 'Participation of Women and Children in Environment' - to be achieved through networking in regard to studies on women and environment and involving administrators, groups of NGOs and field workers, to facilitate exchange of information, joint research and policy formulation. There is no mention of why such participation is desirable or why women are clubbed along with children. Is the participation seen to be similar in nature? Or is the statement an unconscious reflection of deep-rooted ideologies that equate women's capacities or concerns only with children?
Since no official effort has been made to examine peasant women's role in environment management at the regional level, this series of conferences was path-breaking in its search for some concrete areas of cooperation, sharing and empowerment, within the countries of the region.
We must acknowledge the far-sightedness of UNIFEM in making these meetings possible. Our collective identification of peasant women 'as the largest group directly connected' with the environment-development matrix led to the necessity of putting them on the agenda of global, as well as national and regional, debates. And putting them on the agenda, required 'bringing them into our midst'.^6 It is no longer adequate to talk about empowerment in general terms, nor can the prerogative to define such empowerment be taken by any other group. Hence, the four National Summits where peasant women identified the systemic source of their problems, demonstrated their expertise and then held out their offer of a partnership.^7 At the Regional Conference in Lahore, our peasant colleagues empowered us by demonstrating that national and linguistic boundaries cannot prevent their ability to share and support each other's perspectives and aspirations, validating our initial conclusion as
well as our hopes.
Our gratitude to the Delhi office of the FAO's Freedom from Hunger Campaign for enabling us to prepare this paper, not only on the basis of documents, but through direct observation at the Summits. It gave us the opportunity to be warmed by the energy and welcome generated by our peasant sisters, and the trust they bestowed on us to communicate their voices to the world outside.
Vina Mazumdar
Centre for Women's Development Studies
New Delhi, May 15, 1992
Notes
^1 Centre for Science and Environment, The State of India's Environment, First Citizens' Report, Delhi, 1982.
Kumud Sharma, Women in Struggle: Role and Participation in the Chipko Movement in Uttarkhand Region in Uttar Pradesh, Occasional Monograph-I, Centre for Women's Development Studies, Delhi, 1987.
^2 Decision 1/25 of the first Preparatory Committee Meeting; Document on Poverty and Environmental Degradation. - A/Conf. 151/PC/15.
^3 Women and Children First-The Impact of Environmental Degradation and Poverty on Women and Children, Geneva, May 27-30, 1991.
^4 Selected recommendations of the Symposium are given in Annexure-I.
^5 Declaration of the Tribunal of the Miami World Women's Congress for a Healthy Planet, Miami, November 12, 1991.
^6 Irene Santiago (UNIFEM), at the Regional Conference that followed the Summits, February 10-12, 1992.
^7 Ibid.
<section>2</section>
1 The summits
I. Background, context and objectives
II. Organisational mode and preparation
III. Participants, duration and format
IV. The issues
V. Solutions, suggestions, recommendations
1 The summits
I. Background, context and objectives
In many ways, the International Women's Decade precipitated the rediscovery of peasant women. They were the silent, invisible, secluded majority - steeped in superstition, ignorance, irrationality, untouched even by any desire for the change, freedom, self-expression or equality occasionally voiced by educated urban women during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Fleeting glimpses of these faceless millions were obtained during people's struggles against colonialism, oppressive land relations, changing production patterns in the rural economy; such glimpses, however, were soon 'forgotten' by lapses of memory both on the part of official agencies and the chroniclers of such movements.^1 The acknowledged heroines of the women's movement, in South Asia at least, did not include any peasant women.
Though the Constitutions of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal recognised some rights for women, these rights did not extend to control over basic productive resources for agriculture-land,, water or forests, or equal remuneration. Even their labour lacked acknowledgement.^2 The needs of agricultural development led to much scientific, technological and other research, training and extension activity in the region. But just as their training and extension programmes. did not address peasant women, so too, their scholarship did not extend to examining peasant women's actual roles in agriculture. Even less did it uncover the history of their discovery of the reproduction of food crops, especially paddy, through cultivation, the manufacture of textiles from natural fibres, and the art of pre-wheel pottery.^3
This blindness cannot be blamed entirely on lack of data. Decennial censuses for undivided India, with all their shortcomings, recorded women as outnumbering men in agricultural labour until 1931, and in high proportions in most rural occupations -livestock, fisheries, forestry, sericulture, plantations, handloom, handicrafts, agro-processing, retail distribution, etc.^4 Ester Boserup, the Danish scholar, found the same data sufficiently illuminating to write her pathbreaking book, querying administrative and academic perceptions of women's role in farming systems.^5 Four years later, the Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in India was able to interpret the same data with insights provided by the Committee's dialogues with peasant women.^6 Within the next few years, a series of studies from Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka brought in substantive evidence of peasant women's roles in agriculture and allied activities.^7 Over the last decade, an explosion
of studies on women's role in various sectors of agriculture, especially food production, forced the FAO and ILO to revise their assessment of the relative roles of men and women in the agricultural labour force. FAO's estimates (1983) for Asia as a whole placed women at 45% of the total agricultural labour force;^8 ILO's revised estimates, published the same year, provided the following percentages: Nepal - 49%, India - 47%, Bangladesh - 34%, Pakistan - 31%.
According to the World Labour Report (1985), until 1980 agriculture continued to absorb more than two-thirds of the female workforce in developing countries, compared to less than 25% in centrally planned industrialised economies, and less than 10% in the 'industrialised marketing' or 'developed' economies. Surely this data needs to be examined today as an indication of the shape of things to come, in the context of accelerated globalisation and the extension of the economic growth model to the developing countries.
Prior to the International Women's Decade, development theorists regarded the involvement of women in agriculture as an indication of 'backwardness', which provided a rationale for pushing them out or ignoring and downgrading their contribution. The very few Indian scholars who examined the data until the Seventies explained the marked regional variations in women's involvement in agriculture as the result of 'cultural' or 'religious' beliefs and practices, thus locating it outside the purview of economists, planners and scientists.^9
The FAO-ILO data from 82, 91 and 124 (ILO-85) countries respectively demolish both these myths, and substantially challenge the first. Some of the fastest growing economies of Southeast and East Asia, irrespective of their religious or cultural moorings, continue to have a high involvement of women in agriculture. Most of the Islamic countries of Asia and Africa, and the Christian Caribbean also follow the same pattern. A study commissioned by the Nonaligned Summit in 1983 reviewed a large number of studies from Asia, Africa and Latin America, and concluded:
The socio-economic formations in the rural sector are the primary organisations of production in which womens's role has a pivotal importance in most parts of the developing world. In the rural areas of these countries, women work in all capacities, in growing food, post-harvest operations, marketing, animal husbandry and related activities. In several cases, they also work as wage labour on farms. The FAO has estimated that sometimes women's work could be longer than men's work by as much as 43%.^10
The scholar also argued convincingly that 'live human labour is and will continue to be the principal productive force in the rural societies of many of these countries'.^11 The Second Non-aligned Conference on the Role of Women in Development (New Delhi, 1985) concluded:
The most important obstacles in implementing strategies identified in the past to improve women's role in agricultural and rural development have been at the conceptual level, at the infrastructural and operational level and at the implementation level... The conceptual obstacle lies deep rooted in the persistent lack of understanding and knowledge about women's role as producers and providers of family subsistence.^12
The negative consequence of ignoring or neglecting women's role in food production - increased hunger and malnutrition-is gradually gaining serious notice.^13 But agriculture cannot be detached from the condition or management of the natural environment. The connection between peasant women's skills, knowledge, needs and problems and the state of the natural environment still remains unclear as far as the decision makers of the global power system are concerned.^14
The single largest group of South Asian rural women who share their livelihood and familial role characteristics-and their attitudes to the natural environment - are peasant women, i.e., women from marginal farmer or landless agricultural households, who engage directly in field agriculture and the collection of minor forest produce. Despite some broad differences in their participation rate by ecological, cultural or crop regions, they do share certain functional specialisations. They participate in agricultural production-for the family as unpaid labour, or for employers as hired labour. They also engage in the free collection of water, fuel, fodder and other minor forest produce, essential for family consumption and/or income earning activities. Many time-disposition and other micro studies have revealed the enormous value of this free collection for the survival and health of poor peasant households.^15
A few social action groups engaged in grassroot level interventions also noted certain marked differences in attitude among men and women of peasant households to issues related to water, forests and land.^16 Yet neither the reality of this gender difference, nor its reasons have been apparent to those responsible for the conservation, protection and regeneration of the environment. The environmental movement in South Asia today is led by educated 'experts', only some of whom recognise the initiatives of peasant women.
In poor peasant households women have a closer relationship with their natural environment as they depend on the ecosystem for food, fodder, fuel, water and livelihood. The environmental crisis-deforestation, depletion and siltation of water resources, land degradation and environmental pollution - have provoked many peasant women's groups to protest against existing policies of resource management. Some protests like Chipko are better known, but there are many others active in the protection and regeneration of the environment in a variety of ways.^17 Such struggles have, however, been carried out in isolation, with little knowledge of the efforts of other groups elsewhere in the country or region, and there has been little opportunity for these women to come together and share their experiences and insights.^18
Linguistic diversity, household and agricultural labour, the hazards of travelling long distances to unknown places, and apprehensions about their ability to participate meaningfully in any national or international discussions, are frequently offered as reasons by national agencies, official and non-official, for discouraging the involvement of women's groups in conferences on problems in rural development, agriculture or forestry.^19 In early 1991, however, ILO organised a successful national consultation in Delhi on Rural Women and Wasteland Development, with a mixed group of participants. Some were experts, some represented concerned departments of the Government of India, some came from non-governmental social action groups involved in wasteland development, among whom were a few peasant women themselves.^20 In December 1990, UNIFEM collaborated with the Asian Development Bank to organise an Asian Regional Workshop of official and non-official experts in Manila, on
Gender Issues in Agriculture, to which they invited six successful women farmers. The Indian participant was an illiterate peasant woman who now leads a small network of village level peasant women's groups engaged in converting wasteland to productive plantations.^21
These scattered experiments convinced the UNIFEM, ILO and FAO representatives in India and South Asia to respond positively to a suggestion made by the Centre for Women's Development Studies to organise national summits of peasant women in a few South Asian countries, with specific objectives. First, the Summits would provide the peasant women's groups, which would constitute the majority among the participants, an opportunity to share their experiences and, in the process, understand the environmental realities and changes taking place elsewhere; they would also be made aware of the struggles of other groups seeking to reclaim their local resource base. Second, the meetings might encourage the women to work together in their search for solutions. Third, a face-to-face dialogue would help to present, without any mediation, peasant women's perspectives on issues of natural resource management and the factors responsible for the present environmental crisis. It was hoped that
this direct impact by peasant women would help policymakers, planners and technical experts (in agriculture, forestry, sericulture, soil conservation, irrigation etc.) in the country or region to view peasant women as a potential resource and as allies in achieving policy objectives.
II. Organisational mode and preparation
In each country, UNIFEM identified a leading NGO concerned with WID issues, through research and/or grassroot action, to organise the National Summit. In Nepal and Bangladesh, the Summits were preceded by a series of smaller regional meetings which helped to identify the specific problems of those areas, and to select a group to participate in the National Summit. The women who came to the Summit were therefore representing their groups or regions, and felt both empowered and obliged to put across the views expressed by their colleagues. The umbrella nature of the two national NGOs in these countries - (WID, Women in Development in Nepal and ADAB, Association of Development Agencies in Bangladesh) - facilitated this procedure; both combine several NGOs working in different parts of the country on a variety of development issues, requiring grassroot people's action. In Nepal, preliminary workshops were held in 13 districts in cooperation with several women's development
projects initiated by NGOs or by the government. Peasant women attending these workshops, as well as the representatives of the NGOs or government agencies working with them inevitably tended to focus their discussions on the problems they experienced in the particular projects they were involved with.
ADAB in Bangladesh conducted thirteen workshops through its local chapters, which include 65 NGOs working in 52 districts of the country. Most of these are involved in development activities at the grassroots, with a special focus on women's programmes. Each workshop had, on an average, twenty women 'beneficiaries' of the NGOs from whom eight were selected for the National Summit. Environmental issues were broadly defined beforehand, then discussed to identify the local nature of the problems in each workshop.
In India and Pakistan on the other hand, the organising was entrusted to two academic institutions, the Centre for Women's Development Studies in India and the Aurat Foundation for Information and Publication Services in Pakistan, known primarily for their research, advocacy and communication efforts on WID-related issues.
The Centre for Women's Development Studies, however, had also been involved in
action research for over a decade, organising peasant women for empowerment through employment generating activities. This experiment had forced the Centre, under pressure from the peasant women, to become increasingly more involved in some environmental policy research and had brought it into contact with several other environmental groups. It was therefore able to identify NGOs who had organised peasant women to participate in specific environment related protests or development action, and it now sought their assistance in sending at least two members of the peasant women's groups, accompanied by one person who could act as interpreter, to the National Summit. A brief questionnaire was sent out in advance to obtain a profile of the organisation and its activities, but apart from a note explaining the objectives of the Summit, no other documents or guidelines were sent.
Twenty-nine of the 40 NGOs contacted, responded, and except for two, all brought actual peasant women to the Summit. It seemed that even among NGOs working explicitly on environmental problems, the belief in peasant women's capacity to participate directly in a national dialogue was not widely shared.
In Pakistan's case, as the Summit Report mentions, the tradition of grassroots rural women organising, was absent; nor did the Aurat Foundation have any direct contact with groups recently formed, primarily through the efforts of international development agencies like UNICEF, the Aga Khan Foundation and so on. But it succeeded in obtaining the latter's help to identify village women's groups. Being the first Summit of its kind in Pakistan, news about it created great excitement among women in the villages and since then the Foundation has been receiving several queries from different areas regarding follow-up action. As various members of the Foundation reported afterwards, 'The results of the Summit were far beyond our expectations. The women surprised all of us!'^22
III. Participants, duration and format
Variations in the categories of participants, and in the duration and format of the Summits reflected country - specific differences as well as the organisers' priorities.
BANGLADESH
The Bangladesh Summit had 121 peasant women, and 35 others; the latter included facilitators from different NGOs, media personnel, and representatives of some UN agencies. There was no one from the government although they had been invited and some had promised to come. The meeting took place on the premises of the Bangladesh Academy of Rural Development (BARD), the premier research and training institution in the country for rural development; it had won international renown for a highly successful community development project in the district of Comilla in the 1960s. This project was also significant because it included the promotion of a large number of rural women's cooperatives.
The three days of the Summit began with a formal inauguration by the Director of BARD, the staff of ADAB and regional representatives of UN agencies, with each participant being introduced individually. The issues identified in the preparatory workshops were used to formulate guidelines for the ten working groups into which participants were divided, according to geo-ecological regions. Three groups were asked to focus on general problems, the other seven were to focus on problems of (a) dry areas; (b) ponds, tanks, lake areas; (c) river embankment destruction; (d) coastal belt; (e) urban slums; (f) pert-urban industrial areas; and (g) tribal areas, while some problems were common to all. Each group had a facilitator to guide and focus the discussions.
Each of the 10 group reports was presented by a peasant woman from the group in the plenary sessions; after a general discussion in the plenary the recommendations were consolidated by the organisers.
Though each working group was provided with guidelines to focus its discussions, the participants sometimes brought up issues beyond the guidelines and voiced their concern about other or general matters as well. This made for some local tension among facilitators regarding differences in approach. Those who were professional trainers with various NGOs thought the discussions should be confined to the issues identified in the guidelines; those who were grassroot workers, on the other hand, wanted the guidelines to be broadened to accommodate women's concerns and local issues. The pressure to include issues not set out in the guidelines came mostly from the hilly and forest areas, perhaps because discussions during the local workshops had not adequately covered everything; or the women might have been cautious with the NGOs; or again it could be that some organisers of the preparatory workshops did not have clear ideas on women's empowerment, peasant women's concerns or
environmental management. In any event, the move to widen the scope of the guidelines to include these additional concerns was supported by the UNIFEM representative.
NEPAL
In the Nepal Summit, peasant women numbered 106, others, whose numbers kept fluctuating day by day, were roughly 25. Senior government personnel and donor agency representatives were present at the inaugural and concluding sessions; several government officers involved in government-initiated rural women's programmes, and younger staff of NGOs and donor agencies participated through all the stages of the Summit. The interaction between some of these young professionals and the peasant women indicated both a refreshing familiarity and an absence of status consciousness, a not very common occurence in the region where relationships between the urban educated and the illiterate are concerned.
The Summit was held on the premises of the National Academy of Administration and lasted four days. The women arrived one day earlier and had an opportunity to interact with each other, introducing themselves and discussing their previous experiences at the preparatory meetings. They were then divided into nine groups according to the projects they were involved in - by and large this meant according to the particular NGO working with them.
The Summit was formally inaugurated by the Minister for Agriculture, Forests and Environment and was attended by several dignitaries. Project reports were presented, mainly by NGO representatives, and an overview of government policies and programmes, and NGO efforts at promoting women's development and involvement in environment protection was given by the Chairperson of WID, Nepal-the main organiser of the Summit. The Regional Resource Officer of UNIFEM stated the objectives of the Summit. Despite the formal nature of the inaugural session, some of the participating peasant women seized the opportunity to thank the organisers for inviting them to the Summit.
Thereafter participants were divided into three working groups to discuss environment and agriculture, environment and animal husbandry, and environment and health and hygiene. Some guidelines were provided to each of the three groups to facilitate the discussion. Group leaders were drawn either from the government functionaries or from NGO personnel. In some groups discussions tended to be somewhat stilted and hesitant in the beginning, but in most cases the women warmed up by the middle of the second day and participated far more actively. All participants were present when group leaders made short presentations of their group's findings in the late afternoon.
On the last day, however, after watching video clips of the preparatory meetings, and inspired by three days of interaction and by the presence of a Planning Commission Member in the Chair, the women transformed the final round of discussions into a spirited dialogue with the government. Many of them challenged established preconceived notions regarding women's role in the rural economy:
How do you expect to increase productivity in agriculture when you provide all new knowledge, ideas and opportunities only to men? How much work do they do in agriculture? Most of the time they come home and smoke. It is we who do most of the work. The only access we have had to new ideas and knowledge has been provided by this handful of people who have come to work with us in the last few years. When we go home and suggest that we should try out some of these new ideas, our men again light their cheroots and either walk out of the house or lie in bed smoking.
We are all Nepalis, but we never knew anything about how our sisters live in different parts of the country, not even how they dress. This is the first time that we have come together to learn more about each other, and the problems facing the country.
Such statements indicated the critical importance that peasant women attach to the chance to step out of their particular environment and interact with other people, and the empowering experience of meeting other women in similar circumstances, in large numbers.
The statements made by both NGOs and by women working in government programmes for women, however, suggested that they had still to clearly understand the connection between environmental problems and peasant women's life experiences. Their development work with women, so far, had focussed mainly on income-generating activities and providing needed services or to ensuring some access to development assistance and visibility. Most of them had assumed that it was their duty to create awareness among peasant women on environmental problems. But in fact, most of the actual connections between the women's livelihood and other experiences and the state of the environment were articulated by peasant women during the group discussions. Their underlying message was clear - the women wanted access to whatever expertise and knowledge was available so that they could decide what would be useful or viable in their own situations.
As in the case of Bangladesh and other Summits, the peasant women of Nepal linked their low socio-economic status to a lack of recognition of their labour in agriculture and other sectors of the rural economy. Nepali women also related this problem to their exclusion from knowledge systems and extension services.
PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Summit lasted for three days; the participants included 99 peasant women and 40 others. The second group (again a fluctuating number) consisted of representatives and extension workers from NGOs working with peasant women, some government personnel, scientists, Members of Parliament, and representatives of UNICEF and UNIFEM who had assisted the Aurat Foundation in identifying groups from the villages.
The Pakistan Summit did not begin with a formal inauguration. After opening statements by the organisers the plenary session went straight into identifying the problems. In the process many peasant women talked about difficulties in their areas and their efforts to bring about some change in their immediate environment.
Thereafter working groups were formed on the basis of language. Moderators recorded the daily activities of the women and the problems they experienced in their work. Both social and physical aspects of environmental deterioration were discussed in these sessions.
The results of these discussions were presented in a plenary on the second day, mainly by peasant women. This was followed by the recounting of some success stories by a few women from each Province. The participants then returned to their groups to reach some solutions collectively, which they presented to the full conference later in the day. Subsequently, the women heard a presentation on the environment by the Pakistan Agricultural Research Council.
On the last day the women had a face-to-face dialogue with women politicians officials from the Ministry of Local Government, the Agricultural Research Council, the Department of Fisheries and an NGO involved in community development. A key component of the Conference was the dissemination of information to the women, as well as to NGOs, on environment issues and appropriate technologies.
INDIA
The India Summit had the longest duration, five days. The participants included 80 peasant women from 27 groups, and 29 NGO representatives. The third category, whose numbers fluctuated through the five days, included government representatives, scientists, other experts, representatives of donor agencies, the faculty of the two organising institutions - Centre for Women's Development Studies (CWDS) and the National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) - and the Directors of the last two who were present through all the plenary sessions. Some of them also attended group discussions, occasionally putting questions to the peasant women; the Director, NIRD, generously assisted with translations from three south Indian languages, or from Hindi whenever necessary. Translations from English into Hindi or Bengali were done by the faculty of the CWDS or the national representative of UNIFEM.
There was no formal inaugural session. The two Directors informed participants that there was no set agenda, since the main objective of the Summit was to obtain peasant women's perspectives based on their experience and understanding of environmental problems. While introducing themselves during the plenary, peasant women also talked about their problems, struggles and experiences. At the end of the day a list of issues identified by the various women was read out.
Three regional working groups were formed: (i) north and west; (ii) south; and (iii) east, to discuss, elaborate or add to this list of issues through the second, third and fourth days, to work out collective solutions or strategies, and formulate recommendations. Each group had a moderator and one or two rapporteurs.
On the third day the working groups paused in their discussions to have a dialogue in plenary with the well-known agricultural scientist, Dr. M.S. Swaminathan. The peasant women put forward the major problems that they had identified on the first day, as well as further elaborations arrived at during group discussions. Dr. Swaminathan took detailed notes; in his response he commended their struggles to protect their natural resource base as well as their detailed knowledge of their problems, and offered them some basic information on the national dimensions of the problems of land degradation, water pollution and scarcity, and deforestation. He also spoke of the efforts under way by scientists to deal with these problems. He agreed with the women that such problems could only be resolved if the government, scientific agencies and people's groups, 'especially women's groups like yours' worked together in close partnership. He made a few suggestions for the women's
consideration which were taken note of by the working groups in their continued discussions.
The recommendations of the three groups were presented at an evening plenary on the fourth day for general discussion. The rapporteurs then finalised them for presentation at the final session on the fifth day to representatives of the Government of India.
Though the recommendations were presented in English, the peasant women were aware of what they contained because of the previous evening's discussion, as well as the translations made by their own interpreters. It was therefore possible for them to put forward the reasons behind their specific recommendations as well as their own determination to follow up on collective decisions.
The main difference in the format between the India Summit and the others was the absence of any set agenda or guidelines for the peasant women. The issues were identified by them in the working groups; and moderators and rapporteurs did not attempt to control the discussions.
IV. The issues
Despite the variations in format and preparatory approach, all the Summits had marked similarities in the way participants articulated their problems, analysed their causes and effects, and eventually offered solutions, strategies or recommendations. Such similarities demonstrate the commonalities in their experiences and their distinct attitude to issues relating to the natural environment. Apart from some specific problems that had to do with diverse ecological situations, national, cultural or religious diversities appeared to have little significance. Thus even before they met each other across national boundaries at the regional conference held in Lahore (February 10-12 1992), peasant women from all four countries demonstrated their close affinity through the Summits.
How did they perceive the environment? Women at the Bangladesh Summit said that the environment was
... the things that surround us. God-given things are those given to us in nature-air, water, soil, trees, mountain, sky, etc. - and man - made things are constructed by people - like factories, roads, bridges, cars, trains, etc. Social environment, the social conditions under which we live, is a large part of the man-made environment.
In order to emphasise their dependence on nature for their livelihood and survival, peasant women use terms like life, mother, source of happiness and so on, in referring to soil, water, air and trees. For Bibi Sultana from Gilgit, one of the northern-most regions of Pakistan, life centred around snow (or the lack of it) on the mountains:
If there is snow, we are happy, for it means we will have water in summer for irrigation, otherwise not. Our happiness depends on the snow.
Non-availability of potable water, and sometimes just any kind of water affected almost every peasant woman's life.
In our daily life we need water for all types of work, both domestic and outside.
The negative consequences of water scarcity for agriculture, livestock and domestic use was highlighted by all four Summits. The Indian Summit went on to give specific examples of such shortage being caused by man-made destruction, e.g., the filling up of tanks/ponds by the local or urban rich. Some of the groups in the Indian Summit had successfully mobilised village women to resist this cornering of community water resources by the well-to-do.
The rich people in our village were going to fill up the village pond. We called many women to stop this. If the pond went, where would we all get water?
Dayamma, Dharwar District,
Karnataka, India
When clean water is not available, we have to use dirty water. Why are the borewells and tanks neglected? They are not maintained properly. The Manjra river canal is silting up, no trees have been planted along it. In a few years, the people of Hyderabad will get no water because the canal will go dry.
Susheelamma,
Medak District, Andhra Pradesh, India
Deforestation as a major cause, and lack of irrigation as an effect, of water scarcity were mentioned by all the four Summits. The Indian Summit offered some specific examples of mismanagement. Major irrigation projects like the Indira Gandhi Canal in Rajasthan were a glaring example.
The Nahar (Indira Gandhi Canal) was supposed to solve all our water problems. But in many farms along the canal the crops are failing because there is too much water being released from the canal. Other farms, which are on a higher level, get no water. But the Canal Command Authority charges the same rate from everyone. What kind of justice is this?
Daphubai, Bikaner District,
North Rajasthan India
The Summits proved that peasant women do not need anyone to inform them of the causal connection between deforestation, soil erosion and the reduction or drying up of water resources.
Peasant women from Bangladesh, Pakistan and eastern India also brought up the devastating issues of floods, water-logging and salination.
Our problem is too much water. And too much salt.
Soudamini Mandal, 24 Parganas,
West Bengal, India
The India, Pakistan and Bangladesh Summits identified intensive agriculture with excessive irrigation and use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides as major contributory factors for environmental degradation and their misery.
We used to pick snails and paddy roots from the fields but now thanks to the pollution in the water we cannot get them. The pollution has destroyed many sources of food for the poor. These pesticides are killing our birds and us.
Bangladesh Summit
Now that we are restoring some of these lands through planting trees, we want to tell the government that chemical fertilizers and pesticides do a lot of harm to the land, the cattle and human beings. We can suggest methods to produce more of green manure, which our ancestors used. They will also prevent the pollution of water.
Sarala Sardar, President, Nari Bikash
Sangha, Bankura, West Bengal
All the Summits identified deforestation as a major cause of land degradation, soil erosion and shortages - of fuel, fodder and food for the poor.
The disappearance of big trees has increased the destructive power of storms and cyclones.
Even when we plant trees we cannot stop our men from cutting them because we have no land of our own. If we had land, we could have planted many trees and got more nutrition for our children.
Participants in the
Bangladesh Summit
It is not only forests that have succumbed to human greed, the demands of industry, and of the wealthy in urban and rural areas:
Our gomal (pasture) lands, even our village tanks are not safe from the greed of the well-to-do. They have conspired with the panchayat and the government officials, and converted these to private farms, or houses.
Our Mahila Sanghas (women's groups) do not have access to these common lands, or we would develop them for the use of everyone in the village. Women need fuel and fodder - common lands should be under the management of our Sanghas, and not used for private profit by industry or farmers.
Gangamma, peasant woman from
Dharwad District, Karnataka, India
We rear trees as we rear our goats and poultry. When we eat, we think of our livestock and our trees.
Bangladesh Summit
The tendency of peasant women to link various environmental, social and behavioural problems through causal connections demonstrates a holistic approach to the problems of natural and social environment, as well as an awareness of systemic connections and changes over time. Undoubtedly, this tendency created problems for rapporteurs who wanted to separate the problems, isolating their causes and effects. Even when talking about specific area problems like those resulting from shrimp cultivation for export purposes in Bangladesh, peasant women complained:
The country is being destroyed to earn foreign exchange. The saline water is entering our paddy fields, is being drunk by our children and our cattle, and ruining their health.
Every one of the Summits emphasised women's low socio-economic status as a major cause of their miseries, and the denial of any opportunity to participate in managing their own and the community's welfare. In this too, their understanding was holistic, linking their non-participatory status with lack of recognition for their labour, poverty, wage discrimination, unemployment or irregular work (India, Pakistan); neglect by the government (Nepal, India, Pakistan and Bangladesh); and agricultural research, training, and extension agencies (India, Nepal). The overall effect of this depressed status is lack of control over their productive and reproductive lives (Bangladesh).
However much work we do we get no recognition. Men have only one work, we have more than a dozen and the men add to it by deliberately breaking our ovens, pots and dirtying floors that we have just cleaned.
You people in the cities do not know how village women like us have to slog. As the farmer forces his bullocks to labour, poverty forces us to labour all the time.
One side is getting inflated while the other is shrinking. The section that is shrinking is getting destroyed.*
*The peasant women were not aware that this phenomenon is also a demographic reality. The sex-ratio in the populations of Bangladesh, India and Pakistan has recorded a declining proportion of females over several decades.
The Nepal and Pakistan Summits noted the high prices of fertilizers and inflation while the Bangladesh and India Summits criticised the ill-effects of chemicals and pesticides. Corruption in the public services was mentioned at some stage by all the Summits but there was some difference in its analysis. The Nepal and Pakistan Summits emphasised the inadequacy of infrastructural services to assist the rural economy, and women's need for education and health as burning problems. The India Summit, however, went into a detailed discussion on poor land records and worse communication as factors promoting corruption. In the peasant women's view, the poor's, especially poor women's ignorance about their rights contributes to corruption and collusion between local officials, the rich people, contractors and other middle men. They identified these as major reasons for alienation of common lands, tribal land, land allotted to the landless and to women.
We are the indigenous people of this land, we cleared the land and made it habitable. Later you people came with your knowledge, learning, technology and civilization. We welcomed you and made it possible for you to stay here. But now you are destroying our forests, polluting our soil, water and air, destroying our livelihood. You are driving us from our own home. Why are you doing this? A country becomes beautiful and rich if it has various types of people and culture. Just one language and culture in one country is not good. We are enriching our country by different languages, dialects, dresses and cultures. Our learning is less than yours, but do not leave us behind. Educate us so that we all can walk and live happily together.
A tribal peasant woman at the
Bangladesh Summit
Inequality-in wealth, assets, power, knowledge and status-according to all four Summits compounds and aggravates gender inequality.
How did the women respond to the Summits? For the overwhelming majority this was the first time that anyone had ever called them for such a discussion.
We have come from so far, from near the borders of China, not for tourism. We are representing the women of our valley. We should carry back some solution when we return. People will ask what we said in the Summit and what solutions we brought back.
We have come from east, west, north and south. The women are the same, the lessons are the same, our house work is the same, our field work is the same.
Now that we have come here, we want to take some of your happiness, knowledge and security back with us, while placing some of the burden of our unhappiness and misery on your shoulders.
We shall fill our minds like cassettes with all that we have learnt here, so that when we go back we can explain to others.
I like the way the women have taken possession of these meeting rooms as if the rooms are their own. My faculty was so afraid that they would feel intimidated by this large campus, the video recording, the microphones, so many strange people. I find no such signs.
Though the last plenary had been scheduled to take place in the auditorium, the Director, NIRD, changed the plan when he discovered the women had already settled down in the room they had come to regard as "their conference room". They sang on their way to join the sessions, at the end of the day's work, or during the lunch break. Perhaps they were celebrating their few days of freedom from their daily grind of work. Or was the stimulus provided by a feeling of empowerment, from solidarity and the birth of new hopes?
V. Solutions, suggestions, recommendations
The most significant feature of the Summits' collective exercise in seeking solutions to the problems that they identified was that the suggestions and recommendations were directed towards women themselves as well as other authorities.
I have just realised that had the participants in this Conference been men from the same households, some of these recommendations (especially those relating to mutual cooperation between the women's groups across state boundaries to protect their forests from marauders) would never have come. These women are offering to take up very difficult responsibilities!
Samar Singh, Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests, Government of India at the
India Summit
As pointed out in the report of the Indian Summit, the sense of solidarity with others that resulted from the sharing of experiences and discovering commonalities, coupled with the opportunity to interact with persons in authority proved to be empowering experiences for the women.
Unlike many other conferences on similar themes, the groups did not confine themselves to making recommendations to the governments or other agencies. They proceeded to identify their own responsibilities and the specific types of support that they needed to discharge them effectively.
From this perspective, the peasant women's conference went far beyond the politics of protest or the politics of recommendations. It indicated the beginning of what might be termed as the politics of constructive participation within the framework of a partnership.
Report of the India Summit
A similar process marked the other Summits as well.
The Bangladesh Summit suggested measures to minimise soil erosion: "Plant five to ten trees if you cut one. Rear them like your children, and resist deforestation." For the government the Summit recommended programmes of afforestation, distribution of plants, either free or at cheap rates, and prohibiting the use of firewood in brick kilns.
The Pakistan Summit called on all women to organise, aquire land from the government for afforestation and ask all households to plant at least two trees, but "the government must supply water, cow-dung, grow forests - and let the community look after them - and set up biogas plants".
The Nepal Summit called upon its government to establish nurseries, distribute saplings, supply fencing material and allow only the lopping of branches rather than the felling of trees. It should also plant fodder, encourage tree-planting and introduce smokeless chulhas (cooking stoves). Women should take the responsibility to stop animals from straying, and also pressurise their men to divert family resources from alcohol and gambling to farming. The women's efforts were likely to be more effective if the government improved the supply of biogas at concessional rates and of agricultural credit and marketing services.
The India Summit first called on the women's groups to network with others, both within and outside their states, to widen the mass base of voluntary action. It proposed a collaboration between women's groups and scientific institutions to ensure access to information, education and training in various alternative methods of solving their problems for the former. The government, on the other hand, was asked to incorporate support for income-generating activities by women within programmes for wasteland development, recovery of water resources, agro-processing etc., "to help strengthen peasant women's concern for natural resources and empower them collectively". The government was also asked to promote the active and effective involvement of peasant women's groups in the management, preservation and regeneration of forests, the recovery of common property resources, and so on, with due authority and support. Before all this, however, it recommended that the government
improve, update and publicise its land records, prevent the privatisation of common lands and water, and the misuse of local resources by officials.
Both the Bangladesh and India Summits laid great emphasis on limiting the use of chemicals in agriculture. At an individual level the women from Bangladesh pledged to propagate the use of organic manure, to reduce the cultivation of high yielding varieties (HYV) of paddy (which require heavy inputs of fertilizers and pesticides), and halt the killing of birds, frogs and bees. The government was asked to promote the production of indigenous foodgrains, stop building fertilizer factories and airspraying fertilizers.
The Pakistan Summit was equally forthright. It recommended that the government construct wells to ensure regular water supply, but stop the construction of the Kalabag dam. Village organisations, on the other hand, were urged to collect funds for channelising river water to villages and installing water-pumping machines.
On the issue of health and sanitation the Bangladesh Summit advocated that individuals and villagers should use closed toilets, bury dead animals and refrain from throwing trash and sewage into open areas and rivers. For its part government was asked to provide free or cheap toilets and tubewells.
The Pakistan Summit wanted their government to provide health centres, trained birth attendants and lady health visitors, as well as regular visits by doctors to villages, but placed the responsibility for improving the health and educational facilities and tackling the problem of official corruption on the local community, especially its chairman. Village level committees were asked to organise garbage removal, and raise public awareness. It recommended that there be more schools with trained teachers to teach hygiene, nutrition and health, but here too responsibilities should be divided. Girls with primary education should teach others, the community should provide buildings, and the government start the school. The provision of electricity, roads, vocational training centres and interest-free loans should be the responsibility of the government.
Despite the commonality in most of the solutions or recommendations, there were differences in presentation and emphasis. The importance of women's organisations and collective action was highlighted by all the Summits, but only the India and the Pakistan Summits identified actual roles for such grassroot organisations in managing, conserving or improving the environment.
The harsh impact of economic and social inequality within the social system on peasant women was again a common finding of all the Summits. But the need to ensure women's rights over land, trees and water resources was highlighted by the India, Pakistan and Bangladesh Summits. The India Summit also went on to speak about the need to recover, expand and redefine women's traditional rights in these matters.
While all the Summits acknowledged the positive role played by various NGOs in helping peasant women to obtain needed services and to organise themselves, the India Summit discussed this issue at some length. As the Report says:
In many cases the intermediary organisations are required to withdraw once the project reaches a certain level of success of the immediate objective e.g., income generation, afforestation, etc. But such success, important as it is for releasing women's confidence and faith in collective action and their own ability, needs to be sustained with new ideas, support, knowledge, guidance and resources if the women's groups are to overcome the powerful oppositions that are ranged against them. It is important for the intermediary organisations to continue to play a watchdog role and network with similar organisations on important issues to enable the women at the grassroot to learn from others' experiences... The intermediary organisations should not therefore confine their role to obtaining schemes and funds but think of long-term strategies for bringing about the needed changes in the natural and social environments.
For peasant women to play an effective role in solving the crisis of environment and development, the vital instrument is their overall empowerment. Empowerment, participation, partnership are relational terms. The continued use of conventional terms like 'beneficiaries' by many intermediaries and donor agencies demonstrates some degree of ideological confusion. Unless these are eliminated through careful analysis, discussion and collective effort, they could affect the quality of the intermediaries' relationship to the women at the grassroots. Everyone has a role to play in bringing about this change-the women themselves, their NGO supporters, the government and the scientific, educational and research establishments.
Notes
^1 Sunil Sen, Working Women and Popular Movements in Bangladesh: From the Gandhi Era to the Present Day, Calcutta, K.P. Bagchi, 1985.
Madhuri Bose, Martha Loutfi and Shimwaayi Muntemba, Rural Development with Women-Elements of Success, Geneva, ILO, 1984, Paper for African and Asian International ILO.
K. Lalita, V. Kannabiran et al: We Were Making History: Life Stories of Women in the Telengana People's Struggle, Delhi, Kali; Samya Shakti, Vol. I & 2 II, CWDS, 1984.
^2 Lotika Sarkar, What Price Constitutional Equality? Peasant Women and Land Reform in India (forthcoming). See also Bina Agarwal, Who Sows? Who Reaps? Gender and Land Rights in South Asia, Cambridge University Press (forthcoming); Kumud Sharma, Women in Social Forestry Programmes: two case studies of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (mimeo), CWDS, 1987; Narayan Banerjee, "Women's Work and Family Strategies: A Case Study from Bankura, West Bengal, CWDS; Bina Pradhan, et al, "Women's Work and Family Strategies: Case Studies from Nepal" (mimeo), Centre for Women and Development, Kathmandu; Sudhin Mukhopadhya, and Banisikha Ghose, "Women's Work, Technology and Family Strategies Case Studies from Nadia and Burdwan, West Bengal" (mimeo), Centre for Human Development, Kalyani University, West Bengal; Report of the National Colloquium on Role of Women in Water Resource Management, A CWDS/UNICEF/National Drinking Water Mission joint publication, 1990; Report of National Workshop on
Women and Wasteland Development, ILO, Delhi, 1991.
^3 D.D Kosambi, Culture and Civilisation of Ancient India in Historical Outline, Delhi, Vikas, 1982.
M.S Swaminathan, The Role of Education and Research in Enhancing Rural Women's Income and Household Happiness, Delhi, CWDS, 1985.
Vina Mazumdar, "Education and Rural Women: Towards an Alternative Perspective" in Arunashree Rao (ed.) "Women's Studies-Nairobi and Beyond," New York, Feminist Press, 1991.
Vina Mazumdar and Kumud Sharma, "Sexual Division of Labour: A Reappraisal from India," in Irene Tinker (ed.) Persistent Inequalities: Women and World Development, New York, Oxford University Press, 1990
^4 Asok Mitra, India's Population. Aspects of Quality and Control, Vol. 1, Delhi, Abhinav, 1978.
Asok Mitra, The Status of Women: Shifts in Occupational Participation, 1961-71. Delhi, Abhinav, 1980.
International Rice Research Institute: Women in Rice Farming - Proceedings of Workshop on Women in Rice Farming Systems, England, Gower, 1985.
^5 Ester Boserup, Women's Role in Economic Development, New York, St. Martin's, 1970.
^6 India, Ministry of Education and Social Welfare, Towards Equality: Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in India, New Delhi, 1974.
^7 Status of Women in Nepal. Centre for Economic Development and Administration, Kathmandu, 1979.
R. Chowdhury, Huda and Ahmed Rajhan Female Status in Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies, 1980.
Joan P. Mencher, "Landless Women Agricultural Labourers in India: Some Observations from Tamil Nadu, Kerala and West Bengal". In Women in Rice Farming, op cit. See also Acharya Sarathi and Praveen Patkar, K. Saradamoni, Tarunnessa Abdulla and Bina Pradhan in the same volume.
^9 Kumud Sharma and Vina Mazumdar, "Women's Studies in India: New Perceptions and Challenges" Economic and Political Weekly, January 1979.
^10 Sarthi Acharya, "Women and Rural Development in the Third World," Bombay, TISS, 1987.
^11 Ibid.
^12 "Women and Development: Report of the Nonaligned Minister's Conference," Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development, 1985.
^13 Ibid.
^14 UNICEF/UNFPA/UNCED Symposium on Women and Children First, Geneva 1991.
Declaration of the Tribunal of Miami World Congress for a Healthy Planet, Miami, Florida, November 12 1991.
^15 N.C. Saxena, "Women and Wasteland Development in India: Policy Issues" Technical Workshop on Women and Wasteland Development, organised by ILO, January 9-11, 1991.
Robert Chambers, N.C. Saxena and Tushar Shah, To the Hands of the Poor: Water and Trees, Delhi, Oxford, 1989.
Vandana Shiva, Staying Alive: Women, Ecology and Survival in India, Delhi, Kali for Women, 1988.
Report of the National Committee on Role and Participation of Women in Agriculture and Rural Development, Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture, 1980.
Gamel Rao Parthasarathy, G. Dasaradharma, "Women in Labour Foce in India," in Women in the Indian Labour Force, Bangkok, ARTEP, 1981.
Devaki Jain, and Malini Chand Sheth, "Domestic Work-Its Implication for Enumeration of Workers." Conference on the Role of Women in the Caribbean & Barbados, September 12-16, 1982.
Centre for Women's Development Studies, "Who Will Save the Earth?" Report of a Workshop at Bankura, West Bengal, August 27-30, 1987.
"National Colloquium on Role of Women in Water Resource Management," A CWDS/UNICEF/National Drinking Water Mission joint publication, 1990.
Anil Agarwal, Try Asking Women First, Centre for Science and Environment, Delhi, Mimeo.
Kumud Sharma, "Women in Struggle: A Case Study of the Chipko Movement," Samya Shakti, Vol. 1, 1984.
^16 International Labour Organisation, "Technical Workshop on Women and Wasteland Development," January 9-11, 1991, Delhi.
^17 Centre for Science and Environment, State of India's Environment, Delhi, 1983 & 1985.
^18 "Management and Regeneration of the Natural Environment: A Wider Role for Peasant Women," Report of the National Conference, Hyderabad, August 26-30, 1991.
ILO, The Bankura Story, Delhi, 1990.
^19 The author's suggestion to this effect for the International Conference on Women in Agriculture organised by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, 1989 was rejected by the latter as "impossible".
^20 ILO, "Rural Women and Wasteland Development," op. cit.
^21 See ILO, The Bankura Story, op. cit.
Vina Mazumdar, "Peasant Women Organise for Empowerment: The Bankura Experiment," paper presented at a Symposium on Progress for Women in Developing Countries, Brussels, September 27-29, 1988.
Vina Mazumdar, Martyn Webb & Audrey and Narayan Banerjee, Women of the Forest, CWDS & Orient Longman (forthcoming).
^22 In personal conversation with the author during the AWID Conference at Washington, November 23, 1991.
Source Documents for the rest of this chapter are a) the reports of the four Summits, and b) observation notes of the Nepal and Bangladesh Summits made by the author and her colleague, N.K. Banerjee.
<section>3</section>
2 The regional conference on women and environment
Bangladesh
India
Nepal
Pakistan
Report of the non-official delegates
Report of the official delegates
2 The regional conference on women and environment
The Regional Conference on Women and Environment was held at Lahore, Pakistan from February 10 -12,1992. Participants included official representatives of the Governments of Bangladesh, India, Nepal and Pakistan; two peasant women from each country who had participated in the National Summits; representatives of the NGOs involved in organising the Summits; and representatives of various United Nations agencies, UNIFEM, UNICEF, ILO, and UNCED. The Conference was sponsored by UNIFEM and organised by Aurat Foundation which had earlier organised the Pakistan National Summit. For unavoidable reasons peasant women from India could not attend the meeting.
The first session was chaired by Dr. Arshad Zaman, Chief Economist and Special Secretary in the Ministry of Planning and Development, Government of Pakistan. Chandni Joshi, Regional Resource Officer, UNIFEM (who had attended three of the National Summits) reiterated UNIFEM's concern with presenting the voices of South Asian peasant women on issues related to their livelihood and their environment, and ensuring that their voices be heard at global discussions on the future of the world's environment. Being the first of their kind in all four countries, the Summits had been recognised as being "historic". Irene Santiago, Chief of the Asia Pacific Section of UNIFEM, welcomed both "the friends of the environment and friends of women" to the Summit. She expressed her happiness at the fact that the Summits had, for the first time, enabled South Asian peasant women to conduct a dialogue among themselves and present their views on environmental problems. They had also made several
valuable points suchs as:
- in order to put women on the agenda we have to have women in our midst;
- there is an immediate need to tackle the powerlessness and invisibility of peasant women;
- it is absolutely imperative for women to speak out;
- policy makers should hold dialogues with peasant women on a regular basis.
The six peasant women from Pakistan, Nepal and Bangladesh spoke at length of their experiences at the Summits. We offer a summary below:
When I participated in Haryali (Greening) Conference at Manawan, Pakistan, I had come with the assumption that women from our area were suffering the most because of environmental degradation. But when I talked to other women from different areas of Pakistan, I realised that most of our problems were similar, especially the problem of water. I belong to the northern area. There, when it snows hard in winter, we are happy because more snow in winter means more water in summer. But in summer, we have to face floods if it has snowed more in the previous winter. Water finishes quickly; also it becomes muddier because the same source of water is used and subsequently polluted by animals. We also find muddy water in wells. There is no way to clear the muddy water of the wells. During winter, the surface of the well freezes. We have to trek many kilometres to reach the wells and have to break the ice on the surface first to get to the water. Use of unhygienic water causes many
diseases like goitre, stomach problems, etc.
The second big problem is deforestation. Gradually the forests have disappeared. We have to buy very expensive firewood at Rs. 80-100 per maund (approximately 36-37 kg.) Kerosene oil is more than five rupees per litre. If we go out to look for firewood, we have to trek for at least two to four hours. Sometimes there are landslides. In all the provinces of Pakistan, women's lives are very difficult.
The land has been reduced because of division of property and the same needs for vegetables, food and fodder have to be fulfilled from the same land. Some people have become landless. Since tea has become more popular as a drink, the consumption of milk has increased and sometimes one has to buy milk as well. It is women's responsibility to look after the livestock. If the husband or other male members of the family have outmigrated due to economic reasons, women are the ones looking after the crops, gardens, children; they do almost everything to keep the home running smoothly.
But please don't think that peasant women only know how to complain; they also work very hard to solve these problems. The peasant women don't depend on others; they do most of their work themselves.
We are grateful to Aga Khan Rural Support Programme (AKRSP) who have helped us unite and work together. Now there are 500 women's organisations in our area and our total savings amount to 15 million rupees.
Bibi Sultana, peasant woman
from Gilgit, Pakistan
The state of our environment is worsening every day. One of the reasons behind this phenomenon is the use of chemical fertilizers which cause many diseases, e.g., cancer, etc. The rain clouds are scarcer now than before which may mean famine in places where agriculture depends on rains. Trees are also becoming fewer and fewer due to inconsiderate and unplanned cutting. Earlier people used to sit together under the shade of trees and share their problems; no longer. Availability of wood for cooking and construction has been curtailed. Gardens are disappearing as well.
There is a negative change in the social environment. More and more people are using heroin, opium and other drugs. This change does not augur well for our society.
Women these days are trying to change themselves. In the past they tried to limit themselves to the four walls of their homes. Now, they are going out of the homes to work; they are also taking part in politics, which is an encouraging sign.
Most of the women have to suffer, so it is important for all of us to express our solidarity with them, which means expressing solidarity with ourselves as all of us suffer the same fate. There is a proverb in Sindhi which, loosely translated, means, "Not till the sufferers get together, will the mourning be becoming.
Mumtaz Nizamani, peasant woman
formally associated with Sindhiani
Tehrik in Sind, Pakistan
I shall first talk of the natural environment. The issue of trees is extremely important. We must grow more trees for food and fuel use. We have heard stories of fruit trees and healthy children from our grandparents, but unfortunately due to environmental degradation and lack of trees, haven't seen these ourselves. Now our organisation is trying to plant more trees.
The quality of soil is suffering because of excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Natural pests beneficial to the soil and crops are dying due to indiscriminate use of chemicals. The people of my Adivasi community also contract many skin problems, also our fingers get affected because of the chemical use.
Another problem is water. During March-April especially there is lack of water. There are no deep tube wells and shallow tube-wells do not work. The water we get from wells is usually not clean, due to which there are many health problems. Our organisation is trying to combat these problems.
Drug abuse and its social and health impact is also being tackled by us. We again and again come across people who have become landless, especially tribal people, and our organisation tries to solve their problems if it can.
Sisilia Soren, Member, Jagadishpur
Adivasi Bhoomihin Mahila Samiti,
Rajshahi, Bangladesh
We have achieved a lot through our organisation. Firstly, we leant to share our problems, define them and work out ways to solve them ourselves. We started a savings scheme; arranged for training, of leadership, mother's health, child care amongst many others.
The problems we come across are many, for example, deforestation. Men have cut the trees down to make money. Now, we realise that we should plant ten trees in its place if we cut one. Lack of sanitation and of proper toilets cause many intestinal diseases. Through our organisation, we have learnt ourselves and taught others the use of toilets and have eliminated many diseases. Then, excessive amount of chemical fertilizers and pesticides/insecticides gets washed in the ponds and other water sources. It not only affects our drinking water but also our survival, i.e., fish.
Our land is a land of rivers. We women fight the floods when they come, we try to protect our livestock and our children during floods, while men run away.
Our strength is in our being together. We are no longer alone and no longer in the background. We are no longer invisible. We decided not to keep anyone in our village illiterate and we succeeded. Now, we have also decided to take part in elections to get power and decision-making into our own hands.
Julekha Begum, Gaibandha, Bangladesh
I attended the National Summit on women and environment in Kathmandu. Now I am here in Pakistan which is a rare opportunity for me.
In Nepal 1979, when women and development programme was started, the landlords and the elite, also the moneylenders, felt threatened. They were afraid that if women became informed and aware, they would lose control over them, so they tried to disrupt the programme. Now the situation is slightly better. Through this conference, I have come to know that there are many programmes being run for women, some of them by women as well, but still a lot more needs to be done where women, environment and development is concerned.
Krishna Kumari Gurung, peasant
woman from Morang, Nepal
The next session began with an overview by Vina Mazumdar (CWDS) synthesising the findings of the four National Summits and the two historic meetings that preceded or coincided with this exercise: the UNICEF/UNFPA/UNCED symposium, Impact of Environmental Degradation and Poverty on Women and Children (May 1991, Geneva) and the Miami World Women's Congress for a Healthy Planet (November 991).1
The morning of the second day began with a global overview of findings from research on women, environment and development, presented by Irene Dankelman, Environment Consultant, UNIFEM, New York. It highlighted various forms of overt and covert discrimination against peasant women practiced in many countries of the world, making it difficult for them to retain control over even the most degraded land. In developed countries like the United States women had protested against nuclear waste polluting water courses and increasing the incidence of cancer and other disabling diseases. Moreover, recent data show that most toxic waste dumps in the US are situated in poor neighbourhoods of blacks and other ethnic minorities.
The health of women and children is further neglected in many development programmes and projects which involve the widespread distribution of pesticides or fertilizers. Users are not alerted about the required safety precautions, and there is now enough evidence to show that peasant and other poor women share the experience of living in an ever degrading environment, the world over. Some positive steps to reverse this cycle have been initiated by NGOs, governments and other development actors. Projects like those supported by ILO and UNIFEM demonstrate that environmental regeneration and the improvement of poor women's status go hand in hand, but a recognition of women's role in natural resource management is largely absent within the scientific and development community.
Filomina Steady from the UNCED Secretariat talked about the efforts being made by her office to ensure that "women's ideas, aspirations, wishes, hopes, concerns and needs are included in the decisions and plans to improve the planet and develop all countries in a way that does not harm the planet while benefitting people". The poverty and environment question is linked to social and economic factors and development policies. Remedying this situation calls for both political will and meaningful participation by the people: "The participation of women, especially peasant women is crucial since their daily lives are involved in an intensive interaction with the environment. It is peasant women's work that may eventually show us how to mother the earth and how to save our planet."
Participants then broke up into four country groups for discussions (see Annexure III for guidelines). The organisers also provided for some intensive discussion amongst government representatives from all four countries, and between peasant women and NGO workers, to arrive at a consensus for presenting the outcome of this conference at the UN Conference on Environment and Development in June 1992.
The recommendations formulated, first by the country- specific groups and then by the cross-country groups of officials and of peasant women and NGOs, present a varied picture of the nature of interaction between ideologically divided groups, leading to an assimilation of new ideas.
Let us briefly consider the discussions within country groups, below.
Bangladesh
The group consisted of two government representatives, two peasant women and one NGO activist. The last-named shared the educational and class background of the two government officials. Of the five only one was a man. The discussions revealed some ideological differences but the final recommendations were concrete and reflected the priorities of the guidelines. These are summarised as follows:
1. Land
- Include transfer of government land by deed to female-headed households.
- Provide for more planned use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, and gather more information regarding existing alternatives and experiences.
2. Water
- While planning embankments plan adequate dredging of rivers and provide a proper drainage system with adequate maintenance.
- Develop new guidelines and special zones for shrimp culture.
- Provide for separate flood relief programmes for women.
- Increase the use of handpumps to provide water for all purposes.
3. Forests
- Provide for the involvement of women in government programmes and revive women's extensive knowledge of plants.
- Shift from monoculture to mixed forestry to provide fuelwood, fruits and timber.
- Adopt tree-planting programmer.
- Reforest along embankments.
- Involve women in afforestation programmes.
4. Empowerment
- Promote the setting up of formal and informal organisations at the local level and encourage networking to develop alternatives.
- Increase literacy and awareness, and access to credit and information.
- Increase women's political participation through direct election and provision of quotas.
- Generate data on women and environment.
- Create opportunities for dialogues between local women and the government.
5. Education
- Extend the BRAC (Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee) model of non-formal education to all rural areas.
- Link family planning programmes with income generation and with motivating men to go in for contraception.
India
The group consisted of three government representatives, one independent researcher-activist and two representatives from UN bodies-UNIFEM and ILO. All six belonged to the educated urban middle class, five were women, and all of them were familiar to some extent with current development debates around women, people's participation, and the environmental crisis. Three of them had been present at the National Summit and greatly impressed by the observations of the peasant women. To compensate for the absence of peasant women at the Lahore Summit, the group decided to take serious note of the discussions held during the National Summit and to formulate concrete recommendations based on them. These are summarised below:
1. Land
- Titles to be made jointly to the husband and wife or poor women's groups in the case of land transfers made by the government.
- The amendment, within a limited time-frame, of provisions violating women's rights in existing land laws and of procedures for the distribution of new lands by the government.
- The setting up of multidisciplinary 'spearhead groups'* in all extension programmes to work with the target groups with a view to accumulating traditional knowledge and practices and incorporate such information into their institutional work.
- Scientific institutions, agricultural universities, other research institutions and NGOs with proven technologies for problem lands to be given a mandate to help a specified number of villages in their own programmes. Some negative incentives should be built into the funding mechanism to ensure the review of grants if such extension work is not carried out.
*An experiment familiar in India through the Dairy Development Programme of the Seventies.
2. Water
- Government projects for water resources (canals, ponds, ground water etc.) should incorporate the provision of water for domestic use.
3. Forests
- The traditional usufructuary rights of rural people should have priority over subsequent laws.
- Joint management of forests should be promoted with 50% representation of poor peasant women in all forest committees to ensure their conservation, and guarantee the rights of peasant women to non-timber forest produce.
- The selection of species for social forestry programmes should be done in consultation with women's groups.
4. Health and Health Education
- Some land from common property resources should be set aside for building toilets and bathing places for women. These must be linked with the available water supply system.
5. Education and Information
- Scientific knowledge regarding the treatment of different types of soil, the hazards of using pesticides and chemical fertilizers, and information on indigenous options should be made available to poor peasant women.
- information regarding women's legal rights, credit facilities, etc. should be disseminated through media, extension networks, training programmes, public notices and other methods.
6. Empowerment
- Legal awareness regarding the protection and enforcement of women's rights should be inculcated among a cross-section of the population.
- Such legal provisions should be a component in all training programmes for government officials and policy makers.
- Education in basic laws should be imparted through schools and literacy programmes.
- Ownership records and government circulars should be publicly displayed in schools and community institutions.
7. Others
- Support should be extended to income generation activities for women in programmes for wasteland development, recovery of water resources, agro-processing etc.
- Forty per cent of the funds in all government programmes involving people's participation should be earmarked for women's groups.
Nepal
The group consisted of two senior government officers, two peasant women, one NGO representative, and the Regional Resource Officer of UNIFEM (who had initiated the Nepal government's WID programme for rural women some years earlier). As pointed out although class differences do not constitute a serious problem for such dialogues in Nepal, the political and constitutional history of the country has prevented the spread of NGO activities in the past. Most NGOs are of recent origin and include many former or even serving officers of the government. This is certainly the case with those NGOs working with rural women. The group therefore, felt it necessary to clearly define the functions of government (legislation and policy formulation), media (creating awareness), and NGOs (as activists and facilitators). The recommendations focussed on:
- Greater interaction between the government and communities.
- The inclusion of extension workers in dialogues, discussion groups and training programmes.
- Training and information about land, water and forests to be made available to women, with a focus on legal, technical and management aspects.
- Research on a priority basis on women and environment issues.
- Community involvement in planning and deciding development projects.
- Promoting the cultivation of cash crops (cardamom, medicinal plants, etc.) on wastelands.
- Training women in the repair and maintenance of drinking water systems.
- Linking drinking water and sanitation programmes.
- Making industries accountable for industrial waste, if necessary, through legislation.
- Use religious tenets to promote conservation.
- Set up an environmental action agency with a strong representation of women.
- Call for the representation of women in the national planning commission.
- Utilise a variety of male and female teachers, including priests and shamans, to disseminate health information and provide services.
- Incorporate women, environment and population components in all formal or non-formal educational programmes, avoiding stereotyping of gender roles.
- Use regional or ethnic languages, face-to-face discussions, audio visual media, and traditional forms of communication in information programmes.
- Lobby for the establishment of international mechanisms to ensure women's rights, check the trafficking in women, and prevent violence against them.
- Promote the establishment of networks in South Asia on women, development and environment.
Others
- The enacting of legislation to prevent the production and sale of tobacco and alcohol.
Pakistan
The group consisted of two senior government officers (both men) two peasant women, several NGO activists (all women), and some local representatives of UN agencies involved in WID programmer. The majority were highly educated professionals, and ideological differences, especially on gender-related issues, were strong. This is reflected in the somewhat general tone and smaller number of recommendations made. The group noted that the roots of environmental degradation lie in "the highly consumerist lifestyle of the industrialised countries and the economically powerful groups within the other countries"; it recommended:
- The initiation and reinforcement of awareness and educational campaigns.
- The monitoring and prevention of the import or production of hazardous fertilizers and pesticides. For this purpose research on their effects should be conducted, users should be educated on their use and possible side effects, and alternatives developed.
- The equipping of agricultural and other extension systems with information and skills to ensure better and more widespread dissemination of information and the involvement of NGOs in this.
- The developing of mechanisms to identify area-specific projects responsive to women's needs, especially with regard to water and sanitation, on a matching-grant basis.
- The promotion of forest management by communities, ensuring the effective participation of women in management committees.
- The assessment of the impact of projects under the national conservation strategy on women, and the potential for involving them at the planning and monitoring stages.
Report of the non-official delegates
The working group's report was presented by Maryam Palejo from Sindhiani Tehrik (Hyderabad, Pakistan), and is reproduced below
The working group appreciates this opportunity of a direct dialogue between the peasant women and policy makers/planners. We hope that [it] will be fruitful for both and that both will learn from each other.
We also feel that we have learnt much from our friends from other South Asian countries. We had thought that we were the only ones suffering from the problems that we have discussed earlier. Now we know that our sisters had to face similar problems. We may be living in different geographical areas but our experiences unite us. We hope that the concerns voiced by us here will also be heard at the Brazil Conference.
The working group is of the opinion that the environmental problems that have been highlighted - water, chemical fertilizers, etc.-cannot be solved completely by the small NGOs that are working actively in this regard at the moment because of limited financial resources. The governments have the financial resources and human power as well to tackle these problems, but somehow they are not doing it. So there is an acute need for all the small organisations to get together and try to pressurise the government to take action. It can be very effective, as is obvious from our Bangladeshi friends' example, who could only get the local authorities to listen to their water problems when 5,000 of them got together and put pressure on the authorities.
We also feel that all these small organisations should form a network to be able to support each other.
Peasant women should be informed of the dangers of excessive fertilizer and pesticide use. They have to use these chemicals because of the food requirements, but we have seen the damage it does to their health, like dizziness, and skin problems, etc. Women should have access to information in this regard; they should also be trained in the proper use of these chemicals.
There is a need to keep our contact and experience sharing alive. We hope that through a larger network, of which all of our small organisations will be a part, we will be able not only to keep in touch but also to formulate common useful strategies to tackle the problems we face.
We also hope that more workshops/summits/conferences of the type we are going through at the moment, will be held. We look forward to such opportunities to get together, share and strengthen one another.
Report of the official delegates
The working group's report was presented by Khemraj Nepal, Joint Secretary, National Planning Commission (Nepal), and is reproduced below:
The working group was of the view that this entire exercise of holding peasant women's summits focussing on environmental problems as they affect their own lives, has been extremely useful. The Regional Conference gave a chance to respective government delegations to listen to the voices of peasant women from our countries as well as the region and note the commonalities as well as diversities in these experiences. We as representatives of respective governments feel that the continuation of such a dialogue with these vitally affected groups of women within our own countries would be a critical input into our policy formulation processes in future. We thank UNIFEM for making this possible.
We have in our countrywise deliberations indicated what we propose to do as follow-up action within our own governments. However, we do feel that it is vital to reach these voices of poor peasant women from our countries to UNCED and recommend that appropriate steps be taken by UNIFEM to incorporate the results of the Four National Summits and this Regional Conference in the agenda for the UNCED through the forthcoming Preparatory Conference in New York.
It was also resolved that the national suggestions to UNCED should include a concrete action plan and mechanisms for regular monitoring of the impact of environmental policies on all poor peasant women; this should be included in their national reports to national legislatures. It was further resolved that the promotion of greater opportunities for sharing experiences among peasant women's groups within each country and the region should form part of the follow-up action plan.
The concluding session was chaired by Akhtar Hameed Khan, the 78 year old initiator of the exemplary Orangi Pilot Project, Karachi.* He referred to the growing evidence on poor women's contribution to building shelters and providing income for the family; on the sense of social responsibility they bring to bear on all community oriented projects; on their contribution to preventive health programmes and credit-based self-employment activities; and on their doing well whenever they get access to education. Acknowledging this the Regional Conference came up with the following declaration:
Empowerment means that women need to be taken seriously. This forum has proved that policy makers, planners, international agencies and experts can no longer ignore the voice of the poor peasant woman when they develop ways and means, against incredible odds, to deal with the present environment crisis. This forum has proved that the issue of North versus South is central to this environment crisis. Women are the epicentre of this centre!
* In his younger days, he had also initiated the Comilla community development project in erstwhile East Bengal and founded the Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development.
The Regional Conference made the following recommendations:
I. Land
1. Recognising that there is a male preference in land ownership, and that women need ownership of land in order to get access and control over (natural) resources and credit; recognising that about 30% of the rural households in the region are headed by women; recognising that for environmental regeneration women's control over land is crucial:
We recommend that ownership of land jointly or singly by women should be guaranteed by the government as a matter of priority.
2. Recognising the serious and rapid degradation of resources throughout the region, and the adverse impact of this degradation on the work and health of women:
We recommend that governments mandate scientific institutes and agricultural universities, which have proven technologies for restoring highly degraded land, to transfer the available knowledge and technologies to local communities, focussing on the needs and knowledge-base of peasant women and ensuring their full participation.
3. Recognising that research and dissemination is a two way process:
We recommend that traditional knowledge and practices of peasant women be documented and used by scientific institutions and policy makers in development policies and programmes on environment and development.
4. Recognising that the over-use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides adversely affects the environment and people's health through direct contact, water sewers and consumption; recognising that women because of their reproductive functions and their offspring are especially vulnerable:
We recommend that women be informed about the hazards of these chemicals and about the technical knowledge for their proper use. We recommend that alternatives for these inputs be studied and encouraged as soon as possible.
II. Water
5 Recognising that availability of clean water is a basic human right and that effective management is necessary; recognising that local water management practices have yielded good results:
We recommend that governments incorporate local communities in the planning and management of their water programmes and projects and in particular guarantee women's participation.
6. Recognising that natural disasters like floods have a detrimental effect on people's life, especially on women; recognising that flood prevention measures and relief tend to neglect women's needs:
We recommend that all flood relief and prevention programmes incorporate the views and voices of women, and ensure their participation at all levels and in all stages.
III. Forests
7. Recognising that peasant women are the primary users and collectors of forest produce, and that therefore forests are central in their lives:
We recommend that the usufruct rights of the people be restored in places where they have fallen into disuse, through adequate information to the communities about these. This should promote the joint management of community and reserve forests by the government and the people. Poor peasant women, who rely on these forests, should have 50% representation on forest management committees
We also recommend that in social forestry programmes the selection of species to be planted should be done in consultation with women's groups. This information should feed into research programmes executed by forest management institutes.
IV. Empowerment
Recognising that the low status of women is the underlying factor exacerbating the environment/development crisis:
We recommend that technical training, legal literacy, environmental literacy, adequate health and nutrition, access to resources, facilities are basic entitlements. Governments are accountable to provide these as enabling factors to improve the status of women.
The experiences of effective group organizations in conserving and regenerating the environment have shown that women's vulnerabilities can be reduced through collective action. We recommend that intermediary organizations like NGOs and traditional organizations promote this kind of activity as an essential tool in the empowerment of women.
Women as a voting constituency are increasingly becoming important on this subcontinent and their voices can no longer be ignored.
Summarising the lessons of the Conference in the last session Khushi Kabir from ADAB (Bangladesh) observed that the Conference had been very valuable for all participants, by providing a forum for a much-needed dialogue. The peasant women had clearly realised the critical importance of organisation, as they indicated by their discussions: "It is good to give recommendations and pass laws, but will they ever be acted on? The solution lies in the whole question of empowerment of which our organisational strength is the basis."
Stressing the need for sharing the strength that comes from solidarity, she said this initiative had to be supported and acted upon "to assess our weakness, test our strength and to devise ways and means for the solution of the problems that we failed to solve".
The next most crucial lesson of the Conference was that of access to and dissemination of information. "The women felt that certain things were known, they felt it with their bodies, they felt it with their hands, they felt it with their minds, but they did not have real information as to what was making things happen."
From the policy planners' point of veiw, the Conference had helped to demonstrate the unity of concerns between their objectives and the women's priorities on the issue of environment. "The success of the whole exercise will depend on its continuity. The dialogue should continue at both national and regional levels."
<section>4</section>
3 Conclusion
Annexure I
Annexure II
Annexure III
3 Conclusion
The need for conceptual clarity on the issue of women and the environment is critical in the face of the threatened disaster. Equally important is the need for authenticity in communicating the complexities of the debates and of ground realities, to our target audiences.
Only once during the eight month exercise described in the preceding pages was the authenticity of the voices questioned. This was when one government representative hinted that the peasant women had obviously been tutored by the urban, educated, middle class feminists. There were oblique references to peasant women being the repository of indigenous cultural values and the destructive nature of ideas (in this case feminist) of western origin. His criticism of the Indian group's recommendation of joint titles to land transferred by government - "A policy impossible to implement-the women will never be able to enjoy this right" - received a sharp retort from Julekha, a peasant woman from East Bengal who shouted across the table: "First you concede the huq (right). Then see if we can't wrest it from you through our struggles."
Then came Chandika (of Nepal's) response to one official's statement that rights to land were neither needed nor wanted by peasant women: "Persons who get food served to them three times a day without having to think from where and how it is coming, what right do they have to decide what we need and what we want?"
This should have convinced him that the women needed no tutoring from anyone!
These exchanges encouraged a young government representative from India to put up a spirited defence of the recommendation made by his team. "We realise the difficulties in implementing such a policy. But can you ignore the sheer empowering effect of a decision like that, once the women come to know of it? You can see it happening right here!" The positive impact of this exchange is evident in the very first recommendation of the final declaration.
The peasant women were taken seriously. Whether the political will required to follow up on the recommendations will be strong enough remains to be seen, but the women's plea to take back some concrete strategies to resolve their problems had not been made in vain.
Summing Up
The preparatory work and the organisational mode of the Summits as well as the recommendations that resulted, indicate the conceptual basis of the national and regional Summits. But before I sum up this exercise, a few words on the concept of ecofeminism may be in order. It is an offshoot of different strands of the Western feminist movement, relatively recent and still evolving. Some of its basic beliefs are:^1
(a) There is a close connection between the subordination of women and the domination and exploitation of nature.
(b) Patriarchal thought identifies women as being closer to nature and men as being closer to culture; because nature is posited as inferior women become inferior to men.
(c) The two processes of domination - of women and nature-are historically contemporaneous, so women have an interest in ending the domination of nature.^2
(d) Both the feminist and the environment movements uphold egalitarian, non-hierarchical systems, and can evolve a common perspective, theory and practice.^3
This rather simplistic set of beliefs suffers from many inadequacies. It is a-historical and underplays diversity across space as well as time. It also emphasises ideological domination at the cost of the material basis for such ideologies. Third, it underplays opposing sets of ideas and beliefs that have persisted in many civilizations down the ages, without examining the reasons why some beliefs acquired greater currency at particular points of time. Fourth, in trying to project a common women's perspective on development and environmental issues^4 it ignores the powerful influence of class, ecological, cultural and socio-political differences, and the inequalities in life experiences of different groups of women within and across nations.
The Miami Congress exhorted all women not to lose their womanly perspectives even if they acquired positions of power and influence, and put its faith in women's collective thinking to guarantee this. Anyone involved in the women's movement knows how difficult it is to achieve such collective agreements, let alone consciousness or perspectives on critical developmental issues, when interests - economic, political and ideological - are widely divergent.
Similar diversities characterise the environmental movement. Within India alone one analyst has identified three distinct ideological streams - Crusading Gandhian, Appropriate Technology, and Ecological Marxism.^5 The first sees modern science as "responsible for industrial society's worse excesses"; the last sees "modern science and the scientific temper as indispensible for constructing a new social order". The appropriate technology groups adopt a more pragmatic approach and propagate a synthesis of traditional and modern technological traditions. Gandhian groups tend to gloss over socio-economic inequalities within rural society, Marxists clearly recognise class and caste inequalities. Appropriate technology groups recognise problems of socio-economic hierarchies but have no clear prescription for dealing with them. On the issue of gender, the position of all three is ambiguous. The Gandhians possibly come closest to the ecofeminists in proclaiming that all women are
conservationist by nature.^6
Even the Geneva Symposium's formulations, refreshing as they are, indicate some conceptual ambiguity. It is only fair to say that resource users should not be viewed as problems. But how should priority be allocated between different categories of users? With diminishing resources and increasing populations is it possible to equate the claims of large industry and the exploding demands of the urban population with the subsistence claims of poor, especially rural, communities? The claims of distant users will always clash with those of local ones, as those of the rich will with those of the poor, of the few over many, of the wealthy and powerful (or politically more vocal) over the powerless.
The basic question remains-is distributive justice possible within an unequal power balance? Large dams that displace millions of poor people are justified on the basis of irrigation needs, more food production and energy that will in turn generate more employment for an expanding population. The Narmada dam spells doom to the villagers of Madhya Pradesh who are going to be displaced, but promises the farmers of Gujarat relief from chronic water scarcity and drought. All these conflicting interests represent user groups. How then can anyone decide which user group will prove to be better managers and conservers of the environment? Which of them has a stake in conservation and regeneration? Which of them is likely to be more accountable and reasonably fair and humane in the allocation and distribution of scarce resources?
The Peasant Women's Summits were undertaken to identify a clearly defined, large group of users across South Asia with certain shared characteristics. They are victims of the environmental crisis; their functional specialisation gives them a set of clearly distinct attitudes to the natural environment which, for want of a better word, may be called conservationist; they have learnt to manage households on scarce resources. Waste in any form is a luxury that they cannot afford and their attitudes to natural resources come closest to what the ecofeminists believe is shared by all women. The Chipko women composed a song illustrating the difference between their own perspectives and that of foresters.
Foresters:
What do the forests bear?
Profits, resin and timber
Women:
What do the forests bear?
Soil, water and pure air
Soil, water and pure air
Sustain the earth and all she bears
Chipko may be a household word in the environmental movement but none of the women present at the Summits had heard of Chipko. Yet they shared a commonality of attitude, one not always shared even by men in their own households. The five meetings highlighted that what makes peasant women view complex natural processes in interactive holistic terms is rooted in the women's material reality, "in their dependence on and actual use of natural resources for survival, the knowledge of nature they gain in that process and the broader cultural parameters which define people's activities and modes of thinking in these communities".^7
The peasant women who gathered at these meetings did not dismiss science as their enemy, but they did ask that its skill in finding alternative solutions be brought to their knowledge. They advocated strategies that would promote and strengthen their own concern for the preservation and regeneration of the environment, and for a fair distribution of scarce natural resources. They were not thus trying to suggest that their attitudes were fixed and unchanging - after all they had seen many other women in their own villages who did not share their concerns or perspectives. Something of this realisation made the Indian group say that sustainable empowerment requires new ideas, support, knowledge, guidance and resources, and the need for NGO intermediaries to think of long term rather than short term strategies.
Two main factors are responsible for this predisposition:
S. Asian peasant women are dependent on the natural environment for subsistence; and are actively involved in agricultural work. The course of agricultural modernisation throughout the world has seen a concomitant reduction in women's participation. This could conceivably be one area for serious rethinking by agricultural policy makers, scientists and environmentalists on the basis of the peasant women's appeals. But as for subsistence living, it would be difficult for anyone in today's context to advocate that peasant women must continue in their present grinding poverty in order to retain their conservationist perspective. The Miami Congress referred to the "violence of poverty"; Mahatma Gandhi, on the other hand, had talked about "property as violence". Karl Marx (though considered to be a fallen prophet these days) had talked about "from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs". It is not possible in this paper to resolve these philosophical
dilemmas, but the historical fact on which long-term strategies for the future of the environment could be built, while protecting the rights of all users, is that common property resources always ensured greater use rights to all, especially women.
Yet another lesson that was learnt through these meetings was that knowledge is a two-way process, and sustainable development in this field too requires learning from each other. Peasant women have held out their offer of a partnership-with governments, scientists and all others who are concerned about the future of the environment. It is obvious that such a relationship has no room for terms like "beneficiaries" or "victims". And if the population "explosion" is still believed to be the greatest threat to the environment, then surely it is high time for all those concerned about the future to pay heed to those demographers who have been arguing for years that the empowerment of women is the best contraceptive!
From the Lahore meeting it became clear that regional cooperation becomes a feasible reality among people who share problems and concerns. SAARC identified Women and Development as a priority issue for regional cooperation, but peasant women in the seven countries remain unaware of this fact. Nor has environment so far been included on the agenda of the Technical Committee set up to promote cooperation in this area. The women's offer of partnership should find a response from members of that Committee.
Finally, our differences with ecofeminists should not be interpreted as a denigration of the international women's movement, which is a living contemporary reality; it was that movement which first brought many women from rich countries to listen to the voices of poor women from poorer parts of the world, at Miami, providing mutual support, strength and courage. And it is the same movement which made these, five meetings possible. But the time has come to acknowledge that empowerment, too, is a two-way process. The participation and partnership of the poor and powerless peasant woman from South Asia and elsewhere is essential to the international women's movement in its struggles against the misuse of knowledge, power and the environment.
Notes
^1 Bina Agarwal, 'The Gender and Environment Debate: Lessons from India,' Feminist Studies 18, No. 1 (Spring 1992).
^2 Ynestra King, "Ecology of Feminism and the Feminism of Ecology" in Healing the Wounds: The Promise of Ecofeminism ed. Judith Plant, Philadelphia: 1989.
^3 Agarwal, op. cit.
^4 Declaration of the Miami World Congress of Women for a Healthy Planet, 1991.
^5 Ramachandra Guha.
^6 Agarwal, op. cit.
^7 Agarwal op. cit.
Annexure I
WOMEN AND CHILDREN FIRST
UNCED/UNICEF/UNFPA
Excerpts from the Report of the Symposium on the Impact of Environmental Degradation and Poverty on Women and Children
Geneva, 27-30 May 1991
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CONSIDERATION BY UNCED
Land Resources
1. Basis for Action: For sustainable development, women should have access to and control over land and other natural and productive resources, such as trees and water. Participants in development activities should derive benefits, i.e. increased access to resources, from their participation.
2. To ensure women's access to and control over resources, special attention and action is required at the sectoral level.
3. To improve women's access to resources, efforts are needed in education and communication, to change traditional attitudes and stereotypes about women.
4. The legal framework for access to resources - specifically the rights of women to land-need to be addressed in the Earth Charter, and tied to the rights of women and children.
5. Agricultural policy and practices must be oriented to building upon local knowledge and initiative, and be geared to fulfilling national and regional needs in food self-sufficiency.
Natural Resource Management and Conservation
1. Basis for Action: Women historically have been the resource managers and have played this role efficiently on the basis of knowledge which is indigenous to them and their communities. This fact has received scant appreciation by development thinkers and planners.
2. Strengthen the research capacity of local researchers to document and interpret the reality of the contribution to sustainable development of grassroots women.
3. Build and strengthen the networks of women, NGOs and researchers deriving their livelihood directly from their ecosystem.
4. Facilitate movements of people within countries and across borders in promotion of people-to-people exchange (knowledge, technologies, experiences).
5. Women should be duly recognised as repositories of indigenous knowledge relevant to sustainable livelihoods and environmental preservation. Their capacities to transmit and to effectively utilise this knowledge should be encouraged, enhanced and strengthened.
6. Agricultural research should be aimed at sustainability, increasing production on rain-fed and flood-recession agricultural fields, in hand-water vegetable gardening, in pastoral livestock herding, and in floodplain and riverine fishing, as well as on irrigated perimeters. At present, agricultural research is focused almost exclusively on irrigation, and on commercial crops, the arena within which most women confront great discrimination.
7. Development programmes and projects need to move away from a sectoral approach towards a more integrated approach. Forestry and natural resource management need to be integrated not only with other land use management issues, such as agriculture and livestock, but also with human resource development, e.g. health education and employment, and improvement of human living conditions, e.g. safe drinking water, sanitation, and adequate housing.
8. The goal of promoting the participation of women and children in forestry development activities is not participation per se, but ensuring that these participants benefit through increased access to, and control over resources. Cost-benefit analyses need to be disaggregated by gender and age.
9. Women's current role in management of household water supplies, as well as their role as agricultural and fisheries workers is a key factor in the ecology of freshwater resources. Women must be given information concerning preservation of ecologically sensitive water resources and conservation, and they must be included in the decisions affecting their work.
10. In all aspects of control of water pollution, including protecting fisheries, development of an integrated pollution control policy, and in research and testing of appropriate techniques for pollution reduction and control, consideration is needed to the special needs of women and children and the potential of their involvement in programmes. Women as householders and mothers are typically strong supporters of positive actions taken to protect food supplies and the health of the environment and of children. They can help provide vital information concerning community needs, the right direction for policy formulation, and mobilise support for implementation of policies.
11. Development of communication between voluntary groups and other NGOs, government officers, aid agency representatives, the World Bank, village leaders and local women's networks (as applicable) should be facilitated to define energy problems, provide education about alternatives, and stimulate local awareness.
Legal Instruments and Institutions
1. All conventions and legal instruments including the Earth Charter must take into account the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. Standards setting instruments must strengthen the human dimension inherent in achieving sustainable development by ensuring access and entitlement to land and other strategic resources for all peoples and promoting the development of human resources.
Education and Public Awareness
1. Technical education in environmental and natural resource fields must focus on community participation. Technical specialists should be trained to work with a wide variety of target groups, learning how to work with people of different genders, ages, and different types of resource users.
2. More such training must be offered to women. More women extension agents are needed to work with women resource users.
3. More grassroots, technical and professional women are needed to participate in policy and decision-making processes affecting women. Training and opportunities must be provided to enable women to participate in policy and decision-making processes.
4. Educational systems should be reoriented toward creative curricula which promote sustainable development and protection of the environment. Existing educational materials and curricula should be reviewed for gender bias and relevance to environmental education and health.
5. Strategies to combat deforestation must have a particular focus on conserving and promoting indigenous medicinal species.
Technology Transfer
1. Technology transfer should not only be environmentally sound, but also benign to women and children. Such technology should build on indigenous technology and knowledge, be appropriate, affordable and based on locally available material. Environmentally sound and equitable methods of production and species preservation should be promoted as part of such transfers, and local capacity to ensure sustainability be fostered.
2. Women must have access to and control over gender-specific and appropriate technologies to improve the quality of life for themselves and their children, and to enhance their ability to continue primary roles as resource managers, caretakers and producers.
3. Improving the overall status of women and their participation in socio-economic development together with availability of family planning services and information, and improved child survival rates, should be the basis of a sound and sustainable population policy.
4. If programmes to combat poverty and environmental degradation seek to broaden social participation, particularly of women and youth, these changes would also contribute to lessening of rapid population growth rates. In general, the best approach to tackling issues of rapid population growth where they exist seems to be support of female participation in socio-economic development including paid employment, education and management of natural resources.
5. Access to family planning services and information should be implemented and ensured as an important right for women, as crucial to the health and well- being of women and children. Every effort should be made to implement measures to include men's active participation in family planning activities.
Annexure II
Excerpts from the Declaration of the Tribunal of Miami World Women's Congress for a Healthy Planet
Miami, Florida, 12 November 1991
SPECIFIC PROPOSALS
I. Global Equity
1. States should recognize the right of all people to an adequate and sustainable standard of living (including food, water, shelter and a healthy environment): implementing this right should be a primary goal of all international financial, economic, trade and aid policies.
2. Acting together, states should develop policies to reduce the over-consumption of scarce resources where that occurs and to enhance the access of those who are disadvantaged to basic resources.
3. The principles of human rights should be extended to protect all people from risks to life or to health arising from environmental damage, hazardous waste disposal, and air, water or land pollution, whether such risks arise from private acts or the acts of state governments.
4. States should be accountable to other states and to individuals for action which seriously reduces the prospects of sustainable life for all. Such action should be regarded as a violation of human rights (UDHR Art. 25, ESCR Art. 11, ICCPR, Act. 6).
5. States should draft a convention to apply the above principles and to confer jurisdiction on an international court/tribunal or commission to investigate violations of those principles and to determine disputes resolution; mechanisms should be included in such a convention.
6. Global standards should be adopted and implemented by all states to cover all environmentally sensitive activities.
These standards should cover the following matters:
(a) Limits on energy use and the adoption of less harmful sources of energy.
(b) Waste management and recycling should aim at neutral effects in terms of pollution of air, water and earth.
(c) Equitable management of water resources.
(d) International forestry policies should aim at sustainable development by linking exploitation to regeneration.
(e) Weapons testing (nuclear and other) should be abandoned.
7. Multinationals should be required to meet these common standards wherever they operate.
8. Developed states and financial agencies should act urgently to review the debts of developing countries and to relieve them from the burden of those debts which they have incurred as the result of fraud, misrepresentation and false expectation that debt would contribute to their prosperity.
9. Developing states should be given access to world markets on fair terms.
II. Resource Ethics
1. A free and democratic society is the necessary basis for action to protect people and environments.
2. States should assess and monitor their economic policies in terms of their social and environmental effect. National measurements of progress should include the well-being of the environment and the people and its effect on economic growth. The work of women in family care, food production and preservation of the environment should be included as part of a new value system.
3. All individuals, organisations and states shall adopt precautionary and preventive approaches and consider the value of the environment when planning actions which may affect the ability of the earth to sustain life.
4 States should give highest priority to the ability of people to be self-sufficient with production of food rather than to the expansion of trade.
5. The development of seeds for food producing plants by big-technology should not, of itself, give rise to proprietary rights.
6. Development and aid policies should give high priority to developing technologies suited to the particular needs of that community.
7. States should recognize the right of indigenous people to take part in decisions relating to the development and use of their traditional lands.
8. School curricula should include education on the environment, as well as sex education.
III. Empowerment of Women
1. States should recognize women's role as managers and conservers of natural resources and should involve women in the decision-making process as equal partners.
2. States should act positively to implement fully Articles 7 and 9 of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (Political Participation, International Representation). They should act immediately to increase the number of women decision-makers at all levels and especially in relation to sustainable development.
3. States should act positively to implement fully Article 14 of the Convention (Rural Women) to ensure that women participate in and benefit from rural development on the basis of equality of men and women, and in particular, that they have access to agricultural credit and loans, marketing facilities, appropriate technology and equal treatment in land and agrarian reform as well as in land resettlement schemes. They must also be assured of access to land use and ownership, education and health services.
4. Development and aid funding should be allocated to women's projects. Women should participate in equal terms and at all levels in decisions relating to development.
5. Article 16.1.e of CEDAW (recognizing the equal right to decide freely and responsibly on the number and spacing of children and to have access to the information, education and means to exercise these rights) should be fully implemented.
6. Women in positions of power and influence should not lose a woman's perspective on development and environmental issues.
7. Women, by acting together, by organizing cooperatives and by managing credit and financial institutions can help change policy, protect the environment, improve their standards of living and challenge current economic analysis.
Further Action
It is our opinion that more should be done to ensure that women are involved in developing and implementing policies for environmental protection and development. To this end, the programmes for UNCED should include areas which are specifically devoted to enhancing women's initiatives and activities for sustainable development.
Annexure III
Guidelines for Discussions in the Working Groups at Lahore
Introduction
At the national summits and the presentations we learnt from the peasant women themselves what their problems and main issues are. They have committed themselves to contribute to an improvement of their situation.
We are also aware of the fact that all governments represented here have stated that they will include women's issues more appropriately in their policymaking and implementation.
Knowing what the problems are, we have to define as concretely as possible what is needed from governments, academics, NGOs and media before and after UNCED in a strategic way to make sure that women s voices are taken seriously regarding:
A. Land
a) to give peasant women actual land rights (not just on paper), and where they have rights how to improve these (including how land acquisition policies come in);
b) clearer definition and allocation of common property rights, especially of those used by women (e.g., common property rights for women's groups);
c) to stop soil erosion and degradation, including destructive mining;
d) to rehabilitate the quality of land on which women depend;
e) reverse the chemicalization and unsustainability of agriculture.
B. Water
a) to ensure water availability and rights;
b) to improve water quality, in terms of health, sanitation and sweetness;
c) to prevent water pollution;
d) to minimize damage by floods.
C. Forests
a) to stop deforestation of existing forests and inappropriate afforestation;
b) to increase the actual forest area;
c) to ensure that each of these forests has trees that provide the five Fs: food, fuel, fodder, fertilizer, fibre;
d) to ensure usufruct rights in the forests for the local women;
e) to encourage local forest-based (traditional) industries for women-based sustainable use of resources.
D. Health and Health Education
a) to promote peasant women's access to basic health facilities and health knowledge;
b) to document traditional forms of health practice and women's own knowledge in that area.
E. Education and Information
a) to increase women's literacy and formal and informal education, including the facilities needed for this;
b) to encourage and develop their artistic and other skills (including leadership skills);
c) to make curricula gender sensitive at all levels of education and training;
d) to educate men on gender, family planning, environmental issues and social evils, and to promote attitudinal changes;
e) to generate more data and statistics on women and environment and to disburse these at local levels, including information on chemicals.
F. Empowerment
a) to increase the acceptance of women's roles in development;
b) to promote women's organisation and networking;
c) to encourage women's legal and policy literacy;
d) to increase women's representation in social organisations;
e) and to promote their decision-making rights at all levels (starting with the family).
G. Other Issues
Are there any other issues which you think should be emphasised, e.g. credit facilities, etc.?
