<title>National sectoral report for the Philippines - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: national sectoral report for the </title>
<section>1</section>
Acronyms and abbreviations
Acronyms and abbreviations
ACPC
Agricultural Credit and Policy Council
ADB
Asian Development Bank
AIDAB
Australian International Development Assistance Bureau
AIDoS
Italian Association for Women in Development
APDC
Asian and Pacific Development Bank
APEC
Asia-Pacific Development Center
ARC
Agrarian Reform Community
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
ATI
Agricultural Training Institute
AWCF
ASEAN Women in Cooperative Forum
BWYW
Bureau of Women and Young Worker
CARD
Center for Agriculture and Rural Development
CARL
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
CARP
Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program
CES
Career Executive Service
CESB
Career Executive Service Board
CIDA
Canadian International Development Authority
CLOA
Certificate of Land ownership Award
CLT
Certificate of Land Transfer
CSC
Certificate of Stewardship Contract
DA
Department of Agriculture
DANIDA
Danish International Development Agency
DAP
Development Academy of the Philippines
DAR
Department of Agrarian Reform
DARLA
DAR Ladies' Association
DECS
Department of Education, Culture and Sports
DENR
Department of Environment and Natural Resources
DILG
Department of Interior and Local Government
DOF
Department of Finance
DOLE
Department of Labor and Employment
DOST
Department of Science and Technology
DOTC
Department of Transportation and Communication
DSWD
Department of Social Welfare and Development
DTI
Department of Trade and Industry
EO
Executive Order
EP
Emancipation Patent
EWIC
Enhancement of Women in Cooperatives
FAITH
Food Always in the Home
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FPA
Fertilizer and Pesticide Authority
GAD
Gender and Development
GATT
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
GO
Government Organization
GTZ
Deutsch Gesellshaft fur Technuische Zwammenarheit
HOPE
Homework's Program for Empowerment
IGP
Income-generating Project
ILO
International Labour Organization
IPC
Institute of Philippine Culture
IRRI
International Rice Research Institute
ISSI
Institute of Small-Scale Industries
JICA
Japan International Cooperation Agency
KaBaPa
Katipunan ng Bagong Filipina
LACWO
Local Accreditation Committee for Women's Organizations
LGU
Local Government Unit
LPDF
Landless People's Development Fund
LWUA
Local Water Utilities Administration
NACWO
National Accreditation Committee for Women's Organizations
NAFTA
North American Free Trade Agreement
NATCCO
National Confederation of Cooperatives
NCRFW
National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women
NEA
National Electrification Administration
NEDA
National Economic and Development Authority
NGO
Non-governmental Organization
NIC
Newly Industrializing Country
NSO
National Statistics Office
ODA
Official Development Assistance
PARC
Presidential Agrarian Reform Council
PATAMABA
Pambansang Tagapag-ugnay ng mga Manggagawa sa Bahay
PDAP
Philippine Development Assistance Programme
PDP-W
Philippine Development Plan for Women
PhilRice
Philippine Rice Research Institute
PLOW
Partnership of Landowners and Workers
PO
People's Organization
PPAEP
Pilot Provincial Agricultural Extension Project
PPGD
Philippine Plan for Gender-Responsive Development
RA
Republic Act
RIC
Rural Improvement Club
SURP
School of Urban and Regional Planning
TCT
Transfer Certificate of Title
TLRC
Technology Outreach and Community Help
TSARRD
Technical Support for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
UN
United Nations
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNFPA
United Nations Fund for Population Activities
UNICEF
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
UNIFEM
United Nations Fund for Women
UP
University of the Philippines
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WID
Women in Development
WINT
Women in Non-traditional Trades
<section>2</section>
Preface
Preface
In early February 1994, the Italian Association for Women in Development (AIDoS) contracted the Institute of Philippine Culture (IPC) of the Ateneo de Manila University, to assess the situation of women in agriculture in the Philippines. In a separate contract, AIDoS hired a statistics consultant to provide IPC with the available statistics, particularly published and unpublished data from the National Statistics Office (NSO), needed for the preparation of the country report. Funds for the activity were provided by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
The preparation of the country report served two needs. It formed part of FAO's Programme of Assistance in Support of Rural Women in Preparation for the Fourth World Conference on Women and, from the Philippines standpoint, the report, by focusing on women in agriculture and in rural areas, complemented the national situation report on Filipino women (NCRFW 1994), which was consider "too urban-biased".
To prepare the country report, the IPC research team coordinated with the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women, incorporated the data supplied by the statistics consultant, and consulted the documents submitted by the agriculture committee that was formed in connection with the preparation of the national situation report. As important as these activities were, the interviews conducted by IPC with groups of rural women in various parts of Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao in March 1994, as well as the provincial and the Manila consultative workshops, provided even deeper insights into the situation of rural women in the country. These consultations involved rural development agencies, rural women's organizations, academic institutions, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working with rural women. For instance, during the Manila meeting, the government agencies represented were the Departments of Agrarian Reform, Agriculture, Environment and Natural Resources,
and Labour (Bureau of Rural Workers); the NCRFW; and the NSO. The University of the Philippines, Ateneo de Manila University, and the ASEAN Women in Cooperative Forum (AWCF), constituted the academic/NGO sector, while the International Rice Research Institute, United Nations Fund for Population Activities, and the FAO (through its Technical Support for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development - TSARRD program) composed the international/multilateral organizations. The peasant women's coalitions (KaBaPa and AMIHAN), and the women's organizations (PATAMABA and LAKAMBINI), were unable to come to the meeting, but the rural women's groups were amply represented in the two provincial consultations held in March 1994.
The group interviews and provincial consultations aimed at ensuring that the voice and concerns of rural women would be reflected in the report. The choice of the research sites was based on our desire to examine the situation of rural women in different agroecosystems. For Luzon, two systems were chosen: monocropping irrigated ricefarming (Camarines, Sur), and coconut-based rainfed farming (Laguna). In the Visayas, two systems were also selected: sugarcane plantation (Negros Occidental) and fishing-farming (Negros Oriental). In Mindanao, an upland, cassava-growing village and a rainfed rice-growing area were chosen. In all, eight groups, involving a total of 111 women, were interviewed in various parts of the country. The majority of women were married, aged 20 to 60 years of age, and had low educational attainment. Except in Negros Occidental, where the contact person invited women from different barangays to a meeting in the city hall, the IPC research team met with
groups of rural women in their own community.
The group interviews covered the following broad topics: changes (in terms of politics, peace and order, technology, employment and wages, and government or NGO programs) in their community between the early 1980s and 1994; strategies used by women, including livelihood activities, resistance, and mobilization; and analyses of current problems and future plans of action. The research coordinator and an assistant posed the questions and facilitated the discussions that ensued. In most instances, a consensus was reached regarding changes, analysis, or proposed action. In rare cases when the women rendered different readings of events, the group generally agreed to leave the reply to a question in the form of an array of possible interpretations or range of experiences.
The IPC team secured the women's permission to tape the interviews. In addition to taping the interviews and to help focus the discussion, the research coordinator wrote the topic and the major points raised on a manila paper that was conspicuously posted for all participants to see. The interviews lasted from two to four hours.
Apart from the group interviews, the IPC research team also held provincial consultations in Visayas and Mindanao and a consultative workshop in Manila. The meeting in Mindanao was convened by a local partner NGO, the Technology Outreach and Community Help (TOUCH) Foundation in Cagayan de Oro; while that in the Visayas was organized by a local academic institution, the Silliman University in Dumaguete. The Manila consultative workshop, in turn, was jointly convened by IPC and NCRFW.
During the consultative meetings, the results of the group interviews were presented by the IPC team for comments and validation. The participants were also asked to provide a wider reading of the situation in the province, particularly in connection with developments in the agricultural sector; to enhance the analysis of women's situation in the province (or, in the case of the Manila meeting, the national situation of rural women) from the mid-1980s to 1994; and to expand the plan of action and strategies that had been elicited during the group interviews. Outside the consultative meetings, the IPC research team interviewed representatives of government agencies to clarify points or elicit data on certain programs or projects, and to address the data gaps that remained after the consultations as well as the information that was not covered by the set provided to IPC by the statistics consultant.
Because of the research methods and processes used, the preparation of the present report involved countless groups and individuals who contributed time, insights, data, and moral support. The statistics consultant (Nelia R. Marquez), the IPC research assistants (Yasmin Lee G. Arpon, Yasmin S. Gatal, and Joannah G. Perez) and support staff (Dhea S. Santos, Raymund C. Lazarito, and Lyzel S. Elias), the women who came to the interviews, our colleagues who facilitated the holding of the consultative meetings, and government agencies and NGOs which supplied the team with data - all played important roles in shaping this report. To them, as well as to NCRFW, AIDoS, and FAO, we say, maraming salamat.
Jeanne Frances I. Illo
23 June 1994
<section>3</section>
Introduction
The land and its people
Agroecological systems
Shifts and upheavals
Introduction
The land and its people
Lying at the western margin of the Pacific Ocean, the Philippines forms a string of 7,107 islands and islets, which are traditionally clustered into three island groups: Luzon, Visayas? and Mindanao. It is largely a mountainous mass extending from north to south (FAPE 1975). It covers a total land and water area of about 1,800,000 sq. km., with the land area measuring only 300,000 million sq. km.
Its tropical and maritime climate is marked by relatively high temperature, high humidity, and abundant rainfall. Rainfall distribution varies from one region to another, depending upon the direction of the moisture-bearing winds and the location of the mountain system. Despite these differences, the Philippine climate can be divided into three seasons: rainy, which extends from June to November; cool dry, which occurs from December to February; and hot dry, which falls from March to May.
The Philippines is vulnerable to typhoons, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. While typhoons devastate different parts of the country every year, earthquakes and volcanic eruptions have been less frequent. In the early 1990s, however, an earthquake destroyed parts of Central and Northern Luzon, while volcanic eruptions (Mount Pinatubo in 1991 and Mayon Volcano in 1993) disrupted lives in other parts of Luzon.
In 1990, about 60.6 million people inhabited the Philippine Islands (Table 1). Of these, 31.1 million (or 51 percent) resided in rural areas. Less than half (49 percent) of the rural population were female. Roughly 63 percent of the total rural population were potential workers (that is, 15 years old or older). About 85 percent of the male workers was deemed labour force members; among the women, only 48 percent was similarly classified (NCRFW 1994:77). In 1991, the primary sector (agriculture, fisheries, and forestry) was the biggest employer of male workers (53 percent). It likewise competed with trade and community, social, and personal services as an employer of female labour (NCSB 1991).
Agroecological systems
Outside urban areas, the major systems are coastal fishing, lowland irrigated farming, rainfed farming, and upland. Yet another system covers riverine and lake fishing systems, which usually combine fishery capture or fish farming with cultivation of crops. This contrasts sharply with coastal areas that lie between the sea and hill/mountain. There, crop farming is rarely practiced as the trek up the hill or the mountain can be time-intensive. In both systems, households generally raise a brood of chicken, ducks and/or geese, and one or two pigs. In crop farming systems, cow and/or carabao (water buffalo) are among the other animals households keep.
Irrigated farming systems mainly grow rice and sugarcane, while coconut, corn, and cassava are the major crops raised in rainfed areas. In both systems, females and males play distinct, but not necessarily rigid, roles. This holds in small or big farms, family-operated plots or plantations. Specific roles and responsibilities often vary by crop or by activity. In areas growing cash crops, like coconut and sugarcane, planting and weeding is done by women, while harvesting and processing (milling or copra production) is usually assigned to men (Illo and Veneracion 1988; IPC 1993a, 1993b). In cassava-producing areas, harvesting and post-harvest activities (including peeling, cutting the cassava into flakes, and drying) involve females and males, adult and children (IPC 1993c, GI/M 1994). With the exception of land preparation, fertilizer application, chemical spraying, mechanized threshing, and rice and corn production, harvest and post-harvest tasks heavily involve female
labour.
The substitutability between male and female labour in farming primarily depends upon the technology employed and/or availability of funds for hiring workers. Thus, land clearing and preparation are generally the responsibility of adult males, although women usually undertake land preparation when minimum tillage is required. Planting and weeding is done by women and children, although male members of farming families sometimes help with the tasks to minimize hired labour cost.
In fishing communities, fishery capture is a predominantly male activity, but women have been known to join their spouse so as to save on cost or to get the entire catch (Illo and Polo 1990). Repair of nets and boats is also a male task. As in other systems, processing and selling of the produce is the women's domain. Hauling, however, is mainly done by male family members or by hired male labour. Nonetheless, improved transport facilities to upland areas has shifted the responsibility of selling the produce to the women (Rives, Uy, and Borlagdan 1991).
To feed their families, women engage principally in the cultivation of kitchen gardens and subsistence crops, especially rootcrops. They also take responsibility for growing vegetables, although the men often take over the enterprise once vegetable production has become the household's major cash crop (GI/M 1994).
Shifts and upheavals
Over the past ten years, life in rural Philippines has been affected by several local and international changes. Of the events that included peace-making efforts in the Middle East and South Africa, the breakdown of communism in Eastern Europe, and the continuing armed conflicts in Kuwait, Somalia, Rwanda, and Yugoslavia, the Gulf War has had the most direct impact on hundreds of thousands of Filipino families. During that time, more than 300,000 workers were in Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern countries. About 70,000 of these workers were women, many of whom were employed as domestic helpers (NSO/NCRFW 1992:101-102). Stories of rape reached the country, and families worried over their relatives' safety. Dollar remittances, which supported many a household, were disrupted, and oil prices tripled during the period of conflict.
The economic crisis of the early 1980s - marked by a huge foreign debt, fiscal and trade deficits, and balance of payments imbalances - continued to haunt the Philippines (NSO 1992). Prolonged recession in industrialized countries, among which were the Philippines' major trading partners, made matters worse. The structural adjustment programs prescribed to correct distortions in prices, taxation, land ownership, and production priorities took its toll on the rural population. The servicing of the country's debt, which in 1987 reached as much as 45 percent of the national budget (Illo 1992), siphoned resources away from social services, physical infrastructure, and investment.
Life in rural Philippines worsened owing to the occurrence of droughts, floods caused by overlooking in many areas, particularly strong typhoons that devastated property, crops and livestock, and the sporadic volcanic activities of Mount Pinatubo. In upland areas, environmental degradation reportedly caused water sources to dry up. In some places, women claimed that they had to walk longer distances to get drinking water, or even water supply for their domestic needs (GI/L 1994; GI/M 1994).
Faced with economic and natural disasters, women and men were pushed to work longer, but with women continuing to bear a double burden of market and home work (Illo 1992). To beat rising prices of basic goods and their rapidly declining profit from their agricultural products, women's food crops, generally small scale and low valued, gained greater importance. Moreover, women's sideline occupations, such as trading or home-based manufacturing, became the household's mainline livelihood (IPC 1993a, GI/L 1994, GI/M 1994). As job opportunities became scarce and real wages continued to fall (NSO 1992), an increasing number of women also left to work as domestic servants. And as community health programs were initiated to fill the gap left by public health agencies, rural women tended to be recruited to serve as unpaid health volunteers (Uy 1991, GI/V 1994).
While the Philippines struggled to regain its economic footing after the end of the Marcos regime in 1986, neighbouring Asian economies soared and grew into "newly industrializing countries" (NIC). To attain "NIC-hood", the Philippine government has been developing industrial estates or "industrial corridors". The schemes have been viewed as threatening not only the livelihood of local communities as rice land gives way to factories, but also endangering the environment as industries befoul the air and pollute nearby waterways (IPC 1993c, PC/M 1994).
Not all the changes have dire effects or prospects. Many of the democratic institutions and processes have been re-established. Inflation is being slowly checked. Peace has returned to many areas GI/L 1994, GI/M 1994). And however flawed, an agrarian reform program is in place.
<section>4</section>
Review and appraisal: The situation in the early eighties
Review and appraisal: The situation in the early eighties
In 1985, the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW) described the condition of, and issues faced by, women in rural Philippines as follows (NCRFW 1985):
1. Philippine agriculture was generally male-oriented, but it nonetheless absorbed 55 percent of all rural female workers. Women, however, comprised only 30 percent of all agricultural workers.
2. Adoption of new technologies has effected a shift from unpaid to paid labour. This was shown by the increased weeding requirements of the high-yielding, early-maturing rice varieties. However, mechanization of such operations as threshing has reduced the share of landless women in the rice harvest.
3. With the exception of home management and other "feminine" inputs, agricultural programs rarely considered women as target clients. This was true for the government-sponsored cooperative program, extension, or credit. This bias against women was attributed to the general assumption that the men were the full-time farmers, while the women were "merely housekeepers".
4. Among the technicians of the Department of Agriculture, only the Home Management Technicians worked with women, although women technicians comprised 58 percent of all technicians (Unnevehr and Stanford 1985:15).
5. Women seemed to prefer combining their economic role with supervising or attending to their home responsibilities. This partly explained the survival of subcontracting schemes which, although generally susceptible to exploitative practices, thrived in rural areas because they do not take women away from their homes.
A more critical reading of the decade was offered by an alternative report on rural women (Pineda-Ofreneo 1985). While the report alluded to the issues raised in the official report, it also traced the roots of rural women's oppression to the imperialist forces that controlled Philippine society; their membership in the more disadvantaged class consisting of peasants, agricultural workers, and other marginalized sectors; and their gender, which placed them at a greater disadvantaged position than the male members of their class. These underlay such specific issues confronting rural women as invisibility of much of their work in labour force surveys, resulting in low labour force participation estimates for women; low wages which, in the case of seasonal plantation workers, were allegedly below the legislated minimum wage; growing landlessness among the rural masses as land got concentrated in the hands of corporations and the rural elite; disastrously low demand for major
export crops, including sugar, in the world market; labour-displacing and environment-unfriendly technologies; conversion of riceland to subdivisions; and intensive exploitation attending rural piecework. Moreover, rural women suffered from double or multiple work burdens as well as from illiteracy and lack of training. All these, Pineda-Ofreneo argues, were reinforced by prevailing notions that the home was still the rightful place for women and that the "economic and cultural subjugation of Filipinas in the countryside generally prevents them from having a concrete awareness of their own reality" (1985:22).
Of greater import to changing rural women's condition lies not in economic and welfare projects for women, but in organizing and educating the women. The 18,000-strong Katipunan ng Bagong Pilipina (Alliance of New Filipinas), or KaBaPa, distinguished themselves on this score as they combined involvement in community projects and services with study meetings, and literacy and other mass campaigns with political content.
To redress the inequalities besetting rural women, the 1981 Conference on Equality, National Independence, and Peace passed a resolution on rural women, which included the following: broadening of consciousness raising so that rural women could understand the goals of the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; promotion of literacy and training programs; sharing of household work with men, which would free women to participate in affairs outside the home; urging women to involve themselves in organizations, cooperatives, community work, economic and political activities to broaden their perspectives and cultivate their potentials; implementation of land reform; creation of remunerative employment opportunities for poor women in rural areas, of increasing regularity, and of equal pay; and effective measures, laws, and controls to protect women workers in homebased industries from exploitation.
Part of the thrusts and objectives raised in the Conference were echoed in the official report's forward-looking strategies, as follows (NCRFW 1985:72):
1. Involving women in agricultural technology and management training, which could help overcome traditional barriers thus enabling them to view themselves as equal partners of men and not merely as their auxiliaries in agriculture.
2. A closer monitoring of subcontractors to eliminate oppressive terms of employment, as well as a reexamination of industrial policies toward the establishment/dispersal of industries to rural areas to provide the women alternatives to subcontracting arrangements.
3. Increasing women's access to effort/time saving technology to help them in the discharge of their double responsibilities and to afford them time for leisure activities.
In addition, the NCRFW report sought the recognition of the value of house-work, stipulating that "the working conditions of domestic helpers . . . should be improved by legislation, assigning higher wages, social benefits, tenure and perhaps professionalization" (1985:72). This proposed action promised relief to young women who migrate from the countryside to the cities and end up as domestic helpers.
<section>5</section>
The post-Nairobi years: Review and appraisal
Too few, too little: Sharing power and decision-making
Institutions and mechanisms to promote women's concerns
Awareness of and commitment to women's rights
The increasing burden of poverty on women
Access to and participation in the productive process
Access to employment, education, and health
Violence against women, war, and armed conflict.
The post-Nairobi years: Review and appraisal
The years after the 1985 Nairobi Conference saw a spate of activities within both the women's movement and the NCRFW. The two streams came together with the coming to power of Corazon C. Aquino in 1986. Together with the government's planning body and different government line agencies, the NCRFW, various women's groups and NGOs, drafted the Philippine Development Plan for Women, 1989-92. It was to serve as a primary touchstone for government agencies, including the rural development departments of agriculture, agrarian reform, and the environment and natural resources, as they attempted to make their programs and services more gender-responsive, to minimize or eradicate discriminatory policies, procedures, and processes, and to strengthen women's claims to development resources.
For the 1995 Beijing Conference, the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women listed the following as major critical areas of concern:
1. Inequality between women and men in the sharing of power and decision-making at all levels;
2. Insufficient mechanisms at all levels to promote the advancement of women;
3. Lack of awareness of, and commitment to, internationally and nationally recognized women's human rights;
4. The persistent and growing burden of poverty on women;
5. Inequality in women's access to, and participation in, the definition of economic structures and policies and the productive process itself;
6. Inequality in access to education, health, employment and other means of maximizing the use of women's capacities;
7. Violence against women; and
8. Effects of continuing national and international armed or other kinds of conflict on women.
These concerns inform the review of the post-Nairobi experiences of women in agricultural and other primary sectors.
Too few, too little: Sharing power and decision-making
The election of Corazon C. Aquino as Philippine president appeared to foster women's active role in politics. There had always been women politicians, but between the elections of 1987/88 and 1992, not only did more women run for office, relatively more women were also voted into office, a pattern that held for both national and local executive and legislative positions (Table 2). The greater visibility of women in Congress seemed to have heightened legislators' interests in women's concerns. It is interesting to note that many of the pro-women bills presented were authored by male legislators.
Women's claims to the highest appointive positions in central government has been shakier. In 1986, President Aquino appointed three women to the Cabinet, namely: the first ever female planning secretary, concurrently the Director General of the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), the Secretary of the Department of Culture and Sports (DECS), and the secretary of the Department of Social Work and Development (DSWD), which had always been headed by a woman. During the last two years of the Aquino Administration, however, only one woman remained in the Cabinet. The number had since increased to two, with the naming of a woman to head the Department of Labour and Employment (DOLE).
Despite gains in both elective and appointive political offices, men continue to hold sway, although there are no legal impediments to women's holding power in the public realm. The same could be said of the top decision-makers in the Philippine government bureaucracy. In 1993, only 27 of all career executives in the government were female, an increase from 16 percent in 1984. The figures for rural development departments in 1993 are as follows: environment and natural resources, 5 percent; agrarian reform, 10 percent; and agriculture, 16 percent (Table 3). In contrast, the trade and industry department had women in 50 percent of its executive positions, while 88 percent of the career executives in social welfare and development were women. While women decision-makers may be attuned to the needs and concerns of rural women, their low participation in bureaucracies that plan for and oversee rural and agricultural development programs does not improve the chances that rural
women would get substantial and effective assistance from government.
Even at the barangay (village) level, office bearers in rural organizations are predominantly male. This applies to the barangay (village) council, to rural cooperatives, and to farmers' groups organized by government technicians (Table 4). In community-type cooperatives, which are open to community members interested to join, women constitute the majority of the membership. However, leadership positions are held by men (Illo and Uy 1992). Women's opportunities to exercise leadership continue to lie in women's organizations.
Within the home, as outside it, power and authority tend to rest on men, but the women have their own areas of authority (Tables 5 and 6). Women decide on how their children will be raised and educated, how earnings will be allocated, when and how much of their crop harvest will be sold, and what to feed their families. In contrast, men have greater say in such matters as investment, loans, and even the choice of contraceptive method (Uy 1991). But in some lowland Christian communities, women claim that even investments and loans are decided jointly by them and their spouses. Among rural households, however, women's decision-making power is almost nonexistent as there is very little chance for the children to stay in school, or very little earnings to be budgeted. Among some cultural groups in the Philippines, not even the children or the budget are considered as women's domain (Table 6). Indeed, for women of these groups, there are too few opportunities for sharing power
and too little decisions to be made. Information from group interviews conducted by the author in March 1994 suggests that part of the problem is women's ignorance about their legal rights, a concern overshadowed by the day-to-day anxieties of basic survival.
Institutions and mechanisms to promote women's concerns
Since 1985, the government has introduced legislation, mechanisms, and processes for the advancement of women and for the eradication of discriminatory forces in the field of employment, training, access to resources, and the like. Outside the government, women's organizations have flourished and NGOs, have experimented with ways of operationalizing and institutionalizing its commitment to gender and development. Among these organizations was AMIHAN, a militant multi-sectoral federation of peasant women founded in October 1986. Unlike many women's groups, AMIHAN, does not cultivate broad working relations with government agencies, believing that it should be self-reliant and independent of the state (Illo and Pineda-Ofreneo 1989: 17).
As noted in the NCRFW report for the Beijing Conference, there has been a shift in the perspective of working for and with women, as many government agencies and NGOs, opted for the gender and development or GAD framework over women in development or WID (NCRFW 1994:25-26). In many instances, GAD, which considers the inequalities in gender relations, has been promoted simply as "for women and men"; hence, it is generally considered as less threatening than the woman focus of WID.
Plan for women. One of the achievements of the post-Nairobi years was the drafting and adoption of the Philippine Development Plan for Women (PDP-W) in 1989. The enterprise involved the mobilization of different women's groups and individual experts. Begun in 1987, preparatory activities took the form of a series of consultations with, and workshops on, different sectors and issues. The Plan was adopted in 1989 with the signing of Executive Order (EO) No. 348 by then President Aquino. Of the 17 chapters of the PDP-W, two were devoted to concerns in agriculture and agrarian reform (Chapter 2) and to environment and natural resources (Chapter 3). The remaining chapters conflated the issues faced by rural women with those of urban women.
A sequel document to the PDP-W is the Philippine Plan for Gender-Responsive Development, 1995-2025 (PPGD), the preparation of which is being spearheaded by the NCRFW in coordination with NEDA. The PPGD is intended to lay down the totality of GAD concerns that need to be addressed in the long run. It shall also spell out gender-related goals and objectives, and set forth comprehensive policies, strategies, and program areas for implementation, mainly by the government over a 30-year period.
Focal points. Mandated by EO No. 348, NCRFW formed WID/GAD focal points in various line agencies, among which were the Department of Agriculture (DA), the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR), and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). These groups developed in slightly different ways (see section on "Programs, Projects, and Initiatives" for details). DAR and DENR set up coordination committees composed of representatives from various divisions, bureaus and attached agencies. DAR called its group the National Steering Technical Committee; DENR, the Technical Working Committee on Women. DA had no steering committee, but instead identified focal points in its different bureaus, attached offices, and regional offices. Its focal point was first based at the Office of the Secretary, but in 1993, it was moved to the planning and monitoring office to facilitate the mainstreaming of gender in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of agricultural
programs.
Focal points were also identified at the regional and provincial levels. In some of the DA regional offices, ad hoc committees, composed of planning and other technical staff, were formed to facilitate coordination of planning, monitoring and evaluation of women's involvement in rural or agricultural development interventions. Under DENR, a Technical Working Group on Women was created not only in the regional offices, but also in six of DENR'S bureaus. At DAR, the effort had been to strengthen the DAR Ladies' Association (DARLA) network at the national, regional and provincial office levels to promote women employees' participation in outreach productive activities and in advocacy, in order to make the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP) more gender-responsive.
Accreditation of women's groups. In connection with the selection of women's sectoral representatives at various legislative bodies, two organizations - the National Accreditation Committee for Women's Organizations (NACWO) and the Local Accreditation Committee for Women's Organizations (LACWO) - were formed to accredit voters, among whom were rural women's groups. Meanwhile, to better prepare rural women for participation in the political process, KaBaPa (which had 26,000 members by 1993) launched a program to increase women's electoral literacy by using a voters' educational manual that it had produced and translated into various Philippine languages and dialects.
NGO support for rural women. NGOs, strove not only to plan, but also to define their own framework for action and assistance. In early 1991, WID advocates within the NGO movement came together to thresh out their GAD framework and strategy. This initiative was pursued by individual NGOs, or NGO coalitions, and resulted in gender planning activities and the formation of women's desks in some organizations, most of which had projects in rural areas and/or with rural women. (A few NGOs, have set up their desks in the late 1980s.)
In the case of one funding window that catered to NGOs working in rural and urban areas, the number of rural-oriented NGOs, granted financial assistance increased from an average of 33 to 34 in 1986 and 1987 to 45 in 1992. Similarly, the number of NGO projects concerned with food security and processing, and with livestock, forestry and fisheries, increased from 67 percent in the mid-1980s to 87 percent in 1992. Taking all projects together, the percentage of women to total beneficiaries likewise showed a rise from about 50 percent to 55 percent (Table 7). These women-biased projects, however, generally involved hog-raising, food and fish processing and vending, and other small-scale agricultural enterprises. Agricultural production loans continued to be given to male beneficiaries.
GO-NGO partnership. Unlike in the previous decade (1976-85), when very little coordination or cooperation existed between the NCRFW and the NGO community, the 1986-95 decade has seen the building of a critical partnership between the government and women's NGOs, In 1992, or two years after the First GO-NGO Congress, the collaboration was formalized as the Women GO-NGO Network. The preparation of the national report for the Beijing Conference and the present report on women in agriculture are further manifestations of this partnership.
Awareness of and commitment to women's rights
Concern for women's rights to resources, livelihood, and social insurance is reflected in the legislation passed since the mid-1980s. The 1987 Constitution recognizes the fundamental equality of women and men before the law. The principle of gender equality is affirmed in new codes and legislation's. After intensive lobbying by different women's groups, the New Family Code stipulated, among others, women's right to own property and to contract employment and credit without their husband's consent (Table 8). Meanwhile, the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law (CARL) guarantees equal rights to ownership of land and its fruits, and equal representation in advisory or decision-making bodies under CARP. For its part, DENR'S Administrative Order No. 4, Series of 1991, grants the Integrated Social Forestry Program's certificates of stewardship contract (CSCs) to both spouses, making the husband and the wife co-stewards of the land. The most recent law that touches rural women's lives,
the Women in Development and Nation Building Act, provides equal access to resources, including credit and training. It also requires the allocation a substantial portion of Official Development Assistance (ODA) to support programs and activities for women. In 1990, the Philippine Congress also passed the Republic Act (RA) 6972, which mandated the establishment of day care centres in every village to free women for other activities. This legislation, like the others, came into being after long lobbying by women's organizations.
These pro-women laws, however, have yet to be fully implemented. In the case of the Women in Development and Nation Building Act, mechanisms and systems have yet to be developed and installed for allocating ODA funds for women's projects and activities, and for monitoring compliance with the law. In the case of the CARL, a total of 1.07 million hectares have been distributed by DAR from 1987 to 1992. In 1992, 363,277 hectares were covered by Emancipation Patents (EPS), while 89,138 hectares were distributed with Certificate of Land Ownership Awards (CLOAS). About 87 percent of the redistributed land went to men, and 13 percent to women. The average land size awarded to women and men varied very slightly. In the decision-making bodies created under CARP, women's participation was generally very low. At the Presidential Agrarian Reform Council (PARC) and the provincial committee levels, the ratio was 1 woman to 20 or 21 men. Female representation increased at the barangay
level to almost 1 woman to 5 men.
In many instances, the low female representation in decision-making groups or positions, and the small share of land and other resources distributed to women, were attributed by the women consulted for this paper to the lack of awareness of women and men to women's rightful claims to resources or to membership in powerful bodies. This ignorance of rights seemed to be widespread (GI/M 1994; GI/l 1994; PC/M 1994), despite gender sensitization or awareness sessions conducted by NGOs, and women's organizations. This is probably because, with the exception of a few groups, the topic of awareness-raising activities does not deal with women's legal rights, particularly those pertinent to the rights of women in the agricultural sector.
The increasing burden of poverty on women
The crises reported in 1985 persist, although in muted form. Inflation continues at about 18.6 percent (vs. a high of 50.5 percent in 1984 and of 23.6 percent in 1985). Budget and trade deficits - from between $1.3 to $3.2 billion in the early 1980s, to $1.5 billion in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Illo 1991) - were primarily financed by both domestic and foreign loans. Foreign debt continued to pile up, rising from about $24 billion in the mid 1980s to $28.9 billion in 1990. At about the same time, the incidence of poverty, which declined between 1985 and 1988, again rose to 37 percent in urban areas and 56 percent in rural areas in 1991 (Table 9).
Deepening poverty in the countryside pushed families to move to urban centers where they could find odd jobs. Thus, while the total number of households increased by 18 percent between 1985 and 1991, with female-headed households increasing by one percentage point more than male-headed households, out-migration from rural areas resulted in a net decline in the number of female-headed households by 2.3 percent, and by 1.3 percent among male-headed households (Table 10). In 1990, 42 percent of all female-headed households lived in rural areas, which was lower than the 52 percent among all male-headed households (Table 11).
Households headed by women appeared to be as poor as, if not slightly better off than, those headed by men. Landlessness among female-headed households was lower (49 percent versus 56 percent among male-headed households; Table 12). In rural areas, their average income was just slightly lower (P40,051 versus P41,353; Table 13). This income differential is partly explained by the fact that rural women workers are often employed in agricultural operations (such as planting/transplanting or weeding) that are paid lower than male field tasks, although there seems to have been a slight closing of the wage gap in 1989 (Table 14). Across all rural occupations, female earnings were estimated to be about 35 percent of male earnings in 1980, 39 percent in 1985, and 36 percent in 1990 (NCRFW 1994:82). Gender-based earnings differentials were much more skewed in rural than in urban areas.
These figures are not surprising as women are generally considered as household heads only after the demise of their spouse. Hence, female-headed households tend to be older and have had more opportunities to accumulate land and other resources than male-headed units. However, this is not to say that female-headed rural households are not becoming impoverished because, in fact they are, and more so than rural households with male heads (Table 15). Being a female household head in rural areas, where the incidence of poverty in 1991 was 56 percent (Table 9), is definitely worse than in the urban areas, where the comparable figure was 37 percent and where informal sector activities abound.
The poverty figures translate to malnutrition or under-nutrition among young children. In 1989/90, 14 percent of children 6 years of age or under were considered as moderately to severely underweight, which was 3 percentage points lower than in 1982 or 1987 (Table 16). Compared with male children, 9.8 percent of whom were reportedly underweight, poor nutrition was particularly evident among female children, of whom 17 percent were considered as underweight (Table 17). It could be surmised that malnutrition is more severe in the rural areas, particularly among female preschoolers.
Access to and participation in the productive process
Women who reside and work in rural Philippines occupy many roles and engage in a multitude of small enterprises. They are, at the same time, household managers, farmers in their own right or partners of their spouses, home-workers, traders, petty food manufacturers, as well as mothers and wives. It is against these multiple production roles that their access to factors of production and their participation in defining economic structures and in the productive process must be considered.
It is widely observed that credit resources earmarked for farmers eventually are given out to male farmers (Illo and Veneracion 1988; Rivas, Uy, and Borlagdan 1991; PC/M 1994; PC/V 1994). This may be true to bank-managed credit programs, mainstream farming, or fishing credit programs (à la Masagana 99). In contrast, small loans disbursed under a social or microenterprise credit scheme, which tend to characterize many NGO credit projects, find their way to women. This, for instance, was true in Northern Samar, where the intended beneficiaries were the family health volunteers, in Negros Occidental, where the beneficiaries included sugarcane plantation workers, and in Laguna, where the clients consisted of the landless, marginal farmers, and other disadvantaged sectors. In these examples, loans released to women borrowers ranged from 78 to 94 percent.
Women's loans invariably underwrite the purchase of a piglet to be raised or a sow to be bred and/or the expansion of working capital for a variety (SARI-SARI) store, the trading of agricultural produce, or the operation of home industry. Sometimes the loan is used to cover farming expenses, but this seldom happens because very few women are considered, or consider themselves, as farmers or farm operators. In Central Luzon, for instance, female operators constitute only 10 percent of the total (Table 19), and relatively more of them are found among farmers with less than half an hectare.
The concept of farming as involving an individual rather than a household as the operator underlies the distribution of land and the design and delivery of agricultural extension services (PC/M, PC/V, GI/L). Rural women's contact tends to be limited to agricultural technicians who were formerly known as home management technicians. They, together with female technicians whose basic training is in fisheries, livestock, and agriculture, account for 47 to 58 percent of all the technicians in four provinces for which data was available (Table 20).
The classification of "housewives" or as "RIC" (Rural Improvement Club, an all women organization) as intended participants in the training activities conducted by the Agricultural Training Institute (ATI), suggests that activities for other adults (farmers or fishers) are assumed to be attended mainly, if not exclusively, by men. Of the adult participants in ATI activities in 1993, about 6 percent were women. The figure was highest (15 percent) for day training, and lowest for on-farm research (3 percent; Table 21). These estimates, however, are necessarily minimum figures since some women who are classified by technicians as "farmers' wives" attend farmers' training in lieu of, or along with, their spouse.
To improve their chances of gaining access to productive resources and controlling the productive process, rural women have resorted to organizing themselves. In most instances, they are organized by DA technicians into RICs. But, in some areas, women have formed themselves into alternative peasant women's organizations. An example of the latter is A AMIHAN, another KaBaPa, which has gone into political education. Another organization, formed in 1993, is made up of home-workers. Called the Pambansang Tagapag-ugnay ng mga Manggagawa sa Bahay (PATAMABA), or the National Network of Homeworkers, the group receives support in the form of credit, marketing, training, and technical assistance from the International Labour Organization (ILO). PATAMABA has some 3,000 home-worker members and contacts in 24 provinces. The members have organized themselves into 15 cooperatives, and the organization dreams of putting up a bank someday.
Access to employment, education, and health
Employment. The primary sector consists of agriculture, animal husbandry, and forest workers, fishers and hunters. It absorbs a large portion of the Philippine population but, overall, its share has declined steadily from 51.1 percent in 1981 to 48.9 percent in 1985 and to 45.2 percent in 1990. Nonetheless, in regions with larger rural populations, agriculture continues to employ between 54 and 63 percent (NCSB 1991: 11.6-11.7). In 1991, the only regions where agricultural workers were outnumbered were the National Capital Region, which includes Metro Manila; Regions 3 and 4, which include the provinces around Metro Manila; and Region 7, which has Cebu as its hub.
It is worth noting that from 1980 to 1990, the rural labour force increased by about 3 million: 1.6 million males, and 1.4 million females (Table 22). The rural work force, however, shrunk between 1990 and 1992 by about 1.5 million - 1 million males and 0.5 million females - connoting higher out-migration of working-aged men. Reflecting the economic crisis that faced the Philippines in the mid-1980s, rural unemployment jumped by 4.1 percentage points, while underemployment rose by 4.9 percentage points; the comparable figures for the whole economy were 6.1 and 2.2 percentage points, respectively. Unemployment and underemployment rates were particularly high among rural male workers. Nevertheless, between 1985 and 1992 the rural employment situation eased (Table 23).
Rural women have been increasingly taking over men in agriculture, although relatively more were going into livestock and poultry production than agricultural production (Table 24). Among men, the percentage engaged in agricultural production dropped from 66 percent in 1980 to about 60 percent in the early 1990s, while the proportion of male workers in livestock/poultry production in fisheries rose by a total of 4 percentage points.
Of the rural primary-sector workers, the women have been consistently reported as unpaid family workers, while men have been reported as own-account workers. In agricultural production, this means that the men are considered the farmers, and women as their unremunerated helpers. However, between 1980 and 1992, there has been a shift among women to establish their own enterprises (from 19.5 to 30.8 percent) or to seek wage employment (12.3 to 17.4 percent). Among men, the movement has been from unpaid farm work to wage jobs (Table 25). These macro figures barely capture the increasing burden home by the rural populace - and women in particular - as their livelihood base has been consistently eroded. When family workers leave for the city or overseas, those left behind have to share the same workload. Given the higher out-migration among men, more and more women are taking over the farm, adding this to housework and their own enterprises.
The multitude of tasks in crop farming, animal raising, and fishery, as shown in Table 26, indicates that rural work is fairly distributed between males and females, although in some systems women bear the greater burden of farm work. The data also suggests some flexibility in task assignment as there is really no operation exclusively for men or for women, except possibly in sugarcane plantations where tasks are generally distributed along gender lines.
The total work burden of rural women may be quantified in terms of hours spent in various production activities. In rainfed farming systems, where households can rarely depend on any one crop, women work 37 hours per week (versus the men's 43 hours), which is much longer than what women in irrigated farms seem to be keeping (8.6 hours; Table 27). It can even compete fairly well with the work week of the men. Regardless of the system, however, women keep much longer total working hours than do men, because in addition to producing food or earning wages or profit, the women have yet to contend with time-intensive housework. Any relief from housework is usually given by other females -daughters, mothers, or mothers-in-law.
Education and health. The Philippines takes pride in the high literacy rates of its population, and particularly in the 10 percentage point improvement from about 83 percent in 1980 to 93 percent in 1990 (Table 28). The decline in the incidence of illiteracy is evident in urban as well as in rural areas, and across all ages. These figures mask the literacy problems in the countryside, particularly among women and among people 45 years and above. In 1990, as in 1980, the higher illiteracy in the rural areas as compared with the urban areas connotes a higher number of dropouts in the former before completion of the 4-year primary, if not the 6 year elementary course (Table 29). It would be safe to surmise that after elementary education, rural school leavers continue to outnumber their urban counterparts. Thus, the drastic drop in net enrolment at the secondary level might well be caused by the withdrawal of rural children from school to farm full-time (among boys), to work as
domestic servants (among girls), or to hire themselves out whenever wage jobs in the farms were available (Illo and Polo 1990).
While there are rural-urban differences in literacy and school attendance, the dropout rates for boys and girls are nearly the same. Licuanan (1991) notes that there is no significant difference in the school participation rates of males and females at the elementary and secondary levels. In fact, at the tertiary level, women tend to outnumber men. All told, therefore, females share with males the advantages of education. Gender bias in educating children has been noted to work either way. Parents have been known to prefer keeping daughters in school because they are more diligent and more interested in studying. In some areas, parents view education as their bequest to their daughters, while they leave the land to the sons (Quisumbing 1990). Other parents, however, choose to educate their sons over their daughters because the former are expected to provide for their own families, whereas the latter will likely be supported by their spouse.
Despite higher female malnutrition rates, females tend to survive longer than males. Infant mortality rates are higher for males (30 per 1000 live births) than for females (24/1000). For children aged one to four years, the comparable figures are 3.8 and 3.4 years (NCRFW 1994:68-69). Maternal mortality rates have been steady at about 10 to 11 per 1,000 live births (Table 30). Life expectancy is estimated at 64.9 years for males and 70.2 years for females (Table 31).
Violence against women, war, and armed conflict.
There is very little data on rural women in regard to these areas of concern. This does not imply, however, that no violence against women exists, or that rural women are not affected by armed conflict. In fact, the March 1994 group interviews suggested that some women are regularly beaten by their spouses, often for very petty reasons and more often when the men were drunk. In most places, no succor is available for the women. However, at least in one site in Mindanao, the women were offered some relief after an NGO held a gender sensitization session for couples in the village. The men who attended the session began to keep their drinking to a minimum and to help around the house.
In other sites, mentions were made about armed conflicts in their areas in the 1970s and 1980s. Families from nearby hills or mountains evacuated to safer places in the lowlands, leaving standing crops behind. In the evacuation areas, women often scrounged around for food and for activities that could earn them some food or income. Meanwhile, men periodically visited their farms but made sure to return to their evacuation base before nightfall. In recent years, however, peace has returned to the communities visited in March 1994. Nonetheless, some of the evacuee-families have stayed put, fearing future outbreaks in hostilities between government and rebel forces.
<section>6</section>
Programs, projects, and initiatives
Institutional level initiatives
Adaptations of the Grameen bank scheme
Agricultural planning with women and men
Political education of rural women
Support systems for Landless and peasant women
Programs, projects, and initiatives
The post-Nairobi years witnessed a variety of efforts and initiatives by government, NGOs, and community organizations to improve women's lives, remove barriers to opportunities and resources, and to mobilize women to demand for their rightful share. Some of these initiatives are being undertaken at the institutional level, that is, within government bureaucracies or NGOs, others, at the community level.
Institutional level initiatives
Building advocates and allies. To bring gender into the agenda of government agencies, the NCRFW used a two-pronged approach: the creation of a WID/GAD focal point or group, as mandated by EO No. 348; and a series of gender sensitivity sessions for decision-makers and a number of staff-members of the department or agency. Based on the evaluation of the focal points, the NCRFW has called for a restructuring of focal points, including the recruitment of high level sponsors, and the strengthening of the gender-advocacy competence of the focal group members. Despite the weaknesses of the focal-point scheme, headway is being made in some departments (Table 32). NCRFW has also initiated discussions on gender issues in the context of the agency's thrust or mandate. The next challenge lies in developing concrete planning and implementation guidelines, as well as effective policy and monitoring instruments that the agency could incorporate into its existing system.
Systematizing gender efforts. Similar efforts to sensitize decision-makers, planners, designers, and field implementers to gender issues in rural development have been taking place among many NGOs, The Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) has supported several levels of gender training for NGOs receiving assistance from any of its funding windows or mechanisms. One of its funding mechanisms, the Philippine Development Assistance Programme (PDAP), has pursued the gender advocacy trail relentlessly. First, it required all of its programme staff to participate in a two-day gender analysis and planning workshop. Then, it required its NGO-partners, most of which are working in rural communities (Table 7), to attend one of several regional gender sensitivity/analysis training workshops. It later invited its project committee members to a gender planning session. After these gender sensitization efforts, PDAP reworked its policies, procedures, and proposal-preparation
guidelines to encourage NGOs, submitting proposals to address gender issues right from the project planning phase. In late 1992, the PDAP tried out a new project monitoring scheme that would ensure gender differentiated reporting not only vis-a-vis beneficiaries and participants, but also in regard to distribution of project resources. All these initiatives took place within a 2-year period. The sustainability of the efforts, however, is in question as a number of the programme staff have left the organization. Nonetheless, between 1986/87 (when PDAP first began its operations) and the end of 1992, the proportion of women beneficiaries increased from 50.9 percent to 55.4. Still, a question that could be asked at this point is one that PDAP itself raised in 1991: Did the project substantially increase women's income'? The women interviewed in March 1994 viewed the issue in a slightly different way, remarking on the smallness of the scale of assistance rather than on the
returns GI/M 1994).
Adaptations of the Grameen bank scheme
Two Philippine variants of the Grameen Bank scheme are provided by the Agricultural Credit and Policy Council, a government agency (ACPC; NCRFW 1994:53-54), and by the Center for Agriculture and Rural Development (CARD), an NGO (Annex A). The two cases share the following features: constitution of its member-borrowers into groups of five, which monitor the members' loan and savings; savings mobilization, intensive orientation and loan supervision; and weekly-repayment schedules. The innovation in the ACPC case lies in the creation of a project-funding tier vis-a-vis the "Grameen Bank replicators" NGOs, and Cooperative Banks) and, indirectly, the communities of women member-borrowers.
In the case of CARD, the initiators and implementers was CARD itself, which manages the Landless People's Development Fund (LPDF), out of grants (revolving credit funds) and savings and loan repayments. Daily lending operations have been turned over to local branches that are run by CARD-trained local bank workers. Through members' peer pressure and intensive orientation and loan supervision by group leaders and by CARD. loan repayment rates have not gone below 90 percent (IPC 1993a). Women claimed that the loans enabled them to have their own economic projects or to expand their operations. The CARD scheme also built their confidence in their ability to run an organization as a benefit of joining CARD's credit program (GI/L 1994). The high repayment rate, however, has its own cost: women worrying about meeting their loan obligations, particularly if their ventures fail (IPC 1993a). A women's organization which considered adopting the CARD scheme found it women-unfriendly,
as it noted how the pressure to repay on schedule had pushed some women borrowers to accept laundry jobs (MC 1994). The group also noted that, unlike in a cooperative set-up, the LPDF was CARD'S, not the members'. Nonetheless, the CARD experience demonstrates one possible credit scheme that works, is sustainable, and can also be made more people-friendly.
Agricultural planning with women and men
In 1992, the Philippine-Australian Pilot Provincial Agricultural Extension Project (PPAEP) was launched in the provinces of Albay and Camarines Sur (in Region 5), and in Bukidnon and Misamis Oriental (in Region 10). Its implementing agency was the Department of Agriculture, and later the local agricultural offices. An integral part of the project was the organization and mobilization of rural-based organizations to draft a community framework plan and, in particular, their agricultural sector action plan.
The chances of women's membership in the planning team were high since the women constituted the majority of the research teams, which were the first groups formed to work with PPAEP. Three strategies were observed by the participating communities, the most common of which was to specify women's agricultural or home-based industry needs in the plan. A less common practice was to specify how women would be involved in, or benefit from, the general agricultural activities or projects. In many instances, activities for women were also included. A much rarer strategy, known to be employed by one community, took the form of a separate "women's plan". The first and third strategies tended to include traditional DA intervention for rural women, while the second forced the community to recognize the roles women play as farmers and technology users, and to think beyond the usual (popular) projects of hog-raising and handicrafts for women.
The women found the planning exercise, and the research activities that preceded it, too time-intensive. However, they acknowledged two benefits: they learned a lot (about planning) from their involvement in the project, and they felt confident that they would benefit from assistance or initiatives that would come out of the plans.
Political education of rural women
Efforts to increase rural women's awareness of political issues and of gender power relations have been noted in the national report (NCRFW 1994). One case is provided by KaBaPa, a coalition of peasant women's organizations; another, by the Technology Outreach and Community Help (TOUCH) Foundation, and NGO working with people's organizations in Mindanao.
The KaBaPa program to increase women's electoral literacy involved the production of a voters' educational manual and its translation into various Philippine languages and dialects. Since 1986, KaBaPa has also been conducting study sessions for its members to discuss pressing political matters, such as the Bataan nuclear plant, the U.S. bases, and more recently the country's foreign debt.
The TOUCH project brings couples together into a session to discuss gender issues based on their own experiences. The topics range from how the man treats his spouse, to work sharing at home, and to leisure and vices. TOUCH community organizers who serve as facilitators try to keep inputs to a minimum, and strive to avoid giving lectures. The emphasis of the sessions is couples' experiences vis-a-vis gender roles and sexual relations; the goals, to sensitize the women about expanding their roles, and to work on the men to share women's burden and to recognize their spouse's right to self-determination. In an assessment of the sessions, women claimed that their spouse did begin to help with housework, and most of them cut down on their drinking - the cause of many marital spats and wife-beating.
Support systems for Landless and peasant women
In 1977, the Rural Improvement Club (RIC) of San Isidro (Libmanan in Camarines Sur) opened a number of "kindergarten schools" in different sitios (settlement districts within a village). Unlike most kindergarten schools, those in San Isidro also served as childminders or day care centers. The schools are housed in borrowed premises and often of very light construction materials. Because cash has always been limited, the RIC leadership has avoided investing in semi-permanent structures, as doing so would result in having only one school.
The RIC runs the kindergartens on donations and on financial and labour contributions from the children's parents. Teacher-volunteers, who have to be at least high school graduates, are paid a small stipend, also from donations. Moreover, the children are usually provided free paper and pencils.
What sets the San Isidro initiative apart, even from other RIC-run kindergartens, is the fact that several schools have been established. The location of the schools has enabled landless women to send their children to the school without having to escort them to the village center. The free paper and pencils also liberated landless families from worries about shelling out cash for school supplies. By providing almost free pre-elementary education to the children, the San Isidro RIC, as other RICs have done, has democratized pre-school education.
Other initiatives are: the dairy project of the Ecumenical Development Cooperative Society, wherein women play an active role in pushing the dairy development in the country from farming to management to lobbying for legislative action (cited in NCRFW 1994:58); the Partnership of Landowners and Workers (PLOW) project, which involves both male and female sugarcane workers in Negros Occidental (IPC 1993c, see also Annex A); the advocacy of the Women in Rice Farming Systems Network based at the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), with IRRI and Philippine Rice Research Institute (PhilRice) scientists to orient their technologies for female as well as male users (Bautista, and others 1994); and the GAD advocacy within the National Confederation of Cooperatives (NATCCO), which has taken the form of the Enhancement of Women in Cooperative (EWIC) pilot project (Illo and Uy 1992). This project includes activities for conducting a series of gender sensitivity sessions with
the leadership and management of affiliate-cooperatives as well as with women's groups within primary cooperatives, preparing training and operational manuals, and lobbying for the allocation of loan resources for women's projects. To date, NATCCO has decided to "integrate" the functions of its WID unit with its regular departments.
<section>7</section>
Review and appraisal of international support
Review and appraisal of international support
During the past decade, the Philippines received bilateral and multilateral funding as well as technical assistance for projects that were designed to involve women either exclusively, or as a sector in a large program/project, or as participants or cooperators in "integrated" projects. A list of these technical cooperation or ODA projects has been gleaned from that contained in the national report (NCRFW: 124-128) and reproduced over the following pages.
Among the funding agencies with a definite bias for women are the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the Australian International Development Assistance Bureau (AIDAB), the Deutsch Gesellshaft Fur Technuische Zwammenarbeit (GTZ), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the Ford Foundation, the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), and the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA). The International Labour Organization (ILO) has also supported DOLE'S program for women entrepreneurs and home-based workers. These agencies have funded projects that employ any of the three approaches: integrating women in the different project activities, incorporating a women's component, or designing a project exclusively for women.
The projects for rural women are of several types: training in leadership, assertiveness, or income/productivity-enhancing technical skills (financial management, livelihood skills); income-generating projects (IGPs) that support existing livelihood activities, which in turn comprise many of the women's components in projects; and organizing women, such as the women along Laguna Lake or the home-based workers. Of indirect importance to the rural women are the gender-sensitivity training activities that the NCRFW and NGOs, conduct with agricultural development agencies in building data bases and the like.
To funnel more resources to rural and urban women, Congress enacted the Women in Development and Nation Building Act (RA 7192), which provides that a substantial portion of ODA funds be allocated to support programs and activities for women. The NCRFW estimates that, as of January to May 1993, 18 percent of the US$ 166.8 million committed ODA funds were earmarked for projects that purported to integrate women in the various project activities, or that had a women's component. Meanwhile, 23 percent of the proposed or pipeline projects evaluated by NEDA for ODA consisted of integrated projects (5 percent), projects with WID components (2 percent), or women-only projects (16 percent). The rest, NCRFW claims, were non-gender sensitive projects. Of the funds slated for women, only a fraction presumably benefited rural women, directly or indirectly.
Technical cooperation and assistance pertinent to women in agriculture^1
Critical area of concern
Project title
Classification
Funding sources and amount²
Status
Inequality in the sharing of power and decision- making at all levels
Training in Leadership and Organization- Building for the Women along Laguna Lake
Women-specific
UNIFEM/ Australia
Proposed/ Pipeline
Pilot Provincial Agricultural Extension Project or PPAEP(Regions 5 and 10)^2
Integrated
A$2.97M AIDAB/(Phase 1)
Ongoing
Insufficient mechanisms at all levels to promote the advancement of women
NCRFW Institutional Strengthening Project(Training)
Specific gender and development project
CIDA/1.53 M
Ongoing
NCRFW Institutional Strengthening Project(Data base)
Specific gender and development project
ADB/0.1 M
Ongoing
Creation of NCRFW Project/Groups
GTZ/ DM 150,000
Ongoing
Women Only
WID/NGO Umbrella Project
CIDA/3.5M
Ongoing
Poverty
Livelihood and Revolving and Capability-Building Fund for Women
For Women Only
Ford Foundation/P10 M
Completed
WID Integrated
Entrepreneur Support Project
CIDA/4.3 M
WID Integrated
Child Survival Project
USAID/3.25 M
WID Integrated
Family Planning Assistance Project
USAID/10 M
Women Only
Ongoing
Financing Program (with 4 NGOs)
USAID/0.94 M
Proposed/
Participatory Action Research for Grassroots Women Development
UNESCO
Pipeline
Inequality in women's access to and participation in the definition of economic structures and policies and in the productive process itself
Shallow Groundwater Irrigation Development Project for Mount Pinatubo Affected Areas
Women's component
JICA/4.46 M
Diversified Crops Irrigation Engineering
Women's component
JICA/4.71 M
Development of Viable Agrarian Reform Communities in Southern Palawan
Women's component
JICA/1.89 M
Inequality of access to education, health, employment and other means of maximizing awareness of women's rights and the use of their capacities
Recurrent Education Program
Netherlands/ ECC; UNESCO
Proposed/ Pipeline
Radio Broadcasting for Women's Concerns
UNESCO
Proposed/ Pipeline
Promoting Self- Employment through Labor Ministries
Women only
ILO-DANIDA/ 0.29M (Phase1) 0.03M (Phase2)
Completed Ongoing
Women in Non- Traditional Trades(WINT)
ILO/Royal Dutch Gov't 0.504 M
Completed
Action Research to Promote Organization Among Piece-Rate Workers
Voluntary Fund for the UN Decade for Women/2,500
Completed
Skills Training Program for Rural Women
ILO/0.092 M
Completed
Cooperative Entrepreneurship for Rural Development
ILO
National Study: Living and Working Conditions of Homeworkers
ILO
Productivity Improvement in Small Enterprises
USAID and ILO
Inequality in access to education, health, employment(cont.)
Project HOPE (Homeworkers Program for Empowerment)
ILO
Child Labour Project
WID integrated
UNICEF
Training of Trainers for Agricultural Extension
Women and Men
APDC (with some support)
Completed
^1 The list was gleaned from The Philippine Country' Report on Women, 1986-95, prepared by the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women for the Fourth United Nations World Conference on Women, Beijing, China, September 1995 (NCRFW 1995a: 124-128). Data before 1992 (pre-RA7192) was not available.
^2 In US$, unless noted otherwise.
^3 These were added to the original list contained in the national report.
Several problems presently limit the effectiveness of the implementation of RA7192 vis-a-vis ODA and technical cooperation. These include absence of a systematic monitoring system by the government on how much is going to projects or activities that address women's concerns, distinguishing between concerns of rural and urban women; lack of general as well as sector-specific Gender and Development (GAD) guidelines to help the government assess the gender-responsiveness of projects or programs; and yet undeveloped mechanisms for categorizing, recording, and reporting on ODA-funded projects according to approaches employed for meeting women's needs and concerns in rural as well as urban areas. The NCRFW has identified other problems that also apply to assistance to rural women, namely: lack of awareness or understanding of foreign experts of the Philippine rural and agricultural situation; lack of funds to train local experts who could provide technical assistance; and fielding
by foreign donors of appraisal missions that are neither gender-sensitive nor aware of the Philippine rural and agricultural situation. Finally, the NCRFW recognizes the need to strengthen its role so that it could not only direct funding to government agencies and NGOs, but also to ensure that a substantial portion of development funds for women are channelled to agricultural and other similar concerns of rural women.
<section>8</section>
Future strategic goals and objectives
Future strategic goals and objectives
The draft report on the national situation of Philippine women (NCRFW 1994:23) included in its "Women Ten Point Political Agenda" two provisions that are of particular relevance to women in the rural areas. One pertains to the environment, the other to agriculture.
Environment. Adopt environmental reconstruction programs to generate sustainable development in terms of the creation of economic activities for women. Stop environmental destruction which specifically affects women as providers of food, water, and fuel, through total log ban, garbage recycling, and prevention of air and water pollution.
Agriculture. Enact laws to recognize rural women as farmers and fisher-folk and ensure the right of women peasants and agricultural workers to own land and access to support services.
The NCRFW report also contains a set of future strategic goals and objectives, some of which are relevant to women in rural areas. This subset is presented in Annex B of the present report. The strategies included:
1. Conduct leadership and assertiveness training, and disseminate information on women's rights and the like;
2. Organize women or activate women's organizations;
3. Review policies or instructional/training materials;
4. Increase land ownership rights among women;
5. Provide basic services to all barangays;
6. Protect Filipino producers, industries, and markets;
7. Increase productivity and income from subcontracting industry and from agriculture;
8. Provide primary importance on food security over export-oriented cash-crop production;
9. Ensure the conservation of prime agricultural lands and stopping discriminate land conversion through women power; and,
10. Facilitate local employment and increasing access to employment opportunities and job alternatives.
These strategies are echoed by the rural women interviewed in March 1994. Their issues, however, were more pointed, and their strategies more immediate (Annex C). Among their strategies were:
1. Putting up a small factory in the barangay as an alternative to individual home-based work;
2. Increasing capitalization for term trading:
3. Increasing the scale of funding or assistance for women;
4. Initiating gender and poverty-responsive training programs;
5. Promoting diversification of crops without jeopardizing food supply;
6. Organizing women farmers into a producers' union to enable them to negotiate for better prices and terms with traders;
7. Obtaining two-way radios (communication equipment) which would help women (and men) farmers to monitor prices and locate the best buyers for their products;
8. Making technicians more aware that women farmers need technical assistance beyond the stereotyped home-management and backyard-garden technologies;
9. Promoting awareness among women of their rights as individuals, farmers, and workers, and involving men in the discussion of women's (and men's) roles, rights, and duties;
10. Monitoring compliance to wage laws pertinent to plantations;
11. Promoting land sharing between plantation owners and workers;
12. Generating alternative livelihood to fishing and/or diversifying fishing equipment to enable households to fish at different times of the year;
13. Arresting further resource depletion by enforcing existing laws and disseminating technical information about environment-friendly fishing technologies;
14. Involving women in training and application of resource-enhancing technologies;
15. Planting of fast-maturing trees that could be harvested;
16. Mobilizing women to demand for roads, transportation facilities, and basic services like potable water;
17. Promoting the organization of women's groups in Agrarian Reform Communities (ARCS);
18. Promoting the involvement of women in cooperatives at all levels;
19. Naming of women in ownership or land-control documents; and,
20. Promoting FAITH ("food always in the home") and similar schemes to secure the food supply of the household.
The rural women's set of strategies, along with the more general NCRFW strategic plans, seem to define the future, according to the women most involved in agriculture and other primary producing sectors. The struggle for access to resources, the need for protection from exploitation, and the desire for the improvement of self, family and community, reverberate in the plan of action for women in agriculture.
<section>9</section>
References cited
References cited
Alcober, Dolores L., and Nester O. Morales
1992 Intrahousehold Dynamics of Farm Households in the Upland Villages of Matalom, Leyte. A Terminal Report. Baybay, Leyte: Farm and Resource Management Institute, Visayas State College of Agriculture. Typescript.
Bautista, E.U., A.B. Vasallo, R.F. Orga, C.P. Diaz, and T.R. Paris
1994 "Developing Small Engineering Technologies for Women." Paper presented during the 7th National Rice R&D Planning and Evaluation Workshop, Philippine Rice Research Institute, Munoz, Nueva Ecija, 23-25 March. Typescript.
Center for Women's Resources (CWR)
1993 Enhancing the Pole and Status of Filipino Women in Social Development. Case Studies of Barangay Aduyugan, Ifugao; Barangay Antipolo, Kiangan, Ifugao; Barangay Tinoc, Ifugao; Barangay 2, Bacolod City; Barangay Alangilan, Bacolod City; Barangay Makasandag, Parang, Maguindano; Barangay Sabaken, UPI, Maguindanao; and Case Study of the Visayan Women of Bulalo, Sultan Kudarat. Makati, Metro Manila: United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund. Typescript.
Fund for Assistance to Private Education (FAPE)
1975 The Philippine Atlas: A Historical, Economic, and Educational Profile of the Philippines. Manila: Fund for Assistance to Private Education.
Group Interviews/Luzon (GI/L)
1994 Group interviews conducted in Dolores, Quezon; Bautista, San Pablo; San Isidro, Libmanan, Camarines Sur; attended by a total of 45 women. 4 and 28 March.
Group Interviews/Mindanao (GI/M)
1994 Group interviews conducted in Kitam-is, Manolo Fortich, Bukidnon; and Kibungsod and San Vicente, Magsaysay, Misamis Oriental; attended by a total of 31 women. March.
Group Interviews/Visayas (GI/V)
1994 Group interviews in Hacienda Santa Catalina, Talisay, Negros Occidental; and in Bais, Negros Oriental; attended by a total of 36 women. 4 and 12 March.
Illo, Jeanne Frances I.
1985 "Women's Participation in Two Philippine Irrigation Projects. "In Philippine Sociological Review 33(3-4):19-45.
1988 Irrigation in the Philippines: Impact on Women and Their Households, The Aslong Project Case. Women's Roles and Gender Differences in Development: Cases for Planners, Asia. No. 2. Bangkok: Population Council.
1992 "A Preliminary Inquiry into the Micro-level Gender Effects of Macroeconomic Adjustment Policies." Working Paper Series, No. 92-16. Makati, Metro Manila: Philippine Institute for Development Studies.
Illo, Jeanne Frances I., and Rosalinda Pineda-Ofreneo
1989 "Producers, Traders, Workers: Philippine Women in Agriculture." Paper prepared for the Thailand Development and Research Institute/Food and Agriculture Organization's Southeast Asian Seminar on Women in Agriculture held in Chomtien, Thailand.
Illo, Jeanne Frances I., and Jaime B. Polo
1990 Fishers, Traders, Farmers, Wives: The Life Stories of Ten Women in a Fishing Village. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University.
Illo, Jeanne Frances I., and Cecile C. Uy
1992 Members But Not Leaders: Finding a Niche for Women in Cooperatives. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University.
Illo, Jeanne Frances I., and Cynthia C. Veneracion
1988 Women and Men in Rainfed Farming Systems: Case Studies of Households in Bicol Region. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University.
Institute of Philippine Culture (IPC)
1993a Assessing PDAP Assistance: Luzon. Field Report Nos. 1 and 4. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University.
1993b Assessing PDAP Assistance: Visayas. Field Report Nos. 2 and 5. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University.
1993c Assessing PDAP Assistance: Mindanao. Field Report Nos. 3 and 6. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University.
Licuanan, Patricia B.
1991 "A Situation Analysis of Women in the Philippines." In Gender Analysis and Planning. The 1990 IPC-CIDA Workshop. Jeanne Frances I. Illo, ed. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University. Pp. 15-28.
Manila consultation (MC)
1994 Final consultative meeting held in Quezon City, and participated in by 12 women and one man from government agencies (Departments of Agriculture, Agrarian Reform, Environment and Natural Resources, and Labour and Employment; and the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women), academic institutions (Ateneo de Manila University and University of the Philippines), the International Rice Research Institute, and the United Nations Fund for Population Activities.
Philippines (Republic) NCRFW
1985a The Women's Decade in the Philippines. Analysis of Significant Changes in Women's Role and Status. Manila: National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women.
1985d Filipino Women in Public Affairs. Manila: National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women.
1985c Women Workers in the Philippines. Manila: National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women.
1994 The Philippine Country Report on Women: 1986-1995. Manila: National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women in cooperation with the National Preparatory Committee and National Steering Committee of Women NGOs.
Philippines (Republic) NCRFW/NEDA
1993 Guidelines for Developing and Implementing Gender-Responsive Projects and Programs. Manila: National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women and the National Economic and Development Authority.
Philippines (Republic) NSCB
1991 1991 Philippine Statistical Yearbook. Makati, Metro Manila: National Statistical Coordination Board.
Philippines (Republic) NSO/NCRFW
1991 Statistics on the Filipino Women. Manila: National Statistics Office in cooperation with the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women.
Philippines (Republic) NSO
1992 Philippine Yearbook. Manila: National Statistics Office.
Pineda-Ofreneo, Rosalinda
1985 Women of the Soil: An Alternative Philippine Report on Rural Women. Philippine Women's Research Collective.
1991 The Philippines: Debt and Poverty. Oxford: Oxfam (in association with the Philippines' Freedom from Debt Coalition).
Provincial consultation/Mindanao (PC/M)
1994 Provincial consultative meeting held in Cagayan de Oro, and attended by 15 participants from NGOs, government agencies, and women's organizations. 10 March.
Provincial consultation/Visayas (PC/V)
1994 Provincial consultative meeting held in Dumaguete, and attended by 17 women participants from NGOs, government agencies, women's organizations, and Siliman University. 15 March.
Quisumbing, Agnes R.
1990 "Land Rights, Schooling, and Assets as Intergenerational Wealth Transfers in Philippine Rice Villages." University of the Philippines and Yale University. Typescript.
Rivas, Rene M, Cecile C. Uy, and Salve B. Borlagdan
1991 "Women and Men in an Upland Project: The Bulolakaw Case." In Gender Analysis and Planning: The 1990 IPC-CIDA Workshops. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University. Pp. 75-86.
Rola, A.C., H.F. Dayo, and J.T. Hernandez
1994 "Family Labor Use in an Upland Rice-Based Farming System: A Gender Analysis." Paper presented during the Crop Science Society of the Philippines Convention held at Puerto Princesa, Palawan on 15-21 May. Typescript.
Tan, Michael L.
1991 "Philippine Health Matters." Health Alert Special Issue 116-117, Vol. VII. April/May. Quezon City: Health Action Information Network. P.24
Unnevehr, L.J., and M.L. Stanford
1985 "Technology and the demand for women's labour in Asian rice farming." In Women in Rice Farming. IRRI. Hants, England: Gower Publishing Company, Limited. Pp. 120.
Uy, Cecile C.
1991 "Women and Men in a Community Health Project." In Gender Analysis and Planning: The 1990 IPC-CIDA Workshops. Jeanne Frances I. Illo, ed. Quezon City: Institute of Philippine Culture, Ateneo de Manila University. Pp. 99-113.
Velasco, Esther Catherine C.
1993 Gender-Role Differentiation in Sweet Potato Farming Households. A (M.A.) thesis presented to the Faculty of the Graduate School, Ateneo de Manila University, Quezon City.
<title>National sectoral report for the Philippines - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: national sectoral report for the </title>
Appendix tables
Appendix tables
Table 1: Total population of the Philippines, by gender and place of residence
Year and
Total population
Urban population
Rural population
Percent of rural to
gender
Number
Percent
Number
Percent
Number
Percent
total population
Both
Male
Female
Both
Male
Female
Source: 1980 and 1990 Census of Population, National Statistics Office, Manila.
Table 2: Political participation of women in national and local elections. 1987. 1988 1992
Position
Number of candidates
Number of elected officials
Total
Percent female
Total
Percent female
1987 Elections
Senator (National)
Congressman (Distuct)
1988 Local Elections
Provincial Governor
Vice Governor
Provincial Board Member
Lt. Governor
Asst. Lt. Governor
Special Board
City Mayor
City Vice Mayor
City Council
Municipal Mayor
Municipal Vice Mayor
Municipal Council
1992 Elections (national, district, local)
President^1
Vice President^1
Senators (national)
Congressman (district)
Provincial Governor
Provincial Vice Governor
Provincial Board
City Mayor
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
City Vice Mayor
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
City Council
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
Municipal Mayor
n.d.
n.d.
Municipal Vice Mayor
n.d.
n.d.
Municipal Council
n.d.
n.d.
^1 The presidential and vice-presidential candidates refer only to the front runners.
Source: Commission on Elections, Manila
Table 3: Percentage of females in career executive service (CES) positions in selected government agencies, 1984 and 1993^1
Agency
Agrarian Reform
Agriculture
Environment and Natural Resources ^2
Labour and Employment
Science and Technology ^3
Social Services and Development
Trade and Industry
National Economic and Development Authority
Overall- national government agencies ^3
^1 CES positions include ministry/department undersecretaries, assistant secretaries, directors, assistant directors, regional directors, assistant regional directors, and positions of comparable level.
^2 For 1984, the figure integrates that for the Ministry of Energy with that for the Ministry of Natural Resources.
^3 For 1984, 26 national agencies are included, for 1993, 25 agencies are included, along with government towed and controlled corporations.
Source: Career Executive Service Board (CESB). For the 1984 figures, National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women, Filipino women in Public Affairs, Manila, 1985, page 43.
Table 4: Percentage of women members and office bearers in agricultural/rural organizations by gender and year
Agricultural/rural
Early 1980s
1990s
organization
Members
Office bearers
Members
Office bearers
Cooperatives
n.d.
n.d.
Farmers associations
Fisherfolks' association
n.d.
n.d.
^1 Based on an irrigators association in Camarines Sur (Illo 1985:27).
^2 Based on all office bearers in sectors of the irrigators association (Illo 1985:27). All sectors had male presidents.
^3 Based on figures supplied by the Cooperative Development Authority for 1992.
^4 Illo and Uy (1992:175).
^5 Based on organizations that are affiliated with the TOUCH Foundation (IPC 1993b).
^6 Based on organizations that are affiliated with the Center for Alternative
Rural Technology (CART) had. The data on office bearers refer only to presidents of the organizations. Of the members of farmers organizations affiliated with CART only 17 percent were females (IPC 1993b).
Table 5: Decisionmaking authority in Matalom. Leyte. a rainfed village^1
Selected decisionmaking area
Household head
Male
Female
Crop Production
Area to be cultivated
Method of land preparation
Crops to grow
Method of planting
Variety of crop to plant
Sequence of interpolated crops
Time of weeding
Number of weeding
Equipment to use
Method of controlling pest
Time of harvesting/threshing
Method of harvesting/threshing
Time of selecting seeds
Criteria for seed selection
Method of storing crop harvest
Use of crop harvested for household consumption
Method of post-harvest processing to be used
Disposal of the harvest
Carabao/cattle production
Selection of breed
Acquisition/buying of stock
Grazing/tethering
Selling/ pricing
Swine/goat production
Selection of breed
Acquisition/buying of stock
Putting up of a shelter
Preparation of feeds and feeding
Calving/furrowing
Selling/pricing
^1 The figures refer to the percentage of women/men who reported that they usually decide on matters specified in the table. The data was taken from a study of 47 households by Alcober and Morales (1992). The figures for crop production refer to involvement in decisionmaking, while those for animal production pertain to work involvement.
Table 6: Women's decision- making authority at the household level in selected areas^1
Item
Area
Ifugao, Luzon
Bacolod, Visayas
Maguidanao, Mindanao (tribal)
Maguidanao, Mindanao (Visayan)
What to grow
Use of inputs and raw materials
How much to sell (products)
Seeking production loans
Allocating family expenditures
How much to save
Disciplining children
Education of children
Child's medical treatment
Choice of family planning method
Number of children (family size)
^1 The figures pertain to the percentage of wives who reported that they usually decide on the items in the table.
Source: Center for Women's Resources (1993).
Table 7: NGO support to rural women in food security: agriculture, food production and processing, and other areas by year^1
Year
Total no. of NGOs working in rural
Total number of NGO projects related to food security
Beneficiaries
areas
Agriculture, food production and processing
Livestock, forestry, and fisheries
Total
Female
Percent female
^1 Pertains only to NGOs funded by the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) through the Philippine NGO Development Assistance Programme (PDAP). Data provided by PDAP, April 1994.
Table 8: Legal instruments available to women for obtaining land, livestock, credit, employment, and social insurance^1
Legislation
Year enacted
Specific provisions to eliminate discrimination against women or enhance their status
The Philippine Constitution of 1987
Recognizes the fundamental equality of women and men before the law
New Family Code
Affirms women's right to own property and to contract employment and credit without the need of her husband's consent
Republic Act 6657 ("Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Law")
Guarantees to all "qualified women members of the agricultural labor force" equal rights to ownership of land' equal shares of the farm's produce and representation in advisory or appropriate decision-making bodies to qualified women of the agricultural work force (Chap. 40, No. 5)
Republic Act 6972
Mandates the establishment of day care centers in every barangay in order to free women for other activities, such as farming or attending extension and other meetings
Republic Act 7192 ("Women in Nation Building Act")
Ensures the fundamental equality of women and men invarious areas, including credit and training; provides that full-time household managers could avail of social security services through their working spouses; and provides for a substantial portion of ODA funds from foreign governments and multi-lateral agencies be allocated to support programs
^1 Culled from the national report on women (NCRFW 1994).
Table 9 Annual poverty threshold (in Philippine P) and incidence of poverty by year and place of residence
Year
Total Annual poverty threshold^1
Urban Incidence^2 (in percent)
Rural Annual poverty threshold
Incidence (in percent)
Annual poverty threshold
Incidence (in percent)
^1Refers to the annual income required to satisfy the nutritional requirements of 2,000 calories and other basic needs of a family of six.
²Refers to the proportion of the population whose income falls below the poverty threshold.
^3Preliminary figures.
Source: National Statistical Coordination Board, Metro Manila.
Table 10: Heads of households, by place of residence, gender, and year
Gender of head and place of residence
No. of households
Increase in families (1985-1991)
Number
Percent
Overall
Male-headed
Female-headed
Urban areas
Male-headed
Female-headed
Rural areas
Male-headed
Female-headed
Source: 1985 and 1991 Family Income and Expenditures Survey, National Statistics Office, Manila.
Table 11 Percentage of rural house-holds by year and gender of household head
Year
Total households
Male-headed households
Female-headed households
Total
Percent rural
Total
Percent rural
Total
Percent rural
Table 12: Landless households. by gender of household head
Type of land owned
All households
Male-headed households
Female-headed households
Number
Percent to total
Number
Percent to total
Number
Percent to total
Total households
Landless households
Households with land
Households with agricultural land
Source: 1990 Census of Population Housing, National Statistics Office, Manila.
Table 13: Rural household income and expenditures (in Philippine P). by Bender of household head and year
Item
Male-headed households
Female-headed households
Average annual income
Average annual expenditures
Average annual savings
Source: Family Income and Expenditures Survey, National Statistics Office, Manila.
Table 14: Average nominal and real daily wage rate of farm workers (without meals), by farm operation, Calendar Year 1987-89
Farm operation
Nominal wage rate
Real wage rate (1985=100)^1
All operations
Plowing
Man
Man and animal
Harrowing
Man
Man and animal
Planting/transplanting
Weeding
Care of crops (including fertilizing and spraying)
Harvesting
Splitting/shelling
Others (drying and hauling)
^1The deflator used was the consumer price index for areas outside Metro Manila (NCSB 1991:21).
Source: National Statistics Office, 1992 Philippine Yearbook, Manila, p. 389.
Table 15: Distribution of female headed rural families by decile class and year
Decile class ^1
No. of families
Percent to total
No. of families
Percent to total
First decile
Second decile
Third decile
Fourth decile
Fifth decile
Sixth decile
Seventh decile
Eighth decile
Ninth decile
Tenth decile
All female-headed rural households
^1 The decile classes were constructed based on income of all households.
Source: National Statistics Office, Manila.
Table 16: Under-nutrition rates (in percent) for children six years of age and under, by year
Type of undernutrition
FNRI 1982 Survey
FNRI 1987 Survey
FNRI 1989/90 Survey
Underweight (moderate and severe)
Stunted (inadequate height for age)
Wasted (inadequate weight for height)
Stunted and wasted
Source: Tan (1991:24).
Table 17: Under-nutrition rates (in percent) for children six years of age and under by gender. 1989/90
Type of undernutrition
Male children
Female children
Underweight (moderate and severe)
Stunted (inadequate height for age)
Wasted (inadequate, weight for height)
Source: Tan (1991:67).
Table 18: Loans, borrowers, and membership in rural organizations, by area and by gender, 1993'
Item
Metro Manila (1993)
Laguna (1991)
Northern Samar (1993)
Negros Occidental (1993)
Total
% female
Total
% female
Total
% female
Total
% female
Loans: Borrowers
Amount (in Philippine P)
n.d.
n.d.
Membership
^1 Data refer to rural organizations affiliated with NGOs studied in 1993 and 1994 that received development assistance from CIDA through PDAP. The data was taken from IPC (1993a and 1993c).
Table 19: Rural land operations, by gender and size of holding in Central Luzon, 1991
Area of farm (in hectares)
Gender of the operator
Percent of female to
All operators
Male
Female
total farm operators
Total farms in Central Luzon
Under 0.50
0.50 to 0.99
1.00 to 1.99
2.00 to 2.99
3.00 to 4.99
5.00 to 6.99
7.00 to 24.99
25.00 to 49.99
50.00 and over
Source: 1991 Census of Agriculture, National Statistics Office, Manila.
Table 20: Extension staff by position and gender, 1990^1
Extension post
Albay
Camarines Sur
Bukidnon
Misamis Oriental
Total
Percent female
Total
Percent female
Total
Percent female
Total
Percent female
Provincial agriculturist
Provincial extension staff
Provincial research staff
Municipal agriculturist
Agriculture technicians(including fisheries extension agents)
^1 The data pertains only to two provinces in the Bicol Region (Albay and Camarines Sur), and two provinces in Mindanao (Bukidnon and Misamis Oriental). All provinces are currently project sites of the Pilot Provincial Agricultural Extension Project (PPAEP) of the Philippine Government and the Government of Australia.
Table 21: Farmer participation in agricultural training, by activity and gender, 1993
Type of
Participants
% RIC and
training
Farmers
Fishers
Housewives
RIC
Youth
Others
Total
wives to total adults ^1
On-farm research
Day training
Symposia
Total
^1 Pertains to the minimum estimate of female participation in training activities conducted by the Agricultural Training Institute in 1993, and does not include "youth" or "others".
Source: Agricultural Training Institute, Quezon City.
Table 22: Economically active rural population (in thousands), by gender and year
Category
All rural workers
Male rural workers
Female Rural workers
In the labour force
Unemployed
Employed
Under-employed
Source: Integrated Survey of Households, Third Quarter round of Labour Force Survey, 1985, 1990, 1992; National Statistics Office. Past quarter as reference period.
Table 23: Rural unemployment and underemployment rates, by gender and year
Gender of worker
Unemployment rates
Underemployment rates
All rural workers
Male workers
Female workers
Source: Integrated Survey of Households, Third Quarter round of Labour Force Survey, 1985, 1990, 1992; National Statistics Office. Past quarter as reference period.
Table 24: Employed persons in agriculture, by minor industry group, gender and year
Minor industry
Year
group and gender
No.
% dist.
No.
% dist.
No.
% dist.
No.
% dist.
Total employed persons
Agricultural production
Livestock and poultry production
Agricultural services
Fishery
Forestry
Male
Agricultural production
Livestock and poultry production
Agricultural services
Fishery
Forestry
Female
Agricultural production
Livestock and poultry production
Agricultural services
Fishery
Forestry
Source: Integrated Survey of Households, Third Quarter-round of Labor Force Survey, 1980, 1985, 1990 and 1992; National Statistics Office. Past quarter as reference period.
Table 25: Employed persons in agriculture, by gender, class of worker and year
Year
Class of worker
and gender
No.
No.
No.
No.
dist.
dist.
dist..
dist.
All employed workers
Wage and salary
Own account worker
Unpaid family worker
Male
Wage and salary
Own account worker
Unpaid family worker
Female
Wage and salary
Own account worker
Unpaid family worker
Source: Integrated Survey of Households, Third Quarter-rounds of Labor Force Survey, 1980, 1985, 1990 and 1992: National Statistics Office. Past quarter as reference period.
Table 26: Division of labour in agriculture, by corp., activity. and gender
Gender composition of work force
Activity
Predominantly female adults
Predominantly male adults
Crop farming
Rice^1 (Camarines Sur, 1985 and 1994)
Selection and preservation of seeds, transplanting/ planting, weeding, harvesting, non-mechanized threshing, selling the harvest, contacting and contracting hired labourers
Land preparation, seedbed preparation, spraying chemicals and fertilizers, mechanized farm tasks, hauling and transporting palay from the field, repair of bunds and irrigation canals
Corn^2 (Bukidnon, 1993)
Planting, application of fertilizer, weeding, and harvesting, selling the produce to the market
Plowing, harrowing and furrowing; off-baring of fields; and bagging of corn
Coconut^3 (Camarines Norte, 1987; Quezon, 1993)
Weeding area around the trees, gathering harvested nuts, slicing copra meat, contracting buyers
Harvesting (picking nuts), hauling nuts to copra shed, dehusking, extracting fresh meat, smoking and drying copra, bagging
Sugarcane^4 (Negros Occidental, 1993)
Cutting cane points, loading machine with cane points, planting cane points, manual fertilizer application
Clearing the fields; weeding through sifting, raking, burning or transplanting; driving planting machine; repair and maintenance of roads and of drainage and irrigation canals; cutting and hauling of canes
Cassava^2 (Bukidnon, 1993)
Planting, harvesting, weeding, cutting the stalks, chopping the tuber into chips, and drying
Plowing, harrowing and furrowing, and bagging of cassava, contracting buyers
Sweet potato ^5 (Quezon, 1993)
Washing, sorting, vending
Land clearing (burning compost), plowing, harrowing, furrowing, pitting and seedling collection, planting, fertilization, mounding, weeding, harvesting, gathering, hauling, packing, weighing
Vegetables^6 (Camarines Norte, 1987)
Planting, weeding, thinning, crop management, land preparation (if only minimum tillage needed), processing, bundling or bagging (depending on crop), selection of seeds or planting materials, selling the produce in the market
Land preparation, construction and installation of posts or trellises, transporting/hauling to the market
Fruit trees^3 (Quezon, 1993)
Planting or establishment of fruit tree, weeding, care of tree, contracting hired laborers and/or buyers, selling fruits in the market
Pruning, fertilizing, spraying of chemicals, smoking (as in the case of mango trees), picking fruits
Care of livestock
Carabao/cattle^6 Camarines Norte (1987)
Purchase of fodder and medicine
Selection of stock, pasturing, providing water to animals, attending to foaling
Hogs^7 (Camarines Sur 1994)
Feeding, preparing feeds, purchase of commercial feeds, purchase of stock, sale of issues
Bringing in water for the hogs, watering down, and cleaning the pig pens
Poultry (mostly backyard broods)^7 (Camarines Sur 1994)
Purchase of commercial feeds and medicine; purchase or trading for stocks; feeding; marketing
Capture fishing^8 (Quezon, 1986)
Processing of fishery products (salting or smoking), vending the fishery catch, financing spear-fishers and other bootless fishermen
Actual capture with the use of nets, traps, and other equipment; mending of nets and boats; building and maintenance of fish corrals; selection of nets and fishing technology
Agroforestry productions^9 (Cebu, 1986)
contouring, planting of tree species provided by forestry bureau, selling produce in the market
Construction of rockwall, land clearing, cultivation and care of crop, transporting crop and forestry products to the market
^1 Based on Illo (1988) and updated during group interview (GI/L 1994).
^2 Based on data described in IPC (1993b).
^3 Based on data described in IPC (1993a), for Quezon; and Illo and Veneracion (1988), for Camarines Norte.
^4 Based on data described in IPC (1993c).
^5 Based on Velasco (1993).
^6 Based on Illo and Veneracion (1988).
^7 Based on group interview conducted in Camarines Sur in March 1994 (GI/L 1994).
^8 Based on Illo and Polo (1990).
^9 Based on Rivas, Uy, and Borlagdan (1991).
Table 27: Average number of hours spent per week on economic and domestic activities, by task, gender, and year^1
Item
Bicol (irrigated, 1985)
Bicol (rainfed, 1987)^2
Bicol (1990)^2
Mindanao (1990)^1
M
F
M
F
M
F
M
F
Market production(own account)
Rice farming
Gardens/other crops
Livestock/poultry raising
Trading
Work-animal care
Home industries
Others
0. I
Wage work
Total market work
Total home production time
Total working time
^1 Labor utilization of family labor in upland areas in Cavite are presented in Rola, Dayo, and Hernandez (194), while time allocation data for an upland village in Leyte are discussed in Alcober and Morales (1992). The Cavite data suggested that while female and male roles are substitutable in farm and household activities, men continued to contribute more time to farming. Moreover, the men tended to do more household chores when the women could work in off-farm/non-farm jobs.
^2 Crop farming had been lumped together in the study and the data appear in the present table under "rice farming." In turn, care of livestock and poultry had been combined with work-animal care, and is presented in the table under "livestock/poultry raising."
Sources: For Bicol irrigated farming community in 1985, Illo (1988); for Bicol rainfed community in 1987 (Illo and Veneracion 1988); and for Bicol and Mindanao in 1990,1110 and Uy (1992).
Table 28: Illiteracy rates, by place of residence, age, and gender
Place of residence
and age group
Male
Female
Male
Female
Total
45 and over
Urban
45 and over
Rural
45 and over
Source: 1980 and 1990 Census of Population, National Statistics Office, Manila.
Table 29: Primary and secondary net enrolment (in thousands) and ratios (percent of total population), by school year
School year
Elementary (7-12 years old)
Secondary (13-16 years old)
Enrolment
Population
Rate
Enrolment
Population
Rate
Source: Department of Education, Culture and Sports, Manila.
Table 30: Life expectancy at birth by year and gender
Year
Male
Female
^1 Estimated by the National Statistics Office.
Source: National Statistics Office.
Table 31: Maternal mortality rate (per 1,000 live births), and access to maternal child health and family planning services by year
Year
Maternal mortality
Maternal, child care, and family planning services
Day care centers with medical services
rate
Number^1
Clients served^2
(clients served)^2
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
¹ Source: Internal Planning Services, Department of Health.
^2 Source: Department of Social Welfare and Development.
Table 32: Status of WID Units in government ministries, autonomous units. and other organizations
WID Units
Year
Mandate
Status
Est.
National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women (NCRFW), Office of the President
To review, evaluate and recommend measures including priorities to ensure the full integration of women for economic, social and cultural development, and to ensure further equality between women and men
Board of Commissioners composed of top level officials from government ministries and one from the private sector; projects with the Kabalikat sa Kaunlaran, the women's groups organized by NCRFW at different administrative levels
Board composed largely of women advocates from the various NGOs, including the president of a peasant women's group (KaBaPa); NCRFW continues to focus its advocacy and training work with various government agencies (including DA, DAR, and DENR), through its focal points, but also continues to work with NGOs under the Women GO-NGO Network; NCRFW is also trying to establish a data base on women.
Bureau of Women and Young Workers (BWYW), Department of Labour and Employment
To promote the general welfare of all women and minor/young workers, and to assist women to cope with their responsibilities at home and at the workplace
Continues to oversee matters concerning working and young mothers for DOLE; coordinates with the Bureau of Rural Workers and other units of the department.
Bureau of Women's Welfare, Department of Social Work and Development
Not yet formed
To promote women's welfare, protect women from exploitation, and develop skills for employment and self-actualization
Continues to undertake skills training and income-generating projects for the poor, especially poor women; periodically launches feeding programs; supports a network of day care centers in different barangays; works with displaced women and their families; and the like
WID/GAD focal group, Department of Environment and Natural Resources
Not yet organized
Not yet organized
DENR created its Technical Working Committee on Women, with six bureaus and four regions also forming their own Technical Working Group on Women; ground-working for GAD indicator system and advocating gender desegregation of MIS data on beneficiaries; raising consciousness of DENR personnel
WID/GAD focal group, Department of Agrarian Reform
Not yet organized
Not yet organized
Has an existing National Technical Steering Committee (NTSC) composed of representatives from different offices under DAR; the group is trying to translate RA7192 to agrarian reform with the help of NCRFW, to formulate gender sensitive implementation procedures, and to advocate gender desegregation in monitoring reports; using the DAR Ladies Association as the contact group in the regions and provinces.
Home Economics Programs Division, Bureau of Agricultural Extension, Department of Agriculture
n.d.
To support agriculture and development by involving rural women in the uplift of the family and community
Provides staff support and delivers package of services to Home Economics Extensionists at the field level
In the 1990s, extension agents all made generalists; devolution in 1992 cut the link between central office and the municipal and provincial technicians.
WID/GAD focal group, Department of Agriculture
Not yet organized
To serve as the primary structure for the Philippine Development Plan for Women (PDP-W) implementation, and to serve as catalysts for gender- responsive planning and programming in their respective line agencies; mandate coming from EO No. 348
Not yet organized
WID focal point formed at central office (in 1993, with planning and monitoring service, instead of being under the Office of the Secretary), bureaus and attached agencies, and in regions; consciousness-raising among staff and clientele; and strengthening women's organizations within DA and in sites; formation of WID Secretariat in 1993 to submit the reports required by RA 7192
<title>National sectoral report for the Philippines - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: national sectoral report for the </title>
<section>1</section>
Annexes
Annexes
Annex A. List of selected projects or initiatives elicited during group interviews and regional consultations held in March 1994
Project or initiative(site)
Description
Assessment of the project
Initiator/contact person or group
Landless People s Development Bank (Dolores. Quezon; San Pablo)
This was a social credit-cum-savings scheme a la Grameen Bank. After an 8-step training seminar, prospective fund members, many of whom were women, were organized into groups of 5, with three groups forming a center. The group monitored the activities and collected the savings and loan repayments of its members. In Dolores. loans supported the upland women's economic projects like sewing, hog fattening, and farm produce trading. In San Pablo, the women members were farm-produce traders who sold their goods in Manila.
In Dolores, the women say that their group and project enabled them not only to run their houses, but also to open their own businesses. In San Pablo, the women did not only gain access to capital, but also gained confidence in running their own organization. Men who were initially skeptical about their (women's) success have recently indicated interest in forming a similar credit-savings group. Members of another women's group, however, found the CARD system onerous. Pressured to meet their repayment schedule, the women involved in the LPDF were said to have been forced to accept laundry jobs to come up with the money.
Center for Agricultural and Rural Development, San Pablo City
Day care center/ kindergarten (different sitio in Barangay San Isidro)
This involved the teaching of reading, counting, writing. And socializing to children of peasants, and doubled as a day care center. It was run by a woman who has at least a high school education. RIC paid her a stipend out of donations solicited by the group. In addition to donations, RIC provided free paper and pencils to the children. RIC was also involved in feeding program of DSWD
RIC leaders claim that the center's did not only educate the children of poor families, but they also give the mothers time for work or rest.
Mrs. Hilaria Alfelor, RIC president, San Isidro, Libmanan, Camarines Sur
Partnership of land owners and workers (PLOW) (Negros Occidental; Hacienda Catalina, Talisay)
This was concerned with crop diversification. A turnover of a large tract of sugar plantation land to a workers' cooperative was undertaken. Part of the land turned over was cultivated communally by the cooperative members; the other pan was distributed among the individual worker-families. The plantation owner continued to operate another pan of the plantation.
Women said that because Hacienda Catalina grew food crops as well as sugarcane for export, the workers, the plantation owners, and their respective families did not go hungry during the sugar crisis of the early 1980s. Work continued in the hacienda. With PLOW, women and men were able to raise their own food, making them less dependent on the plantation, especially during the "dead" months of sugarcane production.
Mr. and Mrs. Javellana. Bacolod City; Mr. Ed Locsin. President, Chito Foundation, Bacold City
Community-level gender sensitivity sessions (Cagayan de Oro and Manolo Fortich)
This focused on conducting discussions on gender issues with couples as participants. Lectures or inputs during the activity were minimal. Instead, emphasis was placed on couples' experiences vis-a-vis gender roles and sexual relations, and on working out the issues with the participants.
In Kitam-is, Manolo Fortich, the women claimed that the men who went to the session cut down on their drinking, thus minimizing quarrels and wife beating. Some men also began doing more housework. The women said that the sessions freed them from some of their worries with their husbands.
Technology Outreach and Community Help (TOUCH) Foundation Cagayan de Oro City
Pilot Provincial Agricultural Extension Project (Agricultural planning with women and men) Regions 5 and 10
This mainly involved the preparation of baran gay or village agricultural sector action plans that would be included in the municipal plan and that would serve as a basis for designing extension inputs and activities by agricultural technicians.
The women recognized two benefits from their project involvement: learning about planning and feeling confident that they would benefit from assistance that would come out of the plans. However, they noted that the planning and the research activities were too time-intensive and sometimes conflicted with their domestic and Other responsibilities
Mr. Terry Quinlan, Team Leader, PPAEP Technical Assistance Team, Cagayan de Oro City
Annex B. Future strategic goals and objectives and corresponding financial requirements pertinent to women in agriculture ^1
Issue
Goal/Objective
Strategy/Activity
Required Funding
Implementor
Inequality in the sharing of power and decisionmaking at all levels
Goal:
Share power equally
Objective:
Strengthen the factors promoting full participation of women in the power and structure at all levels of society and eliminate the factors preventing it
Strategy:
Conduct leadership and assertive training
Activity:
Prepare and reproduce training materials
Training Fund:
P3.75M
Schools and universities
Strategy:
Increase land ownership rights among women
Activities:
Disseminate information among concerned agencies
Inform concerned women and men Strategy:
Activate women's organizations in all municipalities and cities Activities:
Identify women's groups
Develop project/program proposals
Organize development teams program/project
Project fund:
P75M
DAR, DENR. HUDCC
Insufficient mechanisms at all levels to promote the advancement of women
Goal:
Build gender-responsive institutions
Objective:
Establish and strengthen mechanisms in government and NGOs for the advancement of women
Strategies:
Set up regional mechanism for women; strengthen structures/ mechanisms in line agencies
Activities:
Implement RA7192
Draft administrative guidelines
Line agencies, P30M; LGUs, P97.5M
Office of the President
Strategy:
Study government operational systems and analyze these vis-a-vis gender-responsive development
Activity:
Incorporate criteria into program/project approval and review process
R&D fund:
P2.0M
Public administration Schools Line agencies
Lack of awareness of and commitment to internationally and nationally recognized women's rights
Goal:
Promote women's rights
Objectives:
Raise general consciousness on women's rights
Eliminate all forms of discrimination against women
Strategy:
Revise sexist textbooks
Activity:
Review textbooks/educational materials for gender biases
Research fund, P1.5M Seminar/ workshops, P1.1M
DECS, NCRFW, NGOs
Strategy:
Disseminate information and raise the consciousness on women's rights, responsibilities and opportunities in the home and in the workplace
Activities:
Reproduce materials
Organize fora in barangays
Printing, P0.3M
DILG, DA, DECS, NGOs, LGUs
Povety
Goal:
Overcome poverty
Objective:
To eliminate the factors that accentuate poverty among women and which prevent them from overcoming the circumstances that place them in that category
Strategy:
Increase number of women entrepreneurs
Activities:
Identify potential entrepreneurs
Organize business development centers
Technical assistance fund: P75M
DTI, LIVECOR, UP-ISSI, TLRC
Strategy:
Increase productivity and income from sub- contracting industries like garments, processing, and crafts
Activities:
Conduct industry study on incomes
Identify productivity improvement measures
Equipment loan fund: P75M
DOLE, DTI, DAP
Strategy:
Provide basic services in every barangay (potable water, electricity, communications systems)
Activity:
Identify target barangays and needs
Infrastructure fund: P750M
LWUA, NEA, DOTC
Strategy:
Guarantee protection of Filipino producers, entrepreneurs, industries and markets
Activities:
Review tariffs and taxes on imports vis-a-vis local products
Develop quality and quantities of local products and services
R&D fund: P0.5M Project Development fund: P5M
DOF, DTI
Strategy:
Produce and market green charcoal as an alternative to fuel wood, organic fertilizers. bio- pesticides, laundry soaps
Activities:
Repeal structural adjustment conditionally (re: import of agro-chemicals and harmful ingredients)
Ensure the representation of women, indigenous people and Muslims in the
Fertilizer and Pesticide Authority (FPA) Board and make FPA Board functional
Ban pesticides and industrial and household agro-chemicals that are environmentally destructive and/or banned in their countries of origin
Working and Equipment Funding, P11.5 M Project Development Fund. P10 M
DOST. DOF. FPA. DA. DTI
Strategy:
Organize community-based environmental groups who can undertake planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation, and environmental impact assessment
Activities:
Develop training programs
Conduct regional and provincial training
Project Fund, P0.5 M Training Fund, P7.5M
UP-SURP PEP
Strategy:
Implement a program on diversified and organic or bio dynamic farming
Activities:
Develop organic and multiple cropping
Conduct farmers' fore
Project Fund, P0.1 M Printing. P0.25 M
DA. DAR
Strategy:
Provide primary importance on food security over export-oriented cash-crop production
Activities:
Evaluate export crop and food production
Propose policy/program recommendations
R&D Fund, P0.5 M
DA, NEDA. DTI
Strategy:
Respect indigenous agricultural and fishing technologies
Activities:
Conduct an inventory of various types of technologies, and document and evaluate this
Disseminate information
R&D Fund, P7.5M
DA, agricultural schools, fisheries schools, indigenous groups
Strategy:
Improve situation of beneficiaries of natural resource management projects
Activities:
Review benefits of programs/projects
Recommend steps to increase access to the use of natural resources and extension services
Project review and monitoring, P0.2 M
DENR
Strategy:
Ensure conservation of prime agricultural land sand stop indiscriminate land conversion through women power
Activities:
Legislate laws banning conversion of prime agricultural lands into mono crop plantations, industrial estates and tourism purposes
Consult peasant organizations, women, indigenous people and ethnic minorities in the review, Planning implementation, monitoring and evaluation
Planning Grant, P5 M
DAR, DOT, DTI, HERB, NGOs
Strategy:
Protect the ownership right of women by indicating their name in the CLOA, EP, TCT, CLT and other forms of ownership titles
Activities:
Review guidelines and forms
Recommend revisions and guidelines
Project Fund, P0.15 M
DENR, LRTA, DAR
Inequitable access to and participation in economic structures and processes
Goal:
Empower women economically
Objective:
Enhance women's economic productivity
Strategy :
Recognize the contribution of unpaid women workers in the home and in the informal sector to the economy
Activities:
Develop data collection and management system and integrate this into present census operations, analyze data and present reports
Research Fund, P1.5 M
NSCB, NSO
Strategy:
Promote balanced industrialization which meets basic needs while promoting Philippine participation in the global economy
Activities:
Identify and develop food production and processing industries as well as potential investors
Extend marketing and export facilitation
Under existing Livelihood Development Funds
Strategy:
Continue to monitor structural adjustment programs, GATT, NAFTA, APEC and their effects on women
Activity:
Incorporate women impact analysis into program/project development processes
R&D Fund, P0.15M
Inequitable access to employment and other means to maximize awareness of women s rights and the use of their employed capacities
Goal:
Have full employment and job alternatives
Enable women to be gainfully and
Strategy:
Increase access to employment opportunities
Activities:
Promote employment alternatives covering both wage and self employment
Strategy:
Facilitate local employment
Activities:
Strengthen self-employment promotion and facilitation programs with technical assistance and facilities
Have safety nets for workers made vulnerable not only by calamities or by their marginalized circumstances. but also by necessary structural adjustments in the economy
Promote remunerative off-farm employment to enhance income-generating capacity and productivity
Strategy:
Have stronger support for the implementation of inter-sectoral and inter-agency development plans for women
Activities:
Promote women's participation in unions, especially at the decision-making level
Provide more solid guarantees for women's equal access to employment Institutionalize training on non-traditional skills for women
Effects on women of continuing national and international armed or other kinds of conflict
Goal:
Involve women in the peace process
Objective:
Promote women's role in achieving and maintaining peace
Strategy:
Protect displace women and children affected by national and international conflicts
Activities:
Organize rescue relocation teams
Provide therapy for trauma
Project Fund: P50M
NGOs. LGUs. DOH
^1 This list has been culled from The Philippine Country Report on Women, 1986-1995, prepared by the National Commission on the Role of Filipino Women for the Fourth United Nations World Conference on Women. to be held in Beijing, China on September 1995.
Annex C. Issues and strategies identified during regional group interviews and consultative meetings held in March 1994
Subsector and issue or concern
Goal
Future strategy
Activities ^1
Sites where identified
Fanning (outside plantations)
Lack of capital for non- farming venture (such as home-based industries or trading)
Improve women's earnings from their own enterprise
Put up factory in the barangay as an alternative to individual, home-based work
Conduct feasibility study re. supply of materials, skills in the barangay, and markets
Prepare proposal for funding workers to safeguard discipline and work quality
Dolores, Quezon; San Pablo, Laguna; Magsaysay, Misamis Oriental: Libmanan, Camarines Sur
Increase capital for farm trading
Contact additional or new suppliers
Prepare proposal for funding
Support to women often limited to small-budget income-generating projects(IGPs) and agricultural activities
Improve access of women to development resources
Increase the scale of funding or assistance for women
Involve women in designing and preparing project proposals
Conduct required financial, technical, and management training larger scale projects
Manolo Fortich, Bukidnon; Magsaysay, Misamis Oriental; Mindanao consultation (Cagayan de Oro)
Rapid decline of women's interest in training and other group activities
Improve women's access to training
Initiate gender and poverty-responsive training programs
Design training where the women are, with least disturbance to their livelihood
Design training with the women
Bais, Negros Oriental; Libmanan, Camarines Sur; Mindanao consultation; Visayas consultation (Dumaguete)
Programs or projects inducing shift to cash crop production
Safeguard food security
Promote diversification of crops without jeopardizing food supply
Disclose pros and cons of crop/technology
Urge farmers to continue cultivation of food crops
Manolo Fortich. Bukidnon: Mindanao consultation
Vulnerability of small producers including women farmers to market price fluctuations
Enable women to gain greater control over their produce
Organize themselves into a producers' union
Obtain communication equipment (two-way radio) to monitor prices and locate best buyers for their product
Ask assistance of their partner- NGO to organize themselves formally
Raise working capital for the group for the acquisition of a radio
Obtain license for the radio and training on how to operate
Manolo Fortich. Bukidnot
Technicians' assumption that all farmers are male even in the light of increasing importance of women's crops(vegetables)
Enable women to demand technical assistance as crop growers and/or livestock raisers
Heighten awareness among women of their status as farmers in their own right
Increase awareness among technicians of the technical assistance needed by women farmers
Conduct awareness-raising sessions with women
Conduct assertiveness training for women to help them deal with technicians and other development agents
Conduct gender sensitization and analysis training for technicians
Prepare an inventory of crops raised by women and prepare technology packages that will improve technicians' ability to work with women farmers
Mindanao consultation: Libmanan. Camarines Sur
Plantation
Wages paid by many plantations inadequate to support household
Protect rights of plantation workers, female and male, to a living wage
Monitor compliance with wage laws
Promote land sharing between owners and workers a la PLOW
Generate sustainable income- generating activities for workers and their households
Encourage women to join labour unions and wage monitoring teams
Disseminate PLOW scheme among plantations
Protect women's claims to land that will be distributed Involve women and men in the design of income-generating activities
Prepare proposal for funding
Implement and review project
Bais, Negros Oriental; Talisay, Negros Occidental
Hiring priority given to males, and in times of crisis, women lose their jobs first
Eradicate discrimination in hiring in plantations
Promote awareness among women of their rights
Urge plantations to practice diversified cropping to minimize occurrence of crises
Prepare awareness-raising materials
Conduct awareness-raising sessions
Develop technologies that would improve existing diversified cropping systems
Bais, Negros Oriental; Talisay, Negros Occidental; Mindanao consultation
Fishing
Declining income of fishing households due to overfishing
Expand livelihood possibilities for women and households in fishing communities
Generate alternative livelihood to fishing
Diversify fishing equipment to enable households to fish at different times of the year
Identify livelihood systems in the area
Identify prospective livelihood for the fishing community
Secure capital to finance acquisition of more varied equipment
Bais, Negros Oriental; Mindanao consultation; Visayas consultation
Declining income (cont.)
Minimize the number of individuals or groups going into fishing
Disseminate effective family planning materials
Involve both men and women in family planning discussions
Bais, Negros Oriental, Mindanao consultation; Visayas consultation
Continuing depletion of marine resources due to overfishing and capture technologies employed
Protect remaining marine resources
Arrest further depletion of marine resources
Enforce existing laws that regulate the fishing technologies used
Disseminate technical information on environment friendly fishing technologies
Mindanao consultation; Bais, Negros Oriental
Declining supply of fish that women could sell, process, and/or feed their families with because fish are brought directly to buying depots
Protect family nutrition and women's incomes
Bais, Negros Oriental; Mindanao consultation
Upland /forestry
Technicians tend to work primarily with men
Enable women to participate in the protection of the environment
Involve women in training and application of resource- enhancing technologies Increase awareness among technicians of women's existing or potential role in protecting the environment women could also adopt these
Conduct gender sensitivity and analysis for the women and for technicians
Conduct assertiveness training for women
Adapt technologies so that
Include women in cross visits to investigate resource enhancing technologies
Bais, Negros Oriental; Mindanao consultation
Low yields of upland farms due to depleted soil nutrients, choice of crop mix. and others
Improve yield and prevent further degradation of the soil
Promote/apply resource- enhancing technologies such as contour farming
Plant fast-maturing trees that could be harvested
Disseminate information and technology packages
Make planting materials for fast-growing trees available
Bais, Negros Oriental; Mindanao consultation
Women's burden brought about by lack of domestic water supply system
Provide dependable domestic water supply
Mobilize women to demand a domestic water system from the local government
Obtain consensus among the women concerning need for action
Prepare petitions
Organize marches or rallies, if need be
Manolo Fortich, Bukidnon; Dolores, Quezon; Visayas consultation
High outmigration (for women, domestic service) due to lack of employment opportunities in the uplands
Stem outmigration (especially migration to Manila)
Provide employment in the barangay or town
Set up small factories consultation: San Pablo.
Train young women and men in income-generating skills
Dolores Quezon. Mindanao Laguna
General
Need to organize women's groups
Protect women s rights under the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Program (CARP)
Promote the organization of women's groups in Agrarian Reform Communities (ARCS)
Promote women's participation in cooperatives at all levels
Initiate gender sensitivity discussions
Discuss women's rights under CARP
Conduct assertiveness training with women
Mindanao consultation: Visayas consultation
Commercialization of women and women's bodies
Prevent the exploitation of women
Raise awareness among women and men in the community about women's rights, roles, and duties
Hold discussions in the barangay about women's rights, roles, and duties
Hold discussion about the plight of overseas workers and other parts of the country
Magsaysay. Misamis Oriental. Libmanan. Camarines Sur
Poor roads and transportation system
Enable producers, female and male, to market their goods at low cost
Produce and market nonperishable goods if roads are not improved
Mobilize community to demand road or transport facilities
Shift part of land to crops that are not perishable
Secure planting materials and information about technology
Prepare petitions
If needed, organize marches or rallies
Mindanao consultation; Dolores, Quezon
Lack of control over women's sexuality
Landlessness
Enable women to gain control
Ensure that women are named in owner-ship or land-control papers (emancipation patents, CLOAs, and certificate of stewardship contracts) as individual or joint owner or steward
Check guidelines covering transfer of land (DAR and DENR)
Monitor implementation(titling) in the field
Involve women in the monitoring activity
Mindanao consultation
Malnutrition
Improve the nutrition of female and male children and adults
Promote FAITH ("food always in the home") and similar schemes to secure food for the household
Prepare communication and planting materials for dissemination
Involve both women and men in the training on new technologies
Mindanao consultation
Poor roads and transportation system
Enable producers, female and male, to market their goods at low cost
Produce and market nonperishable goods if roads are not improved
Mobilize community to demand road or transport facilities
Shift part of land to crops that are not perishable
Secure planting materials and information about technology
Prepare petitions
If needed, organize marches or rallies
Mindanao consultation; Dolores, Quezon
Lack of control over women's sexuality
Landlessness
Enable women to gain control over land
Ensure that women are named in owner-ship or land-control papers (emancipation patents, CLOAs, and certificate of stewardship contracts) as individual or joint owner or steward
Check guidelines covering transfer of land (DAR and DENR)
Monitor implementation(titling) in the field
Involve women in the monitoring activity
Mindanao consultation
Malnutrition
Improve the nutrition of female and male children and adults
Promote FAITH ("food always in the home.) and similar schemes to secure food for the household
Prepare communication and planting materials for dissemination
Involve both women and men in the training on new technologies
Mindanao consultation
^1 Some of the activities were been surmised from the discussions, rather than translation of verbatim suggestions during the interviews and meetings
OTHER SELECTED READINGS IN THE SERIES
National Sectoral Reports on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development for:
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Egypt, El Salvador, Honduras, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tanzania, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
Country "FACT SHEETS" on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development for:
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Congo, Egypt, El Salvador, Honduras, Iran, Lebanon, Namibia, Mauritania, Morocco, Peru, Philippines, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia, Uganda and Zimbabwe
Country papers on The Socioeconomic Situation of Rural Women for:
Albania, Armenia, Bosnia-Herzogovia, Macedonia, and Romania.
Rural Women of Latin America and the Caribbean, Preliminary contribution of FAO to the Sixth Regional Conference on the Integration of Women to the Economic and Social Development of Latin America and the Caribbean, Mar del Plata, Argentina, 25-29 September 1994.
A Synthesis Report: Towards the Development of a Regional Plan of Action for Women in Agriculture in the Near East (1996-2000).
Women, Agriculture and Rural Development: A Synthesis Report of the Africa Region.
Case Study on Women in the Peruvian Amazon.
Case Study on Rural-Urban Migration and Its Impact on Rural Women in Africa.
Case Study on The Socioeconomic Situation of Rural Women in Central and Eastern European Countries.
Report of the Technical Workshop: Women in Agriculture and Rural Development, Dakar, Senegal, 15 November 1994.
FAO Guidelines for Reporting on the Situation of Women in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.
FAO Guidelines for the Improvement of Gender-desegregated Agricultural and Rural Statistics in Near Eastern Countries.
FAO Annotated Bibliography on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development.
<section>e</section>
Executive summary
Executive summary
Between the early 1980s and 1994, natural disasters struck various areas in rural Philippines, a crippling inflation gripped the economy in the mid-1980s, and a huge and ever increasing foreign debt hangs heavy on the shoulders of women, men, and children. Poor employment opportunities have driven more and more women and men to work overseas, with a number of the women ending up as exploited domestic helpers or prostitutes. Efforts of the Philippine government to attain a belated "NIC-hood" for the country have led to conflicts with peasant and environmentalist groups as the industrial estates or industrial corridors threaten not only the livelihood of local communities, but also the environment. However, not all the changes have dire effects or prospects. Democratic processes and institutions have been rebuilt, inflation is being slowly checked, peace has returned to many areas, and an agrarian reform program is in place.
Within this immediate national context, the following developments vis-a-vis women in agriculture or in rural Philippines have been noted:
· Although there are no legal constraints to women's involvement, membership in decision-making circles-be it politics, the rural-development agencies, or rural organizations-continue to be dominated by men, although women have made some inroads; even in homes, men tend to have greater say over a wider array of important matters than the women.
· Women's concerns have been promoted through lobbying Congress for the enactment of pro-women laws; drafting and adopting the Philippine Development Plan for Women; establishing focal points in different line agencies of the government; accreditation of women's groups in preparation for the election of the women's sectoral representatives to various legislative bodies; channelling more development resources to women; and fostering of a partnership between government and NGOs.
- But laws have yet to be enforced;
- Design, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation guidelines and instruments have not been developed;
- Actual implementation has not been monitored; and,
- Substantial returns to women's projects have not been ensured.
· Deepening poverty in the countryside has been pushing people and households to move into cities, resulting in a greater decline of female-headed rural households.
· Gender-based earnings differentials persist because, while male and female workers are paid the same rate for the same work, women are generally hired for the lower-paying tasks.
· Landlessness tends to be lower among female-headed households than among male headed households.
· While malnutrition among young children seems to be on the decline, 14 percent of children age 6 years or younger in 1989/90 remained undernourished, with girls outnumbering boys by 2 to 1.
- But infant and child mortality rates are higher for boys than girls, and life expectancy is longer for females than males.
· Whereas major credit schemes for farmers or fishers may continue to be channelled to men, increasing portions of credit funds being disbursed by NGOs are directed to women.
- But loans to women generally remain small, often insufficient to increase the scale of their operations.
· Except in matters of home management, backyard gardens, and small-scale industries, agricultural or rural extension agents continue to work with and for men.
· Movement of male workers to cities or overseas has left an increasing number of women in charge of farms, although the absent males continue to be considered as the household head.
· Rural women and men have higher illiteracy rates than their urban peers, but more women than men overall tend to proceed to tertiary education.
Also during the past decade, initiatives to address sources of gender inequities and inequalities, and of discrimination against women were varied. These included:
· Development of focal points within rural-development departments and other line agencies;
· Systematization of efforts to incorporate gender concerns in the operations and policies of both government and non-governmental organizations (NGOs);
· Development of creative and sustainable credit schemes for women;
· Systematic involvement of women in the preparation of agricultural plans for their barangays;
· Conducting of political education and gender sensitization sessions with women and men;
· Provision of support systems for landless and peasant women; and,
· Encouraging scientists and engineers to orient their technologies for female as well as male users.
Support for projects, programs, and activities for women by government and NGOs has been promoted by several bilateral and multilateral agencies. More conscious earmarking of Official Development Assistance funds has been provided by the Women in Nation Building Act. However, the law's effectiveness is hindered by the following problems:
· Absence of systematic monitoring system by government on allocation and disbursement of ODA funds;
· Absence of guidelines to help government assess gender-responsiveness of projects and programs, and mechanisms for categorizing, recording, and reporting on ODA-funded projects, according to approach used to meet women's needs and concerns;
· Preparedness of foreign experts to assess projects in the Philippines; and,
· Absence of specific guidelines to operationalize certain provisions of the Act.
As part of the strategic plans for the advancement of rural women, a combination of strategies have been identified. These include:
· Providing employment alternatives and opportunities in the rural areas;
· Increasing the scale of funding for women's projects or enterprises;
· Training in new skills and technologies, including resource-enhancing technologies;
· Monitoring compliance to minimum wage laws;
· Arresting further resource depletion;
· Promoting crop diversification, and protecting food supply for rural families; and,
· Sensitizing rural development technicians to the technical needs of women, including the need for new technologies.
According to the women most involved in agriculture, the set of strategies outlined for rural women will define their future. The struggle for access to resources, the need for protection from exploitation, and the desire for the improvement of self, family and community reverberate in the plan of action for women in agriculture.
