<section>e</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
Abbreviations and acronyms
ARDCs
Agriculture and Rural Development Centres
CANAMCO
Canadian-Namibian Cooperation
CBOs
Community-based Organisations
CCN
Council of Churches in Namibia
DWA
Department of Women Affairs
ECAs
Eastern Communal Areas
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FNDC
First National Development Corporation
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
ha
hectare
HFS
Household Food Security
ILO
International Labour Organization of the United Nations
LAC
Legal Assistance Centre
MAWRD
Ministry of Agriculture Water and Rural Development
MRLGH
Ministry of Regional and Local Government and Housing
NANAWO
Namibia National Women's Organisation
NAU
Namibia Agricultural Union
NDC
Namibia Development Corporation
NDT
Namibia Development Trust
NEPRU
Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit
NGO
Non-governmental Organisation
NISER
Namibia Institute for Social and Economic Research
NNFU
Namibia National Farmers Union
NPC
National Planning Commission
RISE
Rural People's Institute for Social Empowerment
SADF
South African Defense Force
SARDEP
Sustainable Animal and Range Development Programme
SCAs
Southern Communal Areas
SIDA
Swedish International Development Agency
SSD
Social Sciences Division
SWAPO
South West African People's Organisation
TCCF
Technical Committee on Commercial Farmland
UNAM
University of Namibia
UNCEDAW
United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
YWCA
Young Women's Christian Association
<title>National sectoral report for Namibia - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: national sectoral report for Namibia</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction: the national context
Farming systems
Demography and livelihood
Economic policies
Introduction: the national context
Since it gained independence in 1990, Namibia has made considerable strides towards improving the lives of its rural population. Provision of water, construction and upgrading of roads, and a revitalised health and education system have all been priorities of the national government. With the election of local and regional authorities in December 1992, many Namibians have local representation for the first time. However, in addition to service provisions, the nation faces the complex challenge of promoting viable economic development for rural people. A century of colonial practices of land dispossession, exploitation of labour, and underdevelopment has resulted in impoverished black rural areas. Both the German and South African colonizers created ethnically-based reserves and restricted movement into the settler zone in order to limit productivity of African farmers and to force rural men to provide cheap labour for mines, commercial farms, fishing enterprises and urban
businesses. The features of the labour reserve economy persist today. In some regions, the prevalence of outward migration has resulted in rural households consisting mainly of the elderly, women and young children.
Although many households rely heavily on remittances or wages of family members employed in urban areas, the responsibility for food production and preparation and the overall wellbeing of the household, continues to fall on women. The 1991 census reveals that women account for 59% of all those engaged in skilled and subsistence agricultural work. Indeed, rural females comprise the largest demographic group in Namibia (see Table 1). Yet, they remain disadvantaged by unequal access to land, labour, agricultural services and assets, natural resources and employment opportunities. Rural women are also underrepresented in decision-making and leadership positions.
Policies have yet to adequately take account of the multiple roles of Namibian women as farmers, food providers and income earners. Effective policy reforms are in part constrained by the dearth of gender-based statistics and qualitative research on gender roles and relations.^1 The United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women, to be held in Beijing in 1995, provides a timely impetus to review and assess progress in integrating the problems of rural women in development policies and strategies. This report, commissioned by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, considers gender imbalances in the social and political systems and economic processes which underpin agricultural and rural development in Namibia. It further highlights activities and programmes of the government, non-governmental sector and the international community which aim to enhance the productive capacity and social welfare of rural women. The statistics and information presented in
the report have been drawn from previous studies, including socio-economic research and feasibility studies, as well as from interviews with representatives of government departments, non-governmental organisations, and international agencies which work with rural women.^2 Supporting data is compiled in the Appendix Tables. The author used feedback from a consultative workshop with regional and national NGO and extension staff to refine the analysis and to evaluate existing programs and future recommendations. The findings have been incorporated in The Namibia National Report for the Fourth World Conference on Women, which assesses the situation of women throughout the country.
Farming systems
Although sparsely populated, Namibia is home to over a dozen ethnic and language groupings, who exhibit diverse economic adaptations, socio-political structures and cultural traditions.^3 Ecological and historical factors have also shaped a range of rural settlement patterns and farming systems. The country is predominantly semi-arid, but immense variations in climate, soil and topography exist. Rainfall decreases from northeast to southwest with over 600 mm annually in Caprivi, to 200 mm in Mariental, and to as little as 15 mm along the Atlantic coast. Central Namibia consists of grass and scrub savanna plateaus, and is bounded on the west by the Namib desert. Cattle production predominates in this area, although the fertile soils and higher rainfall of the Otavi-Tsumeb-Grootfontein triangle support wheat and maize production.
Further south, vegetation becomes sparser, making the area better suited to goats and sheep. Many commercial farmers are successfully ranching game and karakul sheep, as even large farms (7,000 ha or more) do not ensure profitable cattle production. Livestock production is also the mainstay of inhabitants in the Northwest, which is characterised by desert and bush savanna. The former reserves of Damaraland and Kaokoland lie in this agro-ecological zone.
In the North, higher rainfall and seasonal rivers make crop production possible. Residents in the Owambo regions, which include bush savanna and the seasonal floodplain of the Cuvelai river, practice a mixed system of millet and sorghum production and livestock production, primarily cattle and donkeys. The Okavango region has a similar agro-pastoral system, although there is limited cultivation of maize. Forest products and inland fishing also contribute to local production. In the extensive floodplains of Caprivi, maize is the dominant crop, with cattle raising and fishing as important components. Game, birdlife and diverse flora are abundant in Western Caprivi and the grasslands just south along the Kalahari Desert. It is here that Namibia's indigenous populations, including the Ju/'hoansi, have now permanently settled.
Demography and livelihood
The country's surface area of 824,000 km^2 is home to only 1.4 million inhabitants, yielding a population density of 1.7 per km^2. However, this figure belies the immense regional variation in population density. Water availability is a major determinant of settlement patterns. Rural inhabitants are concentrated around the perennial rivers which form the country's Northern border, around seasonal rivers and floodplains, such as the Cuvelai system in the Owambo regions, and along human-made pipelines and water systems, such as the Eastern National Water Carrier which supplies residents in the otherwise dry areas in eastern and central Namibia. (Additional demographic information is provided in Tables 1-6.)
The racially-biased land policies have also skewed population distribution. Just over 4,000 farmers, primarily white, control 44% of agriculturally useable land. In contrast, 67% of the population currently reside in communal areas, comprising only 41% of agricultural land, not all of which is useable.^4 Although allocation of land within these areas remains communally-based, the regions themselves are largely colonial creations. In the North, the German and South African regimes approximated existing boundaries to confine people to the reserves. In the South and East, people were removed, by war or apartheid practices, to marginal areas.^5 These policies ensured that settlers owned the superior grazing land in the central areas. The subsequent shortage of land and labour created a dualistic agricultural system: black subsistence farming, in which women constitute the majority of producers and white commercial farming, in which black farmworkers provide the bulk of labour.
Seventy-nine percent of the total population is involved in agriculture. However, the migratory labour system is by now entrenched. There is growing urbanization as job seekers stream to the capital and other towns. Indeed, the growth of rural towns and centres, the fluidity of households with links to both environments and the system of food and cash transfers have blurred the line between urban and rural.
The availability of cash income has become the main determinant of household food security. In arid regions, such as Karas, Erongo, and Otjozondjupa regions, food security is directly related to purchasing power. Although sale of livestock is an important contributor to cash income, wage employment and pensions have become the mainstay of daily subsistence. Similarly, in other areas, households cobble together income from agricultural and nonagricultural sources in order to overcome food shortfalls due to low yields or to fill the gaps when off-farm income declines. For most households agriculture is a supplementary but essential source of income.
Pressure on the land and natural resources remains high and, ironically, this is exacerbated by the shortage of labour and assets in many households. Those who cannot afford to hire shepherds, for example, must graze stock in areas closer to the homesteads. Former systems of transhumance, which maximised grazing, have also been disrupted by the fencing off of communal areas by large-scale communal farmers. The growing work burden on women also prompts them to overutilise wood, water and other resources. Deforestation and erosion are prevalent throughout Namibia.
Economic policies
In the wake of concerns that commercial sectors would be nationalized, the new nation has instead implemented pragmatic policies to maintain private sector leadership in the economy, to encourage foreign investment and to avoid overreliance on international loans. Agriculture plays an important role in the national economy by generating revenue, by supplying food and products for domestic consumption and by providing employment. Commercial agriculture, primarily exports of beef and cattle, contributes approximately 10% of the GDP, thereby helping to diversify a national economy reliant on the country's declining mining sector. Namibia's economy is also closely linked to that of South Africa, which is Namibia's main import and export partner. Locally produced foods are often outpriced by imports from its larger neighbour. Nevertheless, an overarching economic strategy is the achievement of national food self-sufficiency as a first step towards reducing dependence on imports
from South Africa. Finally, commercial agriculture directly employs over 30,000 farmworkers, who in turn support families and households in the rural areas. An estimated 22% of economically active Namibians are unemployed, and despite poor wages and working conditions, the sector contributes to stemming the tide of unemployment.
The government is committed to redressing the inequities between the communal and commercial sectors. However, given the uncertain economic climate, it has acted with caution in its efforts to reform the commercial agriculture sector. "Affirmative action" policies in the form of subsidized agricultural support services may not be financially viable. The redistribution of land has met with resistance from commercial farmers while some economists fear it would hinder commercial agriculture and so jeopardize an important revenue base.^6
Programs for the communal sector are often designed on the basis of commercial farming models, and view productivity based solely on the production for market. Commercial farming systems are inappropriate for evaluating and improving agriculture in communal areas, where the value of agriculture and 'by products' such as draught power and milk, contributes to multi-stranded livelihood strategies. The limited reforms to date have mainly served elite farmers and further increased the growing disparities among communal farmers within and between regions and across the gender line.
<section>2</section>
Review and appraisal at the national level
The situation in the Eighties
Agriculture: Pre independence
The mobilisation of women: Pre-independence
Review and appraisal at the national level
The situation in the Eighties
Independence in 1990 provides an important benchmark for measuring change in Namibia. Although the 1985 Nairobi Conference increased awareness of gender issues in the liberation movement, consideration of the status of women took a back seat to the goal of national liberation and racial equity. At that time, race, not gender, was the variable for analysis. Despite their contribution to the struggle, rural women stood in the margins, both in official policy and in the public consciousness. To understand the historical context which affects women farmers at present, it is necessary to look separately at the situation of agriculture and the development of women's movements.
Agriculture: Pre independence
The apartheid policies and neglect of rural areas of the South African government impeded the social, political and economic development of communal farmers.^7 They were denied access to a range of institutions and resources which supported the commercial sector. In 1980, the government passed legislation to create separate, Second-Tier Authorities to administer each of the nine 'self-governing territories' which had been created out of the Odendaal Commission in 1964. Thus, separate agricultural support services, together with provision of health, education and rural water supply, were administered and financed for each separate ethnic group. Most farmers had little or no access to extension services outside of sales of fertilizers and seed. Differential resource allocation created great disparities not only by race but by ethnicity.^8 Women were the least served of all. In general, the least skilled and trained officers were assigned to the communal areas, and they
frequently worked on infrastructure projects, such as road construction.^9 Little research, if any, on communal crops and improved farming systems was undertaken. Marketing, inputs and access to credit services were all neglected.
In contrast, white farmers, under the Administration for Whites, enjoyed the benefits of a network of credit, marketing and supply institutions, designed to advance their interests and to subsidize the sector. AGRA, the supply and marketing cooperative, only operated centres in the commercial areas. In 1979, the Land and Agriculture Bank was formed to assist farmers in financing the purchase of land and inputs. By requiring farmers to have surveyed, freehold land as collateral, the Bank excluded communal farmers. The low interest rates served as a readily available subsidy for white farmers, and just prior to independence a 4% long term loan ensured that freehold land would remain in the hands of whites.^10
The Meat Board, Agronomic Board and Karakul Board regulated pricing and exports of meat, wheat, maize and other commercial crops and karakul pelts respectively. Until recently, millet, the main crop grown in the northern communal areas, was not in the purview of the Agronomic Board. Because the veterinary fence cuts off the densely-populated North -- and in the absence of quarantine facilities -- many communal farmers could not market cattle for export. Communal farmers, whose livestock often did meet the boards' standards, sold them through auctions run by AGRA and Meatco, or to independent buying agents, often at less than market prices. Namibian marketing boards remain closely allied to the Namibia Agricultural Union (NAU), the main body representing white farmers.
One institution which did work in the bantustans was the First National Development Corporation (FNDC), a parastatal set up in 1978.^11 Based on a vision of free market development in the reserves, the FNDC's strategy has been to channel government resources into commercial ventures in the communal areas. For example, the FNDC set up wholesale outlets to supply implements and offer short-term credit facilities. FNDC's operations, which enjoyed tax breaks and government loans, effectively precluded any competition, individual or cooperative.^12 Its agricultural projects, run primarily in the Okavango and Caprivi regions, have primarily been large mechanized and/or irrigated schemes oriented towards individual farmers with entrepreneurial potential. During the 1980s, the Corporation established farmer support programs, supplying technical assistance, inputs and credit, to farmers able to produce commercial crops such as cotton or livestock for market. Thus, the programs
targeted elite farmers and were of little benefit to women, who are engaged in small holder agriculture.
The creation of a black farming elite exacerbated the divisions -- ethnic, racial, and social -- which apartheid carved into rural communities. To weaken its opponents and further fragment rural communities, the government rewarded cooperative individuals and groups of potential supporters with subsidies and infrastructure projects. Resources were often channelled through traditional authorities, some of whom actively collaborated with the South African Defense Force (SADF) and ruling administrations.
At the same time, black farmers were inhibited from forming their own groups. The Cooperative Societies Act of 1964, currently being redrawn, imposed a complicated set of registration procedures and organizational requirements. These cumbersome restrictions precluded the establishment of small, grassroots cooperatives, seen as potential vehicles for political activity, and effectively limited the formation of cooperatives to large-scale agricultural and consumer cooperatives for whites. The absence of indigenous cooperatives helped to marginalise the participation of black groups in the mainstream economy.^13 Importantly, as Independence loomed closer, the FNDC and extension officers worked with more commercially-oriented farmers to establish farmers associations, such as the Likwama Farmers Union in Caprivi. Here again, the focus was on improved marketing, and women's participation was limited. However, these groups have become important models for emergent farmers
associations throughout the country.
The mobilisation of women: Pre-independence
Efforts to improve the status of women differed among exiles outside the country and the women and institutions that remained in Namibia. The demands of the liberation struggle forced men and women both to abandon a rigid division of labour. Women in exile often took on roles and authority not accessible to them within the country. Many fought in combat and trained military cadres.^14 Others took responsibility for running and managing camps, including setting up clinics and kindergartens. Many benefitted from improved access to education. A recent study found that female returnees were 5 times more likely to have Standard 10 levels or higher than stayers of both sexes. They also achieved higher education levels than men in exile. They gained exposure to countries with greater numbers of women in political and professional positions, and many returnees now challenge traditional gender roles and stereotypes. This has not been without high personal and social costs. The study
found that returnee women were considerably more affected by mental stress and other psychological strains caused by life in exile.^15
Although the experience in exile raised awareness of women's issues, the liberation movement did not highlight or press gender issues. Even after the formation of the SWAPO Women's Council, the liberation of women was subsumed under the struggle for national liberation. As one historian notes, "Women's mobilization for the struggle was regarded as strategically important, yet there was no idea that this might imply changes in gender relations or a transformation of the struggle itself."^16 Only as liberation became achievable did women begin to stress the equality of women as integral and part and parcel of independence. No doubt, participation in the Nairobi conference, where SWAPO participated in the government forum, also heightened the awareness of women in the movement.
Inside the country, the war irreconcilably altered the lives of rural women, particularly those in the North. Military recruitment by both sides tore families asunder. The eventual withdrawal of the South African army devastated some households, who had become reliant on the wages of soldiers. Women struggled to survive, as agriculture declined in the wake of crop destruction by the army, severe drought, and the loss of vast numbers of able-bodied young gone into exile or military service.
In the mid 1980s, community organizations began to emerge. Although spurred on by the fight against apartheid, churches and other institutions began to mobilise people around everyday concerns. Self-help groups promoting health, creches and better housing conditions began to crop up in the Windhoek townships and in the South, which was far removed from armed conflict. Some large companies undertook social responsibility programs, resulting in organizations such as the Rossing Foundation, which provided agricultural and skills training to black Namibians. Although these programs were identified with the status quo, their initiatives did enhance the access of Namibians, including women, to training.
Sensing the significance of this movement, the South African regime deployed a hearts and minds campaign, which drew on the emergence of community development schemes, to support development projects, such as clinics and schools in the former reserves and, in some areas, to provide highly subsidized agricultural services. The regime also promoted cultural organisations in an effort to foster ethnic divisions.
Ultimately, the arena of grassroots activity did not extend much beyond the efforts of churches and political party organizations; the base for community development work disappeared in a web of political tensions, suspicious motives, and identities along party lines that to a certain extent persist today.
It is important to note that within the country, calls for jobs, housing, and education were also couched in terms of race not gender. Gender issues took a back seat in efforts to raise the welfare of poor Namibians. A group formed in 1985, the Namibian Women's Voice, attempted to bring women together across party-political lines to promote awareness and action around gender issues. Under the weight of tensions within the organization and pressures from outside, the organization dissolved in 1989. White women, although enfranchised to vote, were largely absent from the liberation movement, and did not play the activist and advocacy role as many of their counterparts in South Africa. Even the election campaign, which sought to woo the female electorate, targeted urban women, stressing issues such as improved working conditions.^17 In sum, neither the exiled liberation struggle, nor the internal grassroots movements, gave priority to rural women per se.
<section>3</section>
Changes since independence
Inequality in the sharing of power and decision-making
Insufficient institutions and mechanisms to promote the advancement of rural women
Women's organisations
Government mechanisms
Rural institutions
Farmers associations and rural co-operatives
Churches
Lack of awareness of, and commitment to, internationally and nationally recognized women's rights
Current legal provisions
Measures to increase awareness
Poverty and the status of rural poor women
Female-headed households and other vulnerable groups
Household food security and sources of livelihood
Malnutrition
Division of labour and decision-making
Inequality in women's access to and participation in the definition of economic structures and the productive process itself
Land and assets
Shortage of labour
Ownership and access to livestock
Credit
Agricultural extension and inputs
Agricultural and rural development centres
Agricultural training and research
Technology
Forestry and natural resource management
Inequality in access to employment
Employment in agriculture
Formal sector employment
Informal sector and income generation activities
Changes since independence
Inequality in the sharing of power and decision-making
The prospects for women's participation in decision-making has increased considerably since independence, an important step toward ensuring that Namibian women, who comprise over half of the population, both contribute to and benefit from development. However, key leadership and policy-making positions within the government as well as in rural organisations remain the domain of men.
Prior to Independence, women were virtually excluded from participation in the ruling government structures. 18 Women are clearly more visible in leadership positions today, but the balance of power has changed little. Only 2 of the 18 ministerial posts are held by women. Women account for only 6 of the 72 members elected to the first house of parliament, the National Assembly. Although these women have used their positions to advocate for gender equity, their efforts may reinforce the lack of commitment of their male counterparts, who perceive gender concerns as women's issues to be handled by women. Efforts to promote gender equality in decision-making must therefore aim to increase the commitment of male leaders as well as to alter the balance of power between men and women.
For rural women, the election of representatives in local and regional government offers the prospect for increased access to power and decision making at the local level. Many have pinned high expectations on these representatives to work to improve conditions in the rural areas and to redress past inequities. Indeed, an exit poll of the election revealed that an average of two-thirds of voters were aware of their party or candidate's position on such issues as land policy, poverty, education and unemployment.^19
Residents in towns, municipalities and 'villages' (which are in essence, small rural towns) are represented by local authority councils. Importantly, with the active lobbying of the Minister of Regional, Local Government and Housing, one of the two women ministers, the government enacted an affirmative action provision for the first elections of local authorities. By stipulating that party lists must include a minimum number of women candidates, the provision ensured that almost 38% of candidates fielded were women. In some instances, lists with no women candidates were changed. while other lists were revised upwards of the required minimum. The provision did not, however, require that women nominees be given priority for filling seats which were won, and the final results showed a drop to 31.5% of seats filled by women. The provision clearly boosted the participation of women in the elections. However, it will not apply to future elections, which will be contested on the
basis of individual candidates rather than party lists.^20
Rural women in constituencies outside of small towns are represented through the 13 regional councils. Each council, in turn, elects two of its members to the National Council, the second house of Parliament. Although the councils do not undertake service provision, they have the mandate to undertake regional planning and development, and have responsibility for land use planning, economic development and natural resource management within the region. The National Council is intended to amplify the needs of rural constituencies onto the national level.
For these elections, no similar affirmative action provision was made and candidates contested the election as individuals. Moreover, parties attached more prestige and power to the regional councils. Interviews with party representatives revealed that many people made gender-based distinctions between the two elections. Respondents attributed political importance to serving on the regional councils. They saw local councils as involved in "non-political" issues such as social and community concerns -- more natural extensions of women's work.^21 As a result, women are extremely underrepresented in regional councils. Only 12 (6%) of the 195 candidates were women. The elections resulted in only 3 women regional councilors (3 %) of the 95 elected. Only one woman was elected to the 26 member National Council. Additional data on local and regional elections is provided in Tables 7 and 8 respectively.
In sum, following Independence, women continue to hold few policy-making positions at the ministerial level. They wield little authority over decision-making, including the development of sectoral policies. Table 9 shows the number of women in filled management positions -deputy director up to permanent secretary -- within the four Ministries most directly concerned with rural development.^22
Most noticeable is the lack of women in the management cadre of the Ministry of Agriculture itself. Constitutional provisions, together with administrative demands, meant that many Ministries retained employees of the colonial administration. The current composition of MAWRD in part reflects the legacy of the Ministry's almost exclusive focus on white, commercial agriculture.
The Ministry of Agriculture recently lost another senior woman, who became the Director of Agriculture at the restructured development parastatal, the Namibia Development Corporation. Her staff includes two departmental leaders and a six-person interdisciplinary consulting team which guides programme directions and design. The sole woman on the team is advising on horticulture.
The drafting of policy and legislation often evolves out of government-appointed committees assigned to explore complex legal and political issues. Here again, women 's participation has been limited. Two commissions of direct relevance to rural women farmers have included the Technical Committee on Commercial Farmland, whose recommendations on the acquisition and reallocation of commercial farmland are expected to reach Parliament in late 1994; and the Commission of Inquiry into Traditional Leadership, whose investigation is expected to form the basis of a bill defining the role of traditional authorities in land allocation and customary law. The former boasted only one women of its nine members; the latter commission of 12 members did not include any women. After lobbying from concerned staff within the MAWRD, the National Task Force on Agricultural Policy added a woman to the six-man committee. Her involvement has prompted the Task Force, which is drafting a sectoral
White Paper, to give greater attention to the role of women farmers and to gender issues in agricultural planning.
Women also remain underrepresented in the leadership of institutions outside of government. In communal areas, traditional authorities hold responsibility for allocating land and adjudicating disputes. With the exception of a few female chiefs and "headmen", women have been and remain almost completely excluded from positions of authority under traditional systems. Only through family lines can women hope to influence the decisions of traditional authorities.^23
Although no statistics are available, discussions suggest that non-governmental organisations have made the most progress in promoting the participation of women in organisational management and leadership. Many organisations have adopted policies, often entrenched in their constitutions, which specify that women must constitute a certain percentage of membership and/or positions on management committees and organisational boards.^24 The forthcoming Co-operative Act includes provisions that cooperatives in which more than a third of the total members are women must have at least one woman on each Management committee and subcommittee.^25 Policies such as these, while not yet balancing power, have helped to diversify leadership structures.
However, the management and field staff of NGOs are primarily men, while the participants in the community groups they serve are mostly women. Some NGO staff feel that extensive travel and overnight stays in the field deter women, who must still tend to household and child care responsibilities. That women often don't have driver's licenses is also seen as an obstacle; this is, of course, easily overcome by supporting driving lessons, and one NGO's recent advertisement for a rural-based position successfully encouraged female applicants by noting that lack of a license would not be a handicap. An overemphasis on secondary or tertiary qualifications may also exclude women, whose qualifications are often more experience-based.
Within community groups, farmers associations and other local-level organisations, a gap continues to exist between membership at the community level and participation in decision-making. As one respondent wryly observed, "Women are the foundation, but they are expected to be a quiet foundation." Women are often praised as the backbone of self-help efforts and community development, but this recognition does not always translate into access to leadership and decision-making. In some self-help programs that work with households, although a woman may be the active participant, her husband is the registered member, attending meetings. Some local associations have also drafted statements that guarantee women have one or more places in management structures. However, this may not guarantee meaningful participation. One observer noted that female committee members are often relegated to be association secretary. Commenting on farmers associations in particular, he noted that news
of important issues and opportunities, often channelled through informal networks, frequently bypasses the female members.
The level of authority which women wield in community groups differs from region to region. In the Owambo regions of the North, where the war and labour system have torn households apart, women are seen to be more independent and willing to take on positions of responsibility and decision-making within local initiatives. In contrast, it was noted that in other rural areas, such as the communal areas in the East, women who do attend meetings sit on the sidelines and speak infrequently. This submissiveness was attributed to a lack of confidence and leadership skills on the one hand, and the hostility of men towards their participation on the other. However, a recent survey of women in an Owambo district underscored the reality that organizational meetings and structures do not take adequate account of rural women's workloads, schedules, and distances from rural centres.^26
Insufficient institutions and mechanisms to promote the advancement of rural women
Women's groups, NGOs, and government networks have proliferated since the transition period and are bringing awareness of gender imbalances into the mainstream. However, institutions which enhance women's role in agriculture and food production and advocate on behalf of women farmers are few and far between in Namibia.
Although widespread information on participation in NGOs and community institutions is sparse, several recent surveys have sobering results. Only 5.9%, 1% and .75% of 1800 women surveyed in the Owambo regions reported involvement in women's groups, literacy groups and self-help groups respectively. Only 12 women in total were involved in committees around village water, health and literacy. Another survey, covering a district in the Omusati region, showed that 40% of respondents (both sexes) were involved in community structures; these were predominantly church groups and to a lesser extent, school committees. In the Eastern Communal Areas, 81% of respondents (half of whom were women) had not participated in development projects. 24 % were in farmers associations, only one-third of whom were women.^27
Women's organisations
The constellation of national organisations formed around women's issues includes women's wings of the major political parties, nonpartisan groups such as the Namibia National Women's Organisation (NANAWO) and the Federation of Namibian Women, and organisations dedicated to specific issues or sectors, including counselling and violence. Several national nongovernmental organizations and unions have gender coordinators and/or gender-based programmes.^28 Dominated by educated, urban-based women, these organizations have yet to establish a significant presence in rural regions, particularly in the communal areas. Their agenda emphasizes improvements in employment conditions and other goals of more relevance to urban women. Conflict over perceived party loyalties, as well as a sense of territoriality over specific regions have, limited the impact of women's organizations.^29
Government mechanisms
At independence, the government established a Department of Women Affairs (DWA) in the Office of the President. The role of the DWA has been to facilitate the inclusion of gender issues into national development, to advocate for policies and legislation which are gender-sensitive, to coordinate the gender-related activities of government ministries and to provide a point of contact between government, NGOs and donors promoting gender issues. DWA has also coordinated public education campaigns. In part through advocacy by the DWA, the National Development Plan for 1995-2000 will specifically address gender issues sector by sector, rather than in a separate section on Women in Development.
Despite its placement in the Office of the President, the DWA lacks a high profile. Its ability to coordinate efforts on a national scale is limited by a small budget and a staff not well-versed in advocacy and policy issues. The DWA has no representative or observer in the Cabinet, and so must advocate and lobby indirectly. Rural women are partially served by a DWA grant-making programme for income-generating activities. This programme has proven a drain on the time and resources of the staff, who are unable to fully assess the feasibility and impact of the activities -- and draw lessons which are relevant to development planning. These constraints have meant that rural women are not in touch with government plans which may affect them, nor are their priorities fully addressed in policy and development debates coordinated by the DWA.
The DWA is planning to facilitate an interministerial network on gender issues to be comprised of committed individuals within the line ministries. As yet, no ministry has a focal point for promoting gender concerns. However, in MAWRD, the integration of women has primarily been the task of the former Directorate of Rural Development. Established to improve household food security in rural areas, the Directorate has undertaken two main activities: the provision of rural water supply, and the establishment of Rural Extension Officers (REOs) and Promoters. Their task has been to mobilize communities through income generation activities, education campaigns, and projects to improve food security. Gender awareness and the participation of women has been a priority.^30
However, MAWRD's commitment to the Directorate has not been strong. Despite a 10% share of MAWRD's budget in its first two years, the Directorate received in actuality only 5-6% of the Department of Agriculture's expenditure.^31 The 20 rural extension officers could not properly serve a vast and scattered rural population. There was also overlap and little coordination between REOs, and the Community Development Extension Service, created by MRLGH. Moreover, some MAWRD staff see rural development as separate (and inferior) to mainstream agricultural activities. In 1993, the rationalization process has merged the Directorate of Agriculture and Rural Development into the Directorate of Extension and Engineering. It has also created a Division of Rural Development, with the mandate of rural development policy formulation, rural development planning, and coordination of rural development activities. This Division has proposed the creation of a Gender in Development Unit. It is
hoped that this strategy will better reorient the agriculture services toward addressing household food security and gender differences. This Directorate has therefore the responsibility for a recently developed initiative to integrate women into agricultural services.
Lastly, it is important to again mention local and regional government. Only limited powers have been decentralised to these structures, and the capacity of the councils remains weak Many councillors lack transportation, and so have little contact with their constituencies Regions in which all or most constituencies lie in communal areas do not have the same revenue bases as those regions with municipalities. As a result, they rely primarily on external funding from the central government, which continues to favour more populated, central regions. Clearly, the elections alone have not ensured a mechanism for democratic participation by rural women.
Rural institutions
As discussed in Chapter I, restrictive legislation, war and migration, and divisions fostered by apartheid stunted the emergence of community organisations and a grassroots movement. Group activities, such as digging wells, are common, particularly in the North. However, formal local-level organisation is a new phenomenon. The establishment of community based organisations is hampered by the lack of experience and resources, as well as the expectation that government must direct development and provide most services. This dependency was fostered by the apartheid regime, which built infrastructure and provided free or subsidized services in order to make the reserve system work. Within the current government, highly visible development schemes, usually publicized with a great ceremony, have only intensified expectations.
Community organizations, although receiving support from donors, NGOs or churches, tend to exist in isolation. They are not linked up to larger networks which could help women voice their priorities, experiences and ideas. Regional development networks of NGO and of line ministry staff have been established in the North. Although primarily seeking to coordinate activities, these groups could play a role in bringing the concerns of women farmers into regional and national decision-making fora.
Farmers associations and rural co-operatives
Farmers unions and other rural organizations emphasize the interests of male members and do not sufficiently target rural women. The Namibia Agricultural Union recently established a wing for communal farmers associations. Like their white counterparts in the commercial sector, it is mostly large-scale stock holders, and therefore, men, who are represented. No numbers are available on the levels of membership by women in the associations affiliated to NAU, but few women, mostly widows, own commercial farms in Namibia.
In June 1992, the Namibia National Farmers Union (NNFU) was established to provide a voice and organizational base for communal farmers. Women comprise an estimated 30-60% of affiliate associations. However, the activities of farmers associations stress marketing and surplus production. Absent are programmes aimed at improved food production and food processing for women farmers. NNFU's policy voice on behalf of the needs of its women members has been overwhelmed by the priority given to commercially-oriented agriculture.^32
Recognising that women's interests are not advanced in the regional farmers union, some NGOs have encouraged women to form separate associations and co-operatives, with the view that they will have more control and gain more leadership experience through their own organisation. The fledgling co-operative movement is also proving to be a significant force for empowering women to participate and for advancing their interests. Currently, an estimated 200 co-operatives nationwide will register upon passage of the Act.^33
Churches
Of all organizations, churches boast the highest numbers of rural women. For example, 83.7% of women surveyed in the Owambo regions had active ties to the church, particularly the Catholic and Evangelical Lutheran churches. Many church activities, such as Bible classes, aim to offer moral guidance and social interaction. However, on their own and through the Council of Churches of Namibia (CCN), churches have been running development projects since the mid 1980s. The activities of church-based organizations have tended to be welfarist in orientation and limited in scope. Their ability to empower women is hindered by the patriarchal attitudes of the churches themselves, which continue to shape narrow attitudes about marriage and pregnancy, and the role of women in leadership.^34
Nevertheless, the churches do provide an important foundation for bringing women together. The Women's Desk of the CCN, and the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) have considerable experience with rural women and are well-integrated into national-level gender networks. The recently formed Ecumenical Church Group of Namibia, with membership from 74 denominations, reaches both rural and urban women. The importance of the scattered projects of churches and NGOs should also not be underestimated. The Government has been able to build on these foundations to expand national initiatives aimed at promoting health care and literacy. CCN, in particular, has gained considerable experience relevant to women farmers through its drought relief programmes and agricultural development centres.
Lack of awareness of, and commitment to, internationally and nationally recognized women's rights
Current legal provisions
Upon independence, Namibia put into place a democratic constitution which promotes the advancement of women. For example, the Constitution prohibits sexual discrimination and guarantees equality between men and women in all aspects of marriage, including at its dissolution.^35 An affirmative action provision enables Parliament to enact legislation for policies and programmes to redress past imbalances and specifically notes that "women in Namibia have traditionally suffered special discrimination and that they need to be encouraged and enabled to play a full, equal and effective role in the political social and economic and cultural life of the nation."^36 The principles of state policy include a commitment to promote the welfare of the people by, inter alia, enactment of legislation to ensure equality of opportunity for women to enable them to participate fully in all spheres of Namibian society.^37 The Constitution also commits Namibia to the promotion of a legal system
open to all, improved public health and access to education, and maintenance and sustainable utilization of ecosystems and biological diversity for the benefit of all Namibians. The articles of most relevance to women are presented in full in Annex I.
Namibia has also endorsed various international conventions in support of women's rights, including the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (UNCEDAW) and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The Constitution, together with the UN Conventions, provide an important framework for promoting and evaluating gender equality. However, to date, constitutional provisions have made few tangible changes in the lives of women, particularly rural women. Provisions such as the affirmative action clause merely serve as guidelines and lack the force to require Parliament to enact legislation. With the exception of the first local authority elections, the affirmative action provision has had limited application, within the government service and in the private sector.^38 Parliament has passed several laws which enhance the status of women workers, including the Labour Act, which prohibits gender discrimination, offers protection for domestic workers and farm labourers and outlines procedures for establishing minimum wages. However, the Act has little relevance to the majority of rural women who are self-employed or operate in the informal sector.
More significantly, the Constitution provides that all laws in force at independence remain in force until repealed or amended by an Act of Parliament or declared unconstitutional by a competent court. Moreover, customary and common law also remains valid, so long as it does not conflict with the Constitution or statutory law.^39 The legacy of people's isolation from the legal system has resulted in few, if any, challenges on the basis of constitutionality. Thus, many discriminatory laws remain in tact. Only through a long process of reform are laws likely to be brought in line with the Constitution and the UNCEDAW.
Discriminatory marriage laws exert the greatest limitations on women's authority over children, control over property, and access to land and credit. Indeed, under both civil and customary system, women are treated as de facto minors. For example, in the absence of an antenuptial contract, most civil law marriages are in community of property. Married women cannot register property in their own name. This gives husbands control over the purchase and disposal of property. Marriage in community of property also restricts women's access to credit; wives require husband's consent and signature to enter into contracts and to initiate law suits. Not recognised as property owners, women are also unable to pledge property as security for credit. The husband is also recognised as the guardian of all children born to the marriage. Similarly, under common law marriages, the upbringing of minor children, including decisions about their education, legally falls under the authority of the
father.^40
Under customary systems, traditional authorities allocate land, adjudicate disputes and rule on criminal acts, and make judgement over traditional divorce. It is important to stress that customary law was largely influenced by colonial interpretation and intervention. With the cooperation of elites and tribal leaders, colonial authorities saw customary law as "a tool to control resources" including the labour and reproductive capacity of women. The stability of the reserve system hinged on these measures. A confusing web of legal provisions continues to govern marriage for most rural women, as colonial marriage laws have been overlaid onto the customary system. Women in customary marriages are also dependent on husbands' authority to sell property or to enter into contracts. As a legacy of colonial law, a separate matrimonial property regime for blacks in the northern communal areas further entrenches customary law by denying men the right to devise cattle and other movable
property by will to wives and children.^41
In some communities, husbands are seen to "own" their wife by virtue of paying 'lobola', or bride price. More research needs to be done to assess the scope and implications of this practice, but a survey of the Owambo Regions highlighted considerable variation. In two of three districts, husbands simply gave gifts, such as the purchase of the wedding dress, as part of a civil marriage ceremony. Bride price was uncommon. In contrast, a majority of men in a neighbouring region paid brideprice of 1-5 cattle.^42
While legislation is required to ensure women equal rights in marriage, it will be more difficult to eradicate the patriarchal attitudes and power which underpin both legal systems. Divorced women and women with children out of wedlock garner little support, and the church requires the mother to attend a rehabilitation course if her child is to be baptised. A relatively small percentage of rural women are married under customary law (see Table 10).
Nevertheless, many women married under civil law in the rural communal areas are subject to traditional systems of land allocation and inheritance. Societies in Namibia follow matrilineal or patrilineal lines of descent. In either system, a male, be it the husband or a relative on the mother or father's side of the family, is the locus of authority. Thus, in some regions, unmarried women, who do not gain access to land by virtue of marriage, can only obtain land through male relatives. Divorce proceedings can also discriminate against women, who face hearings chaired by men and are often prevented from speaking.^43 Elsewhere, in the Eastern and Southern Communal Areas, or in the Okavango Region, women can be allocated land in their own right, but still face discrimination. For example, headmen may give priority to the applications of men, who are seen to be more productive. Alternatively, women may be granted smaller or degraded portions. Women also have little recourse to
challenge encroachment of grazing land by larger stock holders or to fight back against stock theft. Some have suggested that judgements favour men in grazing disputes involving both sexes.^44
Discriminatory inheritance traditions further contribute to women's tenuous position. In the Eastern Communal Areas, a widow's right to keep her home and maintain access to grazing land depends on the goodwill of the deceased's male relatives. Should she return to her family, the relatives will claim her husband's livestock and may or may not permit her to keep her own.^45 Death of the husband often leaves wives in polygamous marriages with virtually no property. In the South, widows appear to be better off, inheriting grazing cards (which regulate rights to use grazing land), livestock and immovable property. In the Okavango Region, the man's family determines who will inherit cattle, typically granting only part of the herd to the widow. Cropland reverts to the widow.
A study for a consultative conference on land reform, held in June 1991, found that women in the Northern crop areas were particularly at risk of losing land and other assets upon the death of husband or fathers (see Table 11). Divorces are also problematic, as many women must turn over assets and property which they have helped to build or purchase. The most drastic examples of discrimination have been reported in the Owambo Regions. The widow does not automatically inherit the land and homestead. Rather, she must pay a fee to the headman to "repurchase" the land.^46 In some instances, even widows who raise the money are forced off the land by the husband's family, who, under customary law, can claim the land and all joint property, including the homestead, any joint enterprise such as a small shop, livestock, and even grain stores. These women return to their families or purchase an inferior plot of land. Women in the region feel strongly that this discrimination must end,
and in a 1994 gender-based survey, respondents clearly agreed that: women should inherit husbands' land, not families; headmen should not charge widows for land; and, in divorce, property should be split equally.^47
Measures to increase awareness
Legislation to enhance the status of women has sorely lagged behind the tenets of gender equality espoused in the Constitution.^48 However, government groups and NGOs together have stepped up efforts to educate men and women on the rights of women, to press for legal reform, and to enable women to promote their interests through the legal system. For example, the Law Reform and Development Commission includes a Women and Law Committee, which will seek to reform civil and customary law in line with the Constitution. This process is being supported by an NGO-based Gender Research Project, which aims to assess gender aspects of the law and evaluate proposals for reform.
One breakthrough occurred in late 1993, when a chief in the Owambo Region agreed not to force widows off the land or to charge fees for them to remain on their land. This agreement was achieved through patient consultation by members of government and representatives of legal organisations including the Women and Law Committee. When a local headman did not follow the new ruling, widows, with support from members of NGOs, organized a demonstration. However, many villagers and headmen remain uninformed of the proclamation, and past practices continue.^49
The effort to reform customary law is part of an ongoing programme, coordinated by the Namibia Development Trust, and the Law Faculty at the University of Namibia, to improve the legal and socio-economic situation of women in Namibia. This process has included the gender-based survey, cited earlier, of three districts in the North. The organizations are now undertaking educational campaigns and workshops to provide information on the difference between being married in and out of community of property -- over half of the women surveyed admitted to not knowing the distinction. Importantly, the survey showed that the majority of respondents rely on their future husbands for advice prior to the marriage, while others seek information from parents and friends.^50 The Law Faculty has conducted several workshops for rural communities to show how a properly prepared will can help widows secure rights to (nonmovable) property and land. However. it is proving difficult to change
attitudes and misconceptions of traditional authorities and men. Moreover, some customary systems do not recognize wills.^51
In addition to the Gender Research Project, programmes are underway to educate women about their rights and how to assert them. One NGO, the Legal Assistance Centre (LAC), is running a legal education project, working closely with the Department of Women's Affairs and non-governmental groups. The project has produced pamphlets for use in schools and communities and a manual for paralegals on the rights of women and children. The rights and procedures which have been or will be covered include maintenance, abortion, rights of single mothers, domestic violence and marriage and divorce. Several other groups have cooperated to produce a booklet on women and rape.^52 The project is also running legal education workshops in townships and rural centres.
The DWA is also working with government departments and partner agencies to communicate the UNCEDAW, and to generate strategies for action and implementation. The booklet has been produced in seven local languages.
Rural women remain underserved by the judiciary system. Magistrate courts have yet to be established in several of the regions, following the new delimitation in 1992. The legal profession is male-dominated and largely urban-based. It is likely that many rural women are not reached by education campaigns. For example, the LAC has been actively encouraging women to invoke a pre-Independence law, the Maintenance Act, to claim their entitlement to maintenance. The Centre has also supported efforts to improve the enforcement of the Act for men who default on payments. However, while increasing numbers of women in the Windhoek area are taking up maintenance procedures, few women in rural areas appear to be utilising it.^53
In addition to its Windhoek office, the Legal Assistance Centre has established branches in five regional centres. Paralegals advise or refer people on cases, most of which concern divorce, maintenance and custody. However, the director of the Legal Education Project is the only woman of ten paralegals involved in the Centre's advice and education functions. Women are often reluctant to bring up concerns about violence, marriage or divorce with men, particularly in light of persistent tolerance towards domestic violence.^54 A significant initiative is the pilot Women's and Children's Abuse Centre, a hospital-based centre which caters for rape, violence and abuse of women and children. Although the Centre is Windhoek-based, it is anticipated that similar centres will be established in towns serving the communal areas.
This lack of self confidence underscores the importance that, in addition to legal reform, women must be empowered socially and economically to challenge unjust measures. Indeed, one important process which has increased the awareness of rights has been the exposure to democratic values, both in national elections and through participation in organizations.^55
Poverty and the status of rural poor women
The health and well-being of the majority of children in Namibia is integrally tied to women's roles as farmers and food producers. To date, no national-level statistics on levels of poverty exist, and the country is in the process of establishing a poverty datum line to monitor changes in the ability of poor Namibians to meet basic needs.^56 However, recent regional studies suggest that as many as 40% of households are food insecure. In Namibia, household food security derives from two sources: the production and food stores of the household from agriculture and food gathering; and the ability of households to purchase or acquire food, either from cash income, food transfers. or bartering.
The disparity between rich and poor is extreme.^57 There is growing differentiation within rural regions, as well as between households at village level (see Table 12). One measure of this is disparity in the ownership of and access to livestock, an important agricultural asset. In Namibia, the decline in crop production and food availability, together with a reduction in cash income, are further entrenching many households in poverty.
Female-headed households and other vulnerable groups
Households headed by women constitute a significant portion of the food insecure. Definitions of what constitutes a household, as well as criteria for determining if the head is a female, vary widely.^58 Some surveys have distinguished between de jure heads, women recognized within civil or customary law as the official head, and de facto heads, women who are in charge in the absence of a male head.^59 Although comprehensive data is limited, regional figures and the national census suggest that between 30-50 % of households are effectively female-headed (see Tables 13 - 16).
Far from homogeneous, female-headed households display a range of composition patterns and socio-economic characteristics. It must also be stressed that a focus on female-headed households masks the vulnerability of single mothers and young married couples, often part of male headed households (see Tables 17, 18 and 19).
A number of factors contribute to the precarious situation of rural women in general, and female headed households in particular. For example, ongoing migration continues to affect the structure of households. In the Northern regions, this pattern is reflected in the noticeable gender imbalances in the productive adult population. Table 20 shows the gradual shift in gender balance from a rural community in the North to a rural town in the South to a Windhoek township.
Migration has created many female headed households with a shortage of adult labour, often resulting in a decline in food productivity. Women must often make up the loss through additional work in the field, including intensive tasks such as tilling and clearing. Data on land holdings is sparse, but several recent surveys in the Owambo Region show that although size of land between male and female headed households is comparable, the amount cultivated is often lower for the latter. Even in regions where gender ratios are equal, women still outnumber men in agriculture.^60 In the South, labour shortages are less problematic; however, many able-bodied youths do not contribute fully to agricultural activities.
Shortage of labour is exacerbated by the higher dependency ratios present in female headed households. According to the 1991 census, female-headed households are comparable in size to those headed by males but support more children. Similarly, the household subsistence survey found the average size of a rural household headed by a man to be 9.4, while that headed by a female is 7.4. In contrast, female-headed households have on average 1.9 dependents (those under 16 or over 60), male headed households only 1.4.^61 Thus, while female headed households support more dependents, they have smaller households and therefore fewer able-bodied members to assist with agricultural and domestic tasks (see Tables 21 - 23). Although school children do contribute to household chores, they are likely to be a net drain.^62 Households who can send their children away to school further benefit from school feeding programmes.
Yet another factor affecting women's ability to procure food is the declining natural resource base. The quality of land is deteriorating, women lack fertiliser, implements and the technical know how to boost the productive potential of their fields. Drought is an ever present threat for communal farmers, whose harvests, in the absence of agricultural inputs, depend even more directly on good rainfall. In the non-crop producing regions, stock-farming households must contend with drought and poor grazing which directly reduce the availability of milk for home consumption. Wild fruits and vegetables, riverine fish, and small animals enhance food security during times of relatively good supply and provide an important buffer for poor households during times of food shortage. However, increasing deforestation and erosion, including along rivers, unsustainable harvesting, and increasing population pressure are shrinking the availability of these foods.
Particularly affected by environmental change, as well as by historical land dispossession are women and their families in traditionally nomadic pastoral or hunting-gathering communities. Bushmen peoples have faced considerable social disruption, caused by restricted access to land and by the influence of the military. Many now live on the margins, squatting in small towns or as overexploited shepherds or maids in the households of communal farmers. Those employed in the military found themselves in precarious circumstances with the withdrawal of the South African Defence Force and the loss of wage income. One group, the Ju/'hoansi, have resettled on traditional grounds, and are working with outside groups to develop a mixed economy including horticulture, cattle-rearing, and craft production in addition to foraging. It remains to be seen how new economic patterns will alter gender roles.
Household food security and sources of livelihood
As a result of these conditions, few households, whether male or female-headed, produce enough food to be self-sufficient. The gender survey of the North found that less than 5 % of all households surveyed had produced a surplus of millet; the majority did not have enough grain in storage to stretch between harvests. Protracted drought no doubt contributed to this extreme situation? but many Northern households must regularly supplement the millet or maize harvested with meal from elsewhere.^63 Even in the best of years, agricultural production is inadequate to meet basic food needs. Since women are the majority of farmers, they are most likely to bear the risk and uncertainty of agriculture.
To meet basic food needs, households therefore augment production from subsistence agriculture with cash or in-kind income from other sources. In addition to purchasing food, cash is also needed to pay for school fees and uniforms, medical bills, clothing and special events. Needs for cash can be severe, and households are occasionally forced to sell food stores or important assets to meet expenses.
Although almost three-quarters of the population participate in agriculture, the main contributor to subsistence across households is cash income directly from formal employment or by way of cash and non-cash remittances from an absentee member. (Tables 24 - 27 show the access to and relative importance of income sources for various regions.) Access to formal employment is the most important distinction between the absolute poor and those able to meet food and income needs. Female headed households have fewer members employed formally or informally than male headed households (see Table 23). Interestingly, a survey in the Omusati Region found that absentee members of male headed households were more likely to be formally employed than those in female headed households, who were almost twice as likely to be looking for work.^64 There are few financial returns to offset the absence of labour.
Moreover, rising unemployment and social breakdown of the family have shrunk the amount and frequency of remittances. The gender-based survey of Owambo districts found that less than 15% of households receive cash remittances, often assumed to be the mainstay of incomes in that area.^65 Similarly, a study of coping strategies in the Erongo Region found that remittances are in decline. 45% of households interviewed had at least one member who had lost his or her job since 1991. Many have taken up ad-hoc employment, earning barely enough to survive.^66
One of the most vulnerable groups are women employed on farms or who are in households in which the principal breadwinner is a labourer on a commercial farm. Over 36,000 farmworkers support an estimated 230,000 dependents, on wages ranging between N$80380/month.^67 Many labourers receive few leaves of absence, and like migrants in the cities, may start second families or lose contact with their rural household. Female workers on farms are in a more precarious position, as their work is often on a casual basis, and they lack job security. Wives resident on the farm have often found themselves evicted upon the death of their husbands.^68 A newly formed farmworkers union and several local associations aim to represent farmworkers and to encourage enforcement of the Labour Act. However, it must be noted that some of the worst abuse and exploitation of farmworkers occurs on communal farms, where immigrants, marginalised peoples such as the Bushmen, and even poor relatives work
for little or no pay.
In the absence of income from remittances or formal employment, women rely more heavily on cash or barter from informal sector trading, such as beer brewing or crafts. Casual labour or piecework is also increasing in importance. A day of weeding can earn some much needed cash or ensure several cups of maize meal for food-poor households. However, this transfer of labour, by reducing a household's agricultural productivity, increases dependence on the largesse of wealthier households.
The reliance on cash is even greater in stock-farming regions. Two recent surveys of the Southern and Eastern Communal Areas found that the majority of households, regardless of wealth, get their food from shops. Purchasing power, then, is the principal determinant of food security. Although inclined to maintain high numbers of livestock, wealthier households own herds large enough to support at least the occasional sale of animals.^69 In contrast, 88% of female headed households in the South receive no cash income from the sale of animals. These and other poor households, live on drought relief transfers, the charity of relatives, or senior citizen pensions.
The extended family is an important network for food distribution, and in turn, household food security. Food gifts, such as cups of maize meal or gifts of fish, thus enable poorer relations and their households to survive food shortages and to defer the impacts of drought or other crises. The shift towards nuclear family patterns appears to be increasing the prospects for joint management of the household on one hand, but is eroding the social and economic support system of the extended family on the other. Some observers have noted that the Namibian Constitution implicitly recognizes the nuclear family as the main family pattern, and so might not fully promote the rights and security of women in other family situations.^70
Among households without another source of cash income, access to a pension is the primary determinant of food security. Namibia and South Africa are the only two countries in Africa which offer universal pensions for all citizens over the age of 60.^71 The income from the pension, paid out bimonthly, is intended to provide a safety net for the elderly, many of whom lack the security of savings and other financial resources. Historically, it formed part of the strategy of the South African regime to ensure a minimum level for survival in the reserves. However, pensions have become a critical element for survival in many rural households across the country. 41% of respondents in the survey of the southern communal areas cited pensions as their predominant cash source. Over 50% of surveyed households in two Northern districts have members who receive pensions^72 (see Table 24).
Although those with pensions are more secure than households without a regular source of income, the social and economic dependence on female pensioners is high. In Namibia, senior women undertake many household and agricultural tasks, and often bear primary responsibility for childrearing. This responsibility, along with the bimonthly pension, enables adult members to leave children in the care of seniors and migrate to urban areas. Relying on this support, young women are now increasingly moving out of rural areas to follow their partners or to seek employment or informal sector work in cities and rural towns. Interestingly, even as pensioners, women are more likely to use the income for the family, and a recent survey showed that grandmothers were almost twice as likely as grandfathers to contribute to the payment of school fees in their household.^73
Ironically, the pension system has reversed the social security system prevalent in most of Africa, whereby children are responsible for supporting elderly parents. Rather than enhancing the well-being of elderly women, the pension system may be increasing their vulnerability. Complacency around pensions may account in part for the decreased flow of remittances and paternal maintenance. Indeed, by accommodating the migration of adult labour, pensions appear to inhibit increased agricultural productivity.
Malnutrition
Households unable to produce or purchase food often ration basic foods and forego essential sources of protein such as meat or fish. Female headed households have more dependents but less means to obtain food, and so face the greatest risk of poor nutrition among children, nursing mothers and the elderly. Data is inconclusive, although a 1990 survey of rural centres in Owambo found that undernourishment and stunting were more prevalent in children of female headed households.^74 In the Southern Communal Areas, female headed households feed more people but obtain less food, including essential components such as meat and milk.^75
As noted above, many households are unable to produce enough food for the whole year. Storage problems, including the loss of crops or dried food to pests, affect food availability and nutrition value. Furthermore, employment and casual labour opportunities often do not parallel periods of food shortage. Lack of cash income and food shortages are further compounded by high prices for maize meal and basic food stuffs in the shops. In the South and East, where food is purchased, cash flow determines the abundance of food; as a result, the number of meals typically declines over the course of a month, or for pensioners, a two month period. In crop producing regions, the "hungry season" before harvest is a period of intense labour, which strains the health of nursing mothers.
Thus, nutrition levels in Namibia are particularly prone to seasonal and crisis (drought)related food shortages. A 1992 national health survey found that Namibian children have high levels of wasting as a result of acute food shortages. As shown in Table 28, malnutrition levels are considerably higher in rural areas.
The survey showed that levels of malnutrition in children differ little by gender, although females are slightly more likely to be stunted. Education of the mother is a factor only at the secondary school level or higher. Mothers at this level are half as likely to have children who are stunted. They also have fewer wasted or undernourished children. While higher levels of education might enhance awareness of nutrition, this difference probably reflects the increased access to employment enjoyed by women with higher educational qualifications.
Although there has been little work on food preferences and consumption, the diets of many Namibian groups include foods rich in protein and vitamins. In the Northern crop areas, women grow and gather several varieties of leafy greens. The Namibia Development Trust survey found that almost 93% of households grow beans, and 36.7% grow ground nuts, while a recent survey of Okavango found that over 80% of households consume fish. In the Eastern and Southern regions, milk is an important dietary staple. These practices enhance nutrition levels and suggest that agricultural research and extension must look beyond productivity to incorporate nutritional needs and diversity.
Division of labour and decision-making
The health and well-being of household members not only rests on the availability of food; rather, household food security is also related to distribution of food and income within the household. Indeed, the very notion of the household as a production unit tends to gloss over competing interests and the uneven access and control over resources within the household. The right and ability of women to control the products of their own labour is central to the advancement of rural women in Namibia.
Namibia is no exception to the gender division of labour which characterises rural communities throughout the world. Women carry out the bulk of domestic and agricultural duties, while men are responsible for specific spheres of activity, such as herding and marketing livestock, ploughing fields, or constructing homes.^76 Men are more likely to allocate or share specific tasks with others, or take on tasks that utilise higher levels of technology, such as animal-drawn traction. In contrast, women are more likely to be engaged in the actual work itself. One survey found that women in the Owambo Regions are twice as likely as men to work in the field.^77 Children share in domestic and agricultural tasks while still young, but soon get tracked into gender-based divisions as they grow older.
Few studies have assessed the allocation of time and work responsibility within rural households, and information on the division of labour among different ethnic groups remains somewhat superficial. The economic value of women's work remains underrepresented in research. In contrast, the growing system of casual labour offers some evidence of the productive value of women's labour (although this is clearly not reflected in amounts of payment). Even less consideration is given to women's roles as mothers and caretakers. These roles not only exert physical demands, but entail ongoing planning, attention, and emotional demands.
A gender-based division of labour is arguably complementary. This has been observed of Ju/'hoan society, in which male and female domains are seen to reflect the mutual interdependence of the two sexes.^78 While this interdependence may have been a feature of pre-colonial societies,^79 the division of labour currently present in most Namibian groups has been distorted by ongoing social and economic change. For example, the transformation of rural economies from agriculturally-based to income-based has increased the work load of women. As noted above, women often make up for the lost input of absentee husbands or family members by taking on additional tasks.^80
Interestingly, as the participation of men in farming activities decreases, the authority of women over agricultural processes may increase. More information is needed to understand the role of men and women in making choices concerning field preparation, seed selection, or care of livestock. Even in male-headed households, Northern women appear to have some say in deciding which crops to grow and when to plant. Women are increasingly responsible for livestock production, traditionally a male domain: the NDT survey found that in 22 % of households, women are the principal person in charge of cattle. In the Southern and Eastern Communal Areas, women are responsible for milking and lambing and exercise control over these processes. In the South, where smallstock predominates, women also make decisions about herding and grazing. (Tables 29 - 32 present some findings on women's decision-making authority at the household level.)
Women and children in all rural regions collect water for domestic use and wood, the principal source of fuel for the majority of rural households in Namibia.^81 Routine tasks such as these, as well as collecting wild foods, fruits, and materials, are made more difficult by a shortage of resources. Some households walk more than 5 km to obtain wood. In regions lacking water infrastructure, households must travel well over one hour to fetch water during the dry season.^82 In addition to hindering agricultural work, labour shortages affect the frequency and distance of trips which poor households can make for water and fuel. Thus, poor households must ration out supplies and/or continue to exploit resources located near to the homestead, contributing further to the spiral of environmental degradation. Men participate in these tasks only if transportation, such as a donkey cart, ox sledge, or truck, is used, or if the household has ready access to a tap or pipeline. Thus,
improving access and supply of water not only reduces time but increases the likelihood of men's participation.
It is in the home that male participation is most lacking, and men benefit by having greater leisure time as a result.^83 Child rearing, food preparation and maintaining the homestead all place considerable demands on a woman's time; in the North, over an hour of each woman's day is spent pounding grains, while women in pastoral systems devote much of their mornings to milking and tending livestock. As discussed above, households are increasingly relying on purchased foods. This eliminates processing and preparation work but affects nutrition and constrains cash flow.
The entry of rural households into commercial activities also increases the labour burden of women. In households able to achieve marketable surpluses. women must ensure subsistence output and contribute to cash crop production. If women have access to the additional income, then the returns to increased labour can be worthwhile.
However, rural women in Namibia continue to have an unequal say in decision-making over agricultural production. Women are expected to utilise their harvest to feed the family, and in some regions, women even farm both individual plots for subsistence and common plots in which men control the harvest. In de facto female headed households, the husband's absence does not necessarily increase a woman's freedom to make decisions. She might be entitled to sell produce on an informal scale, but for more significant decisions, such as hiring labour, she defers to her husband.^84 Women exert even less authority over the sale and disposal of livestock. Men dominate the marketing and slaughter of stock, and although they may confer with their wives, it is men who negotiate prices. In a husband's absence, a woman is expected to consult with his relatives. Reportedly, many women in the Eastern and Southern Communal Areas still wield no control over the sale of animals they themselves
own. Moreover, if her animals are sold in a lot, her husband can determine the share she receives.^85
Women's participation in decisions over the allocation of cash income appears to vary by the composition of the household and the marital relationship. In general, female headed households are more likely to make financial and other decisions jointly with family members. In male-headed households, authority over income and resources is generally vested in the head, but joint decision-making is also commonplace, particularly among nuclear families. There is little work on different areas of responsibility, but women appear to participate more in decisions about health, education and childrearing.
Of course, authority is not clear cut, and women employ a number of strategies to enhance their control. For the most part, women are entitled to spend income they have earned through casual labour or non-farm production as they choose. Some women prefer to work for income in kind, since they know that men are less likely to make claims on maize meal than on cash.^86 Not surprisingly, it is women who also dominate food for work programs, while men hold out for opportunities for cash.
Efforts by the government to boost the production and marketing of traditional crops, such as millet, or of livestock, particularly goats, must take care not to marginalise women.^87 Elsewhere in Africa, crops which women traditionally grow and sell on a small scale have come under the control of men as commercial prospects improved.^88 Schemes initiated by the First National Development Corporation (FNDC) appear to mirror this pattern. Male headed households utilise the labour of wives and families to produce surpluses and to diversify into crops such as cotton and groundnuts. Men have also been able to resettle and participate in special farming ventures managed by the Corporation, knowing that their wife will maintain the family and homestead. Women lose twice, as they see few benefits from the surplus production and contend with dwindling incomes from small-scale marketing. In short, women work more but get less.
Inequality in women's access to and participation in the definition of economic structures and the productive process itself
Agricultural policies and programmes continue to overlook the central role of women in agriculture and reinforce inequality in women's access to: 1) productive resources, including land, labour, inputs and technology; and 2) support services, such as credit, extension and research. Moreover, the failure to acknowledge women's agricultural knowledge and experience makes gender divisions over decision-making even more pronounced. Ultimately, policies must go beyond simply improving services to exploring ways to enhance women's legal and social ability to take up services.
Land and assets
On a national level, the constitution maintains the distinction between commercial land and communal land. Historically, legal control of the communal areas was placed in the colonial government or the reserve administrations. At independence, this ownership transferred to the new government. Property held under private title, including commercial farms, is seen as lawfully owned and therefore exempt.^89 Thus, since the majority of black farmers continue to reside in communal areas, they remain disadvantaged by inequitable distribution of land.
In June 1991, the Prime Minister convened a national conference on land reform and the land question. Background papers and debates showed that the affects of dispossession, the nature of land problems and attitudes towards land reform and policy differed by region.^90 The constraints facing women across the nation to obtain land also vary and cannot be generalised. However, conference recommendations made special note of ensuring rights and support for women. In its recommendations, the Technical Committee on Commercial Farmland (TCCF), mandated to evaluate land policy options, has recommended improving women's access to and control over land, through improved rights, affirmative action programmes, repeal of discriminatory statutory and customary laws, and representation on regional or district level land bodies, should they be formed.^91
The recommendations of the TCCF are still under review. In the absence of legislation, customary allocation of communal land by traditional authorities prevails, with households gaining usufruct rights to residential land, for crop production or grazing as well as access to common pasturage.^92 As discussed earlier, rural women still gain access to land through men, as wives, daughters, sisters. The security of their tenure is also jeopardized by discriminatory marriage customs and inheritance systems. There is no accurate data on landlessness in Namibia. While it is commonly assumed that most households do have access to land under customary law, some landless widows have been forced to move into the households of relatives.
The conference recommendations accept that ancestral land claims will not form the basis of restitution and so preclude large-scale land reform. Current strategies target increasing the Land available to communal farmers and improving the productivity of the existing land base, through improved range management, crop production or alternative uses. Without careful consideration, these options will yield few benefits for women farmers, and may diminish their access to land even further.
For example, efforts are underway to increase land availability by opening up communal lands which are underutilised due to a lack of surface water. In Okavango, the drilling of boreholes is enabling farmers to resettle and to graze livestock away from the river, which currently supports the densest population in the country. Others have moved their herds but maintained homesteads and some stock near the river. However, women are less likely to take up opportunities to resettle or to cultivate new fields. Their child care and domestic responsibilities preclude settlement in marginal areas, which continue to lack basic infrastructure and health care and education facilities. Moreover, the benefits gained by increased crop production are offset by reduced access to fish, veld foods or other natural resources. The distance of fields away from the homestead adds to the time and labour of travelling and transporting harvests, inputs and equipment back and forth.
It is wealthier households and those who own more stock, who most benefit from newly opened grazing lands. These households have the resources to hire herders, and can readily maintain existing lands and keep herds in the new grazing areas. Female headed households lack these resources. In marginal areas, control over water can also dictate access and use to land. In some regions, individuals effectively control water points. Of note, MAWRD is encouraging the formation of village water point committees. To date, the participation of women in the committees has been limited, particularly in regions where men tend to control water infrastructure.^93
A second strategy aims to relieve pressure on communal lands, particularly in stock producing areas, by enabling communal farmers to purchase commercial farms through a low interest loan programme. No gender-disaggregated data is available, but to date, a small number of farmers (67), primarily large stockholders, have been granted loans under the scheme. For many farmers the financial incentives of relocating are low, as grazing and water in the communal areas is free. Ostensibly, the scheme should indirectly benefit poorer households, including those headed by women, who would gain by improved grazing due to lower numbers on the range. However, as has happened elsewhere, farmers with commercial farms continue to graze livestock on communal lands.^94
Elite farmers are also fencing the communal grazing areas at an alarming rate. Many enclose prime grazing areas and dominate water sources. This is effectively privatising the communal lands and reducing the access of poorer households to land. Some farmers are consequently cut off from dry season grazing, a severe constraint to productivity, which rests in part on a strategy of opportunistic and flexible grazing patterns. Illegal fencing has also inhibited the migration of game, an important source of meat for the Ju/'hoan and other groups which actively hunt. The TCCF recommends immediate legislation to stop the fencing, but to date, the government has taken little action against it.^95
Shortage of labour
When asked if they would like more land, 89% of respondents in a survey for the land conference naturally answered positively. On the surface, this response would suggest increased pressure on land. According to one report, for example, average land holdings in the Owambo Region have dropped from 6.3 ha in 1968 to 2.6 ha in 1980.96 However, this drop also reflects the declining importance of agriculture. Households engage in a range of other income activities and so cultivate for consumption rather than surplus production. Ultimately, for many households, the problem is not access to land but rather the ability to utilise it efficiently. Female headed households particularly lack the labour and inputs to cultivate what they do have, and one observer noted that some households farm only 112-1/3 of their arable land.^97 Households, in turn, are unable to farm cultivated areas efficiently. For example, many households only weed once, although two weedings are preferable.
Ownership and access to livestock
Livestock provide milk, meat and dung for fertilizer. Income from the sale of animals, meat and by-products enhances food security and provides a 'nest egg' to cover unanticipated expenses, such as medical costs. In Namibia, cattle are also imbued with social and cultural importance.
As shown in Tables 33 - 42, there is growing differentiation in the ownership of cattle and other livestock among rural households. Unequal access and control of grazing enables wealthy households to expand their herds, while poor households face a decline in herd size. Recent studies suggest that female headed households on average own fewer animals and are more likely to own no cattle at all. The cattle they do own tend to be lower-value.^98
In the Northern regions, a shortage of draught power poses a barrier to crop production. Many female headed households do not own or have free access to draught animals and ploughs.^99 Cash-strapped households further lack the option of hiring labour and so till the land.^100 Households often use two methods of ploughing in order to maximise available resources (see Tables 43 and 44). In contrast, households with draught animals can tap into an added source of income by renting out animals and ploughs. Those forced to hire must wait and so run the risk of late ploughing. Recent droughts have compounded the situation, killing many donkeys and reducing the availability of draught power throughout the North.^101
Credit
As inputs are becoming more available through government schemes, farmers coops and private outlets, the demand for credit is growing. Small-scale farmers have historically been unable to access credit through banks and government institutions, which require titled land as security. Banks in the rural areas only operate in administrative centres and cater to those who earn salaries. Prior to Independence, the development parastatal, the then First National Development Corporation (FNDC), had the mandate to provide loans in the bantustan areas. These loans were granted primarily to urban-based entrepreneurs to set-up nonagricultural businesses, although a few loans were granted to commercially oriented agricultural enterprises.^102 Only an estimated 10% of the loans have been granted to women Few financial institutions have been willing to bear the added costs and risks of administering loans in small amounts.
The largest obstacle to credit faced by women continues to be the restricted rights of marriage in community of property. Married women still require the consent of their husbands to enter into contracts and loans. Few institutions have sought to address this problem.
To a limited extent, programmes run by non-governmental organizations have enhanced women's access by targeting small loan programmes to them. The Private Sector Foundation, which supports informal and small business development, has a loan programme specifically for women. Also important is the fledgling credit union movement. Credit unions have been established in the SCAs and Owambo regions, where an estimated 70-80% of the members are women. Several farmers associations are also supporting credit schemes for their members. The unions provide an opportunity for farmers to access loans without collateral restrictions. The process has been one of trial and error, and NGOs continue to explore models appropriate to Namibia. However, credit unions of necessity serve people with income and so are concentrated in rural centres. The women who participate are those with a reliable income, such as government employees or those engaged in small enterprise.^103
The Namibia Development Corporation (NDC), restructured from the FNDC, has also run a mini-loan programme for entrepreneurs in the small business and informal sector. This programme, too, has served urban residents, who seek support for petty trade and small ventures such as hair salons or shops. Farmers involved in NDC agricultural projects can obtain small sums of money for the purchase of inputs such as seeds through an informal loan programme. It is not known if women have been able to benefit from this service.
Since late 1992, over 450 small-scale communal farmers have also been able to obtain loans through a special scheme administered by MAWRD. Over three quarters of the total amount granted has been for the acquisition of stock, with the remainder for crop production and infrastructure.^104 In the absence of conclusive gender-based data, this suggests that women may be underrepresented, as the purchase of stock often falls to men. The cost and burdensome administration of the programme has led to considerable delays in loan approval and pay out. Its success has also been hampered by the fact that many extension officers remain unaware of the scheme or lack experience with credit.
Currently, MAWRD is developing an agricultural bank equipped to administer a loan programme designed for small-scale communal farmers. The programme would support those farmers who can use loans to increase their productivity, and, in turn, their incomes, through the purchase of inputs, permanent improvements, or the introduction of perennial crops. The programme would make loans to individual farmers organised into informal groups and to formally registered cooperatives. It is anticipated that these approaches will promote shared responsibility for loans and increase the prospects of repayment. The proposed model does not consider affirmative action for women, but it is hoped that loans managed through cooperatives will reach women. Training in gender aware approaches and the hiring of female staff are recommended. Standard credit schemes cannot meet the needs of the poorest, whose incomes are too low to invest. As a result, vulnerable households resort to informal
mechanisms, to meet immediate cash and food needs. For example, households may put up a portion of the future harvest as 'collateral' for loans or as payment for ploughing services. In some regions, a system of loaning cattle, known as mafisa, enables poor households or those with sudden losses to replenish their herds. The borrower tends the animals in return for draught power, milk, and ownership of any calves born. Local shops often allow customers to purchase goods on credit or through barter. In the southern communal areas, an estimated half of households maintain accounts with shop keepers. People also buy clothes, furniture, and large items on laybye and payment plans from larger retail chains. While helping rural residents to overcome shortfalls in food and cash, these mechanisms also increase the likelihood of indebtedness, thereby exacerbating food security over the long term. 105 involvement of women in these mechanisms should be examined and considered when
designing credit programmes.
Finally, households save in order to make investments or as protection against unexpected expenses. In Namibia common wisdom holds that for most households, savings are in the form of cattle, seen as stored wealth. No doubt true, but as noted above, women have little control over the disposal of livestock and so lack access to this form of savings. However, households can and do save cash earnings, although those headed by females face greater difficulties in saving. Nevertheless, a survey in an Owambo district found that 45 % of female headed households and 73 % of male headed households save. The mean amount saved differed greatly with the former saving only N$ 227, usually keeping it at home. The latter saved an average of N$ 966 and was more likely to save at a bank.^106 These results, although inconclusive, underscore the need for women to gain information and access to savings institutions, including the bank, post office, and community savings groups. Programmes that
promote resource-sharing, such as shared control of draught animals and ploughs, or revolving seed banks, can also address the needs of women farmers with limited access to cash income.
Agricultural extension and inputs
Many interventions could enhance the productivity of small-scale farmers. For example, improved application of dung and seed bed preparation could increase harvests of staple crops. However, agricultural extension and services have historically served the interests and needs of commercial farmers. Although steps have been taken to reorient support towards subsistence farmers, many programmes fail to take account of the activities and priorities of women farmers. Initiatives that would benefit women often do not reach them.
The legacy of neglect toward communal areas under the apartheid era continues to hinder the effectiveness of extension and veterinary services.^107 There are too few staff overall to serve the vast numbers of farmers. For example, 25 extension officers in the Owambo Regions serve a population of over 84,000 farmers, resulting in only one officer for over 3,000 farmers. Not surprisingly, many households have little if any contact with extension services. A survey of Okavango Region found that only 1/5 of households had received extension.^108 The NDT survey found that only 13 households of 1365 total had been visited by agriculture or rural development extension officers.^109
Time-consuming administration of the sale of inputs and other commercial services compounds this problem. A review of extension in an Owambo district found that not a single extension officer had spent more than 30% of his or her time with farmers and so reached only an estimated 18% of farmers.^110 Farmers who purchase seeds or fertiliser from extension offices often do not receive any advice about the use of inputs. In the Northern regions, regional agriculture staff spent as much as 90% of their time administering the tractor scheme. MAWRD has been unable to meet the high demand for the programme which may constitute unsustainable financial drain on the Ministry, which subsidizes an estimated 94 % of the actual cost.^111
Women are less able to take advantage of these services, which, for the most part, are provided out of regional centres. Branch extension offices do not have the infrastructure to supply seeds, fertiliser and other services. Veterinary services, including the provision of medicine, are also centralised. Some extension officers lack transportation.
Consequently, farmers must expend time and money to reach the central offices. This disadvantages women who are considerably less mobile than men. In many regions, women lack access to transportation and so usually walk. In some areas, such as the East, cultural norms dictate that women stay close to home; as a result, they have little contact with government institutions. Although ownership of donkey carts is comparable, female-headed households in the South are less likely to own trucks or cars, important for travelling the long distances between settlements.^112 In the Northern areas, female headed households are less likely to own bicycles or cars, and so make fewer journeys to towns.^113 Lack of mobility also limits the involvement of women in auctions and marketing.
Extension and veterinary officers do not record the number of farmers contacted by gender. As shown in Tables 45 and 46, men comprise the majority of extension and veterinary staff. In some regions, where women must defer to men, there are few female extension officers to encourage and support their involvement. Extension officers often communicate with male farmers and do not seek out women farmers, who consequently rely on second-hand information from husbands or male relatives.
Clearly, the gender of extension officers alone will not guarantee that women are better served. However, the approach of male officers is often shaped by training and cultural proscriptions which value livestock production over agronomy and commercial production over subsistence and household food security. Despite the merger of rural development and agricultural extension, many officers lack exposure to concepts of household food security and integrated development.
Women farmers often have different priorities. Recent studies in the Owambo Region highlighted the interest of women farmers in getting advice on planting and fertiliser techniques and crop rotations. They also stressed the need for reasonably priced seeds, implements, and pesticides, as well as access to millet processing and other technologies to reduce their workload.^114 Similarly, for women who till by hand, access to draught animals and ploughs would boost their productivity. They might be better served by programmes to support ploughing services, rather than the more costly and technical approach of tractor services.^115
Agricultural services also do not take adequate account of the knowledge and experience of women farmers. Veterinary services and extension for livestock particularly fail to address women's role in the care of animals. Advice and support often stress cattle, with little comparable assistance on small animals, including chickens, which for some households is a more frequent source of protein than beef. Similarly, veterinary services and extension often overlook women's responsibilities for milking and lambing. Emphasizing meat production to the detriment of milk production can affect the nutritional status of households. Moreover, the health and growth rate of young stock is directly linked to milking practices.^116
During the recent drought, small holders benefitted least from government subsidies. In order to encourage offtake, the programme included paying an extra amount for each goat or head of cattle sold. While some households waited too late to sell, many small holders took advantage of the cash incentive. However, the government also subsidized the price of fodder so that farmers could sustain herds through the drought. Wealthy stock owners could afford to purchase the fodder and maintain their large herds, while small owners found their herds reduced to dangerously low levels. Ultimately, well-targeted interventions to increase lambing rates, milk production, animal health and small-scale marketing will have relatively greater benefit to female-headed and other vulnerable households.
Agricultural and rural development centres
The Ministry of Agriculture is in the process of establishing Agricultural and Rural Development Centres (ARDC's) to coordinate research extension and training of farmers and to coordinate inputs and marketing. In a pilot programme, the Council of Churches in Namibia (CCN) has established a handful of similar centres, which are being incorporated into the MAWRD extension service. Of note, the CCN programme especially hired women who had received agricultural training in exile. Over 20 of 28 officers are women, which will considerably boost the representation of women on the MAWRD staff.
By decentralising agricultural services through the communal areas, the ARDCs represent an important step in making extension and support more accessible. The ARDCs also provide an opportunity for the government to reduce unsustainable subsidies and to promote and support farmers associations and rural cooperatives to design and implement agricultural activities.^117
Agricultural training and research
Programmes by MAWRD, together with NGO initiatives have resulted in considerable progress in improving research and training oriented towards small-scale farming. An NGO project resulted in a quick-growing, drought resistant millet cultivar -- an important development for small-scale farmers whose livelihoods are tied to unpredictable rainfall. The variety has been distributed and taken up by farmers, who plant it along with local varieties to minimise risk. When able, women have also planted the new cultivar. However, many women lack the cash to purchase seeds or do not know where to buy them, and so rely on seed from their own stock or from that of neighbours. Currently, a millet seed multiplication programme is encouraging local farmers to grow seed stock for sale. The programme aims to increase the local availability of seed stock and enable farmers to generate income.^118
Research must be tailored to the needs of small-scale farmers, through on-farm crop trials and livestock research that mirror local farming systems. Indeed, there has been little research and information on local farming strategies, including local knowledge and systems of decision-making. The introduction of new varieties to farmers must also include management of planting. harvesting and storing the variety.
Training is also being reoriented. In 1992, a new curriculum for a 3 year diploma in agriculture was introduced. In addition to technical subjects. extension, rural sociology and agricultural economics are taught. Admission policy at the Ogongo Agricultural College emphasizes regional balance and more representation of women in the student body. However, as shown in Tables 49 and 50, men still outnumber women in enrolment in the colleges.
This gap is even more noticeable when compared to enrolment in agricultural subjects at the secondary level. As shown in Table 51, boys and girls are present in equal numbers in both agricultural science and agricultural production and farming throughout the various grade levels. Interestingly, in grades 10 and 11, there are more girls taking the two subjects, while at grade 12 (matriculation), boys outnumber girls. Since admission into the agricultural college requires grade 12 math and science, boys are more likely to gain entry. This pattern suggests that as youths begin to choose vocational paths, girls are less likely to continue to pursue professional agricultural careers (although they may return to farming). Although gender stereotypes are one cause, another likely factor is the dearth of women teaching agricultural subjects, as well as in extension, who might serve as mentors to young girls.
The curriculum for agricultural subjects at both the junior secondary and senior secondary levels is under revision, in part, through the introduction of the Cambridge system of secondary education. Classes will include a greater emphasis on practical experience and will be made more relevant to Namibian agro-ecological zones. Horticulture and gardening will form one option of the new curriculum for grades 4-7 at the primary level.
However, improving agricultural training at the secondary level faces several obstacles. Many agriculture teachers have their teacher certificate but lack training in agriculture. Plans are underway to include agriculture in-service courses and a new basic education teacher diploma. Agriculture also suffers from the stigma of being a vocational subject, and so gains less attention and resources than academic subjects. Lastly, few schools have the implements, demonstration plots and laboratory facilities needed to integrate practical experience with theoretical learning.^119
Technology
Namibia particularly lags behind on the development and use of labour saving technology. The vast majority of women continue to pound grains, farm, and collect water and wood by slow, physically-demanding methods. Technology is needed to enhance agricultural productivity as well as to reduce the burden and time of routine household tasks. Freeing up women's time on laborious activities can better enable them to take advantage of economic opportunities. The manufacturing and management of technologies can also provide income opportunities.
A rural electrification programme has reached rural regions in Owambo and Okavango. Although the programme greatly benefits government offices, schools, clinics and missions, few households can afford the cost of supplying electricity to their homes. The availability of electricity could support small scale manufacturing and agricultural processing in rural communities.
Agricultural technology has been confined to costly, mechanized equipment, such as spray irrigation systems and tractors. Tractors and improved traction benefit men and women, who both undertake field preparation. Few technologies are available to women to enhance tasks for which they have almost sole responsibility, such as planting, weeding and harvesting. Any programme that addresses ploughing services should also explore options such as line makers that will make weeding and planting more efficient.^120 Any introduction of technology must also evaluate if the device will displace women from casual labour or employment, important sources of cash income.
Improved food storage is also needed to prevent losses and nutritional decline. Large baskets are the granaries for many Northern households, but these are inadequate for keeping stores dry or for keeping out insects and rodents. Training women in alternative processing and drying techniques could also increase the longevity of food. In the Okavango and Caprivi regions, the supply of protein is jeopardized by problems with drying and storing fish. In stock producing regions, spoilage of milk is a problem.
Only a small proportion of women have enjoyed access to food processing machines. The desire is high for these devices, as women and girls spend approximately 50 hours a month processing millet. One survey found that 75% of the poorest households would be willing to pay for processing.' Mills exist at centres in the Okavango and Caprivi Regions, primarily for farmers who are marketing their grains. They have had little success since the design was inappropriate for millet. In the Owambo Regions, a dozen community mills have been established as income generation activities. Poor management has hampered the success of the mills. Expensive milling fees, together with the cost of transportation to the mill are a disincentive for households, particularly those with small amounts to mill. Several reports have also noted that machine milling reduces the taste and shelf life of millet.^122
The Rural Development Centre, located in the Oshana Region, is actively involved in the development of appropriate technology. Alternative energy sources is one focal point of the Centre. Pilot programmes will assess the effectiveness of biogas, locally-made charcoal bricks, solar energy, and energy-saving ovens, to reduce reliance on fuel wood and evaporation cool-boxes. Also underway are efforts to improve transportation, such as donkey carts designed to improve transportation of water and harvests.
One innovation of benefit to women has been the aquaroller, a water barrel that can be pushed. Tested during the 1992 drought, the device effectively halved the number of trips and the amount of time to fetch water, provided households with more water, thereby improving hygiene, and increased the involvement of men and children in water collection. Improved water collection, through rain gutters as well as water harvesting in fields are also being promoted. (Tables 52 and 53 provide data on water supply and toilet facilities to rural households. )
Forestry and natural resource management
Women's knowledge of and reliance upon the environment make them the primary managers of natural resources such as forests, water, soil and vegetation. However, they are theprincipal victims of the deforestation, erosion and degradation scarring Namibia's environment. On a national level, the rural poor compete for natural resources with the demands of Windhoek and other urban centres. Urban residents, along with mining, industrial and commercial users consume proportionately higher levels of water and energy than their rural counterparts. Domestic rural consumption (by 70% of the population) is 85 litres a day/capita, compared to 330 litres a day/capita in urban areas. Irrigation alone accounts for almost 43% of the country's groundwater usage.^123 Similarly, many urban residents continue to cook with fuelwood, relying on wood collected and transported from the rural areas.
Paradoxically, rural poverty further perpetuates the destruction of the resource base. Many women recognize that deforestation and other practices are harmful and even have the knowledge to promote conservation. However, in the absence of economic and technological alternatives, women see no other means of survival. A recent survey of fishing along the Okavango river found that many respondents felt that the use of mosquito nets for fishing is contributing to the decline of fish stocks. Despite this, many continue to use the nets, explaining that they cannot afford to buy meat and can no longer catch enough fish to feed the family with traditional methods.^124
Namibia is committed to the sustainable utilization and management of its natural resources.^125 A national Green Plan actively calls for the participation of local users in managing and benefitting from the environment. However, to date, few programmes have targeted women. In the Northern regions, the planting and caring of trees is a task undertaken by women. Several NGOs are working with women to establish nurseries, including several managed by community groups, and to encourage tree-planting. Efforts are limited in part by access to water supply and fencing, needed to keep out small animals and protect seedlings against wind.
The influence of South Africa, where commercial forestry is an important part of the economy, has resulted in government forestry programmes orientated towards tree plantations and conservation through restricted use. Prior to independence, forestry in Namibia yielded no revenue and so received little attention. Consequently, forestry is not a well-known discipline in Namibia, resulting in a shortage of trained Namibian staff. Programmes to promote social and agroforestry have yet to get beyond the planning stages.
Women have had little positive contact with government staff from departments concerned with natural resource management. In the Okavango and Caprivi Regions, enforcement of regulations on fishing and harvesting of palm leaves (used for baskets) has led some women to view the Department of Nature Conservation Officers principally as policing authorities.^126 As shown in Tables 47 and 48, women are underrepresented on the Forestry field staff and virtually absent from the Nature Conservation Officer core. The enrolment of women in the Forestry programme at Ogongo, and in the proposed Faculty of Agriculture and Natural Resources at the University, should have a significant impact in diversifying the staff of these departments.
Inequality in access to employment
Employment in agriculture
Economic research and policy analysis has typically focused on formal sector employment, overlooking those engaged in subsistence agriculture or in other non-wage earning activities.^127 This focus excludes the majority of women who the census revealed are own account or unpaid family workers. Among the economically active population, 23 % of rural women are own account workers, while 33% are unpaid family workers Women constitute over 60% of those employed in agricultural and fishery work; this work employs over 70% of rural women classified as employed.
Moreover, it is likely that the 1991 census, while taking account of subsistence agriculture for the first time, does not fully capture the involvement of women in the work force. Over one-fifth of women classified as homemakers were not considered economically active, an approach which overlooks the participation of many 'homemakers' in agriculture and other productive activities. (For more information on employment status, see Tables 54 58.)
Seemingly, one strategy to enhancing the livelihoods of women farmers is to support them to produce marketable surpluses. Cash earnings from agriculture could be used to enhance household food security and at higher levels, to invest further in agricultural activities or to support small-scale, non-farm enterprises. However, while agriculture is the largest sector of employment, it is not a major source of income. Farmers with surplus production to sell must contend with a poorly developed formal market, in part due to the high cost of transporting livestock and produce, particularly from the North. For communal farmers, including women, informal markets are often more profitable and convenient for occasional sales.
More importantly, for many households, improving agriculture is secondary in importance to gaining waged jobs. Agricultural productivity is no longer sufficient to ensure household food security, let alone to generate cash income. Instead, households rely on cash income from non-agricultural sources to supplement food production. Thus, off-farm employment and income generation are central components of agricultural and rural development in Namibia. More importantly, strategies to empower rural women must enhance their access to and control over cash income.
Formal sector employment
The expansion of Windhoek and other towns continues to overshadow regional development in Namibia. 42% of jobs in the formal sector are in Windhoek, home to less than 10% of the population.^128 In rural areas, public sector employment constitutes the primary source of employment. Wage-earning opportunities in the private sector are confined to work on commercial farms or in construction or local shops.
As a result. urbanisation is rising steadily, and growing numbers of migrants are straining housing and social service infrastructure. The situation of school leavers is particularly problematic. The 2,000 new jobs created each year fall far short of an ILO estimate that the creation of 20,000 formal sector jobs in a five year period is needed to curb unemployment. Many youths are detached from agriculture and other rural activities and view only civil servant posts or salaried positions as acceptable employment. Social problems, such as alcoholism, crime and violence are on the rise, particularly in rural towns.
Women are not adequately represented in formal sector employment. In 1988, women comprised 33 % of those formally employed. The 1991 census showed little change, with women accounting for 31% of the formally employed, and 25% of those employed in rural areas.129 Rural women have higher levels of literacy and educational attainment than rural men, but are less likely to get unskilled jobs, such as in construction. At the same time, they are far less likely to be literate or to have reached secondary school than their urban counterparts and are less likely to obtain professional positions (see Tables 59 - 62). The NDT survey of 1800 women in the Owambo Regions found that over 90% of respondents had never been employed in the formal sector. Another study in a nearby location found that men were twice as likely to have a job in the formal sector as women.^130
Women must contend with lower pay, less management responsibility, and the low status attributed to female dominated professions, such as nursing and teaching. Even in these professions, the male to female ratios are reversed at senior levels. Men outnumber women in management and business occupations. Women make up the large army of domestic workers employed by middle and upper class households in urban towns. Importantly, this category of employment is now protected under the labour act. Although not well-enforced, the act provides an important framework for action by the recently formed domestic workers union. The new farmworkers union will also lobby for improved working conditions and rights of this class of labourers and their families.
The situation is more difficult for rural women in formal employment. Those who are employed often lack job security and medical or other employment benefits, in addition to low pay, as low as N$25 month.^131 Pre-schools and creches, in short supply in the towns, are virtually non-existent in the rural areas. Thus, employed mothers must rely on family support for the care of children. As noted above, leaving children in the care of pensioners and relatives has allowed many women to migrate to urban areas.
The government aims to promote foreign and private sector investment in the communal areas. Commercial enterprises around commodity crops, such as cotton, oilseeds, and sugarcane, are being developed. Options to boost off-farm employment include agro-industries around the processing of food and products as well as non-agricultural manufacturing and services. However, experience so far suggests that many agricultural development schemes offer limited job creation. As a result, improved productivity through subsistence-based land use might yield greater economic returns.^132
There is also potential for employment through public works programmes. Two labour-based road projects have been undertaken in the North, with the first road already completed. Recruitment and hiring policies stressed that women should have an equal opportunity to participate. At first, communication, channelled through the headmen, failed to reach women. This reflects the persistent division that wage-earning opportunities are for men, while women are expected to take up food for work activities. However, at the urging of the donor, renewed efforts resulted in a labour force of between 28-40% women. However, women were less likely to be promoted to positions of more responsibility. Of note, an informal taboo existed among rural residents of both sexes against the participation of married women who were seen to be supported by their husbands. Thus, the project made only minor inroads in changing attitudes but did improve the wellbeing of women and their families. Some women
were able to invest in production or in their own education.^133
Finally, several pilot programmes are assessing the potential of community-based wildlife programmes to enhance conservation and to generate income for nearby communities. It is too early to judge the effectiveness of this option, although such programmes still require enabling legislation which recognises local rights over land and resources. However, to date, the focus has been exclusively on game, traditionally a male domain. There are few programmes aimed at community-based resource management of trees, plants and fish -- resources more utilised by women.
Informal sector and income generation activities
Unable to find formal jobs, women are engaging in petty trade and other informal sector activities. Unlike in other African countries, most regions in Namibia lack a tradition of entrepreneurial activity. Only since Independence has a lively informal sector, with open markets and home enterprises, begun to emerge. However, as with formal employment, the informal sector has quickly become stratified by gender. Men dominate activities with high profit margins, such as taxi-driving or middle-level trade. Women carry out activities, such as selling cooked food, brewing beer, and making baskets or crafts, with low profit margins and considerable time requirements. Incomes are low, averaging N$50-80 month. However, some women entrepreneurs have turned small-scale activities into lucrative businesses. For example, women in the Caprivi dominate the marketing of fish, and a number of successful fishmongers own boats, hire fishermen, and provide credit. The production and marketing of
baskets also appears to be flourishing, and the informal marketing of large baskets in Owambo extends into South Africa.
Many groups have identified the potential of income generating activities to improve the livelihoods of women and their families. Church institutions, NGOs, and government groups, including the Department of Women Affairs and the Directorate of Community Development, are mobilising women around community level projects. Increasingly, spurred on by the success of initiatives in other towns and villages, women themselves are coming forward to request support for income generation. As a result, projects are blossoming throughout the country.
Yet, to date, a small proportion of income generating activities have enjoyed success in improving the incomes of women and in expanding their sphere of skills and experience. While it is important that projects utilise women's know-how, many activities are centred on tasks traditionally seen as women's work; projects include bakeries, sewing and needlecraft, brickmaking and gardening. As a result, women learn few new skills and do not always receive training and support in finance and management. In some regions, projects have failed to acknowledge that women in the area do not, in fact, have a tradition of needlework, sewing, gardening, etc.
Emphasizing "women's work" reinforces gender patterns, which may be acceptable if the enterprise is financially viable. However, few initiatives are supported with appropriate planning and feasibility studies. Markets in cash-strapped rural areas are particularly weak. People simply do not have the cash to spend. As a result, income-generating projects tend to be concentrated in rural centres, where government employees and other wage earners provide a customer base. Some rural women are able to sell their goods at livestock auctions or the "pension fairs" which take place on pay out days. Moreover, even rural Namibians have become accustomed to purchasing produce and ready made clothing and products from South Africa. Groups producing clothing and handicraft will also have to compete with the South African market and overcome well-ingrained consumer preferences. Consequently, participants may expend much time and labour only to earn little or no money.
Other constraints to programmes include the lack of affordable materials or the limited availability of natural resources, such as water for gardens or cement, or fuelwood. The burdensome workload of women also inhibits their ability to participate in income generation. An evaluation of community gardens in the North found that the time which women had to put into travelling to and working in the garden diverted their attention away from agricultural tasks. Moreover, the gardens did not consider women's experience with growing tomatoes and other small vegetables in their homestead, where using rainfed production places less demands on their time.
Mobilizing for income generation can also ignore the weak foundations for community organizations. Many rural communities in Namibia are inexperienced in cooperative or group models. Income generation projects must therefore assess if group participation is feasible or if involvement on an individual basis might be more desirable.
Development organizations and community groups are drawing on the growing wealth of experience to redesign income generation activities and improve prospects for success. A number of NGO and government programmes are underway to build capacity in planning, training, management and evaluation of income-generating activities.
<section>4</section>
Programmes and experiments in support of women in agriculture
Policy planning and research
Public awareness
Legal and policy reform
Improving women's access to productive resources and services
Networking
Promoting local capacity
Programmes and experiments in support of women in agriculture
Although still in the embryonic stages, a range of government and non-government initiatives seek to involve women in leadership and decision-making and to improve their access to resources and services. Programmes and policies aimed at rural women in particular signal a growing recognition of their contribution to household food security and to the well-being of much of the Namibian population. In its analysis of changes since Namibian Independence, this report has highlighted measures which seek to redress political, legal, social and economic imbalances faced by women farmers. Additional trends and programmes of merit are discussed below. It must be stressed that this study does not do justice to the wealth of innovation and experimentation occurring at the grassroots level. Moreover, the value of development Programmes lies as much in the experience and lessons they offer as in the success.
Policy planning and research
On the most basic level, programmes have aimed to promote awareness and sensitivity to gender issues in government circles and among the general public. An initiative, supported by the Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA), seeks to ensure that women's concerns and priorities are fully integrated into national planning processes. The programme emphasizes training in gender-sensitive planning for civil servants and networking among key Ministries, including MAWRD, and the National Planning Commission (NPC), responsible for development planning in the country.
The fledgling inter-ministerial gender network could prove an important forum for urging policy-makers to incorporate gender in national and sectoral planning processes. Similarly, an effort by an NGO, the Namibia National Women's Organization (NANAWO) educated parliamentarians on issues of women and health and urged them to involve women in their constituencies to address these concerns.
Gender-sensitive planning must be backed up by appropriate research and analysis, a process which has only recently begun in Namibia The NPC's Central Statistics Office, in consultation with government departments, research centres and NGOs, has devised a strategy to generate, analyze, present and disseminate gender-specific statistics. This process represents an important step in overcoming the dearth of statistics needed to inform policy. The Ministry of Education and Culture has established a system of gender-based statistics to monitor differential enrolment and retention rates. Other important research initiatives include the research project of the Legal Assistance Centre and the economic and legal study of the Owambo regions, undertaken by the Namibia Development Trust (NDT) and the University Law Faculty. There are plans to replicate the latter survey in other communal areas. It is envisaged that a new gender research unit at the University of Namibia (UNAM) research
centre, the Social Sciences Division, will promote ongoing and systematic research and policy discussion around gender issues.
Research findings are also being made accessible and disseminated at the local level Although practice is not widespread, simplified versions of the Division of Rural Development's socio-economic survey of the South and the NDT study have proven useful for promoting awareness of the obstacles faced by rural women and for generating debate on development options. The Owambo survey also formed the basis for designing workshops for rural men and women on the implications of customary law. The Central Statistics Office is coordinating the production of a simple booklet with data on women and men in Namibia.
Despite these steps forward, women farmers remain underrepresented in national-level planning and research, even in sectoral initiatives that target the communal areas.^134 However, soon to commence is a programme supported by the Food and Agriculture Organization and MAWRD to integrate women into agricultural development programmes. An important component of the programme will be to improve national agricultural planning through the development of gender-sensitive data collection and approaches to planning. The programme also aims to train extension staff in socio-economic and gender analysis so that regional experiences and needs flow into agricultural and rural development plans and policies.
Public awareness
Efforts also aim to make the public aware of women's rights and of gender issues -the relations between men and women. Namibia is fortunate to have supportive leadership. The President and Prime Minister have been two of the nation's most vocal supporters of women, examples which pose a small but significant challenge to the male dominance prevalent in many rural areas. The radio and print media ensure that debate and discussion of the obstacles faced by women reach a wide audience. The Government newspaper, New Era, is mandated to emphasize community and rural development issues and does so in both English and indigenous language articles^135 These efforts are complemented by campaigns and information, such as that prepared by the Legal Assistance Centre to inform local groups of the rights of women and children enshrined in the Constitution. As noted earlier, the Department of Women's Affairs has simplified and translated the UNCEDAW into Namibian languages to stimulate
discussion at all levels.
In rural schools, efforts are underway to make the curriculum gender-sensitive and to provide guidance and support to girls to overcome gender-barriers when choosing careers. For example, the NANAWO branch in the Okavango region is encouraging girls in secondary schools to consider non-traditional careers, including agriculture professions.
Although not gender-specific, education and media campaigns have also been actively used to educate the public on issues of direct relevance to rural women. Government ministries and NGOs together have produced publications and radio Programmes on topics such as AIDS, wise water use, and the causes of desertification.
Legal and policy reform
Lively debate and informed planning and research are instrumental to creating the legal and policy environment to support the advancement of rural women. Progress has been limited, in part due to the slow and cumbersome translation of polices into legislation. However, new policies, such as a plan to develop an agriculture bank for the communal areas or a policy to establish conservancies for community-based wildlife management, signal greater attention to the need for a legal and policy framework to underpin rural and agricultural development. These policies display some gender sensitivity and would improve the access of rural women to essential resources.
The Co-operative Act, now under review by Parliament, is a notable example of both participation in the policy process itself and of legislation which can create the conditions for local-level organization and control of credit and other productive resources. An advisory committee of government and NGOs developed the policy through broad consultation, and the committee will become a legally-recognized board once the Act is passed. The policy encourages the development of autonomous co-operatives as vehicles for empowering women and, as discussed earlier, stipulates the participation of women in management structures.
Improving women's access to productive resources and services
As legal reform and policy development continues, programmes and interventions are targeting rural women at the local level. The Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development (MAWRD) is implementing several measures aimed at improving extension capacity and outreach to communal farmers in general, and to women farmers in particular. One important initiative in Namibia is the Division of Rural Development's Household Food Security Programme (HFS), closely supported by UNICEF. The programme aims to enhance household food security, particularly for female-headed households, by improving agricultural services and rural development support to women and by reducing the time and labour of women on burdensome tasks. The programme trained rural development extension staff, now incorporated into the main agricultural service, in communication skills, participatory development, and, importantly, on concepts of household food security and gender. In addition, the extension staff
mobilize local participation, in part through training and support to community-based rural development promoters, most of whom are women.
Through the FAO programme noted above, other agricultural extension workers will gain training and experience in participatory and gender-aware approaches. An international NGO, ACORD, is conducting similar training over a five-year period for field workers from farmers associations, the national trade union, and government extension staff. In addition, a newly formed Home Economics Advisory Board is exploring the potential role of home economists in extension, an involvement intended to aid women and men both in income generation and household resource management.
Finally, the Ministry is seeking to shift from the administration of costly services to the provision of extension, research and other farmer support. Over a dozen Agricultural and Rural Development Centres have been or are near completion. The decentralised Agricultural and Rural Development Centres will facilitate the contact of extension services with women farmers and enhance their access to agricultural services and inputs. In the Caprivi, a committee of nongovernment and government staff is considering how the involvement of the Likwama Farmer's Co-operative in selling seeds and inputs and in providing other services can promote complementarily between the Co-operative and MAWRD. Although this process has not addressed women farmers, this co-operation will improve the participation of local people in the Centres. These programmes are a central step towards reorienting agricultural services towards women farmers
The HFS programme, as well as efforts by the Rural Development Centre, CCN and Canadian-Namibian Cooperation (CANAMCO). have led to the pilot introduction of appropriate technologies in some villages. The aquaroller was introduced to female-headed households through the HFS programme. In collaboration with NDT, the Rural Development Centre is designing new donkey carts for transporting water and crops. The experiences with these technologies, such as hammer mills for millet and agricultural implements, are leading to new designs, as well as management strategies more suitable for Namibian women. To date, these projects have been ad hoc and have led to only limited exchange of experience. A UNIFEM-supported initiative, recently underway, will assess technologies of greatest value and relevance to Namibian women on a broader scale.
A particularly fruitful area of NGO involvement has been in credit unions and rural savings schemes. Organizations such as the Rural People's Institute for Social Empowerment (RISE) and the Namibia Credit Union League have gained considerable experience -- from successes and from shortcomings -- in supporting local groups to manage and administer group savings and credit programmes. Many of the credit unions have helped women to mobilize and invest their cash resources. Also valuable are lessons learned by the Private Sector Foundation, the Institute for Management and Leadership Training, Cooperation for Development and other NGOs providing credit and small loans, and training to women entrepreneurs. Similarly, although not always profitable, income generation activities have enhanced the skills and knowledge of women in management, finance and communication.
Networking
Until recently, government and NGO co-operation was weak, and a lack of development coordination resulted in duplication and inefficient resources. Linkages across sectors, within and between regions, and between government and NGOs are helping to improve service provision, enhance access to policy-making, and stimulate the exchange of ideas and information.
For example, the Department of Women Affairs has set up a coordinating structure to facilitate NGO, government and donor participation in nine priority areas under which gender concerns will be addressed. Rural Community programmes constitute one of the areas, and priorities are to implement rural job creation, to reduce the workload of women, to sensitize rural communities to gender issues and to implement projects to reduce malnutrition in rural areas. MAWRD and CCN will be the lead agencies.^136
Several government Ministries are also seeking to coordinate the use of volunteer promoters in literacy, rural development and community health programmes. Regional rural development committees of Ministry, donor, and NGO staff exist in the Owambo regions and in the South. Similar government-NGO coordination is also being formed around both vocational training and micro-enterprise, where there are an array of diverse, ad-hoc initiatives. In the NGO sector, rural organizations are represented in both of the two umbrella organizations. NGO collaboration and consultation with community-based organizations has led to plans for a national, participatory People's Land Conference, to be held in August 1994. Gender issues are a focal point of the research and preparations for the conference.
Promoting local capacity
The success with which policies and endeavours benefit rural women will only emerge over time and with careful assessment. Achievements must be measured against the backdrop of the nation's recent Independence and relatively brief exposure to democracy and participation. In this sense, it is the promotion and nurturing of grassroots organizations which represents the most significant step towards advancing rural women. A number of programmes seek to strengthen local-level structures and organizations to empower local residents to design, manage and assess development processes in their areas.
Developing local capacity takes time, and many communities continue to rely on external funds and technical assistance to implement programmes. Nevertheless, rural women are being incorporated into decision-making and leadership processes through their involvement in local committees and grassroots organizations. Women are present at all decision-making levels in UNICEF's Integrated Area Based Programme, a regional, multi-sectoral development initiative. Piloted in a district in Owambo, the programme has led to the formation of active committees at the village, district and regional levels as well as sectoral committees around agriculture, water and sanitation and other issues. Women are increasingly involved in the management of water points through community-based Water Point Committees. Other initiatives which seek to involve women in community decision-making structures include CANAMCO's regional rural development programme in the Okavango, and the Sustainable Animal
Range Development Programme, with pilot projects in six villages and small towns in the East and South.
While their participation in community organizations is important to promoting gender equality, rural women in Namibia often lack the experience or confidence to accept leadership and decision-making roles. For this reason, some NGOs are supporting the establishment of women only organizations or women-only branches. An affiliated association to the Eastern Epukiro Farmers Association gives Herero women farmers the confidence and autonomy to speak and participate apart from their dominant male counterparts. Similarly, Southern women involved in the regional farmers union have formed the Good Hope Women's Co-operative to better advance their own concerns. Separate organizations could further marginalise women by confining them to stereotypical tasks. In the absence of training and support in organizational management, some organizations have disintegrated, resulting in frustration and disappointment. However, women-only organizations formed around farming and other mainstream
activities appear to enable rural women to assert their knowledge and interest and to gain experience in agriculture and rural development programmes
<section>5</section>
Review and appraisal of international support
Review and appraisal of international support
Independence ushered in financial and technical support from multi-lateral and bi-lateral agencies, many of whom had worked only in the wings with the exiled liberation movement. These agencies have emphasized gender issues in programming and assistance to the government and nongovernment sectors. For example, international assistance has been central to supporting the Department of Women Affairs and to women's organizations such as NANAWO and Sister Collective. The international community has placed priority on women's rights and helped to promote the initiatives aimed at legal education and reform education and reform initiatives.
Several agencies, such as SIDA and the Norwegian aid agency, NORAD, have direct grant-making Programmes for activities which specifically target women. More commonly, donors expect applications for financial support to demonstrate gender-sensitivity in project design, management and evaluation. A number of international agencies request that proposals specifically show how women will benefit or be affected. Some donors also request applicant organizations to specify gender composition of staff and management of boards with a view to redressing imbalances in decision-making posts.
These requirements, together with advocacy and networking, have clearly prompted government ministries and NGOs to better address gender issues in planning and implementation. This influence and control is two-directional. For Namibian NGOs and groups excluded from policy processes, international agencies also serve as a channel for influencing policy. Many foreign donors help to promote to government the ideas and concerns of women's groups, farmers associations and other Namibian organizations underrepresented in policy processes.
A donor co-ordination group on Women in Development is helping to reduce overlap in programming and to better spread resources. Separate sub-committees focus on women in micro-enterprises, women and law, women NGOs, preparations for Beijing, the Department of Women Affairs, and women and training.
However, few donors have translated the focus on gender to support to women farmers. Inversely, technical cooperation in the agricultural sector, even programmes targeting communal farmers, have taken little account of gender issues, and so too, have yielded few benefits to women farmers.^137 Like many of the groups they support, international agencies are Windhoek-based. Those with regional staff are often engaged in infrastructural programmes, such as rural water supply, or micro-enterprise and have limited contact with rural communities. Agricultural projects for women are often confined to horticulture and forestry and preclude crop and livestock production. In addition to the UNICEF and FAO support described above, a notable exception has been the collaboration of the Danish aid agency, DANIDA, with CCN to recruit and train women extension officers and to improve services for women through pilot Agriculture and Development Centres in the North.
Finally, Namibian staff in government, NGOs and CBOs have already echoed concerns raised in countries with more experience with donors. These include an emphasis on project-based rather than core-funding, bias towards particular regions and paternalism towards Namibian institutions, who find their autonomy and control over the development agenda compromised. Others worry that donor support perpetuates dependency, and that, in the absence of financial support and strong local capacity, many initiatives will crumble.
<section>6</section>
Future strategic goals and objectives
Women and decision-making
Institutions to advance women
Promotion of women's rights
Understanding poverty and the status of rural women
Improving women's access to productive resources and services
Improving women's access to employment and income-earning opportunities
Future strategic goals and objectives
Namibia faces the complex challenges of redressing social and economic imbalances and forging a climate of democracy in which all are willing and able to participate. In Namibia, many leaders have recognized the situation of struggle and inequality of women. Greater attention is being given to the role of women in development. The country has demonstrated its commitment to providing better health and education services and to improving conditions in the workplace. The Constitution, together with ongoing legal reform and awareness, is helping to create an environment conducive to women's rights.
However, little of this progress has reached rural women, who continue to struggle under heavy workloads, food insecurity, and unequal access to economic resources and opportunities and social services. Rural women are almost entirely absent from public life and their concerns are underrepresented in the organs of government. That women farmers constitute the primary food producers and caretakers of children must be recognised. Indeed, taking the needs of women farmers into account is a matter of efficiency as well as equity. Programmes are more likely to succeed if women participate. Improving the food security, productivity and well-being of rural households can reduce the need for costly food aid, curative health care and other crisis interventions.
Thus, rural women must be specifically targeted in order to improve their economic and legal status and, in turn, to empower them to participate in development and change. As identified at a consultative workshop on Women and Agriculture, a range of short-term and long-term strategies are needed to promote the advancement of women farmers.^138 While some strategies offer concrete actions, others target changing attitudes and increasing awareness.
Women and decision-making
(1) Affirmative action legislation is expected to be passed by the end of 1994. This measure should be used to ensure that women are better represented in decision-making positions. There should be provision for greater representation of women as members of parliament and on the regional and national councils. Women's involvement in national and sectoral decision-making can help incorporate gender in planning and can yield long-term results in changing attitudes and priorities.
(2) Although some planners and civil servants have received training in gender awareness, there is still a lack of understanding of gender issues. Many government officials and leaders continue to equate gender only with feminism or see it as a woman's issue. Campaigns to create greater gender awareness are needed to ensure that both men and women take responsibility for advancing women's status.
(3) NGOs, CBOs and the private sector must also be lobbied to include more women in management positions and in decision-making bodies, such as boards and committees.
(4) Educated people and those in positions of authority must set an example by recognizing and respecting women as equals.
Institutions to advance women
(1) The Department of Women Affairs must be strengthened as a mouthpiece. It should have representation in the Cabinet and have an official presence in the 13 regions.
(2) Women's organizations remain urban-based. Professionals working in the rural areas should help mobilize rural women into pressure groups.
(3) Farmers associations or affiliated branches of women farmers should be promoted and supported.
(4) Rural institutions often cater to interest groups and serve the influential and wealthy. Skills in strategic planning are needed to ensure that rural institutions clearly target and aim to serve women and other marginalised groups.
(5) The National Planning Commission should encourage donors and NGOs to be more evenly distributed among the regions. Although some progress has been made, formal mechanisms are needed to improve coordination among all NGO, private sector, and government institutions working with rural people. These networks should be used to advocate on behalf of the rural poor and to communicate the needs of rural women into policy processes.
Promotion of women's rights
(1) The country must urgently repeal/amend discriminatory laws. Women should be able to obtain credit and loans in their own right, marriage laws should be amended, and there must be guarantees that women can have equal access and secure rights to land. This process should be expedited through the following strategies:
A. Greater financial and technical support to the Women and Law Reform Committee could expedite the process of review and recommendations.
B. Women should be encouraged to challenge unconstitutional laws in the courts in order to set legal precedents.
C. Namibia's capacity to facilitate legal reform is stretched. A specially-recruited legal drafter is needed to translate recommendations into legal bills.
Understanding poverty and the status of rural women
(1) Socio-economic research is needed to better understand the causes and effects of poverty on rural women and their families.
A. Research by the government and by institutes such as the Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit should assess the impact of macro-economic and sectoral policies on women.
B. There is a need for gender-disaggregated statistics within all Ministries and among non-governmental organizations. The upcoming National Comprehensive Agricultural Survey, to be conducted jointly by the CSO and MAWRD, should include gender-based questions and analysis.
C. Research should also evaluate the power-relations and processes at the household level. Topics include: the fluidity of household composition; division of labour within the household; decision-making processes; the changes in interests in power in productive, domestic and reproductive spheres, and patterns of resource allocation within and between households.
D. Greater information on the informal coping strategies of rural women should inform interventions designed to improve access to credit, technology, employment and services.
E. Longitudinal studies are needed to monitor the status of rural poor women over time. Oral histories of women are also an important tool for understanding cultural attitudes, social changes, and the means by which women survive.
F. The role of women in natural resource use and management also needs to be addressed.
Improving women's access to productive resources and services
(1) Agricultural services should be further decentralised to reach out to the needy, who are not able to reach Agricultural and Rural Development Centres.
(2) Extension officers should undertake agricultural needs assessments of women farmers. Extension staff in agriculture, veterinary services, forestry and nature conservation should receive in-service training on participatory and gender-aware development approaches.
(3) Many services stress high technological inputs, such as tractor services. Women farmers often cannot afford these services or are not reached by them. Agricultural services can both improve local participation and improve yields by focusing on simple, low cost interventions, such as improved seed bed preparation and straight line sowing and planting.
(4) Namibia must develop an appropriate technology base for women's agricultural and domestic tasks. Technologies of use to Namibian women include line makers and weeding tools, simple hand or animal powered mills, and improved food storage. Information and experiences with technology should be disseminated to community groups, NGOs, and extension staff through newsletters and workshops. The Rural Development Centre in the North is a likely candidate for this role.
(5) On-farm teals should women farmers. Women should be involved in research on and distribution of improved crop varieties.
(6) Veterinary services must be targeted to women farmers.
(7) Extension officers have observed that women are more likely to attend and participate in meetings when it is conducted by a woman. MAWRD and other Ministries with extension or field work staff should increase the number of women extension officers. This will entail the following:
A. Working conditions must be conducive for women to be fieldworkers. Decentralising the agricultural services will reduce the distances which extension officers must travel to meet farmers. Primarily seen as an urban issue, the provision of child care facilities at the extension officer's workplace is also essential.
B. The agricultural colleges should implement affirmative action enrolment policies. Experience and skills should be taken into account for those women who, due to pregnancy, marriage, or economic reasons, did not obtain the required educational qualifications. Faculty and staff must be sensitized to the cultural and social obstacles faced by women students.
C. Girls should be encouraged to consider agriculture and environment professions and bursary programmes should assist young women to pursue higher education in agriculture, forestry and natural resources. Extension officers, agricultural teachers and even farmers can serve as mentors to girls in agricultural subjects.
(8) Extension officers and NGOs working in rural areas should utilise rural development promoters, many of whom are women, as a liaison to local villages.
(9) Credit unions, NGOs and MAWRD, currently developing a rural bank, should exchange ideas and develop creative savings and loan schemes appropriate to the needs of rural women. A campaign should urge rural women to save in banks, post offices or local schemes.
(10) Pilot programmes should assess the viability of resource-sharing initiatives, such as programmes with draught-animal power, or group ownership of breeding animals.
(11) MAWRD should implement gender-based record-keeping and evaluations to assess if agricultural services, inputs and small loans schemes are reaching women.
(12) Rural institutions should Improve linkages with the Southern African Development community so that Namibia can learn from the problems and successes of promoting women farmers in neighbouring countries.
Improving women's access to employment and income-earning opportunities
(1) Women's productive work in agriculture and other 'informal" spheres should be recognized in national statistics and policies.
(2) Initiatives to market agricultural produce and livestock production should incorporate rural women.
(3) Income-generation activities are often used to mobilize women who have limited experience or inclination to work in groups. Programmes to support income-generation should also work with individual women to develop financially-viable enterprises.
(4) Gender-sensitive, labour-based projects, such as the road construction project in the North, should be replicated elsewhere in the country. Except for short-term, drought relief programmes, payment should be in cash, not food.
(5) National development planning should give priority to agribusiness and off-farm enterprises which will create wage-earning opportunities for rural women.
<section>7</section>
Endnotes
Endnotes
1. This report, while focusing on women specifically, utilises a framework of gender analysis: an understanding of power relations, including differential control over production and resources, between the sexes. It should be emphasized that both women and men determine the construct of gender within a given arena, be it the household or the state.
2. As a desk study, consultation and participatory appraisal with grassroots organisations and farmers were outside the scope of this study. However, the author has drawn on her own fieldwork and experience in Omusati, Oshana, Okavango, and Caprivi regions, and to a lesser extent, in Karas, Kunene, and Otjozondjupa regions.
3. Ethnic groupings include Baster, Caprivian, Damara, Owambo, Kavango, Herero, Himba, Nama, Tswana and San or "Bushmen" groups; English, German and Afrikaans-speaking whites; and several groupings of "coloureds", and Tswana groups.
4. Office of the Prime Minister, July 1992:1-2. Population figure is calculated from the 1991 census.
5. In 1904-7, widespread uprisings by Herero, Nama and Owambo-speaking peoples were suppressed by the Germans; they used their victories to justify further expropriation of land, a labour code making wage labour mandatory, prohibitions on cattle ownership by Africans, and, most drastically, a policy of wholesale genocide and environmental destruction, which reduced the indigenous population by 50%, including the indirect or direct genocide of 80% of the Herero population.
6. See for example, World Bank 1991.
7. This paper will only refer to South African policies. For a discussion of German practices, see Werner 1993.
8. To cite one example, the per capita expenditure on education varied immensely by ethnicity. A pre-independence survey of educational expenditure found that R329 was spent per capita on students in the Owambo reserve, R553 for those in Okavango, R810 for those in Namaland, R1,071 for those in Hereroland, and R1,190 for Coloreds. At R3,213 per capita, white students received almost 10 times more than their counterparts in the Owambo reserve. Cited in UNDP, December 1989:34.
9. Kahuure and Vigne 1992.
10. World Bank 1992:39.
11. Formerly the Bantu Investment Corporation.
12. Kahuure and Vigne 1992:6-7.
13. Republic of Namibia, Co-operative Policy, December 1992.
14. Although few held senior ranks.
15. Solomon and Kandando 1993.
16. Becker 1993:122. According to Katjavivi, the formation of the SWAPO Women's Council in 1980 did not lead to any significant differences in the composition of the party leadership. In 1982, the central committee had only 3 women, while the executive committee had none (Katjavivi 1988).
17. Becker 1993:179-185.
18. The 60 member National Assembly of the Transitional Government included only 2 women. Women were completely absent from senior positions in the Second Tier Administration, and held only 2 such posts in the National Government Service.. Neither were they present in the National Transitional Government Cabinet. ibid. :73.
19. Cited in Hubbard and Kavari 1993
20. This discussion is drawn from Hubbard and Kavari 1993. Although women comprised almost 42% of the candidates for village councils, only 34% gained seats. This is in part because in SWAPO, women candidates received higher placement for municipal elections. Inversely, DTA women had better placement on the lists for the village councils. SWAPO won the elections by an overwhelming margin.
21. Ibid.
22. Ministerial posts are political appointments. The permanent secretary position is the senior civil servant post. The Arusha declaration has set as a goal that by the year 2000, at least one in eight top policy and decision-makers in Africa (including cabinet ministers, senior civil servants, armed and police forces, parastatals and private corporations), should be a woman. (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa 1991:21).
23. See Becker, 52-3.
24. Among all ten organisations informally surveyed, women members of NGO boards are a minority, even when the constituency served is predominantly female.
25. Republic of Namibia, Co-operative Policy December 1992.
26. Namibia Development Trust (NDT) 1994.
27. Namibia Development Trust (NDT) 1994; Naeraa and Solomon 1994; Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Engineering 1994.
28. For example, the Namibia Development Trust and Oxfam Canada have gender coordinators who are expected to help other staff integrate gender concerns into their field work and program development. The Legal Assistance Centre has a gender research unit and its legal education program has primarily targeted women. The Private Sector Foundation has a small-loan program for women in the informal sector. Regarding unions, the teachers union, together with student organisations, have stressed the need for improved education, including distribution of books, materials and teachers, in rural areas. They have also highlighted the plight of pregnant teens, who often are forced to leave school.
29. Hubbard and Solomon 1993.
30. Gender issues have been highlighted in training workshops and materials for Rural Extension Officers.
31. Excluding rural water supply, which has since been moved to the Department of Water Affairs. Figures calculated from annual budgets and financial ledgers of the Ministry of Finance.
32. Girvan and Tapscott June 1993.
33. Christof Brock, Acting Director, Division of Co-operatives, MAWRD, personal communication.
34. The church has also been cited as reducing the prestige and authority women gained through traditional rituals. For example, by guarding the holy fire, Herero women controlled the communication between families and their ancestors. Sustainable Animal and Range Development Programme (SARDEP), 1993:7.
35. Republic of Namibia l990, Constitution of the Republic of Namibia, Articles 10 and 14 respectively.
36. Ibid., Article 23.
37. Ibid., Article 95. This includes non-discrimination in remuneration, as well as legislation to provide maternity and related benefits for women, and legislation to ensure the health and strength of workers.
38. Indeed, Hubbard points out that, if not for the Constitutional provision authorizing affirmative action, it could be argued that affirmative action violates the provision prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race or sex. (Hubbard 1991).
39. Constitution, Articles 140 and 66 respectively.
40. Republic of Namibia October 1992, A Commitment to Our Children.
41. Erenstein 1993:10.
42. NDT 1994:55-6.
43. NDT 1994:50.
44. NEPRU July 1991A; Yaron, et. al. 1992; Environmental Evaluation Associates of Namibia 1991, SARDEP 1993; NDT 1994; Paul Vleermuis personal interview.
45. NEPRU July 1991A and July 1991B; SARDEP 1993; Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Engineering 1994.
46. Reported in 1991 to be R400 for a plot of 1-2 ha. A recent environmental assessment of one Owambo district reported the price to be R500, or over $150. This represents a substantial chunk of the annual income of subsistence farmers. NEPRU 1991; Irving et. al. 1993.
47. NDT 1994.
48. One of the few measures passed by Parliament of relevance to rural women, a resolution on the inheritance of property by widows, was non-binding.
49. Bience Gawanas. personal communication, Lindiwe Kazamboue, personal interview; NDT 1994:47.
50. NDT 1994:53.
51. Lindiwe Kazamboue, personal interview.
52. The booklet, entitled Women and Rape, was produced by the Federation of Namibian Women, Women's Solidarity, and the Law Society of Namibia in 1992.
53. Hubbard 1991: 14.
54. The NDT survey (NDT 1994) discovered that some women continue to see beating as a husband's right. Current debates in Namibia over corporal punishment, prohibited by the Constitution, reflect the view that physical punishment is merited and effective.
55. For example, during a participatory needs assessment, women in a district in Owambo emphasized the need for reforming the traditional authority system. Ranked alongside access to clean water and health facilities was the need for headmen to be elected and the concern that "headmen don't hand out justice fairly" (Girvan 1993).
56. In the broadest sense, basic needs go beyond food, clothing, and shelter, to include ability and will to participate in social, economic and political realms.
57 The most oft-quoted figure is that in the World Bank report which estimated that the wealthiest 5% of the population controls 70% of the GDP, while only 3% of the GDP is controlled by the poorest 55%. The 1991 figure estimated an average per capita annual income of US$16,300 for whites, US$750 for urban and/or wage earning non-whites, and US$85 for blacks in the traditional sector (World Bank 1991).
58. For example, the census counted a household as female-headed based on who was the person in charge at the time of the survey. Women whose husbands were temporarily absent (i.e., gone to the shop) might have been counted as heads. Some also question the validity of the very concept of head of household, as it vests one member with a singular authority. One lawyer has suggested that the declaration of one person as authority or owner has legal implications by undermining the equality of men and the women in marriage, guaranteed by the Constitution in Article 14 (see Erenstein 1993).
59. During recent fieldwork in the Okavango region, participants suggested to the author that another type of "de facto household" has emerged: Men formerly employed (i.e., by the military) who have withdrawn from working and asserting responsibility for the household, into alcohol.
60. From a comparison of Tables COI and EO3, 1991 Census.
61. Van Rooy, et. al. 1993.
62. Devereaux and Tapscott 1993. When labour demands are high or exacerbated by drought, households may withdraw children from school.
63. An environmental assessment of an Owambo district found that an average sized household ploughing by hand and cultivating 2 ha (the average plot size in the district) will produce enough millet to last only 8 months -- not factoring in losses in storage or the affect of drought on harvests. Irving-Forbes 1993, pp. 267.
64. Naeraa and Solomon 1994.
65. NDT 1994. The study did not assess the number of households who receive non-cash transfers.
66. Naeraa et. al. 1993.
67. International Labour Organization (ILO) 1991:49. Although 1991 figures are cited, recent television and newspaper reports on the plight of farmworkers suggests that despite the labour act, farmworkers remain underpaid.
68. ILO 1991; NEPRU July 1991A:402-3.
69. Interestingly, a study of the Okavango Region found that the food insecure relied proportionately more on income from the sale of animals than the income secure, although the amount of income was considerably higher for the latter. Yaron et. al. 1992:89.
70. Gawanas March 1993.
71. However, until 1991, the amount of the pension varied widely by race and ethnicity, with members of African groups receiving as little as N$55/month, while white pensioners received N$382/month. The pension was equalised in 1991 to N$ 120 for all new applicants, but did not apply to those receiving higher amounts prior to that date. Plans are underway to apply the new policy retroactively.
72. NDT 1994.
73. A baseline survey of Uukwambi district found that 28 % of grandmothers helped to pay school fees, while only 15% of grandfathers were involved. (Naeraa and Solomon 1993.)
74. Cogill and Kiugu 1990. See also Hay et. al. 1990.
75. Directorate of Rural Development (DRD) 1992:35. 28% of all households surveyed only ate mealie pap, with no sauce, milk or meat.
76. The Saamstaa self-help housing scheme and other housing programs in the urban areas show a reversal of this division: women are expected to build the homes and get little assistance from husbands or male relatives.
77. NDT 1994:26.
78. Biesele 1993:97-98.
79. See Becker 1993, Chapters 2 and 3.
80. In 45% of households in an Owambo district, women were responsible for land preparation, while in 27%, men contributed most of the labour. Irving et. al. 1993:30.
81. An estimated 80% of households rely on wood for cooking and heating water, and many also use wood to provide lighting.
82. A survey undertaken just after Independence found that some households walk as much as 1 hour and 42 minutes. Namibia Institute for Social and Economic Research (NISER) 1991 UNICEF Situation Analysis.
83. This issue was addressed by the NDT 1994 survey. Less than 4% of respondents felt that women have too much freetime. Inversely, 84.6% disagreed, some strongly, that women have plenty of time for leisure activities. Over half agreed that migrant labour leads to shortages of labour on the farm. Interestingly, results varied across the three regions on husband's ability to participate. 63% in Uukwambi, 47.3% in Uukwanyama, and only 21:2% in Ombalantu felt that husbands were not too busy to assist.
Moreover, many urban men, who will undertake or assist in household tasks in their homes, revert to traditional roles when in rural areas. This was pointed out by men themselves during a recent training workshop for development fieldworkers.
84. A study of women farmers in Uukwaluhdi district (Omusati Region) found that, women are responsible for the storage of grain, but must seek their husbands' permission before opening a new basket. (Van utyvanck Nove 1993.)
85. SARDEP 1993:9; Directorate of Agricultural Extension 1994; Directorate of Rural Development 1992.
86. This point was made to the author by women in several villages across the Okavango Region.
87. The Namibian Agronomic Board is undertaking a pilot project for the marketing of millet. However, low productivity levels, as well as the cost and associated problems of storage and processing, make its commercial viability questionable. van Uytvanck November 1993; Christof Brock and Piers Vigne, personal interviews.
88. This phenomena was documented by Boserup (1970) in the 1960s, but continues to happen again and again. See, for example, Davison 1988.
89. Constitution, Article 100 and Article 124 together with Schedule 5.
90. For example, relocation and dispossession most affected residents of stock-producing communal areas, including Nama, Damara and Herero-speaking groups. They thus felt that priority for land should be those whose land was stolen. In the crop producing areas, where the policy was one of restricting expansion rather than relocation, residents were more likely to stress that equality of access should guide land reform or that priority should be given to returnees or the unemployed landless. See NEPRU July 1991B.
91. Office of the Prime Minister July 1992, Report of the Technical Committee on Commercial Farmland, 143.
92. The consolidation of fenced settler farms into the bantustans led to the granting of exclusive grazing rights for some farmers and groups of families, primarily in the Eastern and Southern Communal Areas. In addition, a special system of land rights was applied to Rehoboth.
93. Devereaux and !!Naruseb 1994; Devereaux 1993.
94. Directorate of Agricultural Extension 1994:62.
95. This inaction is due in part to the lack of a policy regulating the authority of traditional leaders.
96. ILO 1991:47.
97. Bauer 1993. See also NDT 1994.
98. Directorate of Rural Development 1992; Rohde 1993; Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Engineering 1994; NDT 1994.
99. Van Rooy et. al. 1993:32. The survey attached values to assets and livestock with handtools and chickens at the lowest end of scale and tractors and cattle at the highest.
100. Only half of households in Uukwaludhi district in Owambo use animal-driven plough. Half of these own the animals, the other half borrow or hire. Only 1.5% use oxen. Only 7% used tractor, showing that few farmers have been able to take advantage of a government subsidized tractor service. (Irving et. al. 1993.)
101. The NDT survey found that 68.5% of all households surveyed had no donkeys. This figure was as high as 86.7% in the Kwanyama area. NDT 1994:27.
102. Lightfoot 1994.
103. Gender-based statistics are limited, as are figures on rural and urban participation. 12 of the 21 credit unions affiliated to the Namibia Credit Union League are located in the Owambo regions. Of these 4 are in Oshakati, the urban centre, while the remainder are outside. However, these still tend to be in rural towns and centres, such as Ombalantu, the capital of Omusati region.
104. A total of 863 applications have been received. Of those approved, specifically, N$2105700 was for the acquisition of stock; N$371,125 for crop production and N$353,562 for infrastructure to better manage crop production. Republic of Namibia January 1994:48.
105. A small proportion of cases handled by the Legal Assistance Centre are for people who have been unable to meet payments to stores and face repossession of goods or threat of legal action. Rosa Namises, personal interview.
106. Naeraa and Solomon 1994:45.
107. For example, a 1971 figure shows that of 132 government agricultural workers, only 14 were black. Oloya et. al. 1984:39.
108. Yaron et. al. 1992.
109. In general, households reported little contact with government staff from any ministry. Health was the highest, with only 36 people visited by government health workers. In contrast, 98% had been reached by census takers, which shows that contact is possible. NDT 1994:22.
110. 62% of those surveyed were spending less than 10% of their time in the field, while 36% were spending more than half of their time on administration. (van Uytvanck November 1993.)
111. Hayes and Keulder 1994: :21 -22.
112. SARDEP 1993:8; Directorate of Rural Development 1992; Directorate of Agricultural Extension 1994.
113. The baseline survey of Uukwambi district Owambo found that in male headed households, 17 % of members go to Oshakati, the urban centre, one or more a week, compared to only 1 % of those in female headed households. Similarly, 49% of male-headed households owned a bicycle and 29% owned a vehicle. In contrast. the rates for female-headed households were 14% and 8% respectively. Naeraa and Solomon 1994:40.
114. NDT 1994:77; van Uytvanck November 1983:28. According to extension officers, information on seeds, fertilisers, gardening and crops are the main information requested.
115. An assessment of agricultural services in Caprivi fond that support of draught ploughing services, including ploughing and discing, would be far more cost-efficient and reach far greater numbers of farmers than tractor services. Hayes and Keulder 1994.
116. SARDEP 1994.
117. In the past, high subsidies have created dependence and inhibited the viability of cooperatives, which are unable to compete with the subsidized prices and terms of the government. For example, government subsidized sale of seeds undercut the prices of those being sold by a regional cooperative. The constraints and opportunities of the relationship of MAWRD and cooperatives is highlighted in a case study of the Caprivi. See Hayes and Keulder 1994.
118. Because the seeds must be grown under specific conditions, it is mostly larger-scale crop farmers who are involved.
119. Roger Arenstrup, Ministry of Education and Culture, personal communication.
120. MASDAR Zambia September 1993.
121. Yaron et. al. 1992:40.
122. Irving et. al. 1993; van Uytvanck November 1993B; Hay 1991.
123. Republic of Namibia, n.d.:10.
124. Tvedten and Girvan, 1994.
125. See Article 95 of the Constitution.
126. Tvedten and Girvan 1994.
127. For example, the 1988 Manpower Survey only recorded farmworkers. The category yielded a total of only 1885 women and 9,504 men.
128. ILO 1991.
129. Calculated from Census Table E08. Own account workers and unpaid family members were excluded.
130. NDT 1994; Naeraa and Solomon 1994.
131. NDT 1994:19.
132. Elkan et. al. 1992.
133. Pomuti and Nghikembua 1993. Girvan 1993.
134. For example, scant attention is given to women farmers in missions undertaken to identify and design internationally supported interventions in agriculture. There is little or no gender-based research. These include: FAO 1991, FAO 1992, Masdar 1993 (prepared for the African Development Bank). A 1992 report of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) does address issues of economic differentiation in the communal areas and gender and economic organization. However. this information is not fully incorporated into the final recommendations.
135. The New Era Publication Corporation Act. No. l of 1992, cited in Republic of Namibia October 1992.
136. Other operational sectors are: Reproduction health and maternal protection; Legal affairs; Violence against women; Education and training; Communication; Economic activities; Research and data collection; and Women in decision-making. It is not clear whether rural job creation encompasses improving agricultural productivity.
137. Multilateral agencies, such as the EC, as well as international donors and NGOs, have taken little account of women farmers. For example, the French NGO, CRIAA, has been a central supporter of the Likwama Farmers Association which remains oriented towards serving male farmers.
138. With funding from the Food and Agriculture Organization, this one-day workshop was conducted on 13 May 1994 by the Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit (NEPRU) in collaboration with MAWRD's Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Engineering. Participants included Ministry officials, extension officers from all agro-ecological zones, including 6 female extension officers, members of farmers' associations, and representatives of NGOs. Following an overview of the report, participants drew on their own experiences to assess and to update Chapter I. Chapters II and III were drafted after the workshop and fully incorporate the recommendations highlighted at the workshop.
<section>8</section>
Bibliography
Bibliography
Adams, F. and Werner W. 1990. The Land Issue in Namibia: Inquiry. Windhoek: Namibia Institute for Social and Economic Research
Bauer, A. May 1993. A Study of the Microstructure of Selected Households in the Uukwaluudhi District of Ovambo, Northern Namibia. Windhoek: UNICEF.
Becker, H. April 1993. From Anti-colonial Resistance to Reconstruction: Namibian Women's Movement 1980 to 1992. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Bremen.
Biesele, M. Women Like Meat: The Folklore and Foraging Ideology of the Kalahri Ju/'hoan. Johannesburg: University of the Witwatersrand Press.
Boserup, E. 1970. Women's Role in Economic Development. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Brown, S. November 1992. Assessment of Popular Participation in the Formulation and Implementation of Development Policies and Programmes: A Case Study of Namibia. Windhoek: NEPRU.
Bauvinic, M. and Mehra, R. 1990. "Women and Agricultural Development." In C. Eicher and J. Staatz, eds., Agricultural Development in the Third World. Second Edition. Baltimore, Maryland: John Hopkins University Press.
Cock, J. 1980. Maids and Madams: A Study in the Politics of Exploitation. Johannesburg: Ravan Press.
Cogill, B. and Kiugu, S. 1990. Household Health and Nutrition Survey. Windhoek: Namibian Institute for Social and Economic Research and UNICEF.
Davison, Jean. 1988. "Land and Women's Agricultural Production: The Context." In J. Davison, ed. Agriculture, Women and Land: The African Experience. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
Department of Women Affairs. July 1993. National Communication Strategy in Support of the UN Convention on Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 19931995. Windhoek: GRN: DWA.
Department of Women Affairs. November 1993. Proceedings of the 1st Annual Programme Sharing Forum Involved in Promotion of Women in Development, held at Mariental, Namibia, 14-19 November 1993. Windhoek: DWA.
Devereaux, S. and Tapscott, C. December 1993. "Coping Mechanisms of Communal Farmers in Namibia in Response to Drought." In R. Moorsom and A. Pfouts, eds., Drought Impacts and Preparedness in Namibia. Windhoek: NEPRU.
Devereaux, S. February 1994. Food for Work and the 1992/3 Drought. Paper presented to the Food-for-Work Management Planning Meeting, 2 February 1994.
Devereux, S. and !!Naruseb, G. February 1994. Water and Sanitation in Namibia's Southern Communal Areas: A Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices Survey. SSD Research Report 8. Social Sciences Division and UNICEF.
Devereux, S. and Naeraa, T. September 1993. Aqua Roller Evaluation. Draft. Windhoek: Social Sciences Division.
Devereux, S. November 1993. Water and Sanitation in Eastern Caprivi. A Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices Survey. Social Sciences Division and UNICEF.
Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Engineering. February 1994. Socio-Economic Survey: Eastern Communal Areas 1994. Final draft. Windhoek: GRN: Directorate of Rural Development, MAWRD.
Directorate of Rural Development. August 1992. Socio-Economic Survey: Southern Communal Areas 1992. Windhoek: GRN: Directorate of Rural Development, MAWRD.
Elkan, W. et. al. 1992. Namibian Agriculture: Policies and Prospects. Windhoek: NEPRU.
Environmental Evaluation Associates of Namibia. August 1991. Sustainable Livestock Production Programme (SLPP) in the Less Developed Areas of Namibia. Windhoek: MAWRD.
Erenstein ya Toivo, V. March 1993. Gender, Equality and the Law--Namibia 's Experience. Paper presented for the Conference on Gender, Equality and the Law, Johannesburg, 2628 March 1993.
Food and Agriculture Organization. July 1992. Namibia Rural Services Support Project. Rome: FAO/World Bank Cooperative Programme.
Food and Agriculture Organization. September 1992. Northern Livestock Improvement Project: Socio Economic Production Systems Diagnostic Study. Draft Report. Rome: FAO/IFAD Cooperative Programme.
Gawanas, B. March 1993. "Stuck in the Middle: Women, the Family and Two Systems of Law." Namibia Review, Vol. 2, No. 3.
Girvan, L. December 1993. Ombalantu Labour-based Road Construction Project, Omusati Region. Taking Account of Socio-Economic Factors Affecting Successful Implementation. Windhoek: Social Sciences Division, MRC, UNAM.
Girvan, L and Tapscott, C. June 1993. The Role of Farmers Associations in Agricultural Policy Formulation and Implementation: A Look at Namibia. Paper prepared for an International Conference on Governments, Farmers' Organisations and Food Policy, Kadoma, Zimbabwe.
GRN and UNICEF January 1994. Programme of Cooperation: Annual Project: Plans of Action and Budgets 1994. Windhoek: Government of the Republic of Namibia and UNICEF.
GRN and UNICEF. November 1993. Programme of Cooperation: Report of the Annual Review 1993. GRN and UNICEF
Hakulinen, M. May 1992. Means of Livelihood in Northern Namibia. Helsinki: Institute of Development Studies, University of Helsinki.
Harnett, P. July 1993. The Land Issue and Affirmative Action: Options for Range Management and Tenure. Windhoek: Friedrich Ebert Foundation.
Hay, R. et. al. August 1991. Report on a visit to Namibia to carry out a feasibility study of the production and marketing of pearl millet and its products. Chatam Maritime, England: Natural Resources Institute.
Hay, R., Pell, J. and Tanner, C. February 1990. Household Food Security in Northern Namibia: Report Prepared for UNICEF. Windhoek. Oxford: International Development Centre, Food Studies Group.
Hayes, I. and Keulder, C. 1994. Co-operation in the Provision of Commercial Agricultural Services between the MAWRD and the Private Sector, Including Co-operatives, in the Caprivi Region: Draft Report to the Caprivi Technical Committee. Windhoek: Namibian Economic Policy Research Unit.
Hubbard, D. and Kavari, K. June 1993. Affirmative Action for Women in Local Government in Namibia. Windhoek: Legal Assistance Centre.
Hubbard, D. and Tapscott, C. 1992. Namibia: Country Gender Analysis. Windhoek: Swedish International Development Authority.
Hubbard, D. and Solomons, C. December 1993. The Women's Movement in Namibia. Windhoek: Ford Foundation.
Hubbard, D. March 1991. Women and Children in Namibia: The Legal Context. Windhoek: NISER, UNAM.
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 1992. Strategy-cum-ldentification Mission to Namibia. Windhoek: IFAD.
International Labour Organization (ILO). 1991. Namibia Report of the ILO Employment Advisory and Training Policy Mission. Geneva: ILO.
Irving, T.F., Marsh, A. and van Rhyn, I. November 1993. An Environmental Assessment of Uukwaluudhi. Draft report. Social Sciences Division and UNICEF.
Kahuure, K. and Vigne, P. November 1992. Agricultural Research, Extension and Training Services in Namibia. Windhoek: NEPRU.
Katjavivi, P. 1988. A History of Resistance in Namibia. London: James Currey.
Lightfoot, R.P. January 1994. Namibia. An Agricultural Bank in the Communal Areas. A Report of a Consultancy, October-November 1993. Windhoek: MAWRD and CEC.
MASDAR Zambia. November 1993. Northern Regions Development Programme. Draft Final Report. Windhoek: MAWRD.
MASDAR Zambia. September 1993. Northern Regions Development Programme. Interim Report. Windhoek: MAWRD.
Matengu, E.N. December 1993. Perceptions of Visual Materials in Rural Namibia. Draft. Windhoek: Social Sciences Division.
Melaku-Tjirongo, E. and Devereux, S. December 1993. Adult Literacy in Uukwaluuhdi. Draft: Social Sciences Division.
Ministry of Health and Social Services. May 1993. Namibia Demographic and Health Survey 1992. Windhoek: MHSS; Columbia, Maryland: Macro International Inc.
Naeraa, T. and Solomon, C. March 1994. A Socio-economic Baseline Survey of Uutwambi. Draft. Social Sciences Division and UNICEF. Quoted with special permission.
Naeraa, T. et. al. May 1993. Coping with Drought in Namibia. Informal Social Security Systems in Caprivi and Erongo, 1992. Windhoek: NISER, MRC, UNAM.
Namibia Community Cooperatives Alliance. July 1992. Annual Report. Windhoek: NCCA.
Namibia Development Trust (NDT). January 1994. Improving the Legal and Socio-economic Situation of Women in Namibia. Uukwambi, Ombalantu and Uutwanyama Integrated Report. Prepared with SIAPAC Namibia and The Centre for Applied Social Sciences. Windhoek: NDT.
Namibia National Co-operative Policy. Windhoek: Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development: Directorate of Planning, Marketing and Cooperative Development.
Namibian Institute for Social and Economic Research. March 1991. A Situation Analysis Of Women and Children in Namibia. Windhoek: UNICEF and NISER.
National Planning Commission. 1992. Draft Transitional National Development Plan 1991/92 1993/94. Windhoek: GRN: National Planning Commission.
National Planning Commission/Central Statistics Office. August 1993. 1991 Population and Housing Census. Volumes 1-5. Windhoek: GRN: Central Statistics Office.
NEPRU. July 1991. Land Reform and the Situation of Women. Paper for the National Conference on Land Reform and the Land Question. Windhoek: Office of the Prime Minister, GRN.
NEPRU. July 1991. Socio-economic Conditions and Attitudes to Land Issues. Paper for the National Conference on Land Reform and the Land Question. Windhoek: Office of the Prune Minister, GRN, pp. 171-203.
Office of the Prime Minister. July 1991. National Conference on Land Reform and the Land Question, 25 June -1 July 1991. Volume 1. Research Papers, Addresses and Consensus Document. Windhoek: GRN: Office of the Prime Minister.
Office of the Prune Minister. July 1992. Report of the Technical Committee on Commercial Farmland. Windhoek: Office of the Prime Minister, GRN, pp.171-203.
Oloya, et. al. 1984. Agricultural Economy of Namibia: Strategies for Structural Change, Lusaka. United Nations Institute for Namibia.
Oppong, C. May 1994. Women, Population and Development Issues in Namibia. Windhoek: United Nations Population Fund.
Paskin, R.D. March 1990. A Review of Agriculture in Kaokoland with Special Reference to Animal Practices, Husbandry and Veterinary Extension. Unpublished paper.
Pomuti, A. and Nghikembua, S. July 1993. Onaanda Community-Based Road Construction Project, Western Owambo Region: Final Socio-Economic Report. Windhoek: Social Sciences Division, MRC, UNAM.
Population Planning Unit. 1993. Namibia: Population Data for Development Planning. Windhoek: National Planning Commission.
Republic of Namibia. December 1993. National Program of Action for the Children of Namibia. Annual Report 1993. Windhoek: GRN: National Planning Commission.
Republic of Namibia. December 1992. National Co-operative Policy as Approved by Cabinet on 1 December 1992. Windhoek: Division of Co-operative Development.
Republic of Namibia. October 1992. A Commitment to Our Children. Namibia's Country Report under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Windhoek: Republic of Namibia.
Republic of Namibia. Namibia's Green Plan. Draft plan. Windhoek: Republic of Namibia.
Republic of Namibia. December 1991. National Programme of Action for the Children of Namibia. Windhoek: GRN.
Republic of Namibia. 1990. The Constitution of the Republic of Namibia. Windhoek: GRN.
Rohde, R. 1993. Afternoons in Damaraland: Common Land and Common Sense in One of Namibia's Former 'Homelands'. Edinburgh: Centre of African Studies, Edinburgh University.
Sustainable Animal and Range Development Programme (SARDEP) 1993. Developing Methods to Assess the Living Conditions of Women and Youth in the Eastern and Southern Communal Areas in Namibia. Preliminary Report, Windhoek.
Solomon, C. and Kandando, D. March 1993. "Integration at the Community Level: Case Studies of War-Affected Areas." In The Integration of Returned Exiles, Former Combatants and Other War-affected Namibians. Windhoek: NISER.
Tvedten, I. and Girvan, L. June 1994. A Socio-economic Review of the Freshwater Fishery Sector in Namibia. Social Sciences Division, MRC, UNAM.
United Nations Development Program. December 1989. Integration of Women in the Planning and Programming Process for Namibia: Base Studies on Financial, Economic and Social Aspects for the Arrangements for Independence in Namibia. Mimeo.
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. 1991. Abuja Declaration on Participatory Development: The Role of Women in Africa in the 1990s.
Van Rooy, G. et. al. October 1993. Household Subsistence Levels: Three Selected Communities in Namibia. Preliminary Report. Windhoek: Social Sciences Division, MRC, UNAM. Quoted with permission of authors.
Van Uytvanck, M. December 1993. Agricultural Trial Plan for Extension Officers and Farmers in Uukwaluudhi. Windhoek: UNICEF.
Van Uytvanck, M. November 1993A. A Draft of a Strategy for Agricultural Extension Officers to Improve the Household Food Security in Uukwaluudhi by Focusing on Women Farmers' Activities. Windhoek: UNICEF.
Van Uytvanck, M. November 1993B. Development of a Millet Retailing Project. Windhoek: GRN.
World Bank. 1992. Poverty Alleviation with Sustainable Growth. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Yaron, et. al. 1992. Rural Development in the Okavango Region of Namibia: An Assessment of Needs, Opportunities and Constraints. Windhoek: Gamsberg Macmillan.
<section>9</section>
Appendix tables
Appendix tables
Table 1: Population by sex and urban/rural
Demographic Group
Population
% of Total Population
Urban Male
Urban Female
Rural Male
Rural Female
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census
Table 2: Male and female as a percent of population .
Male
Female
Urban Population
Rural Population
TOTAL POPULATION
Source: 1991 Census
Table 3: Population by geographic area, sex and urban/rural
Area
% Urban Male
%Urban Female
% Rural Male
% Rural Female
Total Population
North
Central
West and
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census
Table 4: Population by sex and communal/commercial
Area
% Female
% Male
Total Population |
Communal
Commercial
Source: 1991 Census
Table 5: Population by communal/commercial and urban/rural
% Urban
% Rural
Total Population
Communal Areas
Commercial Areas
Source: 1991 Census
Table 6: Female population by communal/commercial .
Area
Female Population
% of Female Population
Communal Areas
Commercial Areas
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census
Table 7: Local Authority Elections by gender, 1992
Area
Candidates
Women
% Women of total
Total Seats filled
Women
% Women of total
Municipalities
Towns
Villages
TOTAL
Source: Hubbard and Kavari, 1993.
Table 8: Regional Council Elections by gender, 1992
REGION
No. of Candidates
No. of Women
No. of Seats
No. of Women
Caprivi
Erongo
Hardap
Karas
Khomas
Kunene
Ohangwena
Okavango
Omaheke
Omusati
Oshana
Oshikoto
Otjozondjupa
TOTAL
Source: Hubbard and Kavari 1993
Table 9: Women in management positions in ministries concerned with rural development
Ministry
Women
Men
Total
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Ministry of Lands, Resettlement and Rehabilitation
Ministry of Environment and Tourism
Ministry of Regional and Local Government and Housing
Source: Personnel Officers
Table 10: Marital status of the population aged 15 years and over
Marital Status
Male
Female
Total
Rural %
Total %
Rural %
Total %
Rural %
Total %
Never Married
Married Legally
Married Consensually
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Not Stated
TOTAL
TOTAL NUMBER
Source: 1991 Census
Table 11: Security on the land by region and land tenure
Owambo Cuvelai
Ow. Non Cuvelai
Kavango
Caprivi
Other CAs
Land Owners
Farm Workers
Urban
CA Average
Can anyone lake your land?
Owambo Cuvelai
Ow. Non Cuvelai
Kavango
Caprivi
Other CAs
Land Owners
Farm Workers
Urban
CA Average
Under what circumstances could someone take your land?
Government redist.
Male head of hh dies
Cannot repay loan
Problems w/headman
Divorce
Other
NOBODY CAN
Source: NEPRU July 1991b (For a note on the geographical/tenure categories, see Table 4.6)
Table 12: Poverty and stratification in the Okavango Region (percent)
Group
All HHs
Female- headed HHs
Kangongo
Mpungu
Sikondo
Mabushe
Omuramba
Food insecure^1
Generally poor^2
Income sufficient^3
^1The food insecure - those whose poverty is so great that they are unable to meet even their basic food needs
^2The generally poor - those who have insufficient income to meet their general basic needs but who are able to meet basic food needs. Many of these households will be close to food insecurity and drought, for example, would present a significant threat to many in this group.
^3The income sufficient - those with income sufficient to meet all their basic needs. As basic needs imply none of the luxuries which most of us would require (e.g., transport or entertainment), income sufficiency does not mean that development assistance is not required, merely that there are those whose needs are more acute.
Source: Yaron, et. al., 1992.
Table 13: Household head by sex of head, urban/rural
Household head*
Rural
Urban
Total
Total No. of Households
Male
Female
TOTAL
*The Census defined the head of the household as "the person, male or female, who was recognised as such by the household members. He or she was usually responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the household. If the usual head of the household was absent on the Census Night, the person (male or female) who took charge of the household during his or her absence was regarded as the head and relationships of all household members were specified in terms of that person."
Source: 1991 Census
Table 14: Household head by urban/rural, sex of head
Area
Male Headed
Female Headed
Total
Total No. of Households
Urban
Rural
TOTAL
Note: The household population excludes institutional population (those in hotels, hospitals, hostels, orphanages, prisons and the homeless).
Source: 1991 Census
Table 15: Types of households by region
Region
Type of Household
Extended family
Nuclear family
Male- centred
Female centred
Eastern Communal
Southern Communal
Okavango
Owambo (Ombalantu)
Note: Female-centred includes both de jure and de facto female-headed households.
Sources: Directorate of Agricultural Extension 1994; Directorate of Rural Development 1992; Yaron et. al. 1992; Van Rooy et al. 1993
Table 16: Proportion of household heads without a spouse (percent)
Male Headed
Female Headed
Proportion of sex totals
Of total without spouse
Of all households
Source: 1991 Census.
Table 17: Household heads without a spouse as a percentage of all households by agro-ecological zone
Agro-ecological zone
Male Headed
Female Headed
Total
NORTH Communal
CENTRAL
Commercial
Communal
WEST AND SOUTH
Commercial
Communal
NATIONAL
Source: 1991 Census.
Table 18: Household heads by sex and marital status, urban/rural (percent)
Marital Status
National
Urban
Rural
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Never married
Married legally
Married consensually
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Not stated
Source: 1991 Census.
Table 19: Household heads by sex and educational attainment, urban/rural (percent) .
Educational Attainment
National
Urban
Rural
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
Total
Male
Female
No schooling
Primary
Secondary
Technical/ Vocational
Teacher Training
University
Not stated
Source: 1991 Census.
Table 20: Gender composition of productive adults (age 15-59) by location type
Type of location
% of Males
% of Females
Rural Community
Rural Town
Urban Township
Source: Van Rooy, et. al., 1993.
Table 21: Mean household size by sex of household head and urban/rural
Mean Size
URBAN
Male Headed
Female Headed
RURAL
Male Headed
Female Headed
TOTAL
Male Headed
Female Headed
Note: The Census defined a household as "a group of persons, related or unrelated, who lived in the same housing unit and who shared or had common catering arrangements. A person who lived alone and had his/her own catering arrangements formed a one person household." Only domestic servants who lived in the same household AND shared common catering arrangements were included. It is important to note that the mean household size is influenced by the greater likelihood of one or two person households being male headed: only 32% and 34% respectively are female headed.
Source: 1991 Census
Table 22: Female population by number of children born
Age Group
Women Legally Married
Average # of Children ever Born Live
Women Never Married
Average # of Children ever Born Live
Source: 1991 Census.
Table 23: Rural households by sex, size of household and number of employed persons (percent)
Number of Employed Persons
Total
Size of Household
All heads
Male heads
Female heads
Source: 1991 Census
Table 24: Sources of income to rural households by percent of households with access and region
FOR CASH
Ov-Cuv
Ov-NC
Kav
Cap
Other
Land
FrmWk
Urban
CA Average
Wages/pensions
Pensions
Casual work
3%o
Remittances
Small enterprise
Sales
Service trade
Other ( ie rents)
FOR CASH and/or SUBSISTENCE
Crop Production
Livestock Production
Hunting, gathering, fishing
Food (in-kind, drought)
Note: Owambo Cuvelai (OC) is the central floodplain area. Owambo non-Cuvelai (ONC) is outside the central floodplain. Okavango (Kay) and Caprivi (Cap) are in the higher rainfall, northeastern zone. Other Communal Areas (Other) are the former reserves of Kaokoland, Damaraland,, Bushmanland, Hereroland, and Namaland.
Land owners (Land) are large-scale commercial farmers. Farm workers (FarmWrk) only includes those in the commercial farm sector.
The urban sample only includes Windhoek.
Source: NEPRU July 1991b
Table 25: Relative importance of household income sources - Okavango Region
Income Source
All areas
Subsistence from crops (1)
Subsistence from fish (2)
Crop sales (3)
Animal sales (4)
Home production (5)
Remittance income (6)
Formal sector income (7)
Informal sector income (8)
Pension income (9)
Other income (10)
Agriculture (1+2+3+4)
Transfers (6 + 9)
Employment (5+7+8)
Other (9)
Note: sub-totals may not sum to total due to rounding.
Source: Yaron G. et. al 1992
Table 26: Absolute and relative importance of income sources for poor and non-poor - Okavango Region
PERCENTAGES
MEAN VALUE
All households
Food insecure
Generally poor
Income sufficient
Total income
Subsistence from crops (1)
Subsistence from fish (2)
Crop sales (3)
Animal sales (4)
Home production income (5)
Remittance income (6)
Informal sector income (7)
Formal sector income (8)
Pension income (9)
Other income (10)
Agriculture (%)(1+2+3+4) (Rand
Transfers (%) (6+9) (Rand)
Employment (%)(5+7+8) (Rand)
Other (10) (%) (Rand)
Note: sub-totals may not sum to total due to rounding.
Source: Yaron G. et.al 1992.
Table 27: Contribution of cash sources to monthly household budget - Eastern Communal Areas 1993
Cash Sources
Contribution
Major
Little/None
Remittances
Pension
Wage-Employment
Self-Employment
Sale of Fish
Sale of Animals
Sale of Karakul Pelts
Sale of Crops
Homemade Products
Source: Dir. of Agricultural Ext. and Engineering 1994
Table 28: Levels of malnutrition in children under five by urban/rural and geographic region
Area
Stunting
(Height-for-age)
Wasting (Weight-for age)
Undernourished (Weight-for-age)
Urban
Rural
Northwest
Northeast
Central
South
Source: Ministry of Health and Social Services, National Demographic Health Survey 1992
Table 29. Household decision-rnaking and division of labour by gender - Uukwaluudhi District, Omusati Region (Owambo)
Resource and Activity
Control - Who
Land
Crops
Female > Male
Vegetables
Female > Male
Trees
Female
How much to plant
Male^a
Labour
Ploughing
Male
Sowing
Female
Weeding
Female, Children
Malindilindi
Female, Children^b
Harvesting
Female > Male
Processing
Female, Female Children
Hiring
Male
Livestock
Cattle
Male
Goats
Male
Sheep
Male
Donkeys
Male
Oxen
Male
Horses
Male
Pigs
Female
Poultry
Female
Cash
Keeping
Female
Deciding
Male = Female
Harvest Storage
Female
Household
Seeds
Male
Agricultural tools
Male
Fuel wood
Female, Children
Water
Female, Children
Cooking
Female, Female Children
Education
Female > Male
Training
Female > Male
Literacy
Female > > Male
^aThe person who is ploughing decides.
^bOnly certain areas.
Source: Reprinted from van Uytvanck, November 1993.
Table 30: Household decision-making by gender - Okavango Region
Decision Maker
Yes
No
Joint
Male
Female
Source: Yaron et. al. 1992
Table 31: Household decision-making by type of household - Southern Communal Areas
Type of Household
Decision Maker
Head
Spouse
Joint
Other
Nuclear
Extended
Female-headed
Source: Directorate of Rural Development 1992
Table 32: Household decision-marring by type of household - Eastern Communal Areas
Subject of Decision
Decision Maker
Money to Spend
Sell Animals
Buy Food
Children to School
Clothes
Head
Spouse
Both
Other
Source: Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Engineering 1994
Table 33: Ownership of livestock by households and number of stock - Eastern Communal Areas
Livestock
None
30+ (up to 1,000)
Cattle
Goats
Donkeys
Poultry
Source: Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Engineering 1994
Table 34: Ownership of livestock by type of household and mean number owned - Eastern Communal Areas
Type of Household
Mean Number Owned
Cattle
Goats
Donkeys
Poultry
Nuclear
Extended
Female
Male
Source: Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Engineering 1994
Table 35: Ownership of livestock by households and number of stock - Southern Communal Areas
None
Goats
None
Sheep
None
Cattle
Source: Directorate of Rural Development 1992
Table 36: Ownership of goats by type of household and income level - Southern Communal Areas
Type of Household
Median # of Goats
Extended family
Nuclear
Female headed
Lowest Income
Medium Income
Highest Income
Source: Directorate of Rural Development 1992
Table 37: Ownership of livestock by households and number of stock - Owambo Region
Livestock
None
Cattle
Goats
Source: FAO, Northern Livestock Improvement Project, 1992
Table 38: Ownership of livestock by households and number of stock - Okavango Region
Livestock
None
Cattle
Goats
Source: FAO, Northern Livestock Improvement Project, 1992
Table 39: Ownership of livestock by household income group and mean number owned - Okavango Region
Type of Household
Mean Number Owned
Cattle
Goats
Pigs
Poultry
Food Insecure*
Generally Poor
Income Sufficient
*72% of all female headed households were found to be food insecure.
Source: Yaron et. al. 1992
Table 40: Ownership of livestock by households and number of stock - Erongo/Kunene Regions (former Damaraland)
Livestock
None
Cattle
Goats
Sheep
Note: Percentages are estimated from a graph.
Source: Rohde 1993
Table 41 Ownership of goats by gender and mean number owned - Erongo/Kunene Regions (former Damaraland)
Average Herd Size for Goats as a % of total male/female farmers
None
Male Farmers
Female Farmers
Note: Percentages are estimated from a graph.
Source: Rohde 1993
Table 42: Ownership of cattle by gender and mean number owned - Erongo/Kunene Regions (former Damaraland)
Average Herd Size for Cattle as a % of total male/female farmers
None
Male Farmers
Female Farmers
Note: Percentages are estimated from a graph.
Source: Rohde 1993
Table 43: Farmers' views of constraints to increased crop production (percent) - Okavango Region
Constraints reported as:
Food insecure
Generally poor
Income sofficient
lack of land
lack of credit
lack of equipment
lack of labour
lack of expertise
lack of markets
lack of transport
lack of rain
Source: Yaron et. al., 1992.
Table 44: Type of cultivation used by household head - Uukwambi District, Omusati Region, Owambo
Household Head
Hand hoe
Donkey/ Plough
Oxen/ Plough
Tractor
Hoe & Donkey
Hoe & Oxen
Donkey & Tractor
Hoe & Tractor
Male
Female
Note: The predominance of using two methods of cultivation, including combining tilling by hand with ploughing by tractor, suggests that many households aim to balance limited labour availability with limited cash resources.
Source: Naeraa and Solomon 1994
Table 45: Agricultural extension staff by position and gender
TITLE
Educational Requirement
Female
Male
Total*
% Female
Agriculture Extension Officers
Bachelor of Science
Agriculture Extension Technicians
Senior certificate & 2 year diploma
*Due to rationalisation, 42 positions remain unfilled.
Source: Department of Personnel, Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Table 46: Veterinary services staff by position and gender
Position
Educational Requirement
Female
Male
Tolal*
% Female
State Veterinarians
Bachelor of Science
Meat Inspectors/ Examiners
Senior certificate & 2 year diploma
Technicians
Senior certificate & 2 year diploma
Control/Chief Animal Health Inspectors
Senior certificate
Animal Health Inspectors
Standard 8
Clerical Assistants
Standard10
Stock inspector Assistants
Standard 6-8
Source: Mr. I. Shaw, Director of Veterinary Services, MAWRD
Table 47: Directorate of Forestry staff by position and gender
Position
Educational Requirement
Female
Male
Total*
% Female
Chief Forester/ Director
Bachelor of Science
Forester
Bachelor of Science
Forest Ranger
Senior certificate & 2 year certificate
Forest Technician
Senior certificate & 2 year diploma
Note: A one year program for Forest Guards is also being developed.
Source: Acting Director, Directorate of Forestry, MET
Table 48: Department of Nature Conservation staff by position and gender
Position
Educational Requirement
Female
Male
Total*
% Female
Nature Conservation Researcher
Bachelor of Science
Conservation Research Technicians
Senior certificate & 3 year diploma
Nature Conservation Officers
Senior certificate & 3 year diploma
Source: Personnel, Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism
Table 49: Enrolment in Ogongo Agricultural College by gender
OGONGO
Female
Male
Total
% F
1st year:
3 year diploma
1st year:
2 year forestry
2nd year
3rd year
Source: Principal. Ogongo Agricultural College
Table 50: Enrolment in Neudamm Agricultural College by gender
NEUDAMM
Female
Male
Total
%F
1989 1 st year
1989 2nd year
1990 1st year
1990 2nd year
1991 1st year
1991 2nd year
1992 1st year
1992 2nd year
1993 1st year
1993 2nd year
1994 1st year
1994 2nd year
1994 3rd year
Source: Principal, Neudamm Agricultural College.
Table 51: Secondary school enrolment in agricultural subjects by gender, 1993
Enrolment
Agricultural science
Agricultural production and farming techniques
Both subjects
M
F
All
M
F
All
M
F
All
Pupils
Ratio (%)
Table 52: Water supply to rural households
Piped Indoors
Piped Outdoors
Public Pipe
Well
Borehole
River, canal or lake
Other
TOTAL
Table 53: Toilet facilities of rural households
Water Closet (exclusive)
Water Closet (shared)
Pit
Bucket, pail
Bush
TOTAL
Table 54: Population aged 15 + by sex, activity status and urban/rural
Activity Status
Urban
Rural
Total
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Economically Active
Not Economically Active
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census
Table 55: Population aged 15+ by sex, activity status and agro-ecological zone
Activity Status
Communal Areas
Commercial Areas
Rural Areas
Natl. Total
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Economically Active
Employed
Not Employed
Previously Worked
First job Seekers
Not Economically Active
Student
Homemaker
Income recipient
Disabled
Retired old age
Other
Not Stated
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census
Table 56: Economically active population (aged 10 years and over) by sex, employment status, and area (percent)
Employment Status
National
Rural
North
Central
W - S
Total
CA
CA
CF
CA
CF
CA
CF
All
Employer
Own account worker
Employee: Gov't.
Employee: Private
Unpaid family worker
Other
Not stated
Male
Employer
Own account worker
Employee Gov't.
Employee: Private
Unpaid family worker
Other
Not stated
Female
Employer
Own account worker
Employee: Gov't.
Employee: Private
Unpaid family worker
Other
Not stated
CA: Communal Areas; CF: Commercial Farming
Source: 1991 Census.
Table 57: Population employed in agricultural and fishery work by gender .
Male
Female
Total
% Female
Market Oriented/ Skilled
Subsistence
Labourers
Total
% of Work in Subsistence
Source: 1991 Census
Table 58: Proportion employed in subsistence agricultural and fishery work by gender
Total Employed Population
Subsistence
% Subsistence
Male
Female
Rural Male
Rural Female
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census
Table 59: Literacy rate by sex and urban/rural
Literacy Status
Rural
Urban
Total
Male
Female
Male
Female
Literate
Illiterate
Source: 1991 Census
Table 60: Rural literacy rate by sex and age
Distribution of the rural literate
Age Group
Male
Female
Total
Age 10-24
Age 25-44
Age 45+
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census
Table 61: Population aged 6-24 years by sex and school attendance, urban/rural
School Attendance
Rural
Urban
Total
Male
Female
Male
Female
No schooling
Attending school
Left school
Not stated
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census.
Table 62: Past school attendants by sex, urban/rural
Educational Attainment
Rural
Urban
Total
Male
Female
Male
Female
Primary
Secondary
Technical/Vocational
Teacher training
University
Not Stated
TOTAL
Source: 1991 Census.
Table 63: Participation in the National Literacy Program by gender as of mid-1993
Participants in National Literacy Program
Number of Women
Number of Men
Total
Women as% of total
District Literacy Organisers (paid)
Promoters (voluntary)
Learners
Source: Melaku-Tjirongo, E. and Devereux, S. December 1993.
<title>National sectoral report for Namibia - Women, agriculture and rural development. Women, agriculture and rural development: national sectoral report for Namibia</title>
Annex 1: A selection of constitutional provisions affecting the status of women
Annex 1: A selection of constitutional provisions affecting the status of women
Article 10 Equality and Freedom form Discrimination
(1) All persons shall be equal before the law.
(2) No persons may be discriminated against on the ground of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, religion, creed or social or economic status.
Article 14 Family
(1) Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, colour, ethnic origin, nationality, religion, creed or social or economic status shall have the right to marry and to found a family. They shall be entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and its dissolution.
(2) Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.
(3) The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State.
Article 16 Property
(1) All persons shall have the right in any part of Namibia to acquire, own and dispose of all forms of immovable and movable property individually or in association with others and to bequeath their property to their heirs or legatees: provided the
Parliament may by legislation prohibit or regulate as it deems expedient the right to acquire property by persons who are not Namibian citizens.
(2) The State or competent body or organ authorised by law may expropriate property in the public interest subject to the payment of just compensation, in accordance with requirements and procedures to be determined by an Act of Parliament.
Article 23 Apartheid and Affirmative Action
(1) The practice of racial discrimination and the practice and ideology of apartheid from which the majority of the people of Namibia have suffered for so long shall be prohibited and by Act of Parliament such practices, and the propagation of such practices, may be rendered criminally punishable by the ordinary Courts by means of such punishments as Parliament deems necessary for the purposes of expressing the revulsion of the Namibian people at such practices.
(2) Nothing contained in Article 10 hereof shall prevent Parliament from enacting legislation providing directly or indirectly for the advancement of persons within
Namibia who have been socially, economically or educationally disadvantaged by past discriminatory laws or practices, or for the implementation of policies and programmes aimed at redressing social, economic or educational imbalances in the
Namibian society arising out of past discriminatory laws or practices, or for achieving a balanced structuring of the public service, the police force, the defence force, and the prison service.
(3) In the enactment of legislation and the application of any policies and practices contemplated by Sub-Article (2) hereof, it shall be permissible to have regard to the fact that women in Namibia have traditionally suffered special discrimination and that they need to be encouraged and enabled to play a full, equal and effective role in the political, social economic and cultural life of the nation.
Article 66 Customary and Common Law
(1) Both the customary law and the common law of Namibia in force on the date of Independence shall remain valid to the extent to which such customary or common law does not conflict with this Constitution or any other statutory law.
(2) Subject to the terms of this Constitution, any part of such common law or customary law may be repealed or modified by Act of Parliament, and the application thereof may be confined to particular parts of Namibia or particular periods.
Article 89 Establishment and Independence
(1) There shall be an ombudsman, who shall have the powers and functions set out in this Constitution.
(2) The Ombudsman shall be independent and subject only to this Constitution and the law.
(3) No member of the Cabinet or the Legislature or any other person shall interfere with the Ombudsman in the exercise of his or her functions and all organs of the State shall accord such assistance as may be needed for the protection of the independence, dignity and effectiveness of the Ombudsman.
(4) The Ombudsman shall either be a Judge of Namibia, or a person possessing the legal qualifications which would entitle him or her to practice in all the Courts of Namibia.
Article 95 Promotion of the Welfare of the People
The State shall actively promote and maintain the welfare of the people by adopting, inter alia, policies aimed at the following:
(a) enactment of legislation to ensure equality of opportunity for women, to enable them to participate fully in all spheres of Namibian society; in particular, the Government shall ensure the implementation of the principle of non-discrimination in remuneration of men and women; further, the Government shall seek, through appropriate legislation, to provide maternity and related benefits for women;
(b) enactment of legislation to ensure that the health and strength of the workers, men and women, and the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter vocations unsuited to their age and strength;
(c) active encouragement of the formation of independent trade unions to protect worker's rights and interests, and to promote sound labour relations and fair employment practices;
(d) member of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and, where possible, adherence to and action in accordance with the international Conventions and
Recommendations of the ILO;
(e) ensurance that every citizen has a right to fair and reasonable access to public facilities and services in accordance with the law;
(f) ensurance that senior citizens are entitled to and receive a regular pension adequate for the maintenance of a decent standard of living and the enjoyment of social and cultural opportunities;
(g) enactment of legislation to ensure that the unemployed, the incapacitated, the indigent and the disadvantaged are accorded such social benefits and amenities as are determined by Parliament to be just and affordable with due regard to the resources of the State;
(h) a legal system seeking to promote justice on the basis of equal opportunity by providing free legal aid in defined cases with due regard to resources of the State;
(i) ensurance that workers are paid a living wage adequate for the maintenance of a decent standard of living and the enjoyment of social and cultural opportunities;
(j) consistent planning to raise and maintain an acceptable level of nutrition and standard of living of the Namibian people and to improve public health;
(k) encouragement of the mass of the population through education and other activities and through their organisations to influence Government policy by debating its decisions;
(l) maintenance of ecosystems, essential ecological processes and biological diversity of Namibia and utilization of living natural resources on a sustainable basis for the benefit of all Namibians, both present and future; in particular, the Government shall provide measures against the dumping or recycling of foreign nuclear and toxic waste on Namibian territory.
Article 100 Sovereign Ownership of Natural Resources
Land, water and natural resources below and above the surface of the land and in the continental shelf and within the territorial waters and the exclusive economic zone of Namibia shall belong to the State if they are not otherwise lawfully owned.
Article 140 The Law in Force at the Date of Independence
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, all laws which were in force immediately before the date of Independence shall remain in force until repealed or amended by Act of Parliament or until they are declared unconstitutional by a competent Court.
(2) Any powers vested by such laws in the Government, or in a Minister or other official of the Republic of South Africa shall be deemed to vest in the Government of the Republic of Namibia or in a corresponding Minister or official of the Government of the Republic of Namibia, and all powers, duties and functions which so vested in the Government Service Commission, shall vest in the Public Service Commission referred to in Article 112 hereof.
(3) Anything done under such laws prior to the date of Independence by the Government, or by a Minister or other official of the Republic of South Africa shall be deemed to have been done by the Republic of Namibia or by a corresponding Minister or official of the Government of the Republic of Namibia, unless such action is subsequently repudiated by an Act of Parliament, and anything so done by the Government Service Commission shall be deemed to have been done by the Public Service Commission referred to in Article 112 hereof, unless it is determined otherwise by an Act of Parliament.
(4) Any reference in such laws to the President, the Government, a Minister or other official or institution in the Republic of South Africa shall be deemed to be a reference to the President of Namibia or to a corresponding Minister, official or institution in the Republic of Namibia and any reference to the Public Service Commission referred to in Article 112 hereof or the public service of Namibia.
(5) For the purposes of this Article the Government of the Republic of South Africa shall be deemed to include the Administration of the Administrator-General appointed by the Government of South Africa to administer Namibia, and any reference to the Administrator-General in legislation enacted by such administration shall be deemed to be a reference to the President of Namibia, and any reference to a Minister or official of such administration shall be deemed to be a reference to a corresponding Minister or official of the Government of the Republic of Namibia.
Other Selected Readings in the Series
National Sectoral Reports on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development for:
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Egypt, E1 Salvador, Honduras, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tanzania, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Venezuela, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
Country "FACT SHEETS" on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development for:
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon' Congo, Egypt, E1 Salvador, Honduras, Iran, Lebanon, Namibia, Mauritania, Morocco, Peru, Philippines, Sudan, Tanzania, Tunisia, and Zimbabwe
Country papers on The Socio-economic Situation of Rural Women for: Albania, Armenia, Bosnia-Herzogovia, Macedonia, and Romania.
Rural Women of Latin America and the Caribbean, Preliminary contribution of FAO to the Sixth Regional Conference on the Integration of Women to the Economic and Social Development of Latin America and the Caribbean, Mar del Plata, Argentina, 25-29 September 1994.
A Synthesis Report: Towards the Development of a Regional Plan of Action for Women in Agriculture in the Near East (1996-2000).
Women, Agriculture and Rural Development: A Synthesis Report of the Africa Region.
Case Study on Women in the Peruvian Amazon.
Report of the Technical Workshop: Women in Agriculture and Rural Development, Dakar, Senegal, 15 November 1994.
FAO Guidelines for Reporting on the Situation of Women in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries.
FAO Guidelines for the Improvement of Gender-disaggregated Agricultural and Rural Statistics in Near Eastern Countries.
FAO Annotated Bibliography on Women, Agriculture and Rural Development.
