<section>e</section>
The women in development service
The women in development service
The Women in Development Service (SDWW) is located in the Women and Population Division of the Sustainable Development Department. The work of this Department focuses on key dimensions of sustainability: research and technology, extension and training, natural resources monitoring and management, agrarian transformation, mainstreaming of women in development (WID) and people's participation. It promotes sustainability concepts, strategies and methods in each of these areas, and helps integrate them in the development programmer of FAO member countries and FAO's own technical units. The priority areas of the service are highlighted below.
Promoting Gender in Policies, Legislation and Civil Institutions
With reference to the Beijing Platform for Action adopted in 1995 and the Plan of Action of the WFS in 1996, FAO assists Member Nations to design and implement policies and programmes for rural women that reduce or eliminate legislative, administrative, socioeconomic, and behavioral obstacles to rural women's access to productive resources and services. It also increases women's skills, capacities and opportunities to participate in decision-making processes affecting their productive capacities and their socio-economic and political status. Technical and policy guidance is also provided by SDWW to FAO's Technical Divisions for the implementation of their WID Programmes of Action.
Training and National Capacity Building in Gender, Participation and Food Security.
To enhance the productive capacities of rural women and men and to increase food security, SDWW continues to develop and disseminate through training the materials, tools and methods needed to undertake participatory socio-economic and gender analysis. Special attention will focus on the Socio-Economic and Gender Analysis (SEAGA) Programme, which is being implemented in collaboration with UN and other international agencies, and which has training targets that include staff in key ministries, extension services, research and academic institutions, and NGOs. Capacity building in WID also targets FAO's Technical Divisions in order to strengthen normative and operational activities.
Livelihood Strategies and Resource Management in Rural Households
This priority promotes effective service delivery systems to small farm households and helps to diversify communication systems in the communities. Emphasis is placed on the development and provision of environmentally-sound technologies, home economics training and extension services, and on the expansion of rural employment opportunities for women, including agro-industries, micro enterprises, financial management, and marketing services in the formal and informal sectors. The specific activities take account of the increasing feminization of agriculture and of poverty, food security issues, equitable participation, and sustainability concerns. The living environment, housing and sanitation issues and concerns are also addressed.
Constituency Building in Support of Gender and Food Security
Partnerships and alliances with institutions, INGOs and NGOs that address the concerns of rural women and food security issues are strengthened through normative and technical assistance, through joint, collaborative activities in such areas as training in leadership and management skills, and through rural women's associations and networking. SDWW also participates in the formulation, implementation and evaluation of international policies and strategies for the advancement of women through the existing inter-agency coordinating mechanisms. A special focus is on bringing the issues of rural women to the forefront of the agenda of international fore.
Inter-Disciplinary Approaches to Gender, Environment and Sustainable Development
With reference to Agenda 21 of UNCED, especially Chapter 24: "Global Action for Women Towards Sustainable and Equitable Development", action-oriented research focuses on analyzing the links between women and environmental sustainability. Of particular concern are the impacts of environmental degradation, rural-urban migration, food insecurity, and population policies and practices on the livelihoods of rural women and their families. Concerning food security, attention is drawn to rural women's roles in maintenance and conservation of genetic resources and sustainable resource use in such areas as integrated plant nutrition systems, irrigation and watershed management, integrated pest management, fishery conservation and aquaculture development, and forestry use and conservation.
Information Collection and Dissemination in Support of Gender and Food Security
SDWW supports the collection, compilation, analysis, and diffusion of time and task allocation data and statistics disaggregated by gender and the development of indicators on women's participation in agriculture and related fields in order to make more accurate and detailed development policies and programmer. It highlights the relationship between rural women's status and demographic dynamics, as well as the constraints to the participatory involvement of rural women in development activities. It also emphasizes the roles and contributions of rural women in achieving poverty reduction, building food security, and attaining sustainable development. This priority also promotes the use of information technologies to reach and motivate rural women.
Through it's focus on the above key areas. SDWW aims to:
(a) present a more complete depiction of rural women, so that their conditions and contributions to the economy and to society are valued, recognized and integrated into planning mechanisms
(b) contribute to rural women's empowerment through capacity building activities and training
(c) increase the awareness by governments and policy makers to gender-based equality and accelerate the process of moving from words to deeds in the inclusion of gender issues in macroeconomic policies
(d) address the vital role that women play in food production and food security and affirm the need for the full participation of women at all levels in order to achieve sustainable development.
Women in Development Service
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla - 00100 Rome
Tel.: 39-6-52252251. Fax 39-6- 52252004
<title>Women: The key to food security</title>
<section>1</section>
The population programme service
The population programme service
The Population Programme Service (SDWP) was established in 1995 and is located in the Women and Population Division of the Sustainable Development Department. The work of this Department focuses on key dimensions of sustainability which concern natural and human processes, their interrelations and their impact over time: research and technology, agricultural extension and training, natural resources monitoring and management, agrarian transformation, mainstreaming of women in development, people's participation and population factors.
"Population" is to be understood in a broad manner, as in the Cairo Programme of Action: substantively, activities of the Service focus on the interrelations between population factors, the big-physical environment and socioeconomic and cultural factors as seen from a sustainable development perspective.
- Population Programme Service
Examples of relevant interactions can be given:
· Population <=> big-physical environment: population and water resources; land degradation; deforestation.
· Population <=> socio-economic and cultural factors: population and gender issues in relation to land tenure or farming systems;
· Interrelations between all three dimensions of the triangle: fishers and fisheries; food requirements and population growth.
Further to the identification and analysis of population-rural development interrelations and of their policy and programme implications, the Service applies communication techniques to these issues in order to develop and implement communication strategies into rural development and extension activities.
The Service provides on request relevant information and advice to countries and to FAO's governing bodies and promotes the implementation of those aspects of the 1994 Cairo Programme of Action which correspond to FAO's mandate, in particular those which address population and sustainable development. This means first encouraging in-house integration and mainstreaming of population considerations to all relevant technical areas of FAO; this is done by sensitizing agriculture, fisheries and forestry experts to the importance and relevance of population issues on their activities (e.g. socio-demographic structures and spatial distribution, population changes and growth through time and space as relevant to food security, agriculture, fisheries and forestry).
The Service also synthesizes the experience of FAO and other institutions in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries relevant for population related activities and brings it to the attention of policy makers, programme designers and other users concerned with population, food security and rural development issues.
The Service participates actively in the Technical Support System (TSS) set up by the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and specialized UN agencies: its staff provides technical assistance to the formulation and implementation of UNFPA-funded field projects, thus contributing to build national capacities for population activities; it also provides UNFPA Country Support Teams with methodological and information support. Finally, the Service co-ordinates the implementation of FAO/UNFPA inter-country projects, which currently focus on the integration of population concerns into education programmes for rural youth, community forestry programmes, and fishery policy planning.
More information on the Service activities and outputs can be found in the electronic newsletter of the Sustainable Development Department:
SD Dimensions, <http://www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/sustdev/welcome_.htm> or through the United Nations POPIN system: <http://www.undp.org/popin/fao/faohome.htm>
Population Programme Service
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla - 00100 Rome
Tel: 39-6-52253816; Fax: 39-6-52255490
e-mail: jacques.duguerny@fao.org
(29 October 1996)
<section>2</section>
Women and sustainable food security
Women and sustainable food security
THE GENDER DIVISION OF LABOR
The major constraint to the effective recognition of women's actual roles and responsibilities in agriculture is the scarcity of gender desegregated data available to technicians, planners, and policy-makers
Therefore, the first step towards women's empowerment and full participation in rural development and food security strategies is the collection and analysis of gender desegregated data to understand role differences in food and cash crop production as well as men's and women's differential managerial and financial control over production, storage and marketing of agricultural products.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, micro-level studies have shown that women play a crucial role in many aspects of crop production. While men are often responsible for land clearing, burning and polishing, women specialise in weeding, transplanting, post-harvest work and, in some areas, land preparation and both take part in seeding and harvesting.
Moreover, Sub-Saharan and near Eastern women play a major role in household animal-production enterprises, where they tend to have the primary responsibility for the husbandry of small animals and ruminants, but also take care of large-animal systems, herding, providing water and feed, cleaning stalls and milking. In all types of animal-production systems, women have a predominant role in processing, particularly milk products and are commonly responsible for their marketing.
In many countries women are also responsible for fishing in shallow waters and in coastal lagoons, producing secondary crops, gathering food and firewood, processing, storing and preparing family food and for fetching water for the family.
FEMALE-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS
The number of female-headed households is increasing significantly in rural areas in many developing countries as rural men migrate due to the lack of employment and other income-generating opportunities. In Sub-Saharan Africa, 31 per cent of rural households are headed by women, while in Latin America and the Caribbean and Asia, women head 17 per cent, and 14 per cent, respectively. While there are different types of female-headed households, in almost all countries. female-headed households are concentrated among the poorer strata of society and often have lower income than male-headed households.
The problems of female-headed households in rural areas vary according to their degree of access to productive resources. The FAO has identified. for example, the potential consequences of the absence of male labour both in terms of declining yields and outputs or shifts in production toward less nutritious crops requiring less labour and in terms of increased reliance on child labour which, in turn, has further implications for the family and for the human capital of the country. Therefore in these cases, women's access to labour-saving technology is of particular importance.
Women produce between 60 and 80 per cent of the food in most developing countries and are responsible for half of the world's food production, yet their key role as food producers and providers and their critical contribution to household food security is only recently becoming recognised.
FAO studies confirm that while women are the mainstay of small-scale agriculture, farm labour force and day-to-day family subsistence, they have more difficulties than men in gaining access to resources such as land and credit and productivity enhancing inputs and services.
Food security' in fact, has been defined by the FAO not only in terms of access to, and availability of food, but also in terms of resource distribution to produce food and purchasing power to buy food where it is not produced. Given women's crucial role in food production and provision, any set of strategies for sustainable food security must address their limited access to productive resources security must address their limited access to productive resources.
Women's limited access to resources and their insufficient purchasing power are products of a series of interrelated social, economic and cultural factors that force them into a subordinate role, to the detriment of their own development and that of society as a whole.
The international initiatives and efforts developed especially since the 1975 World Conference on Women in Mexico have contributed to a greater recognition of women's key participation in rural and other domains of development, however, much remains to be done.
ACCESS TO RESOURCES
Despite their role as the backbone of food production and provision for family consumption in developing countries, women remain limited in their access to critical resources and services. While in most developing countries. both men and women farmers do not have access to adequate resources, women's access is even more limited due to cultural. traditional and sociological factors. Accurate information about men's and women's relative access to. and control over, resources is crucial in the development of food security strategies.
· Access to land. Not even 2 percent of land is owned by women. while the e proportion of women heads of household continues to grow. Land reform programmes together with the break-up of communal land holdings have led to the transfer of exclusive land rights to males as heads of households which ignores both the existence of female-headed households and the rights of married women to a joint share.
· Access to credit. For the countries where information is available. only 10 per women produce between 60 and 80 per cent of the food in cent of credit allowances is extended to women, mainly because national legislation and customary law do not allow them to share land property rights along with their husbands, or because women heads of household are excluded from land entitlement schemes and consequently cannot provide the collateral required by lending institutions.
· Access to agricultural inputs. Women's access to technological inputs such as improved seeds, fertilisers and pesticides is limited as they are frequently not reached by extension services and are rarely members of cooperatives, which often distribute government subsidised inputs to small farmers. In addition, they often lack the cash income needed to purchase inputs even when they are subsidised
· Access to education, training and extension services. Two thirds of the one billion illiterate in the world are women and girls. Available figures show that only 5 per cent of extension services has been addressed to rural women, while no more than 15 per cent of the world's extension agents are women. In addition, most of the extension services are focused on cash crops rather than food and subsistence crops, which are the primary concern of women farmers and the key to food security.
NATURE OF WOMEN'S WORK
In most rural areas, the two most time-consuming activities of women are fetching water and firewood. Widespread deforestation and desertification mean that these tasks are becoming more burdensome and are preventing rural women from devoting more time to their productive and income-generating tasks. In some cases, women also pass part of the burden of these activities to their children, usually female children. Relieving women from such drudgery as fetching water and firewood and food processing would allow them to have more time for productive work and would enable their children to attend school. Thus development interventions to reduce women's drudgery can significantly enhance their contribution to household food security. The provision of water supplies; the introduction of light transport facilities for the carrying of firewood, farm produce and other loads; the introduction of labour saving agricultural tools, the introduction of grinding mills and other crop
processing equipment are crucial means of freeing Women's time. Such technologies not only create possibilities for women to enter into more income-generating activities, but also help in reducing their stress and in improving the health and nutrition of women and children.
FAO Women in Agricultural Development, Gender Issues in Rural Food Security in Developing Countries, Rome. 1990.
· Access to decision-making. Given the traditionally limited role of women in decision-making processes at the household, village and national levels in most cultures, their needs, interests and constraints are often not reflected in policymaking processes and laws which are important for poverty reduction, food security and environmental sustainability. The causes of women's exclusion from decision-making processes are closely linked to their additional reproductive roles and their household workload, which account for an important share of their time.
· Access to research and appropriate technology. Women have little access to the benefits of research and innovation, especially in the domain of food crops, which in spite of ensuring food security at the household and community level, have a low priority in crop improvement research. In addition, women farmers' roles and needs are often ignored when devising technology which may cause labour displacement or increased workload.
WOMEN'S NEED FOR INCOME
Research in Africa, Asia and Latin America has found that improvements in household food security and nutrition are associated with women's access to income and their role in household decisions on expenditure as women tend to spend a significantly higher proportion of their income than men on food for the family.
Women's wage income from farm and non-farm employment and from other income-generating opportunities is of particular importance for landless and near-landless rural households. Women's purchasing power may not only be used to buy food and other basic assets for themselves and their families, but also to pay for the inputs used in food production. Since food crops are consumed, the inputs for these have to be provided from income earned in other agricultural enterprises or non-farm income generating activities. Thus, to improve food production for the household, greater priority has to be given to increasing women's participation in market production as well as other income-generating ventures.
SUSTAINABLE FOOD SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR NEW ERA
The understanding of food security has evolved over the years through increasingly integrated attention to the social, gender, environmental. technical and economic dimensions of the problem. The challenge for the future will be to pursue a concrete attainment of equity in access to resources by women to produce food, and purchasing power to buy food where it is not produced there enhancing their potential to generate food security Specific policy measures are required to address the constraints facing women farmers and special consideration given en to the needs of female heads of households. The FAO has recommended that such measures aim to:
· ensure that women have equal opportunities with men to own land;
· facilitate women's access to agricultural services tailoring such services to their needs;
· encourage the productions of food crops through the use of incentives;
· promote the adoption of appropriate inputs and technology to free up Women's time for income-producing activities;
· improve the nutritional status of women and children;
· provide better employment and income earning opportunities;
· promote women's organizations;
· review and re-orient government policies to ensure that the problems that constrain the role of women in food security are addressed.
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department,
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome Italy
Telephone 39 6 52251
Telephone 39 6 52253152
Telex 625852 FAO 1
Cable FOODAGRI ROME
Produced by AIDOS Via dei Giubbonari 34, 00186 Roma, Italy
<section>3</section>
Women-users, preservers and managers of agrao-biodiversity
Women-users, preservers and managers of agrao-biodiversity
On the eve of the 21 st century rural women in developing We countries hold the key to the future of the Earth's agricultural systems and to food and livelihood security through their roles in the selection of seed, the management of small livestock and the conservation and sustainable use of plant and animal diversity
Rural women's key role as food providers and food producers links them directly to the management of genetic resources for food and agriculture and has given them a unique knowledge and decision making role about local species, ecosystems and use acquired over centuries of practical experience.
The poorest farming communities are those that live in marginal and heterogeneous environments that have benefited least from modern high yielding plant varieties. Up to 90% of the planting material of such farmers may be derived from seeds and germplasm produced, selected and saved by themselves. germplasm produced, selected and saved by themselves.
Such subsistence farmers cannot afford external inputs such as fertilisers and pesticides, veterinary products, high quality feeds and fuel for cooking and heating. They rely on maintaining a wide diversity of crops and wild plants and animal breeds and strains that are adapted to the local environment in order to protect against crop failure and animal disease or death, to provide a continuous and varied food supply and to ward against hunger and malnutrition. In many areas, the majority of small-holder farmers are women.
100 YEARS OF AGRICULTURAL CHANGE SOME TRENDS & FIGURES RELATING TO AGRO-BIODIVERSITY
· Some 75% of plant genetic diversify has been lost since the I 1900's as farmers worldwide have left their multiple local varieties and "landraces" for genetically uniform, high yielding varieties.
· 30% of livestock breeds are at the risk of extinction; 6 breeds are lost each month.
· Today, 75% of the world's food is generated from just 12 plants and 5 animal species.
· Of the 4% of the 250,000 - 300,000 known plant species that are edible, only 150-200 are used by humans and only 3 - rice' maize and wheat contribute nearly 60% of calories and proteins obtained by humans from plants.
· Animals provide some 30% of human requirements for food and agriculture and 12% of the population live almost entirely on products from ruminants.
GENDER RESPONSIVE POLICIES. AGREEMENTS AND SUPPORT
Important international policies and legal agreements acknowledge the key role that women play, especially in the developing world, in the management and use of biological resources. Despite this increased recognition at international levels, little has yet been done to clarify the nature of the relationship between agro-biological diversity and the activities, responsibilities and rights of men and women. In fact, women's key roles, responsibilities and management practices for the conservation and improvement of animal and plant genetic resources and their intimate knowledge of plants and animals remain invisible" to the agricultural, forestry, and environmental technicians as well as the planners and policy makers. The lack of recognition at technical and institutional levels means that their interests and demands are given inadequate attention. Moreover, women's involvement in formalised efforts to conserve bio-diversity remain low because of women's poor representation
at policy and decision making levels.
Modern research and development and centralised plant breeding have ignored and undermined the capacities of local farming communities in innovating and improving plant varieties. In those areas where women have traditionally held control, because of modern technologies and perceptions. women have lost substantial influence and control over production and access to resources to men who benefit from extension services and have the ability to buy seeds, fertilisers and the required technologies. In this way women lose also their status and self determination and are not compensated in any we>.
WOMEN AS USERS. PRESERVERS OF AGRO-BIODIVERSITY
As farmers, rural women are responsible for growing and collecting food and for the integrated management and use of diverse natural resources to fulfil daily household needs (crops and wild plants, tree products, wild and domesticated animals) An understanding of gender issues in plant and animal bio-diversity requires a look at men and women's different roles and relations as part of their overall livelihood systems that comprise farms and gardens, common property resources. such as pastures and forested lands, as well as protected areas. In addition to staple food production in the fields, homegardens often provide a wide variety of vegetables. relishes and condiments. These homegarciens are also experimental plots where women try out and adapt diverse wild plants and indigenous species. Research on Go homegardens in Thailand revealed 230 different rent species, many of which had been rescued from a neighboring forest before it was cleared.
The different live hood strategies and interests, land tenure arrangements and organisational structures of different user groups (by gender. age. class. ethnicity and occupation) as well as uneven power relations in access to. use and control over land, animal and plant resources directly influence their capacities and incentives to conserve agro-biodiversity
DIFFERENTIATED KNOWLEDGE OF MEN AND WOMEN
Through their different activities and resources management practices. men and women have developed different expertise and knowledge regarding the local environment, the plant and animal species and their products and uses. These gender differentiate-d local knowledge systems play a decisive role in the conservation in-situ (in their natural habitat/ecosystem), management and improvement of, genetic resources for food and agriculture because the decision of what to conserve depends on the know-how and perception of what is most useful to the household and local community.
The local knowledge is highly sophisticated and is traditionally shared and handed down between generations. Through experience, innovation and experimentation, sustainable practices are developed to protect soil, water and natural vegetation, including biological diversity.
Women's specialised knowledge of the value and diverse use of domesticated crop species and varieties extends to wild plants that are used as food in times of need (leaves, fruits, berries, nuts, seeds, edible roots and tubers) or as medicines and sources of income. This has important implications for the conservation of plant genetic resources.
WOMEN AS "SCIENTISTS" AND DECISION MAKERS IN THE SELECTION AND IMPROVEMENT OF BlODlVERSITY
In smallholder agriculture, women farmers have been largely responsible for the selection, improvement and adaptation of plant varieties. The selection of certain varieties is a complex, multivariate process that depends on choosing certain desirable characteristics (for instance resistance to pests and diseases; soil and agro-climatic adaptability; nutritional, taste and cooking qualities; food processing and storage properties.
In many regions, women are also responsible for the management, including reproduction, of small livestock. As for plants, the choice of preferred traits in the breeding of animals includes adaptations to the local conditions such as available feeds, resistance to disease.
The fact that plants and animals are often produced for a number of purposes adds further complexity to the selection process as multiple traits are sought. For example, sorghum may be grown for the grain and the stalk, sweet potatoes for the leaves as well as the root, and sheep may provide milk, wool and meat. Moreover, to create a favorable microenvironment and better manage space and time, several plant species that complement each other are frequently inter-cropped and mixed farming is often practiced (crop, livestock and agro-forestry).
Recognition of this sophisticated decision making process is gradually leading breeders and researchers to realise that the adoption and selection by a community of improved and new seeds of food crops and animal breeds depends on their being tested and approved by men and women farmers.
WOMEN'S RESPONSIBILITIES AND RIGHTS AND THE CONCEPT OF FARMERS' RIGHTS
Through their daily activities, experience and knowledge women have a major stake in protecting biological diversity. However, at national and local levels rural women today are still hampered by restricted rights to the resources they rely on to meet their needs. In general their rights of access and control over local resources and national policies do
Growing awareness of genetic erosion and the pressing need to develop mechanisms to encourage farming communities to nurture and conserve and the utilise and improve plant genetic resources has led the international community to recognise the concept of Farmers' Rights. As stated in resolution sifting' adopted by the 25th Session of the FAO Conference, these are the "rights arising from the past' present and future contribution farmers in conserving, improving and making available plant genetic resources, particularly those in the centers of origin/diversity". The purpose of these rights is stated to be-ensuring full benefits to farmers and supporting the continuation of their contributions". Key questions remain on how to implement Farmers' Rights in a way that respects the contributions of the venous actors. not match their increasing responsibilities for food production and management of natural resources.
HOW TO ADDRESS GENDER AND AGRO-BIODIVERSITY
The promotion of a long term strategy of conservation, utilisation, improvement and management of genetic resources diversity for food and agriculture requires:
· Recognition and consideration of the gender differentiated roles, responsibilities and contributions of different socioeconomic groups.
· Recognition and valuing of men and women farmers' knowledge, skills and practices and Farmers' Rights.
· Sound and equitable agricultural policies to provide incentives for the sustainable use of genetic resources, especially through "in-situ" conservation and improved linkages with "ex-situ" conservation.
· Appropriate national legislation to protect "threatened" genetic resources for food and agriculture, guarantee their continued use and management by local communities, indigenous peoples, men and women, and ensure the fair and equitable sharing of benefits from their use.
· Enhanced access of women farmers to land and water resources, to education, extension, training, credit and appropriate technology.
· The active participation by women, as partners, decision makers and beneficiaries.
Adherence to the above points will facilitate the provision of appropriate support to the different actors. protect local men and women's interests, enhance food security and enable the development and implementation of sustainable, effective and equitable agro-biodiversity programmes
The challenge for the next generation is the safeguarding of agro-biodiversity by paying greater attention to diverse and integrated agricultural systems, especially those managed by women that provide food and livelihood security. The maintenance of plant and animal diversity will protect the ability of men and women farmers to respond to changing conditions, to alleviate risk and to maintain and enhance crop and livestock production, productivity and sustainable agriculture.
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department,
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome Italy
Telephone 39 6 52251
Telefax 39 6 52253152
Telex 625852 FAO 1
Cable FOODAGRI ROME
Produced by AIDOS, Via dei Giubbonari 130, 00186 Rome, Italy
<section>4</section>
Women and the green revolution
Women and the green revolution
The Green Revolution of the 1960s and 1970s, with its package of improved seeds, farm technology, better irrigation and chemical fertilisers was highly successful at meeting its primary objective of increasing crop yields and augmenting aggregate food supplies. In Asia, where the Green Revolution package was the most widely adopted, food production increased substantially in those decades. Yet despite its success at increasing aggregate food supply, the Green Revolution as a development approach has not necessarily translated into benefits for the lower strata of the rural poor in terms of greater food security or greater economic opportunity and well being.
Under-nutrition and poverty are still prevalent and the distribution of food remains skewed with families in landless, small-scale farming households and general labourers as high risk groups. Studies of impact have shown that the better off strata of rural society have gained access to better incomes generated by the introduction of technology whereas the poorest stratum have tended to lose access to income that was available before its introduction. This has led to the recognition by development agencies, including FAO, of the need to formulate a more equitable and sustainable Green Revolution aimed at improving food security for the hardcore poor in rural areas. Much of the success of this new approach will depend on its ability to respond to the realities of the critical people involved in producing, providing and managing food supply within the poorest rural households women farmers.
EMPLOYMENT CONSEQUENCES OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANCE IN AGRICULTURE
One of the most dramatic macro-level consequences of modernization in agriculture has been the loss of wage labour opportunities for poor rural women due to the introduction of technology that mechanises tasks they traditionally perform. The clearest example of this situation is found in the mechanization of post-harvest practices which has reduced the availability of wage work for women. The introduction of rice mills throughout Asia has made women labourers who were formerly involved with the winnowing, threshing and hand-pounding of rice redundant. In Bangladesh, where manual de-husking of rice is the most important source of female wage employment in rural areas' and often the only source, modern mills employ men. The introduction of a subsidised scheme for motorised rice hullers in Java (Indonesia) is estimated to have thrown 1.2 million landless women, who were employed in the hand-pounding of rice, out of work.
THE IMPACT OF TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN AGRICULTURE
The rapid modernization of agriculture and the introduction of new technologies such as those which characterised the Green Revolution have had a differential impact on rural populations by both class and by gender. How the Green Revolution affected rural people depended on whether they are wage earners, cultivators, or consumers, whether they come from landed or landless, rich or poor, male or female headed households. However, two general trends are apparent: the wealthy have benefited more from technological change in agriculture than the less well off and men have benefited more than women.
Studies on the impact of the Green Revolution have shown that technological change can generate major social benefits but at the same time generate significant costs for particular categories of rural women that are different in kind and in intensity from those experienced by men. For example, the introduction of high-yielding varieties of rice in Asia has had a major impact on rural women's work and employment, most of it unfavorable by:
· increasing the need for cash incomes in rural households to cover the costs of technological inputs which has forced women to work as agricultural labourers;
· increasing the need for unpaid female labour for farming tasks thereby augmenting women's already high labour burden:
· and displacing women's wage earning opportunities through mechanization.
The effects of the adoption of high-yielding varieties (HYV) of rice and wheat in India provides a good example of how particular categories of rural women have been affected differently by technological change in agriculture. For the poorest women from landless or near landless households who rely on agricultural wage labor for survival, the data from India implies that although agricultural modernisation has increased the demand for agricultural labour. wage rates remained static or were depressed by supply an increasing supply of the work force. Not enough employment has been generated for all who are seeking work nor has the relative e increase in employment opportunities necessarily resulted in an increased standard of living. Within this bleak employment scenario, women are paid lower wages than men and are often assigned the more labour- intensive tasks such as weeding, transplanting and harvesting. Moreover, women labourers have clearly lost out from mechanisation of
post-harvest activities - a traditional area of female wage employment - which may' have offset any gains made by increasing employment due to the introduction of HYV technology packages. Low wages and displacement from work means that the majority of rural women in South Asia have insufficient income to improve their diets by taking advantage of the substantial increases in output for irrigated rice and wheat.
Agricultural modernization in India appears to have had mixed effects on women in small-cultivator households. For many, the financial intensifies of adopting the HYV package has increased the need for cash incomes with two effects on women; either forcing them to work as agricultural labourers or increasing their work burden for farming activities in an effort by the household to avoid the use of paid labourers. In households that have been able to take advantage of the technology package, women have generally benefited from the increased income to the household which means that they can withdraw from agricultural labour. The withdraw! from field work, however, has often translated into heavier work in the household compound (for example, cooking for hired labourers) rather than leisure.
WHOSE CRITERIA MATTER?
The major technological thrust of the Green Revolution was the development by agricultural research centres of high yielding varieties of rice and wheat which under favorable conditions increase grain yield considerably over indigenous varieties. But increase in grain yield is not the only desired criteria of preference for women farmers who also value biomass and other components of the crop or plant. To a small producer, rice is not just grain: it provides straw for thatching and mat-making, fodder for livestock, bran for fish ponds, and husks for fuel. These products not only have a role in the domestic economy but are often a valuable input to other income-generating enterprises which provide a livelihood for many of the rural poor, especially women.
Closing the gap between scientists' priorities and those of women farmers will need to be an essential strategy for a more equitable and sustainable Green Revolution in order to design technologies that match the realities experienced by the majority of poor producers in non-irrigated, environmentally fragile areas. This can be brought about by creating channels of communication through participatory research and extension so that farmers can signal their technical requirements to breeders and breeders can learn from the experience of farmers in the optimal management of local varieties under restrictive environmental conditions.
Agricultural research and technology development programmes can assure responsiveness to gender equality issues by:
· recognising women farmers as forming a constituency for agricultural research;
· recording from women the husbandry and utilisation, information on indigenous plant varieties which would provide insight into performance characteristics;
· giving due attention to the multiple uses of plants for food and other uses;
· studying domestic processing, storage and cooking technology and linking them to plant breeding programmes
Adopted from Jiggins, Janice. Gender-related Impacts one) the Work of the International Agricultural Research Centres. World Bank. Washington D.C., 1986.
Settlement schemes for irrigated rice production, which attempted to replicate the Green Revolution experience in Africa, rarely recognised. the importance of women's independent farming and income-generating activities to meet family food requirements and cash for the purchase of goods vital to family well-being. Targeted at male household heads, these schemes introduced land reform and a heavy focus on cash crops which eroded female rights to land without easing their responsibility to feed the family or their need for cash income. The failure to perceive and/or respond to differential allocation of resources and responsibilities between men and women in farming households meant that women's labour requirements for cash crop production were increased although control of the income remained in the hands of men. Moreover, women were allocated small plots of marginal land for food production which resulted in insufficient food for the family and increased pressure on fragile
environments. These examples illustrate that most of the negative effects of agricultural modernization on rural women are indirect consequences of the introduction of technologies which are rarely targeted at them or designed specifically for their needs. Rural women are rarely considered as clientele for agricultural research and development programmes or users of improved technology. Technical training and extension programmes are almost exclusively targeted at men thereby denying women opportunities to improve their skills and access to important channels of communication and state-sponsored support services. Moreover, when fed through traditional systems which limit women's access to resources and impose a sexual division of labour that allocate to women the most tedious, labour intensive e and poorly rewarded work, the introduction of technology has the tendency to increase the labour burden of some of the poorest rural women without necessarily increasing their gains.
It is clear from an examination of the gender related impact of technological change in agriculture that one needs to bear in mind intra-household allocations of labour, income and access to land as factors constraining women or affecting their ability to benefit from change.
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department,
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations,
of the delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome Italy
Telephone 39 6 52251
Telefax 39 6 52253152
Telex 625352 FAO 1
Cable FOODAGRI ROME
Produced by AIDOS, Via dei Giubbonari 30, X186 Roma, Italy
<section>5</section>
Research and extension: a gender perspective
Research and extension: a gender perspective
Properly designed research and extension functions can have a high payoff in terms of improving food availability and providing employment opportunities as well as reducing environmental degradation and enhancing resource management. Extension programmes offer out-of-school educational services for rural producers - farmers. foresters, fisher-folks and herders. They are closely linked with research activities to provide improved technology aimed at increasing productivity and accelerating overall economic growth.
In the past, however, research and extension systems have largely ignored the needs and priorities of women and only recently have they shown any concern for the environment. Although the role and contribution of women in agricultural development has been increasingly documented, most research and extension services continue to be directed primarily toward men, with adverse consequences for the achievement of food security at both household and national levels.
AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND FOOD CROPS
At the same time as they care for their children, manage family nutrition and seek sources of income, rural women in most parts of the developing world carry a majority of the responsibility for the production of food for their families. For household subsistence as well as for the market, they produce, gather and process a wide variety of types of food.
Yet agricultural research programmes have rarely taken into account rural women's knowledge and opinions of crop varieties and planting systems. For the most part, agricultural research has focused on cash crops and other major staples such as maize, rather than on food crops such as hardier grains, legumes, fruits and vegetables. As a result' women's key role in achieving food security through food crop production and selection has often been bypassed.
Neglecting women as agricultural producers and resource managers inhibits the attainment of food security goals. Thus, one of the priorities to improve and support sustainable agricultural production In developing countries is to put food crops and animals that are usually grown or raised by women high on the research agenda.
New approaches to increase women's involvement in agricultural research are emerging in national and international institutions. These seek not only to benefit women but to benefit from them, especially in the areas of crop production and biodiversity. In Peru, for example, the International Potato Centre (CIP) is testing and screening staple food crops grown by women in sub-Saharan Africa, such as the sweet potato, in order to find combinations of early maturity and high yields with some degree of drought tolerance. These crops are often used by women during periods of famine and shortage, and are eaten before the main harvest or when the staple harvest is poor.
In the Côte d'lvoire, the West Africa Rice Development Association (WARDA) has been conducting surveys to identify the preferences of women and men farmers in adopting improved rice varieties. While men prefer short statured high-yielding varieties, women will be reluctant to grow these varieties due to the difficulties of harvesting them while carrying infants on their back. As this constraint may lead women farmers to reject such varieties, WARDA has increasingly shifted its emphasis toward the development of medium to tall-statured varieties.
APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
Improved agricultural technology has been widely recognised. as a prime force for increased agricultural productivity, as well as an engine for accelerating rural economic growth. While rural women are knowledgeable about and use a large amount of traditional technology, they have very little access to modern technology that could benefit them in their farm and household activities. This is due to women's lack of participation in setting research priorities or in generating and disseminating conventional technologies.
Women's lack of access to appropriate technology can have an adverse impact on food security. With the growing feminization of farm labour due to male rural to urban migration, women are forced to carry out work previously done by men. Consequently, women are increasing their workloads and taking care of a wider scope of agricultural tasks.
The problems faced by female-headed households. whether de jure or de facto, vary according to their degree of access to productive resources, including modern agricultural techniques. Studies in some African countries show that the loss of male labour can lead to shifts in production toward less labour intensive and less nutritious crops or to declines in yields and output. In Ghana, lack of male labour for clearing thick bush has led to longer cropping rotations as women are unable to perform this task with existing tools. As a result, land fertility and yields declined and soil erosion increased.
Women's increased workloads in agricultural tasks, combined with dwindling natural resources, means that they often have less time with which to meet other household needs. Although the amount of labour and resources required for maintenance of the household is tremendous, very little research has gone into developing techniques for gathering fuel and water, or for post-harvest activities such as food processing and preparation.
The lack of technologies available to women constrains their ability to either produce enough food and earn an adequate income, or to ensure the maintenance and care of household members. This situation has led to changes in cooking habits and the preparation of less nutritious and/or fewer meals. In some instances child malnutrition has increased, as nutritional security often depends upon the availability of non-food resources such as child and health care, clean water and fuel supplies.
At the same time as women's needs and priorities are excluded from the research agenda, they are often affected by the unintended side-effects of modern technologies introduced for the benefit of others. Experience has shown that technology development and dissemination is not gender-neutral, and can have a devastating impact on women's access to resources and to income-generating activities, as well as on their control over their own labour. In Asia, for example, mechanization packages introduced as part of irrigation schemes have provoked changes in the organisation of farm work, often replacing female labour with male labour. In Bangladesh alone, estimates show that mechanization has displaced female workers between 3.5 to a million days of labour per year.
EXTENSION SERVICES
Women are very important to agricultural production, and their need to receive extension assistance is correspondingly high. The degree of women's involvement in crop production decision-making varies according to region, but is almost always significant, especially in poor households. In Africa, in male-headed households women make decisions regarding at the very least their own plots. women in many regions are also independent decision-makers regarding small livestock production, and their own gathering, foraging, fishing, processing and in many instances marketing activities.
As men do not necessarily discuss production decisions with their wives or transfer extension knowledge to them, there is a clear and compelling need for extension to reach women directly. Yet, a 1989 FAO global survey on extension carried out in 115 countries showed that women only received between 2 and 10 percent of all extension contacts, and a mere 5 percent of extension resources worldwide.
Studies on agricultural extension have highlighted a number of weaknesses in reaching rural women. Traditionally, most extension services have been devoted to farmers who own land and who are willing and able to obtain credit and invest it in inputs and technological innovations. Since women often lack access to land, or to other collateral with which to obtain credit' extension services unintentionally bypass women.
The attitudes of extension personnel have also been found to be an important barrier between extension and women. A study of extension in Africa found several commonly held beliefs which asserted that women are not really significant contributors to agricultural production, they are always tied down with household chores and children, they are shy, difficult to reach and resist innovations.
Moreover, extension tends to be oriented towards alleviating or improving male tasks' such as in cash crop cultivation or commercial fishing, and does not address female tasks to the same degree, if at all. Also, women have lower or no formal education and this hampers them from taking part in extension activities requiring reading and arithmetic skills.
IMPROVING WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH AND EXTENSION
· A mandate to target rural women is essential. Planners' researchers and extension workers must understand that reaching rural women is a key aspect of agricultural and rural development. Studies of the problems encountered by rural women are not sufficient to change the way in which extension systems operate; guidelines for gender-responsive policy, implementation and monitoring of research and extension functions are necessary.
· Move toward demand-led research and extension systems. Extension agents, both male and female, should be trained in gender issues and participatory planning in order to better identify women's and men's needs and constraints, priorities and opportunities, to ensure that technological packages meet their requirements. In order to adapt to the challenge posed by greater agro-ecological and socio-economic diversity, the link between extension and research must be improved. This will also help to ensure that local knowledge and practices are incorporated into research design.
· Broaden the range of research and extension strategies and activities. Research and extension must be broadened to take into consideration the needs of the landless or near landless, including women. and thus should focus on creating synergies between on farm and off-farm income earning opportunities for the poor, such as in the processing and manufacturing of agricultural products in rural areas. There is also a need to focus technical advice on food crops as well as cash crops, on animal health for chickens, pigs and small ruminants. and on labour-saving devices for women's production, processing and household maintenance activities.
· Research and extension services and individual extensionists need to collect gender-desegregated data agricultural activities and constraints. The data collection should be done in a participators fashion, and this data should be fed back to the target groups and used in the design. implementation and monitoring of extension activities.
· Develop training materials appropriate for women. Training materials and methods must be adapted to the needs of women farmers and to their level of literacy.
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department,
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome Italy
Telephone 39 6 52251
Telefax 39 6 52253152
Telex 625852 FAO 1
Cable FOODAGRI ROME
Produced by AIDOS, Via del Giubbonari 30, 00186 Roma, Italy
<section>6</section>
Women and water resources
Women and water resources
Worldwide, the demand for water is growing rapidly, and in many countries the cost of developing new supplies is becoming prohibitive. Simultaneously, increased water pollution is worsening the imbalance between water supply and demand. For these reasons, water resources development and irrigation are of critical importance in efforts to improve food security and sustainable agricultural production.
Women play an important role in water management. They are most often the collectors, users and managers of water in the household as well as farmers of irrigated and rained crops. Because of these roles, women have considerable knowledge about water resources, including quality and reliability, restrictions and acceptable storage methods and are key to the success of water resources development and irrigation policies and programmes.
IRRIGATED AGRICULTURE
In many cases water resource policies and programmes have proven detrimental to women's water rights and, therefore. to their sustainable management and use of water. Interventions such as irrigation habitually fail to take into consideration the existing imbalance between men and Women's ownership rights, division of labour and incomes. By raising the value of the land, irrigation brings about social change which usually favors men.
Irrigation systems also tend to favour mono-cropping, often for the production of cash crops, and thus may exclude provisions for a more diversified cropping pattern supporting a variety of food crops. AS cash crops are usually controlled by men, decisions regarding the scheduling of irrigation water tend to be made without consideration for women's farm and household activities.
Women's entitlement to water is often precarious at best. Since they must depend on small scale or hand irrigation, they have difficulties coping with drought. Often the technologies that are available to them do not respond to their needs, such as pumps with handles they cannot reach or manipulate or that they have not been trained to repair.
Women's agricultural practices must usually be adapted to soil moisture conditions that depend on the vagaries of the climate and the conditions of their soils. When women's survival strategies lead to erosion, their farming practices can be major sources of watershed instability.
WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION
Women and children provide nearly all the water for the household in rural areas. Domestic water is used for processing and preparing food, for drinking, bathing and washing, for irrigating home gardens and watering livestock. women know the location, reliability and quality of local water resources. They collect water, store it and control its use and sanitation. They recycle water, using gray water for washing and irrigation, and runoff from these for livestock.
women make multiple and maximum use of water sources, and attempt to ensure that these sources do not become polluted. Given their multiple and often competing needs, such as water for livestock and for human consumption, as well as time and resource constraints, women often cannot avoid contaminating water supplies. As water sources become contaminated from humans, animals or agricultural runoff, or as drought increases or water sources deteriorate due to watershed mismanagement, women and children must walk longer distances to secure water. Some 30 percent of women in Egypt walk over an hour a day to meet water needs. In some parts of Africa, women and children spend eight hours a day collecting water.
Poor water access and quality affect not only women's crop and livestock production and the amount of labour they must expend to collect, store, protect and distribute water, it also affects their health and that of their families. All types of water related diseases and especially water and vector borne diseases affect millions of poor each year. Women must take care of the people who are ill from malaria, onchocerciasis, shistosomiasis and diarrhoea, and replace with their own labour the labour of those who have fallen ill.
IMPROVING WATER RESOURCE EFFICIENCY
It is now recognised that the exclusion of women from the planning of water supply and sanitation schemes is a major cause of their high rate of failure. International initiatives, such as the International Drinking water Supply and Sanitation Decade and the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), have been instrumental in promoting the role of women in water management. They are increasingly trained on water pump operation and maintenance and perform leadership roles in Drinking Water Users' Organisations.
INTERNATIONAL AGENDA
"Local communities must participate in all phases of water management. ensuring the full involvement of women in view of their crucial role in the practical day-to-day supply, management and use of water."
Agenda 21, United Nations Conference ok Environment and Development (UNCED). 1 992.
Yet, the incorporation of gender issues in the planning, design and implementation of irrigation programmes has been far more limited despite the number of studies documenting the failure of irrigation schemes due to mistaken assumptions regarding the intra-household division of labour and organisation of production. In an irrigation scheme in northern Cameroon, for instance, one third of the scheme's development area remained uncultivated due to intra-household labour conflicts.
Gender analysis can help irrigation planners and policy-makers to improve the performance of irrigation schemes. There are three broad areas in irrigated agricultural production systems that require particular attention, and where a more thorough, gender-based analysis of local situations will help to create more effective, equitable and sustainable irrigation policies and programmes
· Irrigation design. In order to accommodate the water needs and requirements of both male and female farmers, it is necessary to identify who will be using water, the amounts needed, at what times and for what purpose. For this, local participation in project design activities is essential, and thorough discussions should be held during each phase of project planning with different segments of rural communities (village leaders, male irrigators? adult women, youth, and men and women from poorer households)
· Legal, administrative and organizational arrangements. Ensuring women's use and control of land - and irrigation water- is fundamental. Studies have shown a direct correlation between independent land and irrigation rights for women and a higher productivity of land and labour. Thus, land allocation under irrigation schemes should be to individual farmers rather than to households.
In regards to Water Users' Associations, all farmers who own or rent irrigated plots as well as all adult family members who work on irrigated plots, including women and young adult children of plot holders. should be members. Women should also be guaranteed leadership positions based on the proportion of women as members or as participants in the scheme.
· Implementation. Water delivery schedules should be devised in such a way as to accommodate both men's and women's needs with respect to quantity, timing and quality of water. Also, training in water control and management, cropping calendars, and system maintenance should be extended to women as well as need.
Given that women's incomes are considerably lower than men's and that the capital requirements to invest in irrigated crops can be quite high, access to credit systems should be made available to women irrigators. Access to credit will also facilitate women irrigators' access to technology.
In Zimbabwe, women's membership in irrigation management committees increased from 5 percent in 1991 to 90 percent in 1996, in order to reflect the male/female ratio of actual irrigators participating in the scheme.
The Cidurian Upgrading and Water Management Project in Tangerang, West Java, Indonesia conducted a pilot programme for the inclusion of women farmers in planning of the project, after it became apparent that they were not participating. Separate meetings and four special training sessions for women farmers were organised, with the following objectives:
· to provide women with basic information on the programme;
· to overcome women's initial reclutance or shyness, to make an inventory of women's interest in participation, resulting in concrete plans;
· to identify potential leaders and representatives for water users associations.
Field staff, other official and men farmers were involved in special training and discussion sessions on the need for women's involvement
Source: Dok, Yvette van: Kurnia Saptari Purtri; and Avianti Zulaicha, Women in tertiary unit development An experience from Indonesia ICID
GENDER DIVISION OF IRRIGATION TASK
Irrigation Watering
Household labour (%)
Area
Male
Female
Children
Northem Bangladesh
Western Sudan
Zimbabwe
Himachal Pradesh/India
ALLOCATION OF IRRIGATION PLOTS IN ZIMBABWE
Men
Windows
Women with absentee husbands
A PLOT OF ONE'S OWN
The Dakiri irrigation system is one of the few systems in Burkina Faso where women obtained irrigated plots on an individual basis: 60 women for 9 percent of the total number of plot holders} have individual plots. Most of their husbands also have plots. The productivity of both land and labour appear higher where both men and women have their own plots, than in households where men have been allocated -household" plots. Having their own irrigated plot, women's motivation to invest labour in irrigated production significantly increases, thus directly improving the overall performance of the irrigation scheme.
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department,
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome
Italy
Telephone 39 6 52251
Telefax 39 6 52253152
Telex 625852 FAO 1
Cable FOODAGRI ROME
Produced by AIDOS, Vie dei Giubbonari 30, Rome, Italy
<section>7</section>
Women, land tenure and food security
Women, land tenure and food security
One of the most serious obstacles to increasing the agricultural productivity and income of rural women is their lack of security of tenure. Land tenure refers to a set of rights which a person or organisation holds in land. Security of tenure is not limited to private ownership but can exist in a variety of forms such as leases on public land or user rights to communal property. If tenure is secure, the holder can reasonably expect to use the land to its best advantage in accordance with the right, reap a timely and fair return and be able to enforce the right against non-holders. Tenure enables the holder to make management decisions on how land-based resources will be used for immediate household needs and long-term sustainable investment long-term sustainable investment.
In order for women farmers, who are responsible for 60-80% of the food production in developing countries, to use land more efficiently and thereby make a greater contribution to food security, they need access to land, management control of land-based resources, and economic incentives that security of tenure provides.
WHY WOMEN FARMERS DON'T HAVE SECURITY OF TENURE
Historically women's access to land was based on status within the family and involved right of use, not ownership. In Asia, the most prevalent barrier to acquiring real property is inheritance laws which favour male inheritance over female. If a woman inherits property, it is managed by her husband. Hindu women formally hold rights in property for life only; at death it reverts back to the male line. In Africa, custom rather than religious practice excludes women from ownership; property is held in a man's name and passed partrilineally with the group. A widow's right to remain on the land is not secure. In Latin America, discrimination results more from limited status under the law. Women, for example, may reach majority age at 21, but still be required to be represented by their husbands in all legal capacities.
Land reform, legislative reform and the forces of modernization have had a mixed effect. Agrarian reform or resettlement programs use the "head of family" concept, usually a male, as the basis of land reallocation. Few have significant numbers of female beneficiaries or even pay attention to gender as a beneficiary category. New legislation on equality for women is more applicable to the urban-employed class than rural persons: agricultural land is even excluded in some new inheritance schemes. Statutory reform of customary law is confusing and open to interpretation; when customary. religious or statutory systems coexist, the law least favorable to women is often selected. Traditional or customary systems that might have protected a woman's access to land during her lifetime are breaking down under population, economic and environmental pressures. Growing male rural to urban migration is leaving women as de facto heads of household without management authority over land
resources. Even under resettlement schemes in irrigated areas. women de facto heads of household rarely benefit.
In some cases, however, women have gained better access to land through land reform, generally where the participation of rural women is a well-defined state policy. In some countries, agrarian reforms replaced the feudal system where women traditionally held a subordinate role in family production. women's organisations; in Thailand. China, Nicaragua, Malaysia and Cuba have helped to overcome existing barriers or to protect women's rights regarding inheritance of land. There are also many instances where women's organisations; have fought to gain access to land which they farm collectively.
LIMITATIONS THE MARRIED WOMEN'S CAPACITY WITH RESPECT TO PROPERTY IN THE CIVIL CODES OF VARIOUS LATIN-AMERICAN COUNTRIES
COUNTRY
HOW MARITAL AUTHORITY IS REPRESENTED IN THE CIVIL CODES
Chile
The husband is the administrator and representative of the conjugal property under the community property regime.
Ecuador
Unless agreed otherwise in the marriage contract, the husband administers the conjugal property.
El Salvador
The husband administers his wife's assets if she is a minor.
Guatemala
The husband administers the property under both the community property and the property of conjugal partnership regimes.
Mexico (States of Aguas Calientes, Oaxaca and Sonora)
The husband administers the conjugal property under the community properly regime.
Nicaragua
The husband is the family's representative or, in his absence, the wife (Civil Code, Art. 151). In practice, however, this does not appear to have any economic consequences.
Paraguay
Unless otherwise stated in the marriage contract, the husband is the administrator of the property.
Dominican Republic
The husband administers the property, even under the separate property regime.
The data in this fable were taken from the case studies and papers presented at the Round Table on "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate women Participation in Rural Development.
EFFECT ON FOOD SECURITY
50% of the world's resource-poor farmers are women who also have primary responsibility for food security. Their success in meeting daily household needs depends on how well they manage and supplement a limited and delicately balanced set of resources: cropland pasture and forest. Without land and secure tenure a woman cannot access credit and membership in agricultural associations particularly those responsible for processing and marketing. If tenure is secure a woman can invest in rather than exploit the land's productive potential and is more likely to adopt environmentally sustainable farming practices. She can plan and quickly adjust resource allocation decisions under changing climate or economic conditions and rely on the productive results of her labour.
Control of the product is also an important consideration in examining women's land rights. Security of tenure is often the key to having control over major decisions such as what crop to grow what techniques to use and the decision as to what to consume and what to sell. Given women's tendency to grow food as opposed to cash crops and to spend income on family food. security of tenure for women must be viewed as a key link in the chain from household food production to national food security.
Percentage of Ownership of Cultivated Land by Women Farmers in Thailand, Trinidad, Nigeria. Syria
Land Ownership
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Personally owned
Husband's land
Gift from husband
Family land
Government land
Communal land
Squatted land
Rented land
Source. Manju. Dutta Das, Improving the Relevance and Effectiveness of Agricultural Extension
Activities for Women Farmers , FAO , 1995, p. 37.
A WAY OUT?
1 Comprehensive tenure reform for women that considers marriage. inheritance and contract rights should be made a priority food security issue.
2. Legislative and policy initiatives should reflect women's actual experience and needs; the reform process should be participatory.
3. Reform should be matched with legal literacy training for men and women. particularly on the relationship between law and rural productivity.
4. Greater attention should be given the alternative forms of ownership and management such as cooperatives and self help groups including women. The Beijing Platform for Action and the FAO Women in Development Plan of
Action make removal of barriers the women's access the land a high priority.
THE ERITREAN APPROACH
Land tenure legislation promulgated in 1994 reflects a strong policy of gender equality. The right of ownership of all land in Eritrea is the exclusive right of the government. Every Eritrean citizen whose main source of income is the land has a lifetime right of usufruct over land with the provision that such a right is neither divisible nor inheritable. Eritreans qualify automatically for land upon attainment of age 18 regardless of sex religion or marital status; individual holdings are registered and lifetime usufructory title-deeds issued.
Source: Proclamation to Reform the System of Land Tenure ill Eritrea. No. 58/1994
Country
Women's Land Holdings as % of Total Agricultural Holdings
Average Size of Holdings (Hectares)
Women's
Men's
Benin
Congo
Morocco
Tanzania
Zimbabwe
Small-scale commercial sector: 3
Large-scale commercial sector: 10
Women and Population Division
Sustainable Development Department,
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla,
00100 Rome
Italy
Telephone 39 6 52251
Telefax 39 6 52253152
Telex 625852 FAO 1
Cable FOODAGRI ROME
Produced by AIDOS, Via dei Giubbonari 30. 00186 Roma.
<section>8</section>
FAO population programme service (SDWP)
FAO population programme service (SDWP)
Provisional List of FAO Population Related Documents (1992-1997)
1. Population and Socio-economic and Cultural Factors
1.a Rural Women - the Closing Link between Population and Environment, by Zoran Roca. Paper prepared for the Expert Group Meeting on Population and Women, Gaborone, Botswana, 22-26 June 1992.
1.b Women in Rural Savings and Finance, Guidelines - A key intermediation strategy to achieve population and rural development goals, by F. Villareal, RAPA, Bangkok, Thailand, 1992.
1.c Urbanisation and Rural Women: Impact of Rural-to-Urban Migration, by Zoran Roca. Paper prepared for the UN/Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW) Seminar on Women in Urban Areas, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, 22-25 November 1993.
1.d Women, Population and Environment in Agricultural and Rural Development - Policy Challenges and Responses, by Zoran Roca, July 1994.
1.e Environment, Women and Population: Interrelated issues in Rural Development in Southeast Asia, proceedings of the Round Table, edited by Alexandra Stephens, Bangkok, Thailand, 2 - 6 May 1994, [published 1995].
1.f Breaking Through, A Manual For Field Workers and Rural Women on Group Formation, by F. Villareal FAO, Beijing, China, March 1995.
1.g My Very Own, Training Manual Micro-Enterprise Development for Project Officers and Field Workers, by F. Villareal, FAO, Beijing, China, June 1995.
1.h A Journey from Poverty to Empowerment, by F. Villareal, FAO, Beijing, China, June 1995.
1.i Socio-cultural and Behavioural Research Interventions in Reproductive Health/Family Planning, by Janet Edmondson. Newsletter of the UNFPA Country Support Team (CST) for East and South-East Asia, v. 3 (3) December 1995.
1.j Modules on Gender, Population and Rural Development with a Focus on Land Tenure and Farming Systems, by Daphne Topouzis and Jacques du Guerny, 1995.
1.k Behavior and Socio-Cultural Research, by Leila Dabbagh. Paper presented at the Regional Study Directors' Meeting on Socio-Cultural Factors Affecting Demographic Behaviour and Implications for the Formulation and Execution of Population Policies and Programmes, Amman, Jordan, 16-18 April 1996.
1.l Rural Women, Population and Development in Lusophone African Countries, annotated bibliography of selected (Portuguese) literature 1991-1996, compiled by Zoran Roca, 1996.
1.m Women, Migration, Environment and Rural Development Policy in Brazil, by Rosa Ester Rossini and Sonia Alves, 1996.
1.n Streamlining Rural Dimensions of Gender-Population Concerns in UNFPA Planning and Programming Activities, by Stella Ogbuagu. Paper prepared for the UNFPA Gender, Population and Development Workshop, New York, 30 September-3 October 1996.
2. Population and Bio-physical Factors
2.a Potential Population-supporting Capacity of Lands: Environmental Aspects, by Alain Marcoux. Paper prepared for the UN Expert Group Meeting on Population, Environment and Development, New York, 20-24 January 1992.
2.b Population and Water Resources, by Alain Marcoux. Population and the Environment: a Review of Issues and Concepts for Population Programme Staff, no. I, September 1994.
2.c Population and Land Degradation, by Alain Marcoux. Population and the Environment: a Review of Issues and Concepts for Population Programme Staff, no. 2, September 1995.
2.d Dynamique de peuplement des zones rurales libérées de l'onchocercose - pour une mise en valeur durable, par Philippe Collomb et A. Quesnel, 1996.
2.e Population Change-Natural Resources-Environment Linkages in East and Southeast Asia, by Alain Marcoux, March 1996.
2.f Population Change-Natural Resources-Environment Linkages in the Arab States Region, by Alain Marcoux, April 1996.
2.g Interactions dynamique demographique-ressources naturelles-environnement en Afrique de l 'guest et centrale, by Alain Marcoux, June 1996.
2.h Population Change-Natural Resources-Environment Linkages in Central and South Asia, by Alain Marcoux, August 1996.
3. Population and Communication/Extension
3.a Integration of Gender, Environmental, Population Education and Sustainable Development Themes into Agricultural Education and Extension Programmes, by Erich Baier. Paper prepared for the CST/TSS Professional Meeting of IEC Advisers, Unesco, Paris, 17-21 October 1994.
3.b From Research to Communication Planning: a Participatory Workshop Methodology, by Anamaria Decock. Paper prepared for the CST/TSS Professional Meeting of IEC Advisers, Unesco, Paris, 17-21 October 1994.
3.c Rural Women and Population in South East Asia - Population Education Manual for Outreach Workers, FAO, Metro Manila, 1994
3.d Strategic Extension Campaign - A participatory-oriented method of agricultural extension, FAO, Rome, Italy, 1994 (U8955E)
3.e Applying DSC Methodologies to Population Issues - A Case Study in Malawi, Development Communication Case Study No. 12, 1994 (D/V4490E).
3.f Reflections on Population Communication: the Dilemma of Form and Content, by Fathi Botros, May 1995. (in Arabic)
3.g Message: the Epicentre of Social Communication, by Fathi Botros, July 1995 (in Arabic).
3.h The Role of the Individual in Social Communication, by Fathi Botros, July 1995. (in Arabic)
3.i Atelier de formation en développement, mise en oeuvre et évaluation de strategies IEC, population et développement, by Anamaria Decock, November 1995.
3.j Set of Materials for Integrating Population Issues into a Number of Courses of Study in the Malawi Natural Resources College and the Malawi National Forestry College, by Vickie Sigman, 1995.
3.k Population and Family Life Education - a Curriculum Proposal for Integration into Carrier Courses at Alemaya University of Agriculture, by Charles Davies, July 1995.
3.l Tapping Local Cultural Resources for Development. A Walk on the Other Side of the Information Highway, by Anamaria Decock. Paper prepared for the Symposium on Communication, Culture and Development, Catholic University, Brussels, December 1995.
3.m Développement de messages et d'outils en IEC, by Anamaria Decock, April 1996.
3.n Artists as Experts - a Participatory Methodology to Produce Traditional and Population Media Based on Population Communication in Africa, March, 1996 (D/V9888E) ($50)
3.o Wireless Connections, by Anamaria Decock. Ceres, the FAO Review, v. 28(2, = no. l 58) March-April 1996, p. 35-36.
3.p Off the Information Highway, by Anamaria Decock. Paper prepared for the Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference, Unesco, Paris, June 1996
4. Population General
4.a Integrating Population Considerations into Strategies for Fisheries Management and Development, by Fathi Botros, April 1994.
4.b Declaration de l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture, par Jacques du Guerny. Comite préparatoire de la Conférence internationale sur la population et le développement, troisiéme session, New York, 4-22 avril 1994.
4.c Statement by Jacques Diouf, Director-General of FAO, at the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, Egypt, 5-13 September 1994.
4.d ICPD (International Conference on Population and Development Programme of Action - a Digest, by Jacques du Guerny, November 1994.
4.e Population and Housing Censuses as Frames for Agricultural Censuses and Surveys, by A. Gonzalez Villalobos. FAO Quarterly Bulletin of Statistics, v. 8 (1/2) 1995, p. 4- 13. (in English, French and Spanish).
4.f Statement by Jacques du Guerny, Chief, Population Programme Service, FAO, at the 28th Session of the Population Commission, New York, 21 February - 2 March 1995.
4.g Population and Development: an Evolving Debate, by Jacques du Guerny. Paper prepared for a meeting at the Instituto da Defesa Nacional, Ministerio da Defesa Nacional, Lisbon, Portugal, 4 May 1995.
4.h A Population Notebook: Points for Discussion, by Jacques du Guerny. Ceres, the FAO Review, v. 27(5, no. 155) September - October 1995, p. 21-22.
4.i Population growth and the overall economic growth outlook, chapter 3.2 of World Agriculture Towards 2010 An FAO Study, FAO, Rome, 1995, p 75-78.
4.j Issues of food-population balance beyond the year 2010, chapter 3.8 of World Agriculture Towards 2010, An FAO Study, FAO, Rome, 1995, p. 123-140.
4.k Nouvelles configurations villes-campagnes, par Ricardo Abramovay et Ignacy Sachs. Paper written in preparation for Habitat II, the UN Conference on Human Settlements, Istanbul, Turkey, 3-14 June 1996, January 1996.
4.1 Fishers and Fisheries - Population Dimensions of a Vital Sector, June 1996.
4.m Population Pressure and the Food Supply System in the Developing World, by John Bongaarts. Paper prepared for the FAO/UNFPA Expert Group Meeting on Food Production and Population Growth, Rome, 3-5 July 1996.
4.n Report of FAO/UNFPA Expert Group Meeting on Food Production and Population Growth, Rome, 3-5 July 1996.
4.o Gender, Population and Sustainability - Critical Problems and Unresolved Issues, by George Martine and Marcela Villarreal. Paper prepared for the Expert Group Meeting on Women, Population and Sustainable Development: the Road from Rio, Cairo and Beijing, Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, November 1996.
4.p Food Requirements and Population Growth, by Philippe Collomb and Jacques du Guerny. Technical Document No. 4, prepared for the World Food Summit, FAO, Rome, 13-17 November 1996, (in Arabic, Chinese, English, French and Spanish).
4.q Food needs and population, population, fact sheet prepared for the World Food Summit, FAO, Rome, 13-17 November 1996 (in English, French, Spanish and Italian)
5. Other
5.a Report of a Workshop on The Relevance of HI V/AIDS to the Work of FAO, by Günter Hemrich, Rome, July 1995.
5.b The Impact of the HIV/AIDS Epidemic on Agricultural Production and Productivity and the Role of Extension Services in Combatting the Disease in Rural Areas (Especially in Africa): Issues and Challenges, by Erich Baier. October 1995.
5.c Statement by A. Sawadogo, Assistant Director-General Agriculture Department, FAO on the occasion of World AIDS Day, FAO, Rome, December 1995
5.d AIDS: the Future of the Pandemic, statement by Jonathan M. Mann, on the occasion of World AIDS Day, FAO, Rome, December 1995.
5.e FAO and the Socio-Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS on Agriculture, leaflet on FAO's work on AIDS, April 1996.
5.f The Impact of HI V/AIDS on Rural Households/Communities and the Need for Multisectoral Prevention and Mitigation Strategies to Combat the Epidemic in Rural Areas (with special emphasis on Africa), by Erich Baier. January 1997 (in English and French).
For more information or requests, please contact:
Jacques du Guerny
Chief, Population Programme Service (SDWP)
Tel: (39-6) 5225 3816; Fax: (39-6) 5225 5490
e-mail: jacques.duguerny@fao.org
3 April 1997
