<section>e</section>
List of abbreviations
List of abbreviations
ADB
Asian Development Bank
APDC
Asian and Pacific Development Centre
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
ILO
International Labour Organization
INSTRAW
United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
IRRI
International Rice Research Institute, Los Banos, the Philippines
SIDA
Swedish International Development Agency
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environmental Programme
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNFPA
United Nations Fund for Population Activities
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund
WHO
World Health Organization
<title>Environment, women and population: interrelated issues in rural development in Southeast Asia</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Dr. Vivienne Wee, FAO Consultant, prepared the first dra Rofthe guidelines, with inputs from Mr. Zoran Roca. Other FAO professional staff also contributed. Participants at the Round Table on Environment, Women and Population, held at the FAO Regional Office in Bangkok from 2 to 6 May, 1994, provided additional material and made the final revisions. Participants were:
Dr. Vivienne Wee
ENGENDER
Centre for Environment, Gender and
Development
14C Trengganu Street
Singapore 0821
Tel. (65) 227-1439
Fax. (65) 227-7897, 776-6570
Dr. Amornrat Charoenchai
125 Soi Siri
Ram Indra Road
Bangkok 10220
Thailand
Tel. (66-2) 521-0337
Dr. Thelma Romero Paris
Social Sciences Division
International Rice Research Institute
(IRRI)
P.O. Box 933
Manila
The Philippines
Tel. (63-2) 818- 1926
Fax. (63-2) 818-2087
Telex (ITT) 45365 Rice PM
Dr. Achara Navachinda
Head, Department of Home Economics
Faculty of Agriculture
Kasetsart University
Bangkok 10900
Thailand
Tel. (66-2) 579-5514
Ms. Jeanne F.I. Illo
Institute of Philippine Culture
Ateneo de Manila University
Loyola Heights
Quezon City
The Philippines
Fax. (63-2) 924-4690
Ms. Anne-Marie Bruno
Programme Officer
FAO c/- UNDP
B.P. 1640
Vientiane
Lao PDR
Tel. (896) 3344, 5745
Fax. (896) 9091
OBSERVERS
Dr. Ghazi Farooq
Director
UNFPA Country Support Team
14th Floor, UN Building
Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok 10200
Thailand
Tel. (66-2) 282-9161, ext. 1929;
Direct line 280-3320
Fax. (66-2) 280-2715
Ms. Josie Zaini
Executive Director
ERA Consumer
38 Leboh Dinding, Lim Garden
30100 Ipoh, Perak
Malaysia
Tel. (605) 533-401
Fax. (605) 533-401
Ms. Le Thi Hoai Phuong
Programme Officer
Quaker Service
26 Pho Lien Tri
Hanoi
Vietnam
Tel. (84-42) 265-229
Fax. (84-42) 236-819
Mr. Dang Ngoc Quang,
Programme Officer
Saving and Credit Programme
Mennonite Central Committee
No. 51F3, Pho Thai Thinh
Dong Da - Hanoi
Vietnam
Tel. (84-42) 346-647 vii
Dr. Sandra Rennie
UNFPA Country Support Team
14th Floor, UN Building
Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok 10200
Thailand
Tel. (66-2) 282-9161, ext. 1896
Fax. (66-2) 280-2715
SECRETARIAT
Ms. Alexandra Stephens
Regional Sociologist and Women in
Development Officer
FAO Regional Office for Asia and the
Pacific
39 Phra Atit Road
Bangkok 10200
Thailand
Tel. (66-2) 281-7844, ext. 134
Fax. (66-2) 280-0445
Mr. Zoran Roca
Women and Population Officer
ESHW
FAO Headquarters
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Tel. (39-6) 522-55091
Fax. (39-6) 522-53152, 522-55155
Ms. Pawadee Chok-oon-kit
Secretary
FAO RAP
Following the Round Table, Vivienne Wee compiled the text, and Pat Crosscombe and Anne-Marie Bruno provided data for the statistical annex. Anne Johnson, Christina Sandau-Jensen and Alexandra Stephens did the final editing.
<section>2</section>
Part 1 - Environment, women and population: an integrated reality
Part 1 - Environment, women and population: an integrated reality
As caring women, we speak on behalf of those who could not be with us, the millions of women who experience daily the violence of environmental degradation, poverty and exploitation of their work and bodies As long as Nature and women are abused by so-called 'free market" ideology and wrong concepts of "economic growth" there can be no environmental security.
Preamble to the Women's Action Agenda 21
The Asia-Pacific Region has already reached the safe limits of horizontal expansion of agriculture. This means future needs for a growing population can only be met by intensification an option which will not be easy since yields are already showing signs of stagnation on some soils caused by widespread land degradation. A major cause of degradations is erosion caused by water and wind. Only a limited and shrinking area is free from soil-related constraints on agricultural production. These constraints include steeply sloping land, severe soil fertility limitations, and the mining of soil nutrients.
FAO/Netherlands Conference on Agriculture and Environment: "Sustainable Agriculture and Development in Asia and the Pacific" (Regional Document No. 2, 'S-Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands, 15-19 April, 1991)
Escalating population growth, intensified cropping, widespread land degradation and shrinking agricultural land are all leading to an ecological crisis. It is now necessary to consider alternative strategies to arrest this process and promote ecological sustainability, particularly at the rural community level. A key approach here is to integrate issues pertaining to environment, women and population in all policy planning and implementation processes. Policy makers and programmers should, therefore, address the environment-women-population trilogy for what it is - an integrated reality that profoundly affects entire communities. A vital part of the solution is greater attention to women's needs and rights. Policies also have to be designed to remedy gender biases in social, economic and technological conditions in agricultural and rural development This calls for replacing single-sector approaches with cross-sectoral ones that link environment, women and population in all
development policies and programmes.
These guidelines provide a framework and suggestions for achieving such an integration. This sort of pragmatic integration is already practiced by many women farmers in their own decision-making.
The developing countries' populations are still largely rural - over 60 percent in developing countries as a whole, and some 70 percent in Southeast Asia. The majority will undoubtedly still be rural in 2015, the target year for the recommendations of the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD), held in Cairo in 1994.
Population problems are deeply rooted in the rural and agricultural sectors of society. Virtually everywhere rural fertility is higher than urban fertility. Rural migration also is often the prime cause of excessively rapid urbanisation. The majority of births in the developing countries, including those of Southeast Asia, will continue to take place in rural areas for another quarter century or so. Throughout that period and beyond, maternal and child mortality and other health issues will remain predominantly rural ones. For these few significant but obvious reasons, population dynamics in rural areas deserve much more attention in development policy and programmes than they have so far received.
Lack of explicit population, environment and gender considerations in development policy inevitably has serious social and demographic consequences. Policy planners therefore should, at the very least, make sure their programmes and strategies do not further worsen population dynamics, social status and environmental sustainability. Very often however, just such negative consequences do further afflict rural women. Policies that assist large farmers only, for example, or development focussed on mechanisation to increase export crops, too often push the poorer farmers off the land altogether Once landless, they must seek work in other sectors, usually in urban areas, thus fuelling ever greater migration to towns and cities and creating labour shortages on the farms, especially at planting and harvest times. This in turn often frustrates such vital national goals as increased food production, improved nutrition, and enhanced general well-being.
Table I Rural and Urban Poverty in Selected Countries in the 1980s
Country
Rural population (as a percentage of total)
Rural poor(as a percentage of total)
Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births)
Access to safe water(percentage of population)
Rural
Urban
Rural
Urban
India
Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand
Source: UN, 1991.
As natural resource managers, rural women provide food and oversee overall family welfare. More often than not, women are the backbone of smallholder agricultural production. They often hold the key to changes in fertility levels. Ultimately they are responsible for population structure, growth, size and distribution. Population growth and pressure on a limited and increasingly degraded natural resource base, however, can undermine a woman's role as a major resource user and manager. The amount of women's time and energy required in their farm- and home-based work is increasing. Yet women continue to cope with deeply-rooted gender biases, often reinforced through development policies and programmes that constrain their social, economic and legal rights, plus their access to modern technology.
If runaway environmental degradation and ever-increasing poverty are to be overcome, the social and economic conditions under which most rural women live and their access to technology must be greatly improved. Without the needed and missing technology, they will become less and less able to deal with the increasing range of on-farm and off-farm tasks that make up the bulk of their work.
Any reduction in the daily drudgery that is the lot of poor farmers would, in itself, be a big step forward in breaking the endless cycle of rural poverty. All these needed improvements would, at the same time, give women greater choice and motivation to limit family size to numbers more in balance with the realities of availability of land and other natural resources and enhance their access to these assets. But if these improvements continue to be withheld, very little can be accomplished, either for the women or for rural development in general.
To provide such improvements, on the other hand, would at once constitute a starting point for meeting the needs of the rural poor and the launching of a more rational and more just strategy for food policy and agricultural development. To understand the smallholders' needs and their ways of deciding how to ensure family survival is, in fact, a precondition for drafting such a saner and juster strategy.
All this has a direct bearing on rural population growth. The poorer and more wretched a rural woman's life, ironically, the more children she is likely to bear and rear, or attempt to, in poverty. The more improvement, and even hope if you like, that is put into her life, the more likely she is to have fewer, and healthier, children and a more balanced family size. Surely this is to be desired, not only for the rural poor themselves, but for the nation as a whole.
<section>3</section>
Part 2 - Policies and consequences the development of human and natural resources in the rural sector
The consequences of environmental degradation on irrigated rice production, households, population and women: a case study from the Philippines
Part 2 - Policies and consequences the development of human and natural resources in the rural sector
The combination of poverty, environmental degradation and population growth, if not controlled, is a new form of dynamite which is creating a tremendous global insecurity in the world (and) is not limited to developing countries.
Dr. Huguette Labelle, President, The Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)
The development paths followed by Southeast Asian countries are based increasingly on monocentric industrialisation in urban centres where resources and services are increasingly concentrated. This has led to a relative shrinkage of the rural sector, increasing food prices and creating an unhealthy reliance on supplementary food imports. Rural communities in general and rural women in particular are especially vulnerable to the processes of impoverishment. These include: the degradation, depletion or loss of the natural resource base
 uncertainties in the commodities market, particularly during processes of "liberalisation"
 lack of alternative opportunities for income generation or gainful employment
Table 2 Estimates of Forest Cover Area and Rate of Deforestation
Land area
Forest cover
Annual deforestation
million ha
1980 million ha
1990 million ha
million ha
% per annum
Asia and the Pacific
Continental Southeast Asia^a
Insular Southeast Asia^b
Source: FAO, 1993.
Notes:
^a includes Cambodia, Lao, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam
^b includes Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines
Thus the rural poor face an increasing challenge to meet their basic needs, the most basic of which is food security. This situation is exacerbated by ongoing environmental impoverishment, which may in turn lead to a loss of forest products, the depletion of soil nutrients, the pollution of soils and the contamination of water. The impact of these problems is especially felt by rural women, whose livelihood depends on access to natural resources, which are the factors of production.
Inequalities between the sexes in access to resources, entitlements and in the division of labour in the household, have made women the poorest of the poor. Poor women have:
 fewer social, economic, constitutional/legislative and political rights, including rights of access to such essentials as food, health care and education
 reduced access to labour markets and lower economic returns for their work
 fewer legal and customary rights over land, property, water, credit and other productive resources, such as energy, technology and information
 multiple burdens, including economic contributions through their productive work, resource management and conservation, household and community responsibilities, as well as the care of children and the elderly
This already unfair situation is worsened when increasing impoverishment leads to male migration or even abandonment, leaving women to manage the livelihood of their families entirely on their own. If the expected remittances from the migrating male family members do not come, the family suffers increased chances of falling into debt. These women and their families are among the most likely to become destitute, and it is no coincidence that women number over 60 percent of the absolutely poor and destitute in rural areas.
Poverty is a state of resource deprivation relative to basic needs. In rural areas, if one has little access to land or other capital resources, labour becomes the only asset that can be sold or mobilised through work, and by the reproduction of children. Research indicates that the relatively higher fertility rate found in the rural sector is often a response on the part of the rural population to impoverishment on the one hand, and high infant and child mortality on the other. In shoe, the poor tend to have more children because they are poor and because more of their children die before reaching maturity (see, for example, Caldwell 1982, Ruzicka 1984, and Handwerker 1986).
For the poor, the family is the significant unit of economic production. The labour of its members is maximised and pooled through the family. This mode of organising labour at the micro level shapes gender relations and the role of women as the biological reproducers of labour High infant and child mortality thus constitutes a compounding factor that further spurs fertility towards the goal of labour maximisation. This is especially so for smallholder agricultural producers and landless rural workers. In their labour-intensive mode of production, children are producers, labour recruits, workers, parental investments for upward social mobility, and pension providers for the elderly family members.
Such coping strategies at the micro level, however, inevitably have consequences at the macro level because the maintenance, or increase, of high fertility further degrades limited environmental resources. It is clear that macro-level planning for sustainable development must thus necessarily address the micro-level needs of poor households, especially those of poor women. If sustainable development is to be achieved, such planning must also address the serious imbalances between urban and rural areas.
The unequal distribution of development resources between the rural and urban sectors deprives the rural population of the determinants of general well-being, including:
 access to health care services
 adequate nutrition
 potable water
 decent sanitation
 adequate rest and relief from hard physical labour and drudgery
The excessively high mortality rates among the rural population are a result of unequal life chances between rural and urban populations, and between rich and poor. The rural population's poor health conditions account for the higher infant and child mortality rates as compared to those of the urban population. The disparities in infant and child mortality retest between rural and urban families2 in four Southeast Asian countries, are shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Indicators of the Child Mortality Rates of Rural and Urban Populations in
Some Asian Countries
Rural
Urban
Ratios
Country
Neo-
natal
Post-
neonatal
Child
Neo-
natal
Post-
neonatal
Child
Neo-
natal
Post-
neonatal
Child
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Source: Ruzicka 1984 (p. 34).
These death ratios illustrate the uneven development processes occurring in the rural and urban sectors of many countries. As noted by Ruzicka (1984:38,49):
High fertility and high mortality buttress each other.... Despite impressive improvements, in most low income countries of Asia, the hulk of deaths are stiff of children under five years of age.... Most are occurring from a rather limited number of largely related problems: immaturity (low birth weight), often related to mother's poor health, and nutritional status and frequent childbearing; malnutrition as an underlying or associated cause of a death which itself was due to infections (measles, lower respiratory infections, malaria), and the synergistic effects of diarrhoeal disease and malnutrition.
In other words, significant numbers of children in the rural population die because their families are too poor to keep them alive, especially when their mothers are themselves malnourished and in bad health. Such health problems tend to affect women and children much more than they affect men.
The health problems affecting rural women and children are by no means limited to the four countries listed in Table 4. In Vietnam, for example, rural women and children are also at risk from nutritional disorders and infectious diseases (particularly diarrhoea, respiratory infections and malaria The lack of clean drinking water is a major contributor to the spread of infectious diseases.
Table 4 Indicators of the Infant Mortality Rates in Selected Countries
Country
Population growth rate 1980-2000
Infant and child mortality per 1,000 live births
Maternal mortality per 100,000 live births, 1980 (%)
Labour force in agriculture, 1980 (%)
Indonesia
aged -1
aged 1 - 4
Malaysia
aged-1
Philippines
aged -1
Singapore
aged-1
Thailand
aged- 1
aged 1-4
Sources: World Bank, 1986 and 1992; UN, 1991; and ADB, 1986.
Many of the prevalent diseases are water-borne and linked to the poor state of water and sanitation. Less than hay the urban population and less than 10 percent of the rural population have access to safe and adequate water supplies. The remainder depend on a combination of shallow wells, rain water, rain catchment and ponds and rivers. During the dry season, water is sold at high prices and the use of polluted water is common.
SIDA: Country Gender Analysis for Vietnam 1992 UNICEF: Vietnam: the situation of children and women 1990
Other nutritional disorders include a high incidence of goitre due to iodine deficiency, a condition which adversely affects women's reproductive systems. One remedy for this is iodized salt. That this relatively simple solution has not been carried out reflects the poverty and inadequate transport of Vietnam's infrastructure. In mountainous Lao, a recent UNICEF survey estimated the incidence of severe cases of goitre to be fully 65 percent.
UNICEF's survey in Vietnam reported that half the children under five-years-old were malnourished. Fifteen percent were severely malnourished. This stark statistic is particularly tragic now that the country is the world's third-largest rice producer. It also implies that the bulk of Vietnam's rice crop is exported to earn foreign exchange, rather than for internal consumption by the population.
Studies show that malnutrition in rural populations can and too often does persist when development is focussed mainly on increasing export crops, even when the crop in question is a food crop. At the policy level, some confusion obviously exists between national food security and household food security, the assumption being that the former would lead automatically to the latter. This is not always true. A graphic illustration is the crop diversification policy found in many Southeast Asian countries whereby it is rural development policy to assign fruit trees and vegetables for cultivation in the high-altitude uplands, and staples for cultivation as plantation monocultures in the lowlands. Such a policy is generally motivated by a concern for crops cultivated for export rather than subsistence. But this reduces the smallholders' safety net of planting mixed crops that include both food and commercial crops, thus exposing them to greater uncertainties, such as the
fluctuations of the commodities market, the vagaries of the weather, and pests. Monocultures fundamentally affect the diversity of food available which, in turn, affects nutrition, morbidity and mortality, particularly among women and children.
Macro development policies thus have significant environmental and human consequences. Policies such as those listed below are common to most of the countries of the region:
 resource extraction for export
 the absence of policy, or the lack of policy backup, to regulate resource over-use
 re-zoning of agricultural land for hydro-electric dams, industrial use, urban buildup, monocultural plantations, golf courses, roads, and so on
 monocentric industrialisation and urbanisation
 plantation monocultures and crop specialisation through contract farming oriented to the demands of the urban market, and not the needs of the rural food producers
 inadequate attention paid to small farmers, especially women on uplands and rain-fed farms, in favour of plantations and large farms
The adverse environmental and human consequences of these policies are illustrated in Diagram 1.
Monocentric industrialisation and urbanisation on the one hand, and rural impoverishment on the other, are perhaps the primary causes of the massive rural-urban migration now occurring throughout Southeast Asia. Both result from an urban-dominated development model, which has led to increasing disparities between the urban and rural sectors of society.
Table 5 Net Urban In-migration Rates and Sex Ratio, and Sex Ratio of Net Rural-Urban Migrations in Selected Countries, 1960-1980
Net urban in-migration rates
Net rural-urban migration
Males
Females
Country
1960s
1970s
1960s
1970s
1960s
1970s
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Source: UN, 1991.
Of particular relevance is the relationship between urban and rural areas. In countries with large rural sectors, such as Indonesia and Thailand, this has created an imbalance in population distribution, with increasing numbers of young people-both male and female - moving from villages to towns and cities, heavily taxing the infrastructural resources of the urban centres-housing, water, sanitation, waste disposal, transport, etc. Often these rural migrants become the "new urban poor" congregating in squatter communities.
Diagram 1 Environmental and Human Consequences of Development Polices
Table 6 Percentage of Population Residing in Urban Areas in Selected Countries,
Country
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam
Source: UN, 1991.
The rural exodus usually has negative effects on the agricultural sector. The older people generally stay behind in the villages to manage the farming. The resulting labour shortage thus compounds rural poverty, further jeopardising rural development. Farming lands lie idle and are bought up by urban investors for conversion into industrial sites, golf courses, country clubs, resorts and the like.
In this situation, the subsistence base of the rural population is reduced and depleted, especially for rural women and children, smallholders and the landless. Those previously able to provide for their own subsistence are now made dependent on wage labour, either in the urban or rural sector, The livelihood of those who stay in rural areas as wage workers-as plantation workers, for example become vulnerable to the pricing of commodities and labour.3 These in turn are seasonally affected.
A major reason for these negative consequences is the mix of goals that policies and programmes are supposed to fulfill simultaneously:
 economic growth
 social development
 debt servicing
 environmental conservation
This has led to numerous inconsistencies in policy formulation and implementation, as these various goals are not necessarily compatible and may even be in opposition to one another.
An example of policy inconsistency is sometimes seen in land allocation. Policies focussed economic growth and debt servicing tend to treat all land simply as property to be rented, sold or built up and used for commerce and industry. In contrast, policies focussed on environmental conservation tend to treat land as the habitat of flora and fauna to be conserved in their natural state. And policies focussed on social development tend to treat land either as a national resource or as a resource base for the livelihood of the community. These policy inconsistencies can lead to a three-way contradiction or even conflict between different ministries and departments, a situation which is usually resolved in terms of power-political, financial, or even military - often at the expense of rural communities, who are usually the most powerless people.
Extension services meant to address the needs of the farming community in rural development are themselves plagued by such problems as shortages in staffing, funds, and technical support, as well as a lack of sensitivity or awareness of the community situation, a lack of gender-sensitivity, and a lack of female extension workers who attend to the needs of rural women.
Moreover, in the course of their work, extension workers rarely consider marketing prospects when deciding which crops or activities to push for in the production of farming households. In other words, despite the many consequences of macro development policies passed down from the top, at the ground level the extension services do not adequately address the community problems resulting from these policies.
The dynamics of policies and their consequences are illustrated by the following case from the Philippines (see also Diagram 2):
The consequences of environmental degradation on irrigated rice production, households, population and women: a case study from the Philippines
Forest cover in the Philippines is fast disappearing and an increasing number of species of wild flora and fauna are either seriously endangered or have already become extinct. In 1972, the country had 10.4 million hectares of natural forest, covering 34 percent of the total and area. By 1990, there were only 6.16 million hectares of natural forest, covering 10.5 percent of the total land area. The Philippines is estimated to be losing about 1 19,000 hectares of forest each year. If this trend continues, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources estimates that all the country's forests will be completely gone in about 12 years.
This process of forest denudation has to be understood in the context of ecological interactions between highlands and lowlands, a vicious circle leading to increasing environmental degradation in both zones. Unravelling this vicious circle from the point of forest denudation onwards, we can trace a chain of consequences which, in turn, generate yet further deforestation.
Diagram 2 Irrigated - Rainfed Agricultural Production in the Philippines (and other countries)
Source: International Rice Research Institute, 1994.
The major causes of deforestation fall into two categories:
Accidental
 forest fires
 pests
 diseases
Economic
 commercial logging
 shifting cultivation
 subsistence cultivation
 excessive fuel harvesting.
Whatever the genesis, the consequences of denuding forest land are clear:
 flooding
 soil erosion
 salinization
 decreasing soil fertility
 loss of genetic resources.
The land in at least 22 of the Philippines' 73 provinces is already badly eroded. In 1983, about 45 percent of the 5.78 million hectares classified as suitable for crop production were found susceptible to erosion in varying degrees. In 1985, 50 percent of the country's seasonally-cropped areas apparently suffered from soil erosion (A Report on the Philippines 'Environment and Development, Issues and Strategies, 1992).
What is the effect of forest denudation on lowland irrigated rice farms? Studies show that upper watershed degradation brings about externalities imposed on lowland productivity, especially sediment flow affecting irrigation infrastructure. Pingali and de Vera (1991) tried to relate, econometrically, upper watershed degradation to irrigation infrastructure for each region of the Philippines. The results show that forest production through commercial logging and shifting cultivation, and mineral production through mining, have had significant negative effects on the area irrigated in the wet season. In the Philippines as a whole, upper watershed degradation leads to an average loss of 4,200 hectares per year of wet season irrigated land and 2,700 hectares per year of dry season irrigated land. This amounts to a production loss of approximately 24,000 tons per year.
The degradation of the irrigation infrastructure also adversely affects productivity in the lowlands. Another negative effect of this degradation is the contamination of irrigation water and canals from which families draw water for various purposes, including for bathing their animals. The contaminated water may also affect health, leading to increased susceptibility to water-borne diseases and high mortality, especially among infants and children. The degradation of the irrigation infrastructure, exacerbated by the high electricity costs of irrigation, has also expanded the area used for partially-irrigated and rain-fed farms, which has further led to a massive decline in rice production.
This leads to greater poverty for smallholder rice farmers. In many areas, the low income from rice has led to the conversion of land to industrial, recreational or residential use. Due to unemployment and the inability of rice farming to absorb the available labour force, plus the higher wages and greater opportunities offered by non-farm employment, male farmers migrate to the cities, particularly during the dry season. Unless technologies are forthcoming to increase crop productivity and cropping intensity by growing drought-tolerant crops, male migration will continue, leaving women as the sole managers of their animals, minor crops, and all household responsibilities. This, of course, increases women's already heavy workload enormously. In the lowlands, women from smallholder families also have to work on other farms in operations such as weeding and harvesting, tasks which compete for time and energy with their reproductive roles.
Low family income and lack of capital lead to a deepening indebtedness to meet the high input requirements of rice cultivation and daily household needs. The women are mainly responsible for borrowing paddy or cash--usually from private money lenders, who charge inflated interest rates of up to 25 percent a month. The responsibility for repayment also falls on the women. Yet despite the pressure to seek other income, opportunities are quite limited in their villages. So the women resort to various income-generating activities, such as:
 making and selling rice delicacies, thereby adding value to raw products
 working as hired labourers on other farms
 gleaning rice from the output of big mechanical threshers
 engaging in petty trading.
Most women also take care of swine and poultry in their own backyards, important sources of immediate cash. Another important survival strategy for rural families is for one family member to work abroad and send remittances. These are sometimes used for important farm expenditures, such as buying a carabao or a cow. Micro-studies show that for many farm families off-farm income is increasingly more important than income from farming itself
Lack of the irrigation that would enable farmers to grow two to three crops of rice per year tends to intensify land use and increase the yield per hectare through the use of modern varieties. Pingali and de Vera (1991) stated that rice production is characterised by long-term stagnation or declines in yields under intensive irrigated rice production. The degradation of the paddy environment can occur due to one or more causes: pest pressure, rapid depletion of micro-nutrients and changes in soil chemistry brought about by intensive cropping and increased reliance on low quality irrigation water.
Rola and Pingali (1993) have examined the harmful effects on human health of high pesticide use. Although women are not normally directly exposed to pesticides, they are affected by the misuse and mishandling of pesticide containers. This, of course, also affects their children's health. The over use of pesticides also harms the natural habitat. Fish in ponds and edible frogs and weeds-important indigenous food for poor farmers-are fast disappearing. Families have to resort to buying food. To do so they often have to borrow money.
Rural women who do not have access to alternative and remunerative employment in the village have to work as hired labourers in transplanting and harvesting operations, where they are paid either in cash or in kind (i.e., a share of the paddy). Their wages depend on their farming skills and speed. In transplanting, greater competition results in smaller take-home wages. Such rural women suffer from low returns on their labour and from low self-esteem in maintaining family food security.
Low incomes, lack of employment opportunities, increased indebtedness, and diminishing sources of home-produced foods-all these lead to less available food for a family with an average of six children. The poor quality of food and reduced mother's time in food preparation lead to child malnutrition and high infant mortality. In the absence of alternative support systems, the greater time mothers are obliged to spend outside the home leads to the neglect of child care, less time for breast-feeding and poorer feeding habits.
Environmental and economic pressures in the lowland, rain-fed areas result in the loss of sustainable livelihood and reduced employment. This has led to greater and growing migration from the lowlands to the upland areas, thereby merely transferring the environmental and economic pressures to higher zones. Conflicts consequently arise between the lowland migrants and the upland farmers and indigenous tribal communities. The resulting population pressure exacerbates the poverty and survival needs of the uplands people, including both migrant and indigenous communities. This, in turn, feeds further denuding of forest lands and environmental degradation, as the resources of nature become the only accessible goods that can be exploited. Resource depletion, poverty and unemployment lead to rural-urban migration, and the proliferation of city slums and squatter settlements, also imposing various negative environmental penalties.
<section>4</section>
Part 3 - Rural women's decreasing resource base
Part 3 - Rural women's decreasing resource base
We need to realise that the real population problem is not that there are too many people, but that there are too many poor people today over one billion-- in absolute poverty.
Fawzi H. Al-Sultan, President
International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD)
Over the last fifty years, massive development processes have occurred in the countries of Southeast Asia. Very few have helped rural women. Summing up the research findings of a project on "Agricultural Change, Rural Women and Organisations," initiated by the Asian and Pacific Development Centre (APDC) in 1985, Heyzer (1987:3-4) wrote:
Options regarding types of agricultural change and the implementation of rural development policies have for a long while been carried out on the assumption that development that benefits men will automatically benefit women and that development that benefits one stratum of rural society will automatically benefit the rest. The needs of women from the poorest strata of rural society have long been ignored or overlooked by governments in the attempts to raise rural productivity and to create access of the poor to land employment, adequate income and technology. This has limited the economic and social outcomes of many development programmes.... Development projects are vehicles for generating change and a major development effort is to ensure that the changes generated, at the very least, do not increase the vulnerability ,and power lessness and isolation of both men and women who are very poor. In part, rural women's experiences with development are common to those of rural
me'?. However, the negative effects of development processes have been felt more acutely by rural women because of gender-biased hierarchies which, on the one hand, limit women's access to resources and participation and on the other hand, impose sexual divisions of labour that allocate to women the most tedious, labour-intensive and poorly rewarded work, as well as long hours of work. In such a context, the search for solutions cannot be simply to suggest the addition of a 'women's component' to existing development frameworks... There must also be the questioning of the frameworks within which choices are made in order to come Up with new concepts of work, social organisations and relationships which would improve the terms under which many women are obliged to participate.
Indeed, policies on development, labour, agriculture, environment, and population rarely consider women's views and needs. Moreover, policy makers give scant attention to the linkage between women, population and environment. As the findings of APDC's research project indicate, rural women's resource entitlement has decreased significantly. This is evident in several case studies from this project:
CASE STUDY 1: MALAYSIA
The building of the Batang Ai hydro-electric dam in Sarawak led to the resettlement of the indigenous Iban community. This has led to severe ecological, social, cultural and economic disruption for the people, especially the women who have lost all traditional rights to land and other resources. In traditional Iban custom, men and women work equally in paddy planting, acquire land rights and settlement rights equally and inherit property equally. In the process of resettlement, however, this has changed. The compensation money, ranging from M$ 10,000 to M$ 400,000 (about US$ 4,000 to US$ 160,000), was mostly given to the men, under the planners' false assumption that the men were the 'heads of households. '
With the commercialisation of agriculture and SALCRA's (Sarawak Land Consolidation and Rehabilitation Authority) policy of one certificate of ownership to a household, women's rights over land have been abrogated and a dependency relationship created.... One of the most traumatic effects of resettlement for the women? settlers is that they have no land to plant paddy.... Most settlers continued to grow' paddy on SALCRA land when they first moved into the area as commercial crops were yet to be planted However, this is no longer possible as the land is now planted with cocoa and rubber. There is now a rising desperation among the women to find land for their paddy pun (sacred paddy) to be planted every year in perpetuity. Traditionally women are the custodians of the paddy pun.
Hew and Kedit, 1987:188, 192
This is a process of impoverishment, as people who once had abundant resources and were "haves" are now "have-nots " More recent research done by Noeleen Heyzer in Sarawak on the Iban and other indigenous communities:
...points to the poverty-environment-population linkages sharply and the macro forces that impinge upon communities. The invasion of logging companies resulted in the destruction of the livelihood systems of the indigenous communities. Along with this, land-use and land-titles redefined their access to the resources. In some communities, this has resulted in new patterns of poverty due to environmental degradation. This has led to male migration to urban areas for wage work, leaving women to bear all the burdens of subsistence and slash and burn agriculture. There is a labour shortage and pressures are created to have more children. In other words, the trend here is not that population growth results in environmental degradation and poverty, but the opposite: environmental degradation caused by powerful outside interests can lead to new patterns of poverty at [the] local level and this i'? turrn can create pressures for population growth.
Quoted from Mukherjee, 1993:49-50
Table 7 Estimates for Maternal Mortality Rates per 100,000 Births in Selected
Countries, Around 1980 and Latest Available Year
Country
Year
Maternal mortality rate
Year
Maternal mortality rate
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam
Source: UN, 1994.
CASE STUDY 2: THE PHILIPPINES
This case study showed the marginalisation of rural women in agricultural production as a result of technological changes:
The changes in rice technology were: I) a shift in type of seed from the traditional varieties to the short, early maturing ones produced by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), 2) the spread of farm mechanisation in the land-preparation and threshing tasks, and 3) changes in certain farm practises, such as extensive use of fertilisers, pesticides, weedicides and methods of direct seeding.... Technological changes displaced more women than men. Under the old technology, almost half of the labourers working a hectare of rice land...were women. However, by 1986, only 36 percent in Bo. Lalangan and 29 percent in Bo. Tabon were females.... The fact that displacement has occurred in the absence of other job opportunities implies the severely constricted nature of employment opportunities in these areas.... For a number of women in the two villages, however, mechanisation of the threshing operations created [peripheral] tasks which... were associated with the
subsistence activities women had in the past engaged in. As the mechanical thresher blows out the hay stack, women place a plastic mat or net on the ground to catch the falling grains or hay that come with it.... Once this is done, they separate the hay stalks from the grain, a process which must be undertaken right away because the thresher spews out more hay stalk.... Whatever the women got was milled for home consumption.... The worsening unemployment and displacement of women in other villages and towns increased competition for the marginal jobs... The collection and processing of /eft-over grain... symbolises the relegation of women to the left-over employment opportunities of men: [it/ is the rural counterpart of urban scavenging
Banzon-Bautista and Dungo, 1987:280, 285, 287-9
This case study also illustrates the ability of economically-marginalised rural women to make something out of nothing. They convert waste, for example, into a food resource for their families. The economic marginalisation of women nevertheless has repercussions on the welfare of both the women themselves and their children, as the family still remains the responsibility of the women and "the burden of restructuring the budget and meeting cash shortages seems to fall on women" (Banzon-Bautista and Dungo, 198.7:307).
CASE STUDY 3: THAILAND
This study examines changes i'' work patterns in the rural villages of central Thailand due to the construction of a reservoir and development of transportation networks. The resettled farmers have had to change their means of livelihood completely-from lowland paddy cultivation to cultivating dry-field crops in the uplands. Due to this change, farmers who were once self-sufficient in rice are now dependent on cash crops for export. The change from cultivations of food crops to export-oriented crops has throw,' the farmers into the cash economy--i.e., rice, the staple food, has to be bought. Household expenditure on food has increased. I'' poorer households, women as home-keepers and food-providers find it more difficult to manage their small income from agriculture and have had to seek urban employment in nearby towns.
Sirisambhand and Gordon, 1987:313
These case studies and many other examples give clear evidence of an insidious process of the impoverishment of rural women. Ironically, it is the very development processes that are supposed to benefit the people that have dispossessed, displaced, de-skilled and pauperised women and, by extension, their dependents. Invisibility has brought ill-effects for women. While they bear the brunt of agricultural production and, of course, all the childbearing in Southeast Asian society, their work is inadequately acknowledged and rewarded. In the designing of adequate and sustainable development alternatives, therefore, gender equity is not a luxury but a necessity. It has far-reaching consequences for women, population and the environment.
Table 8 Indicators of the Infant Mortality Rates in Selected Countries
Country
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Singapore
Thailand
Vietnam
Source: UNEP, 1994.
Even more ironically, these development processes, orientated as they are towards commercialisation, industrialisation, technologisation, and urbanisation, are environmentally unsustainable. The livelihood of rural communities is badly hurt by environmental disasters including:
 water pollution as a result of sewerage, garbage disposal, industrial waste, pesticides, and sedimentation through soil erosion and timber logging
 toxic wastes dumped in rural areas
 deforestation through timber logging, resulting in the loss of topsoil, landslides, and floods
It is well documented, for example, that massive deforestation has serious consequences on rainfall and climate patterns, resulting in the loss of food crops. These food shortages and price increases affect the livelihood of families and increase women's burden as resource managers who have to seek out increasingly scarce alternatives. The increasing degradation of the natural resource base in many countries has thereby undermined women's roles as major resource users and managers in providing food and securing overall family welfare.
Forests are the source of food, fuel, and medicines. They are also the home of indigenous communities. Deforestation has caused the loss of these essentials for many indigenous, as well as rural, communities. What could have been obtained free from the forests now has to be purchased in the market place. Women as resource managers now need cash, earned only through employment. But in a situation of gender asymmetry, even among the poor, women are the poorest of the poor with little access to scarce resources, including employment opportunities. Pushed into "formal employment," rural women usually enter the labour market as unskilled, low-wage workers. Even so, they must still carry their traditional burdens of child bearing and rearing and overseeing family welfare. Thus children often constitute women's only economic wealth and social security. In the absence of viable alternatives, poor women are motivated to maximise their "wealth" by having many children.
Water pollution and toxic waste dumping also impose serious penalties on women. As pointed out by Dehlot (1992:8):
...women of childbearing age are more vulnerable to environmental pollutants than men because of their reproductive function and breast-feeding practice. Many reports have linked reproductive defects to such contaminants as lead. With the yearly increase in the number of chemicals, the impact on women and children appears to be rising According to UN studies, the possible effects of exposure to chemicals range from infertility, miscarriage, malformation and neonatal death to growth retardation.
Maternal and infant mortality rates are thus a significant indication of health conditions, affected not only by poverty but also by environmental pollution. These figures illustrate the need for major social investment in the health of society's most vulnerable members. Such investment should cover not only the provision of medical services, but perhaps more importantly, poverty alleviation and environmental detoxification.
<section>5</section>
Part 4 - The negative effects of gender insensitivity in rural development
Part 4 - The negative effects of gender insensitivity in rural development
Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself (sic) and of his family, including,, food clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948
Article 25(1)
The following three accounts illustrate the negative effects of gender insensitivity:
ACCOUNT I
In Lampang, northern Thailand, in a Thai Dairy Association project for small dairy farmers, agricultural extension agents provided information only to male farmers. The job of taking care of the cows, however, usually falls on women. As training in dairy cow-keeping was given only to the male farmers, the women who actually do the raising and milking of the cows did not get any direct information. Instead, the women were supposed to rely on learning indirectly from the men, a highly irregular mode of learning.
In 1988, FAO started working with the Department of Agricultural Extension, the Dairy Association of Thailand and the Lampang Agricultural Research and Training Centre of the Rajamangala Institute of Technology. Direct training was then provided for both men and women farmers. The result was much more productive cows, and more and better milk production with a lower bacterial count.
ACCOUNT 2
In the Philippines, new agricultural technologies, introduced without consideration of their gender impact, have led to the economic displacement of women. A clear example is direct seeding with the introduction of short-maturing crops. While motivated by the good intention of maximising land use through cropping intensity to benefit the farmers who own the land, the impact on women was not homogeneous. With direct seeding, transplanting - traditionally done by women - is no longer necessary. Direct seeding also produces an extra crop or two, rather than just one, per year. Women who own land do profit from crop intensification. Others, however, are landless and they are now displaced as transplanters. Some of these women may be re-employed as harvesters of the extra crop.
The women are not usually paid in cash but in kind - i.e.. a share of the paddy - which becomes food for their families. While some payment in kind may be derived from harvesting, on the whole female landless labourers suffer a reduction in employment due to the lack of transplanting work. The result is migration to other villages. The social and economic consequences are neglected children, higher school drop-out rates, and increased child labour, now an important labour resource. The landless women farm workers now have less money for food. Most of them have been transplanting since they were 16-years-old. Now in their forties, they have few prospects of upward social mobility.
For the land-owning female farmer, the increased net profits go into the family income. This often deprives her, however, of her independent income from transplanting work. Ironically, she now has more profit yet less income. Moreover, she has to pay more for fertilisers and herbicides, previously unneeded. The existence of a costly irrigation structure is also crucial for the two crops. Crop intensification is uncertain, totally dependent on infrastructural investment. The loss of the woman farmer's independent income may even be linked to maternal mortality.
In the absence of a safety net, women devise alternative family strategies for generating income. One such is rural-urban migration for family members who remit earnings back to the village. This, however, makes the village family dependent on remittances from abroad. In this situation, the re-institution of a sustainable livelihood for the rural poor, especially women farmers, is crucial.
ACCOUNT 3
In most developing countries, poor rural women are the victims of the increasing costs of pesticides and fertilisers, the depletion of natural resources, loss of soil fertility, diminishing water supplies and increasing hazards to human health. Women farmers in Malaysia, like their sisters elsewhere, do 60 percent of all agricultural work. In addition, they prepare food and must ensure that water and fuel are always available, as these tasks are held to be women's responsibility.
In Malaysia's plantations, women perform most of the chemical-related work, such as spraying and the application of pesticides and fertilisers. This exposes them to serious health hazards. Documented case studies show that women pesticide sprayers suffer from dermatitis and other ills, including nails dropping off, dizziness, vomiting and nose bleeds. Despite these health hazards, women continue to spray unprotected with little, if any, monitoring of their health. The long-term and chronic health effects on women pesticide workers, such as the effects on women's reproductive abilities, have received small attention from researchers.
Apart from some minor medical attention, women pesticide workers do not receive compensation for pesticide-related injuries. Ministries of Agriculture now moving to more humane forms of agriculture should make it mandatory for workers in the agricultural sector to be trained in minimising the risks from pesticides. The women should also be provided with suitable protective wear, have their health conditions monitored regularly, and they should receive adequate medical care and monetary compensation when they suffer injuries (Tenaguita, 1992, and Women and Health in the Plantations, 1985).
<section>6</section>
Part 5 - Towards an integrated, cross-sectoral approach: placing women at the centre
Part 5 - Towards an integrated, cross-sectoral approach: placing women at the centre
If women could their own choices about childbearing, the world would be well on the road to the lowest of the United Nations' projections. That would make a difference of 2.5 billion in population in 2050.
Dr. Nafis Sadik, Secretary-General,
United Nations International
Conference on
Population and Development and Executive Director,
United Nations Fund for
Population Activities (UNFPA)
The analyses in the previous sections point to the need for an integrated, cross-sectoral approach, able to address effectively the complex issues raised. Any policy that fails to deal comprehensively with the total reality of rural women's lives is merely a piecemeal and ad hoc treatment of an arbitrarily isolated fragment of the real world. It is not mere passing intellectual fashion to call for replacing single-sectoral approaches with cross-sectoral ones integrating women, population and environment in development policies and programmes. There is an urgent need for a coherent and effective policy framework that will be gender-sensitive, socially equitable, environmentally sustainable and developmentally innovative.
The need for such integration was recognised in the Bali Declaration on Population and Sustainable Development (Fourth Asian and Pacific Population Conference 1992: UN Document ST/ESCAP/1195), where the members and associate members of ESCAP stated that:
 "An integrated approach incorporating population, resources, the environment and development elements must be pursued, although understanding of the complex interrelationships between these elements is still at an early stage. To do otherwise would endanger the attainment of sustainable development and narrow the options available to future generations."
 "Measures to improve the status, role and participation of women must be given high priority, both because women have a fundamental right to enjoy equality with men in all aspects of life and because women play a critical role in, and must fully participate in, the sustainable development process."
 "The alleviation of poverty is fundamental to the achievement of sustainable development.''
The destination has now been agreed. How to get there is the issue. How do we fully integrate these complex issues into all aspects of planning and policy-making by so many different planners and policy-makers, across so many different sectors? A top-down approach
37 is woefully inadequate. From a top-down perspective, a sector is a specialised purview, a defined jurisdiction, a realm of decision-making, a policy niche. In such a context, to seek integration across different policy sectors is to go against the grain.
But the aim is not to force together disparate fragments. What is sought, rather, is a recognition, an acknowledgement of the intrinsic relatedness of the processes that have an impact on the lives of people. Those who experience these multiple processes are themselves the people most aware of their relatedness. Usually such people are women, because of their multiple roles in all aspects of social life.
Women are involved in all social and cultural activities. It is well documented that development programmes that ignore women either fail or have negative social impact, as they are based on an inadequate and only partial understanding of society. Because of women's vital role in production and reproduction, the many programmes and policies targetted at the rural community have their greatest impact on women. Yet this gender-specific impact is too often ignored by planners, overlooked by field workers, and bypassed in project implementation.
The mistake of ignoring gender is clear when the household serves as the unit of analysis. To regard the man as the head of the household and to relegate the woman to nothing more than his wifely appendage with no independent role, rights, responsibilities, or perspectives of her own, is always a mistake. The reduction of a woman to a stereotypical 'wife' focusses only on her biological reproductive capacity and classifies her as an 'economic dependent' who makes no significant contributions to society outside the domestic domain. This form of gender-blindness assumes the homogeneity of the household unit, ignores interpersonal dynamics across gender and age, and fails to consider women's multiple contributions to society.
An integrated, cross-sectoral approach must thus seek not just to include women as one sector among others. It must place women at the very core of its programme, not as the passive recipients of top-down integrative efforts. It must see women as important social actors who play a key role in sustaining societal integrity in the midst of rapid change. Such a perspective, grounded in women's multiple experiences and roles, would be integrative and cross-sectoral, and would contribute to a new development paradigm based on the recognition of women as the core of the biological and social reproduction of all human societies.
Diagram 3 (Dehlot, 1992:5) illustrates the centrality of women in the nexus of environment, population and development. This centrality is, however, a double-edged sword: on the one hand, women have suffered, at great cost, the impact of multiple forces; on the other hand, they have also developed coping strategies and survival skills that have enabled them to transcend these multiple forces. This is of particular relevance in the rural context and in relation to the four problems discussed previously--poverty, environmental degradation, infant and child mortality, and maternal mortality.
Diagram 3 Women and Ecological Engineering
Adapted from Dehlot, 1992: 5
Women are often the poorest of the poor, shackled to social, cultural, legal and economic inequities. While many women have indeed suffered the wrongs of social injustice, the transcendence of their deprivation enables them to develop innovative ways of maximising meagre resources. Case Study 2 in Part 3, for example, illustrates how women in the Philippines turned a waste by-product into a food resource. While making something out of nothing is, in many cases, borne of necessity, it nonetheless demands labour-intensive drudgery. Because of their marginal position in society, women have drawn on indigenous knowledge for the identification and utilisation of alternative resources usually ignored by the mainstream economy.
This explains why, in rural communities, women's knowledge of big-diversity is often more comprehensive than men's. Women's botanical knowledge, for example, tends to embrace a maximal number of edible plants, including otherwise poisonous plants that can only be made edible through food processing. Knowledge of medicinal herbs and rare plants useful in periods of scarcity is also largely the purview of women, who often hold the keys to sophisticated indigenous plant classifications. In contrast, men's botanical knowledge tends to focus on plants that are used as staples and those marketed as cash crops.
The loss of indigenous knowledge is a permanent loss of a precious resource. An entire bank of data, collected over thousands of years in indigenous knowledge systems, can not be superceded entirely with 'scientific' information. Social data is especially important, but so is indigenous information which holds answers to today's unsustainable development strategies. Environment, population and gender issues have much to gain from a new recognition and search within old knowledge systems. As Vandana Shiva wrote in her essay "Systems of Knowledge as Systems of Power" (1993):
The disappearance of local knowledge through its interaction with the dominant western knowledge takes place at many levels, through many steps. First, local knowledge is made to disappear by simply not seeing it, by negating its very existence. This is very easy in the distant gaze of the globalising dominant system . The western systems of knowledge have generally been viewed as universal. However, the dominant system is also a local system, with its social basis in a particular culture, class and gender. It is not universal in an epistemological sense It i* merely the globalised version of a very local and parochial tradition. Emerging from a dominating and colonising culture, modern knowledge systems are themselves colonising.
And another quote from Vandana Shiva:
A woman anthropologist at IRRI in the Philippines had the sensitivity to observe how male categories of 'efficiency' created the mechanisation imperative. Barog, a process of shaving off the already beaten stalks of rice to glean the grain that remain*, used to be undertaken by women who did this between child care and cooking. They kept all the grain they got (none going to the owner of the field), which, at times, was as high as 10 percent of the total yield Mechanising the barog process was inspired because the male IRRI scientists saw women's gain as 'loss. ' The woman anthropologist asks: "How can IRRI defend counting barog grain as a 'loss'? It is true that the field owner does not get his hands on it. But that the grain passes out of his hands does not reflect the technical inefficiency of the traditional method. The barog grad'' is by no means 'lost' either to the national economy or to the production system itself Village families eat it - and what makes our report
more embarrassing, it is usually the poorest villagers that eat it. At best, our failure to credit the traditional system with this gaing reflects a'' evaluation of rice in terms of money rather than consumable food.
"From a woman anthropologist's note-pad: IRRI memos," Balai No. 7, 1993, quoted from Shiva, 1989:111
Women's indigenous knowledge is founded precisely on their multiple roles and responsibilities in the care of their children, cooking of food, management of scarce resources, and their own survival as the disadvantaged members of an inequitable society. The shadow ecology and shadow economy based on women's indigenous knowledge now need to come out into the sunshine, particularly as our current environmental crisis has been brought about by the over-consumption and wastage of resources. In the search for sustainable development alternatives for all sectors of society, women have a crucial role to play. At micro and community levels, they are usually the managers of local resources upon which everyday life depends. This significant managerial role should be duly acknowledged and integrated into rural development policies and programmes, especially those aimed at smallholder agricultural production.
But though women are half the world and though they play a vital role in society, they are usually considered a social and political minority whose needs and views are seldom included at a macro level. ^4 On the one hand, there is a need to ensure that women fully participate in and benefit from the socio-economic development processes while, on the other, developmental, demographic and environmental issues cannot be adequately addressed without taking into consideration half the human population. Indeed, as shown above, in the current search for new solutions to global problems, women's views and indigenous knowledge should themselves be recognised as vital resources.
Unfortunately, in many Asian countries, women are still not regarded as equal partners in socio-economic development. Even when their vital contributions are acknowledged, they are relegated to a subordinate role.^5 Bearing in mind the existing centrality of women in the nexus of economic, environmental, social, cultural and demographic forces, a comprehensive analysis should be made of:
 the impact of these multiple forces on women's lives
 how women integrate the multiplicity of their experiences, roles and responsibilities
 how they transcend these external forces and make life-choices that simultaneously enhance their own survival, nurture the young, care for the old, manage the household, find and use natural resources, and sustain the environment
There can be no long-term sustainability without social and gender equity. Inequities generate inherent instabilities in the ecosystem as people compete to secure monopolistic resource niches. Nor can there be sustainability if the basic livelihood needs of people are not met.6 It is thus recommended that governments allocate budget priorities and take pro-active measures to safeguard and revitalise the natural environment and to build capacities for sustainable livelihoods through equitable resource use and distribution.
It is also recommended that governments should learn from the costly mistakes of past development failures. They should not follow the NIC (newly-industrialised country) model blindly. There should be an awareness of the ecological and social costs of the so-called "economic miracles" of Asia and the Pacific, which benefit some at the expense of the rest. Development should not be motivated by conspicuous consumption as an expression of affluence. Instead, governments should undertake the following measures:
 reduce the over-consumption and wastage of resources
 re-distribute resources more equitably between urban and rural sectors
 emphasise self-sufficient food security and the provision of adequate nutrition for rural communities, especially for women and children
 rely less on the export of cash crops and primary resources in exchange for food imports
 value the sustainability of a subsistence economy, based on the agricultural production of smallholders practicing mixed cropping, especially the work of women farmers
Governments need to acknowledge women's vital role in maintaining intergenerational sustainability in a self-renewing environment. This is particularly important during the sweeping environmental and societal changes that come in the wake of new economic policies and structural adjustment programmes. It is recommended that in the transformation of the landscape through development activities, efforts be made to design and maintain sustainable living habitats and that women's indigenous knowledge be incorporated into the planning of such habitats. Women's indigenous knowledge should be acknowledged as valid in its own right and therefore included in educational curricula and teaching methods.
In this regard, it is important to protect women's rights of access and control over the land and resources. Their indigenous knowledge, the source of their livelihood, comes from their understanding of these. Protecting the quality of the natural resource base is also needed, as are the retention of topsoil, maintaining unpolluted waters, forest conservation, and preserving big-diversity. Where the environment has undergone degradation, efforts should be made to revitalise all remaining resources, so that a viable, self-renewing resource base can be reconstituted for the sustainable livelihood of rural communities. The role and indigenous knowledge of women as resource managers is of particular significance here.
It is recommended that rural women's productive role be enhanced by addressing the social, cultural and economic forces which undermine women's contribution. First and foremost among these forces is the tradition of patriarchy. Through patriarchy males are able to enjoy, among other privileges:
 rights over productive resources (e.g., land ownership)
 rights over children (e.g., petri-biased kinship)
 rights over female sexuality (e.g., the double sexual standard)
 rights over female labour (e.g., women's double burden)
 rights over their own male person, allowing them to decide for themselves whether to stay in their community or to migrate, to work on the farm or to accept wage work, to marry or not to marry
To provide a counter force to this tradition of gender inequity, it is recommended that governments should recognise:
 women's rights over productive resources (e.g., the right to own land and other economic assets)
 women's rights over their children (e.g., as the head of the family)
 women's rights over their own sexuality (e.g., the right to have or not to have sexual intercourse, to have or not to have children)
 women's rights over their own labour (e.g., owning and enjoying the fruits of their labour, such as money from the sale of food products and handicrafts)
 women's rights over their own person (e.g., rights to mobility, job opportunities and marriage choice)
Another force that women have to contend with is the external market which diverts male family members' labour into off-farm activities in towns and cities, leading to seasonal and permanent migration and leaving the women who remain behind to shoulder all the agricultural tasks. To counterbalance this tendency, governments should not seek to encourage the rural exodus by exporting labour for foreign exchange. Governments should seek to lighten women's load by providing them with extension training, rural credit, processing and marketing skills, and up-to-date technology in agricultural production. Ways should also be found to ease drudgery in domestic work.
It is also recommended that governments and international organisations seek an understanding of the social, cultural, political and economic conditions that lead women to make particular reproductive choices. It is these structures and conditions that need to be addressed to empower women to make alternative reproductive choices. Poverty, gender inequality, early marriage, male control of female sexuality, cultural denotations of parenthood, the social and economic value of children, the preference for sons, the lack of alternative life choices for women: all these and more are the forces and constraints that shape women's reproductive choices. Population care policies should thus look at the roots of the demographic problem and not just its surface manifestation.
The burden of reproductive control should not be placed only on women, and family planning should not be targetted solely at women's bodies. It should be recognised that it is the larger society that has generated the reproductive patterns which usually determine women's fertility. Ultimately, therefore, population care has to take place through social development directed towards society as a whole, so that reproductive patterns that are gender-biased and ecologically unsustainable can be fundamentally reshaped.
As a countervailing force to gender-biased reproductive patterns, governments should recognise women's right to maintain control over their own bodies and their sexuality. Women should also have the right to demand and to shape the kind of information they need and want on sexuality, reproduction, medical technology, marital rights and parental rights. Women, therefore, need access to a range of contraceptive choices, and to be fully informed of their various risks and effects. Family planning then becomes an instrument to promote gender equity. Training and counselling on gender equity should be given to all persons involved in the reproductive and contraceptive process, including family elders, husbands, family planning personnel, and of course the women themselves. There should be a conscious promotion of male respect for women's rights over their own bodies.
<section>7</section>
Part 6 - Issues and recommendations for specific agro-ecological farming systems
Agro-ecological system: swidden (slash-and-burn) in forested uplands
Agro-ecological system: rainfed small farms
Agro-ecological system: fisheries
Agro-ecological system: plantations
Across all agro-ecological farming systems
Endnotes
Bibliography
References
Part 6 - Issues and recommendations for specific agro-ecological farming systems
Equitable and secure rights for those actually working the land are essential for improving natural resource management.
Dr. Solon Barraclough, Senior Consultant at the United Nations
Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD),
Geneva, Switzerland
Agro-ecological system: swidden (slash-and-burn) in forested uplands
Issues
Proposed strategies
Forest degradation and denudation through timber logging, land loss, too much slash and burn, and population pressure
Rehabilitate degraded ecosystems through reforestation of denuded watersheds
Clearly Identify commercial forest areas
Impose selective logging in areas where agricultural lands are affected
Ban logging in ecologically-fragile areas and productive farmlands
Provide timber companies with practical, educational programmes on reforestation and oblige them to devise reforestation projects for the areas they harvest
Impose strict government control over timber exports
Find viable alternatives for shifting cultivators forced out of their traditional mode of livelihood, especially for women who were formerly agricultural producers in their own right
Train and involve both women and men in soil conservation and other resource-enhancing technology and practices
Promote communitty-based forest management which ensures that the community owns the trees; support diverse varieties and species of trees in nurseries and community forests and encourage the establishment of rules about forest maintenance, use and harvest(e.g., assignment of tasks)
Undertake rehabilitation programmes in farmlands affected by deforestation and provide cash compensation for income loss as an incentive to participate in such activities
Conflicts and differences in resource use by men and women (e.g., trees for alley crops or for fuelwood etc.)
Promote soil erosion control technology, such as, alley cropping and terracing, using food-forage crops and multi-purpose tree species
Tap women's indigenous knowledge in preserving big-diversity and traditional rice varieties
Soil erosion, loss of topsoil, poor fertility, and acid soils
Community-based forest management
Replenish soil nutrients through planting leguminous crops in rotation with other cash crops
Introduce alley cropping, using multi-purpose trees
Loss of big-diversity
Promote the principle that big-diversity is a national heritage to be protected for future generations
Ratify and implement the FAO Protocol on Plant Genetics Resources
Initiate national campaigns to promote the greater use of local herbs and vegetables
Conduct an environmental audit of big-diversity
Participate in international efforts to co-operate on preserving bio-diversity
Assist in the development of community seed banks for preserving big-diversity
Inappropriate production intervention, such as the replication of lowland mistakes (high use of pesticides and fertilisers) in the uplands, including the bias for working with male farmers almost exclusively. Terracing for rice production-seldom profitable for farmers-is another illustration of inappropriate intervention (e.g., when FAO terminated one rice terracing project, the farmers abandoned the project. No other projects, or alternative crops, were even considered)
Learn from previous mistakes and develop workable programmes and projects for the uplands
Introducing unsuitable crops into the uplands that endanger people's food security and family income
Promote only the production of crops that grow well in the uplands
Provide seeds, crop selection information and credit to upland farmers
Provide facilities for processing fruit for domestic and foreign markets
Banning of slash and burn cultivation without the provision of alternative livelihood systems, thereby resulting in male migration in search of jobs. This leaves the women and children without adequate resources and entirely dependent on irregular and insufficient remittances sent home by family members
Develop livelihood systems that give priority to household food security and safeguard the community's traditional resource base
Inadequate consideration of hidden costs to the community during resettlement processes-e.g., the loss of forest products, the loss of resource zones and the loss of indigenous knowledge especially in forced migrations of forest dwellers to unfamiliar lowlands
Provide direct and just compensation, including monetary compensation, as starting capital for a new life in resettlement sites
Ensure that resettlements are in environmentally-viable zones, where livelihood systems based on indigenous knowledge can be sustained
Review and evaluate resettlement programmes to make sure they are fair to both sexes, while maintaining a healthy environment and a sustainable population
Discrimination against women in the distribution of land and land rights caused by authorities recognising only men as heads of households
Where private titles or stewardship contracts are being given out to households, ensure that the title or contract is in the name of female and male spouses, or if given out to individual farmers, to both female and male farmers
Increases in women's workload in resettlement because of the loss of their traditional resource zone; insecurity of control over new resource zones; questions about ownership of trees and other resources; their responsibility for finding new sources of food; management of household adjustments; and also finding new income generating activities
Provide gender-sensitive compensation and assistance to women as household resource managers in all resettlement projects
Policy makers' lack of understanding of family's needs-e.g., by giving priority to market-oriented cash-cropping over household food security
Promote food processing through labour-saving technologies and the raising of small farm animals
Exclusion and marginalisation of uplands population, including minority peoples and hill tribes
Ensure the legal status of minority peoples and hill tribes as citizens of the country, with full constitutional rights, even if they are migratory by tradition
Provide educational and health services to both sexes of minority peoples and hill tribes that are culturally appropriate and gender-sensitive
Intrusion of tourism and commercial exploitation of tribal cultures
Safeguard traditions and indigenous knowledge for the younger generations so long as they are environmentally valuable and economically viable
Sexual exploitation of tribal women in the uplands
Provide alternative means of income generation for women in the uplands and provide public education on AIDS, HIV infection and sexually-transmitted diseases
Problems arising from poppy cultivation: the narcotics trade drug addition and over dependence on poppy
Introduce cash crops to replace poppy
Provide public education on the long-term negative affects of drug addiction
Low levels of nutrition in the uplands, high or chronic malnutrition, lower productivity, and increased morbidity and mortality
Develop a nutritional policy and food security programme for the uplands population, with emphasis on the nutritional needs of women and children, especially infants and pregnant and lactating mothers
High incidence of goitre among uplands population caused by iodine deficiency
Provide iodised salt to the uplands population
Blindness among children in the uplands through Vitamin A deficiency
Provide Vitamin A to children in the uplands
Lack of health services in the uplands, due to the reluctance of health workers to travel the long distances separating upland communities from urban centres
Provide basic health care education to the rural community. especially to women who are usually the care givers of the family
Develop mobile health care (e.g., through a "flying doctor" service, radio transmissions, mobile clinic, etc.)
Agro-ecological system: rainfed small farms
Issues
Proposed strategies
Promotion of cash crops, thereby threatening household food security, reducing livelihood prospects, and stimulating more migration
Promote technology which enhances productivity Involve both women and men farmers in all stages of
Promote mixed cropping and diversified cropping with greater concentration on nutritionally-rich varieties
Indigenous plants and traditional food crops should receive increased attention in research and extension
Generate off-farm employment opportunities, particularly during the dry season, with greater attention to small-scale, irrigated gardening
Soil erosion
Agro-forestry should play an important role in soil and water conservation, but also in income generation and nutrition Introduce technology using crops for effective soil conservation
Promote nitrogen-fixing and soil-holding plants
Provide funds for research on cropping systems in rainfed areas
Carry out participatory research involving both women and men farmers in rainfed farming, especially on crop selection, alley-cropping and terrace-cropping
Develop techniques for and training on topsoil conservation, especially to combat soil run-offs during the rainy season
Crowding out of small farm products (fruits, vegetables, eggs and poultry) by plantation-grown products, thereby reducing small farmers' income and provoking the loss of big-diversity
Develop market niches for small farm products (e.g., free-range chicken and eggs, pesticide-free vegetables and exotic fruits) and assist small farmers in preserving big-diversity
Replacement of household-level sustainable systems by technically "efficient" systems, such as the introduction of wrong new crop varieties which increase women's labour while reducing their cash flow-e.g., crops with long ripening periods or processing times
Evaluate all technical interventions as to their social and gender impact and not just "efficiency" alone
Degradation of irrigation structures
Rehabilitate irrigation structures
Promote small-scale irrigation systems
Encourage farmers to build their own water reserves for farming-fishing systems
Cooperate with NGOs in maintaining community-based irrigation management systems
Monocultures
Promote crop diversification to save scarce water, prioritising crops of high value that require little water
Introduce integrated farming systems, including fish farming, animals and crops
Shift from buffalo to tractor, leading to a loss of animal manure to fertilise crops, has a dual impact: males may be released to migrate to other work but this places a heavier burden on the women left behind
Study the impact on women of new technology, over and above considerations of efficiency alone
Excessive use of inorganic fertilisers and pesticides on rice and sugarcane, among others, causing
Promote the use of organic fertilisers and pesticides and reduce the use of inorganic products
contamination of irrigation water. This contaminated water then becomes a health hazard to families using water from the irrigation canals, leading to high rates of mortality and morbidity
Promote non-chemically-produced farm technology and develop extension services for marketing non chemical farm products
Agro-ecological system: fisheries
Issues
Proposed strategies
Disappearance of fish in paddy fields due to high pesticide use
Strictly enforce proper pesticide use
Promote the use of organic pesticides
Diminishing marine and fresh water resources' caused by marine pollution and over-fshing,
Develop and enforce strict control over marine waste including waste fuel from ships, oil spills and chemical toxins
Safeguard littoral food resources collected by women
Depletion of fish stocks through over-fishing
Promote alternatives to trawler fishing
Regulate fishing through seasonal laws that take into account the breeding cycles of different species of marine life
Promote fish fanning as an alternative to heavy fishing
Policy of exporting quality sea and fresh water food when this in turn increases the local prices of fish and prawns alternatives
Meet local needs first before exports
Resettlement of fishing communities to inland areas Ensure that resettlement is located in an with no access to rivers or the sea, leading to a loss environmentally-viable zone, where livelihood of traditional livelihood with no provision for viable systems based on indigenous knowledge can be sustained
Agro-ecological system: plantations
Issues
Proposed strategies
Increased exposure of women to chemical hazards, due to increasing numbers of women sprayers
Provide mandatory, regular medical examination for plantation workers involved in pesticide spraying, with special attention given to the gynecological health of women sprayers
Strictly enforce proper pesticide use
Low wages and unfavourable working conditions
Review labour laws
Monitor compliance with labour laws that benefit workers
Promote fair wages and conditions of employment
Provide quality facilities for women workers, especially child care facilities, such as mobile creches
Across all agro-ecological farming systems
Issues
Proposed strategies
Biased top-down planning and management of water resources, including diverting irrigation works. This has a negative impact on the of the poor and reduces women's access to water for their own needs.
Upgrade support for small irrigation systems, such as water to large-scale water users' associations, that are sustainable, manageable and of positive value to local livelihood livelihood systems
Invest in irrigation systems for women's integrated farming
Encourage women's involvement in the design, construction, and operation and maintenance of irrigation systems
Technical interventions that are environmentally unsustainable, gender-biased, expensive and detrimental to community well-being
Promote the development, dissemination, transfer and use of technology that is consistent with environmental sustainability and gender equality. Such technology should also fulfill basic needs and be financially affordable
Lack of research on crop choices and varieties and on labour-saving farming technologies
Conduct more research on crop varieties; develop labour-saving farming technologies, such as technology for food processing operations
Agri-businesses policies that favour monocultures, cash crops and exports, thereby threatening household food security and often leading to malnutrition, morbidity and mortality
Develop a policy-making framework for agricultural departments and agencies that is gender-responsive and pro-smallholder
Promote a balance between food production and income generation, including cash crops, but ensure and enhance household food security and ability to meet basic needs-e.g., water, land, health care, education, and old age security
Promote preparation of agricultural plans that begin with the village, and involve both women and men
Involve communities in selling priorities according to their needs and available resources
Require extension workers to discuss with women and men farmers existing and prospective technology
Draw in NGOs to facilitate the planning process
Ensure that agri-businesses do not displace women's labour, thus encouraging rural migration, or worsen women's already subordinate position by making them economically dependent on male income
Water pollution through sedimentation and siltation resulting from deforestation and soil erosion. This leads to health hazards and the destruction of irrigation structures, thereby reducing food production and supply and resulting in increased malnutrition, morbidity or mortality, especially among women and children
Find ways to halt deforestation and soil erosion and properly manage the watershed
Develop a safe, potable water programme for all rural communities
Confusion between national food security and household food security, leading to the export of food crops at the expense of household food security
Give priority to household food security as the basis of national food policies and meet domestic food requirements first before exporting, with particular attention to the equal distribution of essential food resources to different family members, old and young, male and female
Ensure that the urban population's market demand does not cause rural starvation, by equitable distribution of food supplies lo the rural population
Review existing agricultural policies and re-assess traditional fanning systems as to their effects on gender equity, environmental sustainability and the basic needs of the poor
Specialisation in a limited number of crops(especially imported crops) for cities' food demands through contract farming for agri-business, leading to the disappearance of traditional crop varieties
Build a database on farmers' indigenous knowledge of agricultural production, including seed and crop varieties, planting, tending and harvesting
Develop a national resources conservation policy, applying FAO's Protocol on Plant Genetic Resources
Initiate campaigns to conserve and consume local herbs and vegetables
Compile a national audit of native biological resources
Rural-urban migration, including female migration, leading to an ageing farming population
Develop social and economic infrastructural services - education, health services, electricity, roads, transportation and communications-in the rural areas
Turn agricultural areas into dynamic habitats through job creation, economic revitalisation, and the provision of recreational and cultural attractions for the young
Stop or slow the rural to urban migration by providing a legal framework and economic incentives for greater investments in smallholders' agricultural production, plus the provision of steady, non-agricultural income in small-scale industries and local services
Promote the processing of surplus agricultural products by small farmers grouped in co-operatives and self-help units, owned and managed by themselves
Promote small-scale, value-adding enterprises that provide employment to rural women through adequate marketing
Encourage self-employment that may or may not be directly related to agricultural production-handicrafts, sale of goods and services-as important strategies for family survival
Design agricultural price policies with incentives for bigger proportions of migrant remittances to be invested in technological improvements in the rural sector
Provide alternatives to urbanism by developing small and medium-sized urban centres, instead of large metropolitan agglomerations, and thus give rural areas much needed employment opportunities and social services
In regional planning and methods, harmonise population growth, densities and spatial distribution with the availability of resources for rural development
Review all decentralisation of industries to rural areas as this often has a backlash on agriculture, inflating the prices of farmland and food' and converting many farmers into industrial workers
Ensure that industries do not decentralise at the expense of agricultural production
Conversion of farming land to industrial and non-agricultural uses
Review strategies for the decentralisation of industries to rural areas to ensure food security for small farmers and other rural inhabitants
Multiple burdens for women: agricultural production, generation of cash income, housework, child care, care of the aged and handicapped, etc.
Involve men in training usually designed for women--e.g., family planning, as well as time and money management training in home economics
In family planning programmes, women's income and the enhancement of their self-esteem should be key considerations
Encourage the sharing of household chores between the male and female household members
Encourage males to respect women, including their work and child-bearing rights
Accepting only men as heads of house- holds, owners of land, and controllers of all resources
Enforce gender-equitable rights of ownership and access to resources, including land titles, inheritance and resettlement compensation
Bias for working with male farmers almost exclusively
Insist that women's representation be commensurate with their participation in all programmes
Bias against women in training, extension curricula and delivery of extension services
Develop gender-sensitive training and curricula
Support women's crop farming and other activities through technical advice, credit, and providing marketing links
Require extension workers to undergo gender-sensitization training
Establish information distribution systems that respond to the needs of women, particularly in methods of environmental management-monitoring rainfall patterns and quality of water; understanding soil structures and the carrying capacity of their lands; the effects of pollution on water, soil, fish and animals through industrial waste disposal; and the correct use of fertilisers, pesticides and farm machinery
Provide women with relevant information on pesticides and other chemicals and their health hazards to themselves and their families
Pay special attention to the fact that women generally have less contact with agricultural services and have lower levels of literacy
Persisting extension-service problems shortages of staff, funds, and technical support, lack of sensitivity or awareness of community situations, and few female extension workers
Give priority in national planning to providing extension services to the rural sector
Upgrade agriculture to science status In secondary schools' curricula to encourage academically-inclined students to take up agricultural studies
Promote community-based research, training, technology and extension services that are fair to both sexes, environmentally-friendly, and pro-smallholder
Credit policies that are unfair to women, women's limited access to agricultural inputs
Make local banking more friendly to women
Make it mandatory for banks to provide credit facilities to women on their own merit without needing husband's or father's signature
Develop gender-equitable technical and credit services
Donor support for women-friendly projects
Ensure women's participation in all stages of all projects, from planning to implementation, aiming to achieve 50 percent women's participation in all projects
No data by agro-ecologieal system, giving gender differentiated morbidity and mortality rates, and no data on the gender-differential impact of rural
Develop a gender-differentiated database of relevant statistics and information
Make environmental impact assessment concepts and techniques development programmes gender-sensitive and responsive to soeio-eeonomie costs and benefits in agricultural production and rural community life
Set up information exchange systems and co-operation on gender, environment and population issues in the region
Lack of credit and appropriate technology to small farmers
Provide credit and training to small farmers
Develop alternative community-based credit and food security systems
Extension workers' neglect of marketing prospects when deciding which crops or activities to push
Provide training in the marketing of agricultural products to extension workers, and develop a marketing extension service, especially for the promotion of non-chemical farm products marketed at better prices for ecologically-friendly consumers
Marketing, transport and price information problems, especially for women who market their own crops
Develop a gender-responsive, user-friendly information-sharing system and effective infrastructure for transportation
Introduce durable, high-market-value crops that can be easily
Structural adjustments reducing social
Establish guidelines for community well-being, adopting existing services or loss of previous security nets standards as the minimum criteria below which social services and security nets should not be allowed to fall
Health and social services as part of the government's political strategy, which can be unilaterally withdrawn when these strategies no longer serve political purposes
Empower the community to provide self-help services and a code of government accountability to the rural population, usually the most powerless
Provide follow-up services--health care, sanitation, water, education, housing standards and family planning services-to displaced rural communities, as well as rural-urban migrants living in squatter areas
Insufficient recognition of NGOs' potential
Include NGOs in development policy-making bodies and at project and programme implementation levels
Recognise NGOs' role officially by spelling out a policy to facilitate their participation in national planning
Child prostitution, especially of female children
Enforce laws protecting children, especially laws against the selling of daughters
Impose heavy penalties on prostitution racketeers, pimps, brothel keepers, customers and the parents of child prostitutes, not on the girl child herself
Promote education for girls, especially basic literacy and accounting skills, as this relates to better productivity and more informed fertility choices
Develop alternative job opportunities for young women that generate income and enhance their self-esteem
Address the under-valuation of women's work, by ensuring that their income is proportionate to their work time and effort
Alleviate rural poverty and provide alternative means of income for poor families
Provide information and child-friendly training to parents for both their girls and boys
Spread of AIDS, HIV infection and sexually-transmitted diseases
Include information on AIDS, HIV infection and STDs in the training of extension workers
Develop a health-centred family planning approach and promote the use of condoms
Provide public education on AIDS, HIV infection and STDs
Include rural communities in national strategies for the prevention and control of AIDS, HIV infection and STDs
Endnotes
1 The mortality rates are given per 1,000 at risk: neonatal deaths per 1,000 live births, post-neonatal deaths per 1,000 surviving to the age of one month, and children's deaths per 1,000 surviving to the age of one year, but not surviving till the age of five.
2 "Traditional rural" = rural, uneducated, agricultural couple, with the wife engaged in family work; "metropolitan elite" = urban couple with seven-plus years of education, where the wife is employed outside the home and the husband is in a professional or clerical occupation.
3 Such development processes, noted Hamilton (1992:414):
"...generally leave a large part of the rural population pauperised and starving for long periods, perhaps several decades. They are the casualties of social and economic transition; capitalist growth generally entails the impoverishment for long periods of large sections of the population."
"Those countries which have a high dependence on exports of commodities are likely to have difficulty with the volatility that this dependence imparts to their economies. Sustained growth is based on sustained investment and the latter requires a degree of stability and certainty about the future. It is not possible to predict changes in prices of primary commodities on world markets" (Hamilton, 1992:407-8).
4 A delegate to the 26th FAO Conference explained the necessity of doing so in the following terms:
...(his country) places emphasis on gender equity and the need for integrating women into the development process in all of (their) interventions in UN institutions, not because this is a standard paragraph; not because it is simply an ethical argument, though that point could be made; not because it is a matter of social justice, though that indeed is perfectly valid; and not because of women's particular role in social development, though that is very important. The reason for our emphasis, he continued, is simply that we believe very sincerely that pragmatic development effectiveness and efficiency demand that half the population not be excluded from the decision-making process and from activities which directly affect them. This applies increasingly, he added, to the allocation of financial resources for development which, of course, have a direct impact on economic and socially-sustainable development (quoted from Zoran Roca's Introductory Statement to the Regional
Workshop on Women, Population and Sustainable Agricultural Development, 3-6 December, 1991, Kariba, Zimbabwe).
5 Such cultural attitudes are expressed, for example, in the following Thai proverb:
Men are the front legs of the elephant
Women are the hind legs of the elephant
This is understood to mean that traditionally the man "appears" as the decision-maker: he goes first and chooses the course. The hind legs are, however, the large burden bearers. They actually do the tremendous job of supporting the elephant's weight. If the hind legs were to sit down, it would not matter where the front legs wanted to go: they would not be able to go anywhere until the hind legs decided to carry them. If the hind legs were to be injured, the whole elephant would be incapacitated. Nevertheless, though the hind legs may carry the elephant's weight and even refuse to move, they are not in a position to lead the front legs or set the direction for the elephant.
But men and women are not mere legs. Society is not an organic body and men and women are not parts of this organic body. Our understanding of society should not be based on a totally false analogy which reduces the complementarily of men and women to an organic division of body parts. Even if such proverbs had seemed applicable in earlier historical eras, the hierarchical attitudes they express are increasingly obsolete and irrelevant.
6 As Gita Sen (1992:1 1) has pointed out:
"For example, a national energy policy that does not take adequate account of the needs of the poor for fuel is unlikely to be sustainable."
Bibliography
Document
No.
1 Background paper on "Demographic trends and implications for a sustainable population and environment in Malaysia," by Abdullah, 1992.
2 Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars, Volume 24, No. 4, 1992.
3 The Lao Expenditure and Consumption Survey 1992/93
4 "Country Gender Analysis for the LAO People's Democratic Republic," SIDA, February, 1992.
5 VIETNAM: The situation of children and women UNICEF: Hanoi, 1990.
6 Vietnam Social Science 1194.
7 "Country Gender Analysis for Vietnam," SIDA: 1992.
8 Women, Population and Environment in Thailand Rural Development, by Amornrat Charoenchai, May 1994.
9 A report on the "Philippines' Environment and Development-Issues and Strategies," 1992.
10 Agricultural Growth and the Environmental Condition for Their Compatibility in Asia's Humid Tropic, September 1991.
11 Land Rights, Schooling and Assets as Intergenerational Wealth Transfers in Philippines' Rice Villages, by Agnes R. Quisumbing, 1990.
12 "Living Conditions in Lao People's Democratic Republic" Basic results from two sample surveys carried out from 1992-1993.
13 Gender, Population and Environment and Rural Development in Vietnam by Dang Ngoc Quang, 1994.
14 Population, Education, Environment and Nutrition, 1993.
References
ADB 1986. Key Indicators 1986, Manila: Asian Development Bank.
Banzon-Bautista, Cynthia and Nanette G. Dungo. 1987. "The Differential Impact of Farm Technology on Men and Women: a case study of two Philippine villages." In Noeleen Heyzer (ed.), Women Farmers and Rural Change i'' Asia: towards equal access and participations. Kuala Lumpur: APDC.
Bello, Walden and Stephanie Rosenfeld. 1992. Dragons in Distress: Asia's miracle economies i'/ crisis. London: Penguin Books.
Caldwell, J.C. 1982. Theory of Fertility Decline. New York: Academic Press.
Correa, Sonia. 1993. "Population and Reproductive Rights." A platform document prepared for Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN).
Dehlot, Colette S. 1992. "Women, Population and Environment: a global concern." Paper presented at the Expert Group Meeting on Population and Women (22-26 June, 1992, Gabarone, Botswana) in preparation for the International Conference on Population and Development, 1994. UNFPA: ESD/P/ICPD, 1994/EG.III/18.
Devlin, Robert. 1992. "Options for Tackling the External Debt Problem." In Charles K. Wilber and Kenneth P. Jameson (eds.), The Political Economy of Development and Underdevelopment (95th edition). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Environmental Defense Fund, Washington D.C. 1992. Population Statement.
Hamilton, Clive. 1992. "Can the Rest of Asia Emulate the NICs?" In Charles K. Wilber and Kenneth P. Jameson (eds. ), The Political Economy of Development and Underdevelopment (fifth edition). New York: McGraw-Hill.
FAO. 1993. Selected Indicators of Food and Agriculture Development in the Asia-Pacific Region, 1982-92. Bangkok: FAO RAP.
Handwerker, W. Penn (ed.). 1986. Culture and Reproduction: an anthropological critique of the demographic transition theory. Boulder, Colorado and London: Westview Press.
Hew, Cheng Sim and Flora Kedit. 1987. "The Batang Ai Dam, Resettlement and Rural Iban Women." In Noeleen Heyzer (ed.), Women Farmers and Rural Change in Asia: towards equal acces and participation. Kuala Lumpur: APDC.
Heyzer, Noeleen (ed.). 1987. Women Farmers and Rural Change in Asia: towards equal access and participation. Kuala Lumpur: APDC.
Heyzer, Noeleen and Vivienne Wee. 1992. "Domestic Workers in Transient Overseas Employment: who benefits, who profits?" Paper presented at the APDC Regional Policy Dialogue on Foreign Domestic Workers: International Migration, Employment and National Policies, held from 10-14 August, 1992, in Colombo.
Hurst, Philip. 1990. Rainforest Politics: ecological destruction i'' South-east Asia. London: Zed Press (1991 Southeast Asian edition published by S. Abdul Majeed).
IRRI. 1993. "From a woman anthropologist's note-pad: IRRI Memos," Balai No. 7, Los Bagnos, the Philippines.
Jacobson, Jodi J. 1991. "India's Misconceived Family Plan." Worldwatch, November December, 1991.
Loebis, F. 1992. "The Experience of Norplant Use in Indonesia." Paper presented at the WHO Meeting on Women's Perspectives on the Introduction of Fertility Regulation Technologies, held from 5-9 October, 1992, in Manila.
Loebis, F. et al. 1992. "Service Delivery Implications of Introducing Cyclofem in Indonesia." Jakarta: Yayasan Kusuma Buana. Unpublished paper.
Mukherjee, Vanita Nayak. 1993. Shaping a Better Future: women's perspectives on alternative economic framework and population and reproductive rights. Report of the DAWN/APDC Asian Regional Meeting on Population, Gender and Sustainable Development, held from 12-14 April, 1993, in Singapore. APDC.
Postel, Elys. 1992. "Gender, Health and Population Policy." Women's Global Network for Reproductive Rights Newsletter 39, April-June, 1992.
Raharjo, Yulfita. 1993. "Population Policies, Reproductive Health and Reproductive Rights: Indonesia case." Paper presented at the DAWN/APDC Regional Meeting on Population, Gender and Sustainable Development, held from 12-14 April, 1993, in Singapore. APDC.
Roca, Zoran. 1991. Introductory Statement to the Regional Workshop on Women, Population and Sustainable Agricultural Development, held from 3-6 December, 1991, in Kariba, Zimbabwe.
Ruzicka, L.T. 1984. "Mortality Transition in Asia: technology confronts poverty." In Gavin W. Jones (ed.), Demographic Transition in Asia. Singapore: Maruzen Asia.
Sen, Amartya. 1992. "Development: which way now?" Reprinted in Charles K. Wilber and Kenneth P. Jameson (eds.), The Political Economy of Development and Underdevelopment (95th edition). New York: McGraw-Hill (first published in the Economic Journal, December 1983).
Sen, Gita. 1992. "Women, Poverty and Population: issues for the concerned environmentalist." Paper written for a collaborative project of the International Social Sciences Association, the Social Science Research Council, and DAWN on "Rethinking Population and the Environment."
HR/PUB/91/2.
Shiva, Vandana. 1989. Staying Alive: women, ecology and development. London: Zed Books.
. 1993. "Systems of Knowledge as Systems of Power."
Singelmann, Joachim. 1991."Global Assessment of Levels and Trends of Female Internal Migration, 1960-1980." Paper presented at the UN Expert Group Meeting on the Feminisation of Internal Migration, held from 22 to 25 October, 1991, in Aguascalientes, Mexico.
Sirisambhand, Napat and Alex Gordon. 1987. "Rural Women and Changes in Work Patterns: the impact of a reservoir and transportation networks on three Thai villages." In Noeleen Heyzer (ed.), Women Farmers and Rural Change in Asia: towards equal access and participation. participation. Kuala Lumpur: APDC.
Tenaguita. 1992. Victims without Voices.
UN. 1991. The Realisation of the Right to Development 1991: global consultation on the right to development as a human right. Document No. HR/PUB/91/2.
1991. The World's Women--Trends and Statistics 1970-90.
1991. World Population Monitoring 1991.
1 991. World Urbanization Prospects.
1992. "Bali Declaration on Population and Sustainable Development." Document ST/ESCAP/1195 from the Fourth Asian and Pacific Population Conference.
UN, New York. 1994. Statistics Compendium on Women i'? Asia and the Pacific.
UNDP. I 990. Human Development Report 1990.
UNEP. 1994. Environmental DATA Report 1993-94.
Wilber, Charles K. and Kenneth P. Jameson (eds.). 1992. The Political Economy of Development and Underdevelopment (95th edition). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Women and Health in the Plantations. (H Study). 1985.
World Bank. World Development Report 1986, 1988, l 990, 1991 and 1992.
World Wildlife Federation Network on Conservation and Religion. 1990. The New Road. Bulletin, 16 0ctober.
<section>8</section>
Part 7 - Statistical annex
Some key issues- a compilation of statistical information
References
Part 7 - Statistical annex
The following data, notes and quotes were compiled in the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific from sources in Bangkok- ESCAP, FAO, the Asian Institute of Technology and Kasetsart University-prior to the Round Table. Additional data were provided by participants, and later by FAO during the finalisation of the guidelines. These are appended here to provide information to assist users in country and regional analyses.
Some key issues- a compilation of statistical information
WOMEN
Table I Education
Adult literacy^1 f as %m
Ratio of female to male enrollments^2 (x 100) 1985-1987
Country
First level3 level
Third level
Indonesia
93^b
Vietnam
31 ^bd
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
93^b
Sources: ^1UNICEF 1994:50, 2UN, 1991.
Notes: ..
.. data unavailable.
^b 980/84.
^d Including correspondence courses.
^3 UNESCO defines education at the primary level as usually beginning between the ages of 5 and 7 and lasting for about five years. Education at the second level is defined as beginning at about age 10-12 and lasting for about three years in the first stage, and as beginning at about age 13-15 and lasting for about four years during the second stage. Education at the third level, including universities and colleges, is defined as beginning at about age 17-19 and lasting at least three or four years.
Quotes:
"Studies in Malaysia, the Republic of Korea and Thailand, and more recently in Bangladesh, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan and several Latin American countries, have shown that farmers with schooling are more productive than similarly situated farmers without education" (UNICEF, 1 994:42).
"Other studies have shown that the economic returns from investments in primary education exceed those of any other kind of investment" (UNICEF, 1994:42).
"In particular, the education of girls has been shown to be one of the most basic determinants of fertility decline. Educated women usually have more opportunities, more awareness of family planning possibilities, and are more likely to discuss and decide with their partners how many children to have and when. They are also more likely to marry late, to postpone the first pregnancy, to leave more time between births, and to have fewer children in total" (UNICEF, 194:43).
"In the Philippines, women who never went to school have on average six children each. If they stay in school for seven years it drops to only two" ( Power, 1992:21).
Comments:
 In all countries of the Region, female literacy rates are lower than for males, although in the Philippines the difference is negligible. There is a clear, positive correlation between literacy and fertility.
 Higher enrollment of females in secondary school in Malaysia and the Philippines probably reflects male-female population ratio, or a temporary closing of past gaps.
 Women continue to have lower literacy rates and lower enrollment levels than men at the secondary and tertiary education levels.
 Public awareness and adult education programmes are less accessible to women because of their double and triple work burdens in and outside the home, even where radio, television, and print media are available. How, therefore, should programmes be designed to reach women?
Table 2 Communications Media Available
Country
No. of radios per 1,000 people
No. of televisions per 1,000 people
Daily newspaper circulation per 1,000 people
Malaysia
Vietnam
Thailand
Indonesia
Philippines
Source: UNDP, 1993:166,199.
Table 3 Women in Politics and Decision Makers in Government
Parliamentary seats occupied by women (%)
Women decision makers in government, 1987 (%)
Country
All ministries
Ministerial level
Malaysia
Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam
Source: UN, 1991:41.
Note: .. data unavailable.
Comments:
 Indicates women's lack of participation and influence in the decision-making process.
 No Asian country has achieved a critical mass of women in politics, although in a few countries women politicians are making a difference.
 Where women have been represented beyond mere tokenism, significant changes have been made. In the Philippines, for example, women have raised the issues of population, the environment, the status of women, etc.
 The political decision-making process is overwhelmingly male dominated, with priority given to male concerns and male vested interests.
 Some centrally-planned economies reserve parliamentary seats for women, but have not given them any real power (Vietnam). The advent of "democracy" usually sees these seats lost to men.
Table 4 Distribution of GDP and Female Labour Force By Economic Activity
Agriculture
Mining
Industry (excl. mining), transport
Services (excl. transport)
% of labour force
% of labour force
% of labour force
% of labour force
Country
% of GDP
f
m
% of GDP
f
m
% of GDP
f
m
% of GDP
f
m
Indonesia 1980
Indonesia 1985
Malaysia 1986
Source: UN, 1991:93.
Note: The groups of economic activities shown are mutually exclusive. Percentages of GDP, female labour force and male labour force thus each total 100 for each country across the four groups.
Table 5 Women's Contribution in the Informal Sector to Industry and Services Production
Industry (excl. mining)
Transport
Services (excl. transport)
Total
Country
% of fem. lab. force^a
% of prod. Informal
% of informal fem.
% of fem. labour force^a
% of prod. Informal
% of informal
% of fem. lab. force^a
% of prod. Informal
% of informal fem.
% of fem. labour force^b
% of prod. Informal
% of informal
Indonesia
Malaysia
Source: UN, 1991 93
Notes:
^a Excluding agriculture and mining.
^b Female labour force in industry, transport and services as percent of total female labour force in all branches of the economy.
Quote:
"Economically-active women are concentrated in low-productivity agricultural or service industries in developing regions. They are often forced to improvise their own economic opportunities, with few resources or support, in the informal sector" (UN, 1991:93).
Table 6 Labour Force By Status in Employment, 1980-87
Employers/own-account
Employees
Unpaid family
Country
% of total
% female
% of total
% female
% of total
% female
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Source: UN, 1991:110
Table 7 Economic Activity and Occupational Groups
Occupational groups: Females per 100 males (in the 1980s)
Economically-active population aged 15 years and older
Country
Admin., managerial workers
Clerical, sales, service workers
Prod., transport workers, labourers
Agric., hunting, forestry workers
Female
Male
Women as % of total 1990
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam
Source: UN, 1991:106.
Notes: .. data unavailable.
Economic activity in the "formal" and "informal" sectors. The characteristics of the informal sector most often cited include simple technology, very little capital, no fixed place of business, few or no employees, quasi-legality or lack of registration, and little or no record-keeping.
Quotes:
"No definite distinction has been established in statistics between the formal and informal sectors, and the ILO and United Nations' concepts of labour force and economic production are applied without regard to "informal" sector characteristics. Statistical recommendations, however, do clearly distinguish economically-active persons working on their own account without employees and unpaid family workers from other economically-active persons. Therefore, for statistical purposes in the short term this is the definition used by the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) and the Statistical Office of the United Nations Secretariat to identify women in the informal sector in Africa, Latin America and Asia. All persons working in the informal sector are also considered economically active" (UN, 1991:92).
Comments:
National statistics fail to include the "true" economic activities of women, which would include such activities as child-bearing, child care, housework, food preparation, family care and other unpaid housework..
Women's contribution to income and the economy of their countries cannot be denied. An increase in women's income has a positive effect on population growth. Low income has a negative effect on population growth, yet in statistics about economic activity, unpaid household work and child care are not included. Nor are fetching water and fuelwood, making handicrafts for home use, etc.
If the above excluded activities were included in the GDP, they would increase 25-30 percent according to most estimates (UN, 1991:90).
Table 8 Children Affected By Undernutrition and Maternal Mortality
% of children suffering (1980-1992) from:
Country
% of infants with low birth weights^1 1990
under weight with low
wasting(12-23 months) moderate & severe^2
stunting(24-59 months) moderate and severe^2
Maternal mortality rate. (1980-1991)
moderate and severe
severe^3
Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand
26x
4x
28x
Malaysia
Vietnam
12x
49x
Source: UNICEF, 1994:66.
Notes: I Low birth weight is less than 2,500 grams.
2 Moderate and severe: below minus two standard deviations from median weight for age and reference population.
3 Severe: below minus three standard deviations from median weight for age and reference population.
4 Number of deaths of women from pregnancy-related causes per 100,000 live births.
.. data unavailable. x Indicates data that refer to years or periods other than those specified in the column heading, and which differ from the standard definition or refer to only part of a country.
Comments:
 In comparison, in such developed countries as the United States, Canada and New Zealand, maternal mortality rates range from only 5-13.
Chronic undernutrition exists among those people whose estimated average daily energy intake over a year falls below that required to maintain body weight and support light activity.
Table 9 Deaths Per Year Per 1,000 Population
Country
Girls
Boys
Thailand
Philippines
Source: UN, 1991:60.
Quotes:
"In Eastern Asia, excluding China, 17-18 percent of women aged 15-49 are anemic. In pregnant women, this figure rises to 20 percent" (in the 1980s) (UN, 1991:59).
"In the Southeast Asia region, 100 million people have goitre, 100 million pre-school children are affected by xerophthalmia, and 616 million people suffer from iron deficiency or anaemia" (FAD/WHO, 1992:1 5).
"The Southeast Asian area is relatively free from starvation. Nutritional adequacy, however, is another story. There has been a significant increase in the number of undernourished people in the Region to approximately 400 million" (Dent et al, 1992:2).
"FAO and WHO estimated that during 1988-1990, 19 percent of the population in Asia and the Pacific were suffering from chronic undernutrition" (FAD/WHO 1992:6).
"The most severe affects of stunting are effected before a child's first birthday. Even if nutrition improves thereafter, the child is likely to suffer from below-normal growth and physical and mental development. This compromises the future of both the child and the nation" (UNICEF, 1994: 16).
"Nutrition affects the intellectual development, learning capacity and school performance of children. Growth retardation due to undernutrition affects the development of motor and mental functions, while severe undernutrition affects brain growth as well as activity levels. Results of 20-year follow-up testing of malnourished children from the 1970s indicate early irreversible damage to intellectual development resulting from malnutrition. Malnutrition in pre-school years leads to stunting. Hunger during the school day affects attention and learning capacity. Ill health and chronic malnutrition, especially anaemia, persisting during the crucial early years of education, can hinder learning capacity" (FAO/WHO, 1992:25).
Comments:
 Low birth weight has a negative correlation with maternal education levels.
 Maternal mortality is linked to the low status of women.
 Gender bias (against women) causes poverty (Worldwatch Institute, 1992).
Table 10 Water and Sanitary Facilities
% of population with access to safe water1988-91
% of population with access to adequate sanitation 1988-91
Country
Total
Urban
Rural
Total
Urban
Rural
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam
Source: UNICEF, 1994:68.
Comments:
As women are usually responsible for the collection of water, they have to walk further and are thus burdened with an additional workload.
Urban areas continue to lag behind rural areas in the provision of potable water and sanitary facilities.
Population
Table 11 Basic Demographic Indicators
Population annual growth rate %(1980-92)
Crude death rate(1992)
Crude birth rate(1992)
Total fertility rate(1992)
Life expectancy at birth^1 (years)
Country
male
female
Indonesia
Vietnam
Thailand
Malaysia
Philippines
Source: UNICEF, 1994:74.
1 ESCAP, 1993.
Notes: Total fertility rate = The number of children that would be born per woman, were she to live to the end of her child-bearing years and bear children at each age in accordance with prevailing age-specific fertility rates.
Crude death rate = Annual number of deaths per 1,000 population.
Crude birth rate = Annual number of births per 1,000 population.
Table 12 Prevalence of Contraceptive Methods for Couples with the Wife in Reproductive Age, By Method of Contraception (latest year available)
Male methods
Female methods
Country
Year
Any method
Sterilization
Condom
Withdrawal
Sterilization
Pill
IUD
Others
% of male methods of any methods
Malaysia
Vietnam
Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand
Source: Ono - Asaki, K., 1993: 106 tote: * included in female sterilization.
Notes:
"It is significant that almost without exception in-the poorer countries of Asia, fertility has Ellen most among groups who are most literate and with higher educational attainment. educational attainment is clearly also related to the status of women and their ability to engage productive employment outside of the home--factors which in turn determine decisions rout childbearing" (UN, ] 993).
Between 1975 and 1990, there was a decline in the total fertility rate in Thailand of 48 perrcent, in Indonesia of 33 percent, in the Philippines of 20 percent, and in Malaysia of 19 Percent" (Corazon, R.M., 1993).
Contraception is regarded as very much a woman's problem and male contraceptive measures e hardly used at all. One in three pregnancies end in abortion (there are one million per year). Women want small families, two or three children, which is not surprising in a country where omen marry late, the great majority are literate, and most are engaged in work outside the ome" (Kyanh district, Vietnam) (Power, J., 1992:152).
Comments:
Malaysia, Vietnam, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand view their fertility rates as still too high (Ono-Osaki, K., 1993: 106).
There is still a very high unmet demand for family planning (UNICEF, 1994).
The level of contraceptive use is overall quite low.
The level of male methods is very low, family planning responsibility is clearly vested in females.
Table 13 Rural/Urban Migration and Growth Rates
Rural-urban migration F/100 m1965/75
Annual change in population(1985-1990) %
Country
Urban
Rural
Indonesia
Malaysia
Thailand
Philippines
Vietnam . .
Source: 1991:79.
Quotes:
"It is difficult to say how urbanization by itself affects child-bearing, but urban life's greater employment and educational opportunities may be more conducive to smaller families, as might the urban life style. Children may also cost more in urban environments. With higher costs of education, health and housing, the costs of rearing children go up and the children's contribution to the family economy goes down" (UN, 1991:61).
"Women living in urban areas in Vietnam tend to stay in school longer than those living in rural areas. In the study year, 52 percent of girls aged 15-19 years in urban areas were still in school as compared to only 16 percent of girls in rural areas" (Institute of Economic Research, 1 993: 1 30).
Conclusions:
 Urban populations have grown and continue to grow at a considerably faster rate than rural populations.
 Statistics do not usually differentiate between rural and urban child-bearing rates. Urban mothers, however, tend to have fewer children.
Table 14 Urban Population and Poverty
Urban population % of total population
Female Headed^3 Households
% of Population below absolute poverty level 1980-1989^4
Country
Urban
Rural
Indonesia
Vietnam
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Sources:
^1 ESCAP, 1980.
^2 ESCAP, 1993.
^3 UN, 1994.
^4 UNICEF, 1994:74.
Notes:
..data not available.
Absolute poverty level: the income level below which a minimum nutritionally adequate diet, plus essential non-food requirements, is not affordable (main source: World Bank).
Environment
Table 15 Estimated Extent of Degraded Land (unit: 1,000 hectare)
Country
Density^1 (persons per km2)
Arable and permanently cropped area(1989)
Irrigated land
Sat affected land
Estimated degraded area
Indonesia
Philippines
Thailand
Malaysia
Vietnam
Sources: FAO, 1992: 10,14.
^1ESCAP, 1993.
Notes: Salt affected land includes irrigated and non-irrigated land.
Percentage of categories of land to total land area is shown in parenthesis
Quotes:
"In 1989, the proportion of arable and permanently cropped land to the Region's total la' area was 15 percent. The estimated proportion of land free from soil-related constraints agricultural production was only 14 percent. Although a number of countries may appear have some constraint-free land available, the Region as a whole seems to have reached - indeed passed - the safe limits for horizontal expansion of agricultural production.
This hypothesis is supported by the low average annual growth rates of both arable a' permanently cropped land and total agricultural land (including permanent pasture) recorded the Region over the last 28 years. These were 0.41 percent and 0.06 percent, respective! Although the ratio of agricultural population to total population declined from 72.8 percent 1961 to 58.8 percent in 1989, the agricultural population increased in absolute numbers As result, the ratio of arable and permanently cropped land to agricultural population has decline from 0.34 hectares/capita in 1961 to 0.26 hectares/capita in 1989. This is a direct indicator land scarcity. It contrasts sharply with land/man ratios in the rest of the world, which we 1.61 in 1961 and 1.60 in 1989" (Dent et al, 1992:1).
"Rough estimates of the evolution of food crop demands by the population forecast that A' as a whole should have an average food crop yield in equivalent cereals of 3.2 tons/hectare the year 2010 and 4.75 tons/hectare in 2030 to cover minimum food requirements. To achie such yields, the average available land will be 0.9 hectares/capita in 2010 and 0.6 hectares/capita in 2030. To maintain present average cereal production per capita between 1990 and 2030 in all other developing countries in Asia (without China) the average yield increase for the next 40 years should be 2.5 times higher than the yield increase observed between 1970 and 1990 (0.8 tons/hectare). This represents twice the efforts achieved during the Green Revolution" (FAO, 1993: 5).
"Population pressure in developing countries is rapidly reaching crisis level. Developing countries now produce only one-third of the world's carbon dioxide. By 2025, with the effect of rapid population, they could increase their share to two-thirds, a much higher level. Developing countries produce one-sixth of the world's CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons). By the year 2025 this could be one-third or higher" (Kitatani, K., 1991).
"We have to stop rigging the market in favour of destroying the environment. In many countries, it is government policy that energy, and especially electricity, remain very cheap. The result is that there is very little incentive to conserve it. The same goes for water, often paid for by generalized taxes rather than charged to the consumer according to the quantity consumed" (Holdgate, M., 1991).
Comments:
 Regarding the cost of repairing environmental damage: in 1993, the Port Authority of Thailand estimated that dredging of the Chao Phraya River for navigation purposes cost US$ 6 million per year. The Royal Irrigation Department estimates it costs US$ I per cubic metre a year to excavate, maintain, and rehabilitate silted canals. The cause of the flash floods which occurred in Southern Thailand in 1988 was attributed to deforestation. Costs were estimated at over 6,000 million baht (US$ 240 million) in property and service damage(FAO, 1992:437).
 In North East Thailand, the area affected by soil salinity quadrupled between 1971 and 1982 and now covers as much as 880,000 hectares (ESCAP, 1992:27).
 Dam Gajah Mungkur Reservoir in Central Java, Indonesia was expected to have a technical lifetime of 100 years, but because of serious erosion and siltation, its present age expectancy is calculated to be only about 25 years, a great and tragic loss (FAO, 1992:252).
Table 16 Best Estimates of Extent of Shifting Cultivation, 1991
Country
Population dependent on shifting cultivation
Total area affected by shifting cultivation (ha)
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Thailand
Vietnam
Source. Dent et al, 1992:6.
Quote:
'Shifting cultivation is perceived and used by different people in different contexts in widely different ways. It is, however, generally agreed that cultivation is neither permanent nor continuous. It is interrupted by a period of natural fallow. If the fallow period is of sufficient length it ensures adequate regrowth of vegetation and soil rehabilitation. Near-stability of land can be attained under shifting cultivation. The great weakness of any shifting cultivation system, however, is its inability to keep pace with an increase in population. These increases inevitably lead to increased deforestation and/or shortening of fallow periods which, in turn, result in degradation of the land, lower yield, and the spread of fire-resistant grasses at the expense of forest species" (Dent et al, 1992:5).
Table 17 Estimates of Forest Cover Area and Rate of Deforestation
Land area
Forest cover
Annual deforestation 1981-90
million ha
1980 million ha
1990 million ha
million ha
% per annum
Asia and Pacific
Continental Southeast Asia^a
Insular Southeast Asia^b
Source: FAO,2 1993:25. Notes: a includes Cambodia, Lao, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam. b includes Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines.
Table 18 Forest Area Change During 1981-1990 in Southeast Asia
Land area
Natural forest
Plantations
Total 1990
Annual deforestation 1981-1990
Total 1990
Annual plantation 1981-1990
County ha
000 ha
000 ha
ha/000 capita
000 ha
000 ha
ha/000capita
Thailand
Vietnam
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
x
Source: FAO,2 1993:27.
Table 19 Area of Natural Forests and Plantations
Natural forests
Plantations
Forest cover
Area
Country
% land area
ha/capita
% land area
ha/capita
Thailand
Vietnam
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
Source: FAO,2 1993:26.
Notes: Plantations are defined as:
- forest stands established artificially by afforestation on land which previously did not carry forests; or
- forest stands established artificially by reforestation on land which carried forest within the previous 50 years, or within living memory, and involving the replacement of the previous crop by a new and essentially different crop.
Quotes:
Indonesia
"To meet increasing demands for space for life and food in Indonesia, over one million hectares of virgin forest must be cleared annually. Improper forest clearing and post clearing soil management practices in the past caused soil degradation. Some of these areas were abandoned and are now infested with alang-alang (Imperata cilindrica) It is estimated that approximately 14 million hectares of land, particularly outside Java, have been infested with alang-alang. Shifting cultivation practiced by local farmers may also increase the acreage of such land. Phosphorous is usually deficient in these soils and they are also low in other plant nutrients, such as N,K, and Mg." (FAO,^1 1993:132).
"Every year about 50,000 hectares of agriculturally-productive land are transferred (converted) into non-agricultural land, while through land development programmes, there is an average of 30,000 hectares of newly-developed agricultural land. This newly-developed land is mostly marginal and productivity is quite low, particularly during the first two to three years of farming" (Yunan. S., 1992:250).
"Every year through the 'greening movement' and reforestation programmes, an average of 150,000 hectares of critical land is restored to productive land. In the same period, due to improper management and other practices 300,000-500,000 hectares of good land is transformed into critical or at least semi-critical land. This kind of condition has resulted in serious technical, social and economic effects, such as declining soil productivity, water shortages and declines in people's income" (FAO, 1992:255).
The Philippines
Table 20 Estimated Farm-Agricultural Area of the Philippines in 1960, 1971, 1980 and 1987
Year
Per capita arable land
Area (ha)
Change
0.127 ha^1
0.093 ha^2
Source: Recel, 1992:398.
Notes: ^11970; ^2 in the 1980s.
Comment:
 At the same time that agricultural land is decreasing, urban areas increased to about one million hectares by 1988, an increase of about 16.55 percent from 1981 (Recel, 1992:398).
Table 21 Changes in Arable Land Area in the Philippines, 1960, 1971 and 1980
Year
Area
Change
Source: Recel, 1992:398.
Quotes:
"Records from the Department of Agrarian Reform show that between 1988 and 1990, there have been 419 land conversions (land converted from agricultural use to other purposes), covering over 5,476 hectares of agricultural land. Encroachment on prime land pushes farmers further towards the hilly and uplands areas for survival. Consequently, prime agricultural lands as well as forest cover are irreversibly shrinking. As a result, forest lands have changed to grasslands, brushlands, and other extensive land uses that now occupy some 6.55 million hectares of former forest lands" (Recel, 1992:397).
"The food demand of the 60.5 million population in 1990 was estimated to be about 7.7 million tons of milled rice at the recommended per capita requirement of 127 6 kilogrammes per annum. Such rice requirement is estimated to be produced from at least 3.5 million hectares of irrigated rice lands under the average production level of 2.5 tons/hectare at a cropping intensity of 1.7 and 50 percent milling recovery" (Recel, 1992:398).
"At a population growth rate of 2.3 percent per annum, the estimated annual population increase of 1.85 million will also require an additional 110,684 hectares of irrigated rice lands per year under existing production levels. The available best land for irrigated rice comes to about 2.77 million hectares" (Recel, 1992:399).
"Additional pressures for land come from homeless families and a backlog of squatters" (Recel, 1992:399).
"The above factors show that the Philippines has reached the critical level of population growth where every incremental population growth exerts serious pressure on the available land, while agricultural land conversion as a result of population explosion and human and economic activities remains hopelessly unabated." (Recel, 1992:399).
References
Brown, L.R. (ed.) 1992. The State of the World 1992. New York: World Watch Institute.
Corazon, R. 1993. "Cost-Effectiveness and Efficiency of Programmes." In Family Planning Programmes in Asia and the Pacific: Implications for the 1990s. New York: UN/ESCAP.
Davidson, J., Myers, D., with Chakroabory, M. 1992. No Time to Waste. U.K: Oxfam.
Dent, F.J., Rao, Y.S., and Takeuchi, K. 1992. Womb of the Earth. Occasional Paper No. 2. Bangkok: FAO RAP.
ESCAP. 1980. "Population Data Sheet." Bangkok.
__1992. State of the Environment in Asia and the Pacific. Bangkok: ESCAP Publication No. ST/ESCAP/917.
__1993. "Population Data Sheet." Bangkok.
FAO. 1992. "Environmental Issues in Land and Water Development." In Report of the Regional Expert Consultation 077 Environmental Issues in Land and Water Development Bangkok: FAO RAP, Publication No. 1992/8.
__^1 1993. The Role of IPNS in Sustainable and Environmentally Sound Agricultural Development Bangkok: FAO RAP, Publication No. 1 993/1 3.
__^2 1993. Topical Resources Assessment: Tropical Countries. Rome: FAO Forestry Paper No. 112.
FAO/WHO. 1992. International Conference 077 Nutrition. Nutrition and Development- A Global Assessment. Rome.
Holdgate, M. 1991. Quoted in "Putting Quality of Life on the Agenda." Earthwatch, Second Quarter, No. 41.
Institute of Economic Research. 1993. "Vietnam." In Urbanization and Socio-economic Development in Asia and the Pacific. New York: ESCAP Publication No. ST/ESCAP/1277, p. 130.
Kitatani, K. 1991. Quoted in "Putting Quality of Life on the Agenda." Earthwatch, Second Quarter, No. 41.
Leete, R. 1993. "Determinants of Fertility Behaviour and Change in Asia." In Family Planning Programmes i'? Asia and the Pacific: Implications for the 1990s. New York: UN/ESCAP.
Ono-Osaki, Keiko. 1993. "Men, Adolescents and Youth." In Family Planning Programmes in Asia and the Pacific: Implications for the 1990s. New York: UN/ESCAP.
Power, J. 1992. The Report on Rural Women Living in Poverty. IFAD.
Recel, M.R. 1992. "Environmental Issues in Land Development in the Philippines." In Report of the Regional Expert Consultation on Environmental Issues and Water Development. Bangkok: FAO RAP, Publication No. 1992/8.
Sudjadi, M. 1993. "The Role of Integrated Plant Nutrition Systems in Sustainable and Environmentally Sound Agricultural Development in Indonesia." The Role of IPNS in Sustainable and Environmentally Sound Agricultural Development. Bangkok: FAO RAP, Publication No. 1993/13.
UN. 1991. The World's Women 1970-1990: trends and statistics. New York.
_.1994. Statistical Chart on World Families. New York.
UNDP. 1993. Human Development Report 1993.
UNICEF. 1994. The State of the World's Children 1994. New York.
UNESCO. 1993. Women in Politics: Australia, India, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand. Bangkok.
Yunan, S. 1992. "Environmental Issues in Land and Water Development--Indonesia Country Paper." In Environmental Issues in Water Development. Bangkok: FAO RAP, Publication No. 1992/8.
