<title>Indian experience on household food and nutrition security</title>
<section>1</section>
1. The concept of household food & nutrition security
1. The concept of household food & nutrition security
Access to adequate food, which is one of the fore-most basic needs of life should be the birthright of every single human being on this earth. On its part, mother nature has provided this unique planet of ours with such abundant resources and human beings with such intelligence that the global production can easily feed the present and future population of this entire world. Yet, the way human society has got organised, one fifth of the population of the developing countries i.e. about 800 million people suffer from chronic under nutrition (FAO 1992). Many of them are at the threshold of starvation, one or two poor harvests can push them into the jaws of death. These chronically undernourished millions are trapped in a vicious cycle - not getting adequate food regularly and therefore, not being able to lead a healthy and active life and without such a life, not being able to either produce or procure required food. Many more millions are mildly or moderately undernourished.
In lay man's language all these millions can be said to be food insecure and others can be said to be enjoying food security.
The specific term "food security" is of recent origin, although in some form or other, adequate availability of food must have been one of the most primary concerns of the human beings since time immemorial. In recent years, most of the experts like to define food security as access by all people at all times to enough food for a healthy life. It was FAO Committee on World Food Security which, in a way, formalised the definition in 1983 and incorporated following three specific goals for food security:
i) ensuring adequacy of food supplies;
ii) maximising stability of supplies; and
iii) securing access to available supplies to all who need them.
The World Bank Position Paper on Poverty and Hunger (19.86) added an "activity level" concept to these goals, stating that "food security must assure access by all people at all times to enough food for an active and healthy life." In turn, food insecurity was defined as the lack of access to enough food for a healthy, active life style. It is now being increasingly appreciated that food security is primarily a matter of ensuring effective demand rather than a problem relating to food supply. With such realisation, inter-relationship between poverty, hunger and food security is gaining international recognition and serious attempts are being made to define and identify people at risk. It is, therefore, important that every household should either have capacity to produce adequate food for all the members or have purchasing power to acquire it. It has to be appreciated that a country may be food surplus but all its citizens may not be enjoying food security as some may have
no purchasing power. On the other hand, a country may be food deficit but every person may be enjoying food security, with that country being able to import the required quantity of food and each person having either direct access (through the family's income) or indirect access (provided by the welfare State) to required food. In its turn, the lack of adequate access is a function of either production fluctuation or price fluctuation or a combination of both. "These two fluctuation lead directly to a fluctuation in real income within the community. These fluctuations in real income, both direct & indirect, affect the farmer, the agricultural labourer, as well as other member of the society, will ultimately have an impact on household food consumption, that of the poorer households being particularly sensitive." (Alberto Valde's, 1981) It is therefore, necessary to combat such fluctuation in order to ensure and maintain food security, for which the country must hold highly
liquid assets, either in the shape of food stocks or monetary instruments. Attaining food security is therefore, a costly affair and this is why we find rich countries being food secure at any cost & poor ones food-insecure.
Household Food Security
It will be clear from the above that although national food security is important as providing a foundation, in the ultimate analysis what is more important is food security for each and every household and within it to every member of the family. Put differently, "at the household level, food security is defined as access to food that is adequate in terms of quality, quantity, safety and cultural acceptability for all household members." (Gillespie, and Mason, 1991). Reference can, at this stage, be also drawn to the concept of household food security adopted recently at the International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) held at Rome during December 1992, at which the author happened to have represented the country. "Food security is defined in its most basic form as an access by all people at all times to the food needed for a healthy life". Achieving food security has thus three dimensions. "It is necessary to ensure a safe and nutritionally adequate food supply both at the
national level and at the household level. It is necessary to have a reasonable degree of stability in the supply of food, both from one year to the other and during the year. And most critical, is the need to ensure that each household has physical, social and economic access to enough food to meet its needs" (ICN Pub, 1992). This means that each household must have the knowledge and the ability to produce or resources to procure the food that it needs on a sustainable basis. The Conference went one step forward and recognised the importance of intake of balanced diets and also cautioned against over consumption or waste of nutrition as sometimes seen in developed countries. It reiterated that assuring food security should be the fundamental objective of the development strategy of countries and the extent of the attainment of this goal should be a major indicator of the success or failure of the developmental process. The Conference went on to suggest that in countries
where food insecurity is quite prevalent a multi-sectoral and multi-organisational approach has to be adopted which should, inter-alia, include adoption of such appropriate developmental strategies which will encourage economic growth with a specific focus on removal of poverty. The emerging phenomenon of what is being described as "jobless growth" has also to be taken care of, especially in developing countries like India, where labour saving technologies may be inducing national growth and incomes but rate of employment generation may not, in reality, be increasing. It will, therefore, be necessary to make substantial investments in human development so as to improve the health, as also the educational and technological skills of the work force enabling them to participate gainfully in the expanding economy and earn increasingly higher incomes. If this does not happen, the poor will be crushed between unemployment on one hand and rising food price on the other. It has to
be appreciated and acknowledged that investment for ensuring food security is investment in development and Food' is really a 'development input'.
The strategy should also consciously reduce the fall-outs on account of structural adjustment programmes to a minimum and where such fall-outs become inevitable, provide for appropriate measures to alleviate the hardships for the poor. The families at risk would also need to be identified and such risk reduced by stimulating employment generation, increasing the skills of both men and women, providing improved and appropriate production technologies etc. In the rural areas, access to land and other resources would need to be improved, marketing infrastructure expanded, agriculture diversified to high value products and agro-industries promoted. It will also be necessary to stabilise food supplies and smoothen year to year and seasonal variations in food availability by maintaining required buffer stocks. Further, if, as a part of globalisation of economy, domestic cereal prices are allowed to rise and domestic market is integrated with the international market, it will have
to be seen whether incomes of the poor are also moving towards international levels. Even if this positive development is taking place, short term measures like public distribution of foodgrains, food coupons etc. will have to be continued because Indian consumer with one three hundredth per capita income compared to that of the developed countries cannot be expected to pay the same price for food-grains as those in the developed countries.
International Recognition and Action
Organised international concern and concrete action in the field of food security has been of a fairly recent origin. It was at the World Food Conference, organised by the FAO at Rome in 1974, that pointed attention of the world leaders was drawn to the need for devising ways and means for ensuring food security to the millions of poor of the world who could not afford even one square meal a day. The Conference was organised against the background of a sharp decline in the world food production in the sixties and early seventies, threatening a famine at the global level. The Conference adopted a solemn declaration stating that "no child, woman or man should go to bed hungry and no human being's physical and mental capabilities should be stunted by malnutrition". A special agency under the aegis of the U.N., named the World Food Council, was also set up to coordinate production and distribution of food at the global level to realise the goal set by the Conference. It was the
good luck of the millions living in the threatened countries that the global famine did not occur and the apprehended sharp decline in world food production did not take place. On the other hand, countries including India, were able to get out of the rut of stagnating food production and achieve rapid growth through adoption of a technological package, commonly called the green revolution. This silver lining apart, the declarations adopted at the World Food Conference could not really be attained in the subsequent years; may be the world community became complacent once the threatened global famine did not materialise. It is disappointing that the U.N. is presently examining the possibility of either abolishing the WFC or transferring its functions to some other U.N. agency due to resources crunch. Not that the world has become free of famines but localised famines probably do not stir the conscience of world community to that extent any more. The other side of the picture
is that it is now well accepted that the specter of hunger will not vanish even if the world as a whole is able to produce every year the quantity of food required arithmetically i.e. population multiplied by per capita nutritional norms. This is also true at country level in the developing world. It is now fully realised that what is more important is to provide purchasing power to households at risk; the production and availability of food will automatically go up. This, however, is a highly elusive goal; with no immediate scope to get stable gainful employment, families cannot have any food security.
It is, therefore, no wonder that as recently as in 1990 the FAO report on the State of Food and Agriculture concedes that "no contemporary problem compared in gravity to the human devastation caused by persisting hunger and malnutrition". Recognising the grave situation at the joint FAD/WHO sponsored International Conference on Nutrition (ICN) at Rome in 1992, all the participating countries pledged, amongst other things, to eliminate, before the end of the decade (i.e. by 2000 AD), famine and famine related deaths and reduce starvation and widespread chronic hunger substantially within the same decade. The concern highlighted at these two Conferences in 1974 and 1992 has at least succeeded in putting into sharp focus the great challenge before the policy makers in ensuring food security to all in their countries and the need for concerted action at the global level. ICN-92 has, in fact, extended the concept of food security to one of nutrition security, without which an
active and healthy life for all will not be possible. The unfortunate thing is that that challenge appears too big for many countries to handle, notwithstanding the efforts being made by them and such efforts being supplemented by FAO to increase food production and by World Food Programme and UNICEF to reach the food and nutrition to the needy. Much greater efforts will be required both by the concerned countries as also by the UN agencies, to achieve at least food security to all the people on this earth in foreseeable future and simultaneously work for the total nutrition security for all, though it may be achieveable only over a longer period of time.
Availability of Food at the Global Level
At the global level, there is adequate food available for every human being and enough food can be produced for the world's growing population. However, the World is characterised by a limited number of surplus food producers with the potential to export food and a very large number of food deficit countries, which cannot afford to import the required quantities of food, are developing countries with serious balance of payments problems. Such countries, even those facing chronic food shortages, cannot depend on food aid and when it is made available it can sometimes carry its own hidden price. "The distribution of food aid, predominantly itself a result of domestic need to dispose off surplus production in ways which do not depress the world food prices has often been political" (Tarrant, 1980). To make matters even more difficult for underfed, the aid is often tied to specific projects with a part of the aid, sometimes substantial, getting back to the donor countries in the
shape of purchase of machines and payments to experts. At the other end of the spectrum, there are situations when "aid is used by elites in the receiving countries to entrench themselves and continue with their exploitation of poor in other own countries." (Jon Bennet, 1987). If only the food aid could be delinked from all extraneous politico-rnilitary consideration, there would be no need for millions to go hungry to bed and breed more numbers in the false hope of fighting off poverty and hunger. It is unfortunate that such a situation prevails notwithstanding mountains of accumulated foodgrains with a few countries. If fact, some of these countries have to make incentive payments to their farmers to keep their fields fallow so that food prices are maintained at high levels. In the most recent past, while people in the starvation hit sub-Saharan countries could be saved by sending a few million tons of food there, the developed countries carried a closing stock of
something like 273 million tones of foodgrains at the end of 1992-93 (International Wheat Council Report No. 214, London, 1994). The global production and consumption pattern for foodgrains is itself very skewed. It is estimated that the developing countries having 70% of the world's population, produce only 45% of the foodgrains. While a substantial part of the grains produced in the developed countries is fed to the animals, it is estimated that "as compared to an average requirement of 2250 calories, about 5000 calories are used on per capita basis in the developed countries. (Bapna, 1990). A paper distributed at the PrepCom meeting for the International Conference on Population & Dev. in Cairo (Robert Sessone, 1994) also echoed similar sentiments and tried to explode the myth that the problem of developing countries are their own creation due to burgeoning population they have. It observed that "the 20 countries having the worst food situation are low population
countries and 18 of the 20 have low population densities; that since 1961, the percentage of people living in developing countries with a diet averaging less than 2000 calories per day has decreased from 74 to 6%; that since 1961, the percentage of people living in developing countries with a diet averaging more than 2600 calories per day, has increased from 2 to 50%; that since 1947, food production per person has increased by more than 40% in developing countries; that more of earth is covered by forest than is used for farming and that most of the earth's potential farming land is not used for farming." The situation is compounded by the fact that most of the developing countries neither have the financial resources to purchase the required foodgrains from the international market nor have been able to get out of the rut of shortage of food from their own indigoes production due to a number of factors - historical as well as the inequalities imposed by the modern market
economy. In her introduction to the book "The Hunger Machine", Susan George says "This book, because it is about hunger, is primarily about inequalities. Sometimes these inequalities are quite straightforward, like the obvious disparity between the rich nations and the poor. Sometimes they are hidden one inside another, like Russian dolls. But always everywhere they are reasons for deep seated, persistent hunger, simply another name of injustice." (Jon Bennet, 1987). Distortion in aid policies continues even today. "Donors send only one third of development assistance to the 10 most populous countries, which have two thirds of the world's poor. The richer developing countries of W.Asia get US$ 21 per capita against US$ 6 per capita for the poorer countries of South Asia" (UNDP, 1994 Edn). The availability of food in different countries, therefore, varies greatly. Such availability can be assessed on the basis of dietary energy supply (DES), which generally measures
availability in terms of calories per capita per day. DES for some selected developing and developed countries is given in Table I below (FAO Annual Reprot, 1992)
Table 1 PER CAPITAL DIETARY ENERGY SUPPLIES
CALORIES SUPPLIES PER CAPITA
COUNTRY
India
Pakistan
China
Bangladesh
Brazil
Egypt
Mexico
Belgium
France
Australia
Germany
DES in 1986-88 was thus as low as 1925 calories in Bangladesh and as high as 3901 in Belgium. It is certainly a huge disparity, even after discounting the varying calorie requirements of people in different climatic regions. The disparity is substantial even within the developing world, the DES to an average Chinese was almost 25% more than to an average Indian. Another point to be noted is that while DES for the developed countries has been continuously rising since 1972-74, and has also been increasing for some developing countries like China, Brazil, Egypt and Mexico; for many poor countries, it has been more or less stagnating at prevailing levels, showing even negative growth once in a while. This clearly brings out the inter play between food security and poverty in many of the developing countries. It is, therefore, no wonder that in the FAO Report, 1990 Mr. Edward Saouma, Director General of FAO stated "I must express once again my deep concern that one out of five
persons of the population of nearly 100 developing countries remain under-nourished. Also, we cannot be oblivious of, nor indifferent to, the fate of the millions of people who are threatened by starvation as soon as a season of insufficient rainfall or any other natural or man made event, disrupts the normal supply of food or hinders their access to it", it also has to be appreciated that no less than 30% and up to 75% of total calorie supply in developing countries is cereal based. Therefore, as the first step toward food security, the availability of cereals itself is the major problem for millions of poor people in these countries. The problem is most serious in some of the African and South Asian countries. However, availability of cereals is only the first and in fact, preliminary step. Such availability may only prevent the human being from dying of hunger. Human beings, unlike animals, cannot just live at survival threshold. The human mind goads him to indulge in
physical and mental activities that will make human life easier and richer. For this, one must have a healthy body and mind. In order to reach such a stage of healthy body and mind and maintain oneself at that stage, intake of not only cereals but other food items like milk, fruits. vegetables, pulses, fish, egg etc. is required so that the human body can get various nutrients (including micronutrients) that will make the body active and healthy both physically and mentally. The availability of all these has to be, therefore, looked into. In other words, the entire food and nutrition security is what that must interest us. In the next Chapter, we will examine the requirements of various foodstuffs and nutrients that experts recommend for consumption in India.
<section>2</section>
2. Nutritional requirements in India
2. Nutritional requirements in India
In the present endeavour to. find the status of food and nutrition security in India, it is necessary to first examine the 'standards' against which such security is to be judged. At the conceptual plane, it can, be stated that a country can be said to have achieved complete food and nutrition security if each and every person in that country is able to consume a minimum quantum and quality of various ingredients of what I would like to call 'an adequate and balanced diet' on a regular basis. Availability and affordability of such diet, backed by health and educational services in an environmentally sustainable scenario will then enable each member of the society to live a 'good' life; each individual personality getting an opportunity to flower to one's full potential. However, it is a matter of intense international debate as to what should be considered an adequate and balanced diet for different groups of individuals in a society, "The World Bank (1986) used FAD/WHO
norms for reference individuals for 'moderate' activity for specific countries/regions. A large variation in defining 'adequate' food exists, ranging between 1400 and 2800 calories and therefore, is subject to value judgment. (Maxwell et.al., 1992). "The poor in rural areas who do heavy physical work in the field need much higher calorie intake than for moderate activity which can swell the number of food insecure substantially." (Bapna, 1993).
It is actually not easy for experts to exactly lay down nutrient requirements and quantities of various ingredients separately for various population and activity groups. Requirements of special categories like infants, mothers etc. have to be separately looked into. In any case, standards setting for any human activity is indeed a very difficult task. Diversity in agro-climatic conditions; food habits; life styles and spiritual/philosophical inclinations condition the nutritional intakes, apart from the 'measurable physiological needs' of the human body. To go on to determine the averages, experts have to depend on sample surveys which suffer from their inherent limitations. At the same time, an average balanced diet made up of various food items has to be prescribed so that a country could plan to produce or procure these.
In India, it is the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) that sets up Nutrition Advisory Committees or Expert Groups and recommend the "Dietary Allowances" in respect of energy (Calories), proteins, fats, minerals, iron, vitamins etc. for various age groups within the population including special groups like infants, pregnant/nursing mothers, children etc. and at the same time recommend dietary allowance by activity groupings also. These Committees/Expert Group also recommend weighted average per capita requirements for the population of the country as a whole, to enable the policy-makers plan for production or procurement of the required quantities of various foodstuffs. The first Nutrition Advisory Committee of ICMR had made its recommendations way back in 1944. The recommendations have been reviewed, up-dated and amended ever since, generally at intervals of ten years. Such reviews and revised recommendations have been made in 1958, 1968, 1978, 1984 and 1990. The
1984 Recommendations had specially observed that "RDA (Recommended Dietary Allowance) for Indians are being revised and updated at intervals of about 10 years in view of the changes in our concept of human requirements of several nutrients as a result of studies carried out during the previous decade" (ICMR pub. 1984).
The most recent recommendations available are those made by the Expert Group of ICMR in 1990. The concerned publication (ICMR pub. 1990) can be seen for details but the recommendation made in respect of the two important nutrition requirements i.e. energy and protein are given below:
Table 2 ENERGY ALLOWANCE FOR ADULTS
Category
Reference body
Weight Kg.
Activity
Energy Allowance
K.Cal
Man
Sedentary
Moderate
Heavy
Woman
Sedantary
Moderate
Heavy
Table 3 PROTEIN ALLOWANCES FOR ADULTS
Category
Body Weight
Protein requirement in g.
Kg.
Per Kg.
Per day
Man
Woman
The energy and protein requirements are given separately for various age groups like adults, infants, children and special categories like pregnant and nursing mothers. Although the ICMR Expert Group also recommends dietary allowances for other nutrients like fat, iron, calcium, vitamins etc. and we will have an occasion to refer to these later on, we may discuss only energy and protein recommendations in details here since these are the most important nutrients which need to be tackled first. Height, body-weight and physical activity are three important determinants of energy requirement. It may also be mentioned that the 1990 report of the Expert Group recommended an upward revision in the 'reference body weight of adult man and woman in order to harmonise the body weights of adults with those of well-to-do and normally growing children and also taking into consideration the expanded weights for their heights. This was important since "the national goal of any country
would be to provide adequate nutrition and health to its population so that they attain their full genetic potential in growth and development". (ICMR, 1990).
Recommendations on energy requirements are vital because they have a direct bearing on the status of poverty, which in India, is defined by per capita incomes that will enable a person to achieve daily intake of 2400 K.Cal in rural areas and 2100 K Cal in urban areas. While proportion of people living below the poverty 'line' can be adjudged against these standards, we need to have a weighted average of energy requirement for the entire population so that nation can plan for production and availability of at least that much energy giving foodstuffs. The ICMR Expert Group (1990) has concluded that on the basis of the present recommended dietary allowance (RDA), it ought to be 2200 Kcal per capita per day.
As regards recommendation on the weighted average protein requirement, the Expert Group (1990) has suggested 50 gins/capita/day. This again, just like weighted average energy requirement, is based on recommended dietary protein allowance of different groups, which constitutes the absolute safe levels. Thus, while many individuals with intakes below RDA are not necessarily at risk, those with intakes of RDA norms or higher are certainly not at risk. The Expert Group also recommended that a PE percentage between 8 and 12 would meet the protein requirements of any group, provided its energy needs are fulfilled.
We will have an occasion to discuss in details the requirement and availability picture of energy and protein as brought out by the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) of the National Institute of Nutrition through their surveys during 1975-79 and repeat surveys during 198890, as also by the Working Group set by the Ministry of Agriculture (April 1994) based on production and availability of various foodstuffs. At this stage, it can be mentioned that while NNMB has used per consumption unit requirement of 2400 Kcal of energy and 60 gms of protein, the Working Group in Agriculture has used the weighted average per capita requirement of 2200 Kcal energy & 50 gms of proteins.
Balanced Diets
Composition of balanced diet is the end result of the RDAs. The balanced diet is, in a way, the practical prescription for consumption of a basket of food items, which is likely to provide all the required nutrients to the human body. It was the Advisory Committee of the ICMR (1984) that had reviewed the matter in detail and formulated a new set of recommendations with regard to balanced diets for Indians based on the concept of 'least cost'. As compared to the previous recommendations on balanced diets, lower quantities of pulses and green leafy vegetables have been recommended without of course, sacrificing the nutrients contents to make the recommended diet more practical and acceptable. The report has given details of balanced diets for adult man, adult woman, children, boys and girls separately & activity wise but those for adult man and woman are given below:
Table 4 RECOMMENDED BALANCED DIETS
Adult Man
Adult Woman
Bood Items
Sedentary
Moderate
at work
Heavy
work
Sedentary
Moderate
work
Heavy
work
Cereals
Pulses
Leafy Vegetables
Other-do-
Roots & Tubers
Milk
Oils & fats
Sugar & Jaggery
The 1984 report, recognising that the average per capita requirement of foodstuffs is one of the important considerations from the practical point of view in estimating national food supplies, gave this per capita requirement as under:
Table 5 PER CAPITA REQUIREMENT OF FOOD (gins/day) AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
Foodstuff
Physiological
Retail
Production
Cereals
Pulses
Leafy Vegetables
Other-do-
Roots & tubers
Milk
Fats & Oils
Sugar/Jaggery
It is against the above recommended requirement of food items that we have to judge the food and nutrition security of India. However, any narrow value judgments might not be easy to pronounce because of the great diversity inherent in all aspects of life in this highly populous subcontinent type of country. The climatic variations ranging from tropical climate to snow bound areas on one hand and from desert to hot-humid sub-tropical climate on the other, the country presents a bewildering diversity making the task of prescribing an average standard that much difficult. However, the scientific methods of surveys and studies undertaken by the experts on a continuous basis can make the above mentioned averages quite useful guide for the nutritional surveillance and planning.
An extremely important consideration in India is of course, the prevailing poverty. This country's richness till 16th century or so which had earned it the title of the "golden bird", also became its undoing. It attracted invaders repeatedly, culminating in a long spell of British rule. Along with industrial revolution of Britain, India turned into a backyard, a supplier of raw material with sharp decline in workforce engaged in manufacturing. These centuries saw growing poverty and frequent famines, many taking tolls in millions. The last famine before independence in 1943 is known to have resulted in death of around 3.5 million people. With such a background, when even two square meals were not available to millions of households, the availability of basic cereals itself became an important goal to be achieved when the country became independent. It is, therefore, very important to first examine the status of availability and consumption of cereals, which in any case
account for 75 to 80 percent of the dietary energy. Then comes the availability and consumption of pulses which are the main source of proteins in a country where the population is predominantly vegetarian. Finally, the availability of fats and oils, milk, vegetable, sugar, vitamins etc.
It is, therefore, proposed to examine the production, availability and consumption of cereals in India in quite a detailed manner. The role of the price policy and public procurement in increasing the agricultural production will also be examined. The fluctuations in foodgrains production will, inter alia, be examined as it seriously affect the food security. The Public Distribution System (PDS), which is one of the most important instruments in providing food security, will also be discussed in some detail to examine its evolution, its shortcomings and reforms needed to make it a sharper instrument in providing food security to poor households. Since poverty is the root cause of undernourishment, the status of poverty and alleviation programmes also need to be examined in detail as these improve the purchasing power of the poor households and consequently enhance their access to food. The data on availability and consumption of other nutrients is not as exhaustive as
foodgrains but whatever data is available will be analysed for examining the status of intake of other nutrients.
It has also to be appreciated that recommended dietary intakes are given for the individuals. However, it is almost impossible to divide the consumption of a household amongst all its members with any degree of accuracy. The normal practice, therefore, is to take a household as a unit of food and nutrition security exercise. In the NNMB surveys on consumption of food amongst households chosen for survey, all the food consumed by the family as a whole is taken into account and converted into nutrients by referring to food composition Tables of Indian Foodstuffs. In the weighment method, all raw material used for cooking by the family during the day is weighed whereas in 24 -furs recall method, amount of cooked food consumed by the formally is assessed. The individuals constituting the family are converted into consumption units (CU) and per CU per day intakes calculated. Thus household food security becomes the bottom line even though in some cases, there may not be a just
sharing of the food.
<section>3</section>
3. Historical perspective of food management in India
3. Historical perspective of food management in India
Shortage of food has not been unknown to the societies world over throughout the ages. The most extreme form of such shortage, the famines, have also been experienced by societies in varying degrees. Some of the notable instances "beginning with 436 B.C. when thousands of starving Romans threw themselves in the Tiber; or in Kashmir in AD 918 when one could scarcely see the water of Vitasta (Jhelum) entirely covered as the river was with corpses; or in 1933-37 in China, when we are told, four million people died in one region only; or in 1770 in India when the best estimates point to ten millions deaths; or in 1945-51 in Ireland when the potato famine killed about one fifth of the total Irish population and led to emigration of a comparable number" (Amartya Sen, 1981).
India, with a vast population and uncertain harvest due to dependence on monsoon rains, has always been vulnerable to famines. The countries in the North also face year to year variation in precipitation and resultant fluctuations in harvests. Their buffer stocks and their ability to purchase, allows them to sail through such fluctuations with no adverse impact on food security. However, in countries like India, dependent as they are on vagaries of the monsoon, even one year of drought can, depress the production very substantially and also dry up the reserves and pipelines stocks. A second successive year of drought not only further depresses the production, but there is hardly anything left in the private or community stocks and the pipelines also get completely dried up. The situation then becomes ripe for a famine. The problem was further compounded earlier due to lack of transportation facilities and even if there were surplus foodgrains stocks in one part of the
country, it would not be possible to transfer huge stocks from such parts to distressed areas. So, famines remained a part of India's history. Kautilya, the great statesman of ancient India, in his exhaustive chronicle on statecraft "Arthashastra" (321-301 BC), has advised the kings that during famine, the king should show favour to his people providing them with seeds and provisions. He may either do such works as are usually resorted to in clamities; he may show favour by distributing either his own collection of provisions or the hoarded income of the rich among the people". (Bhatia, 1970). In Vedic era, the parting direction of Guru to his disciples, was to go and grow foodgrains. The saying "Annam Brahmam" (grain is God) also illustrate the importance that was given to foodgrains. There was "a gradual evolution of an elaborate system of precautions against famines and for grappling with food problems... The Mauryas under whom India received her first unity-both cultural
and political-laid down elaborate instructions to the higher officers with respect to the measures for dealing with famine and other natural calamities" (Acharya, 1983). Villages were encouraged to have their own "grain reserves" and kings used to maintain their own emergency stocks. "The Sohgaure Plate-another early Mauryas document discovered in Gorakhpur district, records an order to Mahamatya (Chief Minister) of Sravasti to the effect that certain store houses (Katha galani) at Triveni, Mathura, Cancu, Modena and Bhadra are to be opened to cultivators in season of distress" (Acharya, 1983). Occasional famines appear to have occurred in India in some sort of regularity all through-it is said that India faces a major drought once in fifty years. There were 14 famines between 11th and 17th century (Bhatia, 1985). It, however, appears that earlier these famines were localised and it was only after 1860 that famines come to signify general shortage of foodgrains in the
country: Frequency of famines also seems to have increased, there being 20 between 1860 and 1909. However, the Governments remained unaffected by these famines and perhaps felt that, at worst, the prices of foodgrains in affected areas will go up but foodgrains will also reach those areas through the marketing channels in view of the attraction of high prices. In fact, "the Famine Commission (1880) had observed that each province in British India was surplus in foodgrains and annual surplus, including of Burma (then part of British India, later an independent country Burma and now Myanmar) was 5.16 million tons" (Bhatia, 1970). At that time, annual export of rice and other grains from India was to the tune of one million tons. Situation seems to have changed drastically on the eve of the Second World War and the Bengal Famine of 1943 is known to have claimed around 3.5 million lives though the official Famine Inquiry Commission had pegged the figure at 1.4 million. However,
the Commission did make a general observation that "as many as 30% of the people remained hungry." In any case, this famine jolted the Government out of its slumber and gave birth to a new era of food management in the country, resulting in introduction of policies of control on price and regulation of the distribution of foodgrains by the State.
Food Situation at the time of Partition of the Country
Partition of the country in 1947 left India with 82% of the total population of undivided India but only 75% of the cereal production. The surplus province of Punjab was partitioned and West Punjab, which had a well-established network of irrigation canals, went to Pakistan, Sind province, which too was a surplus province also went to Pakistan. These two provinces together used to supply about one million tons of foodgrains to other provinces in undivided India. At the time of independence, thus, the new nation India started its tryst with destiny with lots of handicaps as far as food security was concerned.
Soon after becoming an Independent nation on 15 August 1947, India opted for planned economic development. Rapid economic growth to improve the standards of living of all, through appropriate distributive mechanisms was an important principle of Indian Planning. Gandhi's philosophy of aiming for contentment and happiness with wants being kept at a low level, and each village becoming more or less a self-reliant entity, was quickly given a go by. This was an universal phenomenon during that period, the days of psychological and spiritual happiness and contentment were getting replaced by materialistic well-being. Modernity was the concept in vogue. In fact, the idea of what constituted good life seemed to be not significantly different between the socialist and the capitalist modernisers. while "the Gandhian approach has always talked about the voluntary limitation of wants, the 'need for having self-reproducing village communities and about issues bearing a better balance
between man and nature, Gandhi and his disciples looked more like moralizing old men than people who could be expected to change the direction of the society. Thus, the modernising school under Nehru won the day" (Sukhamoy Chakraborty, 1988). Since then, Indian planning has consciously and consistently accepted "growth with equality" as the cornerstone of its strategy. The equality concept requires, among other things that market forces would not be allowed to have unrestrained free play and will be controlled to an extent that will help superimpose social policy over the economic policies. Striving for equality, in practical terms at least the minimum level of standard of living, including of the household food security, was an important practical manifestation of such equality. The concept of attainment of a minimum standard for all the people becomes all the more relevant in case of commodities like foodgrains which are required by all to satisfy one of their most basic
human needs and critical lack of which had resulted in loss of millions of lives in the pre-Independence history of this country. The equity concept in respect of food becomes absolutely compelling in a country like India, where around 300 million people were still living below the poverty line; their physical and mental growth being stunted on account of poverty led malnutrition. India's food policy seeks to achieve the social justice through its price, foodgrain production & distribution policies; through the mechanism of world's biggest public distribution system; through various poverty alleviation programmes, in some of which foodgrains is distributed as part of the wages and through programmes launching a direct attack on malnutrition. This superimposition of social policy over the food policy to control, albeit as minimal as possible, the freeplay of open market forces is nothing peculiar in India; most of the countries do it. "The necessity for food stamps programme
in the U.S., however, suggests that market oriented economies may never become rich enough for all consumers to be able to afford adequate diets from their own earned incomes. Even rich countries will have hungry people if there are not food interventions" (Timmer, 1986). We will have, later on, an occasion to refer to these programmes and policies as these have a strong bearing on the status of the food and nutrition security scenario.
Emergence of a Comprehensive Food Policy in Independent India
The food policy of independent India was examined by a Foodgrains Policy Commission under the chairmanship of Sir Purshottam Das Thakur Das in 1947 which submitted its report in April 1948. It came to the conclusion that imports were necessary to enable maintenance of central reserves to guard against crop failures and such reserve could be of the tune of two million tons. It simultaneously recommended that the commitment to maintain the rationing system, introduced during the World War II, as also the need to import foodgrains, should be liquidated in phases. The Commission also recommended that the indigenous foodgrains production should be increased by 10 million tons per annum till self sufficiency is achieved. Without saying so in as many words, this Commission did ask the country to move towards the first stage of national food security by attaining self sufficiency and can be justifiably termed as the first major policy initiative towards the achievement of food
security. However in December 1947, all controls on foodgrains, imposed in the wake of Bengal Famine and War, were removed all at once. The time for such a dramatic reform was perhaps not opportune and the weather Gods too were not willing to cooperate. There were floods and crop losses. This resulted in steep rise in prices of foodgrains and the controls were immediately reintroduced. Independent India's first experiment with free market economy in foodgrains was, thus, unsuccessful.
Food policy being necessarily a dynamic concept, the 1947 Foodgrains Policy Commission was followed by a number of Commissions which examined the food policy from time-to-time. The Foodgrains Investigation Commission of 1949 again stressed self sufficiency. Foodgrains Procurement Commission (1950) stressed on maintaining a reasonable level of foodgrains prices to ensure adequate supplies to consumers. To further protect the consumers, it recommended rationing in all the towns with population of more than 50,000, informal rationing in other towns and some regulated supply of grains in rural areas. To carry out this, it recommended monopoly of foodgrains trade in the hands of the Government with procurement at primary markets and levy on the processors. One of the members, R.P. Noronha, gave a dissenting note in which he pleaded for reducing the Government's distribution commitments with sufficient proportion of total effective demand to be met at controlled prices to act as a
brake on rise of prices, because according to him, "Democracy is essentially Government by consent and consent to stringent measures ran only be obtained in times of stress and for temporary periods. " He, thus, suggested a policy of via-media, neither total control nor complete free play of market forces. This has been, more or less, the bed-rock of food policy all these years.
A spell of decontrol was again attempted in May 1952, when foodgrain production jumped from 51.99 to 59.20 million tons. The rising trend in food production was maintained up to 1956-57 with production reaching a plateau of 66 to 69 million tons. However, there was a decline of more than 5.5 million tons in 1957-58, forcing the Government to set up the Foodgrains Enquiry Committee (1957) under the eminent economist Ashok Mehta. The Committee criticised total dismantling of food control mechanism as a hasty step, especially when no buffer stocks were built during the years of good production. It recommended maintenance of a buffer of 1.5 to 3 million tons. It also suggested control on foodgrains trading; some regulation of consumption; programmes to increase production but imports pending self-sufficiency; establishment of Price Stabilisation Board; setting up of a Foodgrains Stabilisation Board; setting up of a Foodgrains Stabilisation Organisation to undertake purchase and
sale operations and constitution of a Central Food Advisory Council at the national level.
The next and a very important landmark was setting up of the Food Corporation of India (FCI) and the Agriculture Prices Commission in 1965. The former was to provide price support to farmers by purchasing quantities that could not fetch minimum support prices in the market, store the grains scientifically, move grains from surplus to deficit areas and make available gains to states to feed the public distribution system. The Agricultural Prices Commission (now known as the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP), a body on which farmers are also represented, was to advise the Government on price policy for agricultural commodities and evolve a balanced and integrated price structure in the perspective of the overall needs of the producers and the consumers. The Commission was, inter alia, to keep in view the need to provide incentives to producers for adopting technology for enhanced production; to ensure rational utilisation of land and other productive
resources; to take account of the likely effect of the prices on the rest of the economy, broadly on the cost of living, level of wages, industrial cost etc. and to also keep in view the terms of trade between the agricultural sector and the nonagricultural sector.
These two vital instruments of food policy have come to stay since 1965 and have contributed greatly to the present day situation when India can take pride in having achieved self sufficiency in foodgrains and banished famines and starvations. To the extent the country acquired self sufficiency, the food security-at least at the national level, has also gone up dramatically but before we go on to that, it will be better to examine as to how this self sufficiency was dependent on the fluctuations in the agricultural production, which itself was very much influenced by the behaviour and quantum of the monsoon rains.
Fluctuations in Foodgrains Production & Food Policy
It is necessary to touch upon the fluctuations in foodgrains production at this juncture itself as these have greatly influenced the food policy. It has already been mentioned as to how a complete decontrol was attempted in 1947 and 1952 when he country had good harvest but how the control were reintroduced when production declined and prices started going up. Stabilization of production along with its increase, therefore, became important goals for Indian agriculture. It must also be appreciated at this juncture that great wisdom was displayed by policy-makers when they kept the agriculture in private sector, although time and again there were occasional pressures for bringing a large part of Indian agriculture under cooperative sector, if not in the public sector. Had the agriculture gone into public or cooperative sector, we could not have reached the comfortable situation as we have done presently.
The First Five Year Plan, launched in 1951, gave highest priority to Agriculture and even though the investment priority shifted to industries in the Second, the foundation laid by the First Plan continued to be the guiding spirit for planning and implementation of agricultural development programmes in India. The first Prime Minister of India, Jawahar Lal Nehru, was convinced that there was no contradiction in pursuing development of both agriculture and industry. "Ever since the demand for the development of modern industry arose in India, we have been told that India is preeminently an agricultural country and it is in her interest to stick to agriculture. Industrial development may upset the balance and prove harmful to her main business-agriculture. The solicitude that British industrialists and economist has shown for the Indian peasant is very gratifying... As if any Indian with an iota of intelligence could forget the peasants. The Indian peasant is our main focus
and it is on his progress that India's progress depends. But crisis in agriculture, grave as it is, is interlinked with crisis in industry, out of which it arose. The two cannot be disconnected and dealt with separately, and it is essential for the disproportion between the two to be remedied." (Nehru, 1946). The results of such pragmatism are there to be seen today in both agricultural & industrial sectors.
When India embarked on the path of planned economic development in 1951-52, the total foodgrain production was just 51 million tonnes. Within four decades or so, it is estimated to have reached 180 million tonnes in 1993-94. The growth rate of foodgrains production in the long term period 1949-50 to 1991-92 was 2.7% per annum, which was somewhat higher than the population growth rate of 2.1% per annum during the same period. It may be argued that growth rate of GDP originating in Agriculture could have been even more, especially against the background of many countries in Asia, notably China and Indonesia, having been able to register much higher growth rates. It, therefore, appears that whereas Indian agriculture did make a quantum jump between 195152 and 1967-68 with foodgrain production going up from 51 to 95 million tonnes, the growth in the next two decades was not as impressive as made by some other Countries. The production stagnated between 95 and 108 million tonnes
during the next 7 years but recorded another quantum jump in 1975-76, when it went up to 121 million tons. For next 12 years, it hovered between 121 and 140 Metric tons. Post-1988 period again witnessed a jump from 140 million tonnes in 1988 to almost 170 million tons in 1989, a massive increase of 40 million tonnes or 21% in just one year. The tempo could not again be maintained and while the production hovered around the level of 176 million tons achieved in 1988-89 for next two years, it dropped to only 168.4 million tonnes in 1991-92, a substantial decline of nine million tonnes as compared to the previous year, forcing the Government to tie up import of three million tonnes of wheat, the imports being resorted to after a gap of four years. However, this import was just 1.8 percent of the net production of foodgrains in that year and the country had no difficulty in buying it by making cash down payment in US $. The agricultural production again revived in 1992-93 and
reached a healthy 180 million tonnes. There is a likelihood of a small decline in 1993-94 with expected production likely to be 179.1 million tons (Economic Survey 1993-94 p).
As was mentioned earlier, food insecurity is essentially caused either by production or price fluctuations. It is a matter of concern that Indian agriculture is still prone to substantial fluctuations. What is borne out from the above, is that only a small abnormality in the quantum and spread of monsoon rains can still create substantial ups and downs in the agricultural production in India. Such fluctuations can be observed even during the last six year period, starting from 1988-89, when the country is seen to be enjoying average monsoon rains for these six years in a row. The challenge, therefore, is stabilising production and solution lies in expanding irrigation and making optimum use of existing irrigation resources.
With the fluctuations in production and buffers being only small fraction of total production, the per capita availability also correspondingly fluctuates as can be seen from the table below:
Table 6 PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF ALL FOODGRAINS AT ALL INDIA LEVEL
(in million tonnes)
Year
Net Production
Net Imports
Change in
Govt. Stocks
Net availability
Per Capita
availability per annum
(in Kg.)
Note : Net Production is Gross Production minus 12.5 for seed, food & wastage.
Source: Economic Survey, Govt. of India, 1993-94 1991-92.
It will be seen from the table that it is only during one year i.e. 1991 that the availability of foodgrains crossed the recommended nutritional norm of 182.5 Kg. per capita per annum. (cereals plus pulses intake for male sedentary worker). However, the very next year it slipped down to 173.9 kg; a level that was achieved way back in 1965. The population explosion has obviously been the villian. If the estimated foodgrains production of about 180 million tonnes in 1993 is confirmed in final estimates, the availability will again rise to around 180 Kg. FAO had estimated (1992) that the Index of food production in India (base 1979-78 = 100) did rise from 123 in 1987 to 147 in 1989 i.e. an increase of 9.7 per cent per year but only by 1.3 percent per annum in the period of next two years 1989-91. The per capita rise in the index has been an unsatisfactory -0.96 per cent in the entire four year period 1987-91.
Buffer Stock Policy
The availability picture is thus one characterised by sharp fluctuations and becomes an important element to be taken care of in India's food policy. It is, therefore, necessary to use a part of the bumper production of good years in the subsequent year(s) of lower production by creating buffer stocks during favourable years and using such stocks in the lean years. Buffer stocks also stabilise the intra-year availability, taking care of the lean months. There are some critics of buffer stocking policy of the Government of India, who argue that these involve huge costs, as also some inevitable damage to stored grains and, therefore, suggest imports, as and when required, as an alternative. Practical experience has, however, shown that imports can never provide that sort of the national food security for a big and populous country like India, which buffer stocks can. Most importantly, imports cannot be on the tap, as if imports of all the required quantities will materialise
as and when one wishes. There is not only a lead time but in the absence of buffer stocks from which quantities can be immediately released in the market, speculative tendencies will not only have a field day in the domestic market but the country's bargaining power in the international market would be seriously eroded with the result that purchases may have to be made at high prices and on the sellers terms. The money required will be in foreign exchange whereas cost of buffer is at least in the domestic currency. Above all, why is it that a natural calamity like drought, flood a cyclone can still impair food security of the affected people very grievously in the developing countries but as observed by Jon Bennett "No one in USA starves when drought hits the mid West plains, for the country has mountains of stored grains. And why does Japan still wants to produce its own rice at great cost when it can buy any amount of rice any time. The moral is try and have your own food
buffer. Finally, in the absence of buffer stocks, the nation is prone to be pressured economically as well as politically-the autonomy of the country may itself be in the danger of being impaired. (Jon Bennet, 1987) Buffer stocks provide food security to nation and also give it the required strength and pride at the global level. It has also been experienced that when India enters the international market for imports, which necessarily have to be substantial, the prices tend to harden. Further, the foodgrains, especially rice, in this part of the world also suffers a decline and even the availability goes down. During 1992, when India had to import, Australia, which is the cheapest and ideal source, indicated their inability to spare any quantities out of their 1991 harvest, which had also gone down by 20 to 25 percent due to poor rains.
The Challenge for the Indian Agriculture
The challenge for the Indian agriculture that lies ahead is to not only increase the agricultural production substantially but also to achieve stability in it. The increase in production has to be achieved by increasing the productivity since the cropped area has remained more or less static at around 120-130 million hectares during the last 25 years. Latest data is available for the year 199091, when the cropped area was reported to be 127.52 million hectares with per hectare yield for foodgrains being only 1382 kg. Serious attention will have to be given to rain fed crops especially coarse cereals, where new high yielding varieties will have to be developed. In fact a second Green Revolution for crops other than rice and wheat and for areas other than Punjab, Haryana & W. Uttar Pradesh needs to be ushered in. That the challenge has been accepted in the right spirit is clear from the goals set out both by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Agriculture for the next
fifteen years. Assuming growth rate of population at 2% per annum up to 1997 and 1.8% for the next 10 years, the rate of increase in the demand for foodgrains, after taking into consideration increase in demand on account of rise in incomes, can be assumed to be 2.6% up to 1997 and 2.4% between 1997 and 2007. Based on these assumptions, the Ministry of Agriculture has planned for a total production of 198 million tonnes by 1997 and 251 million tonnes by 2007 AD. This tallies more or less with the foodgrains requirement estimated in the Eight Five Year Plan document which has stated that "India will have an estimated 941 million people by 1997 AD. This will increase to 1102 million by 2007. With this population and given improvements in consumption levels associated with growth in incomes, the estimated foodgrains requirement for 1997 and 2007 will be around 208 million tonnes and 283 million tonnes respectively". These figures speak for themselves and the big challenge in
the attainment of food security is obvious.
<section>4</section>
4. Production & availability of cereals
4. Production & availability of cereals
Production and availability of cereals is proposed to be examined in some details in this chapter because cereals happen to be the most important source of energy and adequate availability of just cereals themselves will go a long way in reducing hunger and poverty on one hand and assuring food and nutrition security to people on the other hand. An Inter-Ministerial Working Group set up in the Ministry of Agriculture recently has observed that on the basis of average net production of cereals for consumption during the last three years 199193, 1501 Kcal energy per capita per day is provided by cereals alone. Taking average energy requirement of 2200 Kcal per capita per day, cereals alone are providing about 68 per cent of the 'total energy requirements. Above all, poverty itself is defined in terms of energy intake. Besides, available cereals were also providing 37.4 gms. of protein per capita per day which works to about 74.8 per cent of the total average per capita daily
requirement of protein of 50 gms. (Working Group, Ministry of Agriculture, 1994).
As far as production of cereals is concerned, it is matter of great satisfaction that India has achieved self sufficiency, more or less on a sustainable basis. There may be a decline in production once in a while due to climatic factors but gone are the days when frequent famines in some part or other of the country were not too uncommon and were known to have taken a toll of million of lives. The pre-independence era was also characterised by an all pervading hunger among a large section of the population. It was estimated by the Famine Inquiry Commission in 1945 that as many as 30 per cent of the population remained hungry. The British had not much time for removal of hunger through increased cereals production. They were content with dealing with intermediaries and were only interested in Indian Agriculture producing raw material for their mills back home. Such raw material had to be produced even if it meant, for example, transforming paddy fields into robin dye fields.
The intermediaries, in turn, were great exploiters and had no interest in either investing or even encouraging the cultivator to raise the harvests. It is, therefore, no wonder that the well known economic historian Daniel Thorner observes that "when the British withdrew from India in 1947, they left the country with perhaps the world's most refractory land problem. For the upper classes who were in a position to collect rents, lend out money at interest or trade in agricultural commodities, the returns were so high that there was little incentive to invest in cultivation proper. The vast majority of cultivators never had a chance to accumulate for themselves enough capital with which to become capitalist farmers". (P.C. Joshi in India's Economic Development Strategies, Ed. Mongia & Vyas, 1986). The extremely unjust land tenure system accompanied by the heavy taxation of impoverished agricultural sector contributed to "the permanent poverty of the Indian people".
India was importing substantial quantities of cereals even after independence. Some bridging imports become necessary even now but that now-a-days happens once in 4-5 years and the proportion of imported grains is only a small fraction of what is indigenously produced, even during the years of drought as can be seen from Table No. 7.
Table 7 PRODUCTION AND IMPORT OF CEREAL
(in million tonnes)
Year
Total Production
Net Import
Percentage of
Imports to Production
Neg
Source: Directorate of Economics & Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture (1992).
It can be observed from above table that in 1951, India imported as high as 9.67 percent of domestic production of cereals which proportion was repeated only in 1965 when the country had a very bad harvest due to drought. In recent years import of wheat & rice was made in 1988 (2 million tonnes of wheat and 0.8 million tonnes of rice) and in 1992-93 (3 million tonnes of wheat and 0.14 million tonnes of rice) and these quantities were only a small proportion of domestic production of cereals.
Fluctuations in Cereals Production
It is no doubt a remarkable achievement to increase the cereal production by more than three times between 1951 and 1993. Net cereal protection went up from 40.1 million tonnes in 1951 to 145.6 million tonnes in 1993, the increase being 263 per cent over 42 years. (Reference Table 8).
Agriculture almost all over the world suffers from fluctuating yields and Indian agriculture is also very much characterized by substantial fluctuations in production. In fact, depending on the cycle of good and poor monsoon rains, the agricultural production, especially that of cereals, also displays peaks and troughs and in between increasing or decreasing trends. Such fluctuations are prevailing in recent years also and if we observe the net production of cereals and their per capita availability, as shown in Table 8, the effect of such fluctuations will become evident:
Table 8 PRODUCTION & AVAILABILITY OF CEREALS IN RECENT YEARS
Year
Population
(Millions)
Net
Production
(Million tonnes)
Net
Imports
(Million tonnes)
Change in
Govt. stocks
(Million tonnes)
Net Per
Capita availability
gins/day)
Neg.
Note : Net Production has been taken as 87.5 per cent of gross production.
Source: Economic Survey, 1993-94.
It will be observed from the above table that even in recent period of last six years, the net per capita availability of cereals has seen wide fluctuations. After the drought year 1987-88, it increased for 452.6 gins/capita/day in 1989, only to decline to 435.3 gms in the following year and then reach a high of 468.5 gms in 1991. It has again declined in 1992 and 1993. In fact, if we examine the per capita availability of cereals since 1951, it is seen that the availability was over 400 gms only in 1964, 1965, 1968, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1974, 1978, 1981, 1982 and from 1984 onward, it was always over 400 gms, the lowest during 19841993 being 411.8 gms in 1988, the year following one of the worst droughts in recent history. This analysis indicate that per capita availability of cereals has substantially improved over the years, especially since 1988. Since the net availability has been calculated after adjusting for imports/exports as also change in government stocks, it can be
safely presumed that availability picture can work as a proxy for consumption of cereals in India. It, therefore, follows that the per capita consumption of cereals has vasty improved over the years and since a well off household cannot overconsume cereals, infect it will consume less on its income increasing, the consumption of cereals amongst even poor households must have substantially improved. Whether such consumption was equal to or above the recommended dietary intake (RDI) or not, is now required to be examined.
Average daily per capita net availability of energy (Kcal) and protein from different food items during the biennium 1991-93 has been worked out by the Inter-Ministerial Working Group set up by the Ministry of Agriculture (April 1994) by averaging the production for the biennium 1991-93, arriving at net availability by assigning certain reduction percentage to cover seed, feed and wastages and assigning the energy and protein values to each. The picture that emerges is given in Table No. 9.
Table No. 9 AVAILABILITY OF FOODSTUFFS FOR CONSUMPTION (TRIENNIUM 1991-93)
Food Item
Total
Availability
(Million tons)
Daily Per
Capita Avail.
(gms)
Daily Per
Capita
Energy Avail.
(Kcal)
Daily Per
Capita Protein
availability
(gms)
Rice
Wheat
Coarse Grains
Sub GP Total
Pulses
Edible Oils
Spices
Cashew nuts
Fruits
Vegetables
Fish
Meat
Milk
Eggs
Sugar
Jaggery
Grand Total
Sources : Working Group, Ministry of Agriculture, April, 1994.
It can be observed from the above table that against the average normative average requirement of energy for the entire population i.e. 2200 Kcal, the availability during the biennium 1991-93 has been 2400 and against the average normative protein requirement of 50 gms per capita per day, the availability has been 64.9 gms. The Working Group has also observed that the energy value of 64.9 gms of protein is 260 Kcal, a highly satisfactory Protein-Energy percentage of 9.2.
It will be also observed from the above table that 1501 Kcal energy was being available from cereals alone and another 123 Kcal from pulses, i.e. a total of 1624 Kcal from foodgrains. However, the Working Group observed that "with increasing production of fruits and vegetables and food of animal origin (milk, eggs, fish, meat)., the average per capita demand for foodgrains (both cereals and pulses) will remain stagnant or decline and the net daily average per capita normative requirements of our population for foodgrains (cereals and pulses) is not expected to exceed 1450 Kcal (i.e. 419 gms. at physiological level and 493 gms at production) during the rest of the current decade". The Working Group proceeded to explain away the excess scenario. "It can be inferred that the quantities of foodgrains stocks carried over by surplus farmers, households, traders and processors must have increased". (Working Group, Ministry of Agriculture, April, 1994).
If 1450 Kcal of energy from foodgrains in adopted as suggested by the Working Group, it may be considered that 120 Kcal or 35 gm/capita/day was available from the pulses and the rest i.e. 1330 Kcal from, 383 gms of cereals.
It is proposed to break foodgrain separately into cereals and pulses because while there can be over consumption of pulses by comparatively better off households, no such over consumption will normally take place in case of cereals and average availability can be truly representative of all the people in the country.
The production of rice, wheat and coarse grains totaling to production of cereals has been as shown below:
Table No. 10 PRODUCTION OF CEREALS
(in million tonnes)
Year
Rice
Wheat
Coarse Grain
Total Cereals
likely
Source: Directorate of Economics & Politics, Ministry of Agriculture, GOI, May, 1992.
Of the total production of cereals given above, what quantities are available for consumption at physiological level ? It is unexceptionable that some quantities are lost at farm level, transportation and storage at various levels and even at the kitchen level. Nutrition Advisory Committees or Expert Group set up by the Indian Council of Medical Research, which have been making their recommendations on the Dietary Allowances for various nutrients since 1944 have been adopting a certain percentage deduction. The latest recommendations available are those made by the Expert Group in 1990. In respect of cereals they have recommended an intake of 396 gins/capita/day at physiological level. In order to make available this, quantity required at retail and production level is 436 and 490 gms. respectively. It means that a deduction of 23.7 per cent has to be made from production figures to arrive at the quantity available for consumption at physiological level. We may call it
scenario I.
The most recent Inter-Ministerial Working Group on Foodgrains Requirement up to 2000 AD set up by the Ministry of Agriculture (Apr., 1994) has however suggested a deduction of 15% in case of cereals. Although the report does not mention the considerations that have gone into for adopting this standard, perhaps the improvement in transportation and storage infrastructure and services coupled with sustained campaign to reduce post-harvest losses has made this group arrive at a figure of 15 per cent. While at the National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, I had detailed discussions on this topic with the Director, Dr. Vinodini Reddy. It so happened that she was a member of the Working Group set up by the Ministry of Agriculture (April 1994) as also of the Expert Groups of ICMR. It transpired that the Nutrition Advisory Committees/ Expert Group of ICMR did not have their own data on the deduction factor to be used and they simply adopted a percentage suggested by the Ministry
of Agriculture. She felt that if the Ministry of Agriculture is now suggesting a reduction of 15% from production stage to physiological stage, there may be no objection to that. As discussed a couple of paragraphs earlier, the requirements of cereals adopted by this group was 383 gins/capita/day. Let us call this Scenario II.
The quantity of cereals available for actual consumption at physiological level during last 3 years has now been calculated adopting the two sets of reduction factors and per capita daily requirements. Two scenarios about adequacy of cereals availability that emerge are tabulated below:
Table No. 11 PHYSIOLOGICAL LEVEL AVAILABILITY AND REQUIREMENT OF CEREALS
(Qty. in million tonnes)
Year
Total
Scenario I
Scenario II
Cereal Prod.
Availability with
Reduction factor
Availability after
adjustment of net import & change in
Govt. stocks
Requirement @
396 gms
capita/ day
Availability with
Reduction factor
Availability after
adjustment of net imports & change in
Govt. stocks
Requirement @
383 gms
per capita daily
Note: Adjustment for net imports and change in Govt. Stocks has been adopted from Economic Survey, 1993-94.
Source:
1. Population: Working Group Representative (Min. of Agriculture, 1994)
2. Food Production: ESA, Ministry of Agriculture.
3. Reduction Factor 23.7% ICMR, 1990.
4. Reduction Factor 15% Working Group Repd. (Min. of Agriculture).
5. Requirement @ 396 ICMR (1990).
6. Requirement @ 383 Working Group, Min.of Agriculture (1994).
An analysis of the data given in the Table No. 11 above for the last three years (1991-93) throws up, as expected, two different pictures under the two different scenarios and these are discussed below:
Scenario I
A comparison of data in Col.4 and Col.5 indicates that net availability of cereals for physiological consumption in 1991 was more than the requirement and worked out to 103.8 per cent of the requirement. In the following year, 1992, the net availability was slightly less than the requirement, being 97.3 per cent. In 1993, the availability declined and was only 84.7 per cent of the requirement. The picture is thus a mixed one, little more in 1991, slightly less in 1992 and still lesser in 1993. The stocks held back and in the pipe line may also be making some difference as these are never same in all the years. Of course, change in stocks held by the government has already have taken care of in Cols 4 along with net imports. However, no estimates of stocks held back by surplus farmers, traders and processors are maintained. As far as traders are concerned, and also surplus farmers to some extent, the stocks held back by them are higher in the years of shortages and lower in
the year of plenty. We can, therefore, total up the net availability and requirement from the three years 1991-93. It transpires that total availability of cereals during this biennium was 369.60 million tonnes whereas requirements was 389.91 million tonnes. This, with average satisfaction level of about 95 percent, is a fairly comfortable situation even though stiffer standards of both reduction factor and higher norms of per capita consumption have been used. In other words, against the recommended daily per capita consumption of 396 gms of cereals, the average net availability in the three year period has been 376 gms.
Scenario II
While scenario I was based on the reduction factor of 23.7 per cent from production to physiological consumption level and daily per capita consumptional requirement of 396 gms (ICMR, 1990), Scenario II is based on the recent report of the inter-ministerial Working Group (Ministry of Agriculture, April, 1994) which has used a reduction factor of 15 per cent and recommended an average daily per capita consumptional requirement of 383 gms for cereals for a period up to 2000 AD. Columns 7 and ~ in Table No.11 can be compared to examine the availability and requirement of cereals under this Scenario. It will be observed that in all the three years, 1991-93, the net availability has been substantially higher than the requirement. It has, in fact been 119.2, 112.7 & 108.6 per cent of the requirement. If we take a total picture of the three year period, the net availability of cereals has been 412.79 million tonnes or, in other words, the availability has been 113.4 per cent of the
requirement. This gives an exceedingly bright picture but some questions need to be answered before the report of this recent Working Group can be finally accepted by the Working Group which is likely to be set up by the Indian Planning Commission to go into the demand and supply figures for foodgrains at a higher and more technical level. Some of the questions that may be posed are: What is the basis for adopting reduction factor of 15 per cent ? While storage and transportation facilities have gone up, the higher production of animal based food items may also have increased the quantum of cereals going into feed sector. Further, if about 13 per cent cereals are being produced over and above the nutritional requirements and exports are insignificant, are the Indians over consuming the cereals ? The explanation sought to be given is that 'carried over stocks at the level of households, surplus farmers and traders must have increased substantially during recent years in too
simplistic. Foodgrain except national buffers, are not normally stored by anybody even after the next harvest. During years of good production and comfortable availability, as is the situation during these three years, nobody, hoards foodgrains unnecessarily and in fact, the year end stocks should in all probability, be very small and of the same quantum in all the three such years. Lastly, cereals do not lend themselves to over consumption by better off households. While poor households would increase their consumption up to nutritional standards and even beyond that slightly due to non-availability and non-access to other food items, this will be more than compensated by the decline in the quantity of cereals consumed by households whose incomes are on the upswing. This assumption is unexceptionable and the following data on share of total consumer expenditure of Quintiles in urban and rural areas (National Sample Survey Organisation, Planning Commission, Govt. of India,
43rd Round-July 1987 to June 1988) brings this out quite clearly.
Household Food Security & Consumption Expenditure
Distribution of per capita monthly consumer expenditure obtained by NSSO during their 43rd Round (Jul 87-June 88) is given below separately for rural and urban areas:
Table No. 12 SHARE OF TOTAL MONTHLY CONSUMER EXPENDITURE
Quantities
Cereal
Pulses, Vegetable,
Meat, Egg.,
Fish etc.
(PVM)
Food goods
Non food goods
Fuel & Light
Other misc.
goods & services
Rural India
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Urban India
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Source: NSSO, 43rd Round (Jul 87-June 88).
It is quite apparent from above that the Quintile one, the lowest income group in rural areas, spends as high as 41.52 per cent of their incomes on cereals, whereas the highest spends only 16.17 per cents. In urban areas, the corresponding shares are 24.48 and 14.75 per cent. As incomes rise the household first try to earmark larger share of income to purchase cereals and stave off the hunger and then start spending more on pulses, foods from animal origin, food goods and other goods and services.
The NSSO data of various rounds as given below, on the other hand, shows as to how the share of expenditure on cereals has been going down both in Rural and Urban areas.
Table No.13 SHARE OF MONTHLY EXPENDITURE IN CEREAL OVER A PERIOD
Rural Period
Rural Areas
Urban Areas
Cereals
PVM
Others
Cereals
PVM
Others
27 (Oct.72-Sep.73)
32 (Jul.77-Jun.78)
38 (Jan-Dec.83)
43 (Jul.87-Jun.88)
44 (Jul.88-Jun.89)
45 (Jul.89-Jun.90)
Source: NSSO, 27th 45th Round. Note: PVM group includes pulses, vegetables and milk etc.
The macro national level trends indicated by the Tables 12 and 13 above, more or less hold good for various states. To illustrate, the table below gives the proportion of per capita monthly consumer expenditure for three selected states. Selected states are Punjab (the state with highest per capita income and least proportion of population below poverty line), Maharashtra (the state in the middle of the rankings of states by proportion of people below poverty line) and Orissa (the state with the maximum proportion of poor. To save space, data on only three relevant groups of consumer expenditure out of six viz. cereals, PVM and food goods is being given:
Table No. 14 DISTRIBUTION OF PER CAPITA MONTHLY CONSUMER EXPENDITURE IN PUNJAB, MAHARASHTRA & ORISSA
Round
Punjab (Least poor)
Maharashtra (Middle)
Orissa (poorest)
No/Yr.
Cer.
PVM
FG
Cer.
PVM
FG
Cer.
PVM
FG
Source: NSS, 27th to 45th Round
It can be observed from the above table that the percentage of expenditure on cereals has come down in all the three states, the decline being approximately 39% in Punjab, 20% in Maharashtra and 25% in Orissa. Lower base of only 16.75% expenditure and a steep decline of 39% in Punjab is quite understandable, it being a very well off state in all aspects, Orissa, the poor state on the other hand, had even at the latest round (1989-90), a high proportion of expenditure on cereals (39.17%) which in fact was obtainable in middle ranking states of Maharashtra some 18 years back in 1972-73.
Some very significant conclusions can be drawn from the data shown in the Tables 12 to 14. These are:
(a) Between Oct. 72 and June 90, roughly about a period of 18 years, the proportion of monthly house hold expenditure on cereals declined in rural areas from 40.77% to 23.95% i.e., a drop of more than 70 per cent. In the same period, the decline in urban areas was from 23.08% to 14.19% i.e. by 63 per cent. These declines point to general prosperity and improved household food security as people have been able to spare more money for other consumption items. At the same time, while there may have been short spells of shortage of foodgrains resulting in higher open market prices, the public distribution system and the 'food for work type' or plain and simple employment generation schemes, must have helped people to tide over such periods of stresses. There were no serious reports of starvation, food-shortage driven migration and famine. It is also to be appreciated that any situation of food shortage and starvation would not go unnoticed in India because of a vigorous and free
press and political parties who are on the look out of any issue on which the party in power can be embarrassed.
(b) Higher percentage of monthly consumer expedition on cereals in the rural areas as compared to urban areas, confirms that the problem of poverty is much more pronounced there, forcing people to spend much more on cereals.
(c) With decline in expenditure on cereals, the expenditure on PVM (Pulses, Vegetables, Milk, Eggs, Mutton etc.) group has shown an increase in rural areas. This is a welcome sign and indicates movement towards a more balanced diet. In urban areas, the increase in the share of expenditure on PVM group has been rather modest, just about 10 per cent as compared to about 35 per cent in rural areas. It indicates the rural households are able to diversify their diets much more than their counterparts in urban areas. However this substantially bigger increase in rural areas could also be on account of some food items, like seasonal fruits, nonmarketed green or other vegetables, etc. which were consumed without having to buy them are now getting marketed and households have to pay for them, In this connection, the example of mangoes in Indo-Gangetic belt, stretching from Delhi to West Bengal comes to mind. Even some 40-45 years back, the whole village used to spend hot summer
days in Mango groves and families used to eat traditional small varieties of mangoes from the buckets where mangoes used to be soaked in water. All the mango groves have now been converted into commercialised mango orchards and the entire orchards are sold out to businessmen well in advance, whose guards will not allow even a single mango to be eaten by children of the villages free of cost. This again seems to be the price that has to be paid for market driven economic development and with income levels not rising fast enough, even the small luxuries in life like, mangoes, are getting beyond the reach of poor households.
The long and short of this exercise is that cereals availability is now more than required if the report of the Working Group (Ministry of Agriculture, Apr. 194) is to be followed. This cereals availability is almost 95 per cent of the required even if the old standards of the Expert Group (ICMR, 1990) regarding the reduction factor between production and consumption and per capita daily requirement of cereals are adopted. Adequate availability of cereals would have a highly positive impact on household food and nutrition security. It is hoped that the percentage of people living below poverty line will sharply decline when the Planning Commission of India revises its earlier estimates of 1987-88. It is also hoped that the consumption pattern and the extent of malnutrition which is presently available from the recent surveys conducted by the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau of the National Institute of Nutrition will also throw up a different and much more brighter
picture when the results as compared to the one given by their earlier two rounds of surveys during 1975-79 and then 1988-90.
Apart from the NSSO data, we also have data thrown up on expenditure pattern by the surveys conducted by the National Nutrition Monitoring Board of the NIN. It has been found that 63.8 per cent of expenditure was on food items in rural areas and it was 57.1 percent in urban areas. (Nutrition Trends in India NIN, 1993).
EXPEDITURE PATTERN
The picture thrown up by NNMB surveys of 1991 naturally is not exactly the same as shown by NSSO surveys. Further, in the NSSO data, expenditure has been shown separately for following food-related groups-cereals, PVM and food goods. In NNMB surveys the entire expenditure on food as a whole has been clubbed together. The NSSO surveys show 60.96% as the above mentioned three food-related groups for rural areas during Jul.89-Jnu.90 whereas NNMB surveys indicates expenditure as food as 68%. Similarly, for urban areas too, NSSO figure is 51.6% whereas NNMB figure is 57.1%. Thus, even though those two surveys have been done by two different organisations with different sample families, the expenditure pattern is not too different and both indicate more or less the same situation prevailing in rural and urban areas.
The extent of consumption of cereals and other food items by people against recommended dietary intake (RDI) should have a direct correlation with extent of poverty amongst such people. However, the consumption data culled from the NNMB surveys in various states does not show such correlation, when compared with poverty ranking of the states:
Consumption of Foodstuffs & Poverty
It can be observed from the above figure that consumption of cereals is exactly equal to RDI (as given in Table 30) in case of Kerala whereas it is higher than RDI is all the states shown here. What is surprising is that consumption of cereals at 628 gms/cu/day in Orissa is not only very much higher than RDI of 460 gms/cu/day, but it happens to be highest in the country. How is this when Orissa had 44.7% of its of people living below poverty line ? Of course, Orissa is somewhat surplus in foodgrains production but in a single zone national market, it does not mean all the cereals produced in Orissa are consumed there itself. Similarly, consumption of cereals in Bihar at 481 gms is very much higher than RDI, although Bihar is not only the second most poor state in the country (from the point of view of proportion of people below poverty line) but is a highly deficit state also. The consumption surveys of NNMB, therefore, cannot be taken on their face value, the only purpose
they serve is to reiterate that cereals availability and consumption situation is quite comfortable.
Consumption of as high as 494 gms cereals per capita per day in Punjab also is not easily explainable. An average Punjabi is known to consume quite a lot of milk (confirmed by NNMB survey being highest in the country at 396 gms against RDI of 150 gms) and milk products, vegetables, fruits etc. but notwithstanding this, it appears that an average person in Punjab is consuming lot of cereals also perhaps for maintaining his or her high vigour. Residents of Punjab are also known to be taller and heavier than average Indian. But consumption of substantially higher quantity of cereals even by an average resident from Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa and most of the other states (not shown in figure 2. above) raises a question whether the RDI of 460 gms/cu/day at physiological level requires fresh examination and revision. The RDI prescribed for Indians should also have some parity with that recommended for people in at least neighbouring countries, especially China. Incidentally, as
shown in Table 1, the Dietary Energy Supply for average Chinese in terms of calories per capita per day during the period of 1986-86 was as high as 2637 (FAO Report, 1990-92).
That the consumption of pulses is much less than RDI is clearly brought out. Surprisingly, Orissa, the bottom state in poverty scale, has consumption of pulses more or less equal to the RDI level. It is lower than RDI even in Punjab. Consumption of pulses is higher than RDI only in Uttar Pradesh (45 gms) and Madhya Pradesh (43 gms/cu/day).
Milk consumption is higher than RDI only in case of Punjab. In all the other states it is substantially lower than RDI. In case of Kerala also, a state with fairly low proportion of poor and with fairly high per capita income as also the highest literacy, has an extremely low milk intake of 18 gms against recommended 150 gm/cu/day.
The consumption of fats & oils also is lagging behind the RDI. Against RDI of 20 gms/cu/day, it is 17 and 14 even for Punjab and Kerala respectively but again, rather surprisingly, 16 for Orissa. It is only 4 for Uttar Pradesh and 7 for Bihar. In fact, consumption of fats and oils is higher than RDI only in case of Gujarat (not shown here), 21 gins/capita/day.
Consumption pattern surveys of the NNMB, therefore, do not help very much is finding out the actual picture about consumption of even these four food items. The problem perhaps was that these were carried out only in nine states, samples were small and response of the respondent was probably inaccurate. It is not improbable that the respondents either had no definite idea of the quantity of these items consumed in the family or even may have indicated inflated quantities to keep up their social prestige in the village community. However, as far as consumption of cereals is concerned, these surveys reconfirm the picture of at least fairly comfortable availability.
<section>5</section>
5. Poverty, purchasing power & food security
5. Poverty, purchasing power & food security
The National Nutrition Policy has recently been formulated in India. Appropriately, it starts with the adverse impact of poverty on nutritional status of people. "Widespread poverty resulting in chronic and persistent hunger is the single biggest scourge of the developing world today. The physical expression of this continuously re-enacted tragedy is the condition of under-nutrition which manifests itself among large section of the poor, particularly among the women and children. This condition of under nutrition, therefore, reduces work capacity and productivity amongst adults and enhances mortality and morbidity amongst children. Such reduced productivity translates into reduced earning capacity, leading to further poverty and the vicious cycle goes on. " (NNP 1993)
THE VICIOUS CYCLE OF POVERTY
Poverty related issues have always been a matter of greatest concern for the developing countries, which are having a running battle with this scourge. Of late, especially since the second half of the eighties, these issues have also started disturbing those thinkers, political activists, policy makers etc. in the developed countries and the economists working in international organisations, who feel that such stark contradiction in respect of such a basic requirement of human life cannot go on and it is for the good of the entire mankind that poverty, hunger and wastages of human lives is banished from the entire face of the earth as early as possible. Food for all and the food and nutrition security have at least started getting talked about and these efforts have finally led to adoption of a World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition at Rome in December 1992. The structural adjustment programmes undertaken in many countries have also forced policy makers and
intellectuals to consider impact of these adjustments on the nutritional status of people. "In particular, in the second half of the decade, the need for special attention to poverty issues induced or overlooked by adjustment programmes was widely acknowledged in Bank (World) documents. One component of current approach to poverty with adjustment is an attention to investments in human capital in general and nutrition in particular, More concretely, future interventions might benefit from continued assessment of whether explicit nutrition programmes are more appropriate than broad policy considerations, whether targeted programmes are more effectively implemented than broad based measures in all environments and whether nutrition is best promoted by food policy and food oriented subsidies or by health and sanitation programmes (Alderman, 1992). Of course, the policies will differ from country to country and will depend largely on the complexities of problems and resources
endowment of different countries. As far as India is concerned, it has opted for an integrated policy. Till the end of IVth Plan, India's main emphasis was on the aggregate growth of the economy and reliance was placed on the percolation effects of growth. "In the face of continuing poverty and malnutrition, an alternative strategy of development, comprising a frontal attack on poverty, unemployment and malnutrition became a national priority from the beginning of the V Plan. This shift in strategy has given rise to a number of inter-ventions to increase the purchasing power of the poor; to improve the provision of basic service to the poor and to devise a security system through which the most vulnerable sections of the poor, viz. women & children, can be protected". (NMP, 1993)
Food & Purchasing Power
Household food security is a function not only of availability of food but also of the purchasing power available with each household. It has now been well established that at the global level availability of food is not a problem. Even at our national level, availability of foodgrains is not the real problem, it is prevailing poverty amongst a large number of household that comes in the way of achieving households food security. There may be abundance of food but it is no help to the poor households if it has no access to that. "There is no assurance of deliverance from hunger unless those charged with the tasks of governing him (the poor) take conscious and deliberate steps to channel that abundance in his direction so that he can absorb the little he needs". (Vanugopal, 1992). It will, therefore, be worthwhile to see as to what is the status of poverty in India that impairs the purchasing power, which ultimately results in food-insecure households and what programmes have
been launched to combat it.
It is said that India has achieved self-sufficiency in the matter of foodgrains but what exactly one means when one says this. To my mind, in our case it loosely refers to the fact that India is no longer required to import foodgrains and can even export some and even when it has to resort to imports once in a while, it is a very small quantity and that too only once in a while. For example, in the current decade, India imported two million tons of wheat and 0.6 million tons or rice in 1988 and 3 million tons of wheat and 0.2 million tons of rice in 1992, both these imports coming after a gap of four years. Thus, even when it was required to import cereals, such imports were only around 1.5% of the total foodgrains produced in India. India has, therefore, achieved self sufficiency in foodgrains production in that particular manner of speaking. It certainly can legitimately take pride in being able to manage the existing demand for foodgrains with indigenous production. But
what about the suppressed demand, the demand that should have been there but it is not there due to poverty ? Effective demand and consequent consumption of required quantity of foodgrains is not what it should be; otherwise millions would not have been below poverty line, not being able to consume at least minimum levels of calories even if we keep other nutrients out of consideration for the time being. Many of the households, have, therefore, inadequate access of foodgrains and are food insecure to that extent. The root cause of such non-access or food in-security is poverty and one has to understand this in order to appreciate the contradiction between food self sufficiency on the one hand and prevailing malnutrition on the other. This lack of access or lack of purchasing power has been forcefully brought out by Amartya Sen when he describes it as deprivation due to non-entitlement or "the inability of certain people to command food through the legal means available in
the society, including the use of production possibilities, trade opportunities, entitlement vis-a-vis the State and other methods of acquiring food" (Amartya Sen, 1981). He goes on to say that a "person starves either because he does not have the ability to command enough food or because he does not use this ability to avoid starvation." In India, large scale unemployment is a great aggravating factor and in conjunction with rapidly growing population, severely impairs the purchasing power of a large number of households or forces the families to acquire purchasing power at a certain social cost like child labour. The magnitude of the problem can be imagined when we find that" unemployment which w as of the order of 2-3 crores (23 million) during the beginning of Eighth Plan in 1992, is expected to increase by another 3.5 crores by the end of the plan in 1997, implying an increase of 7 hundred thousand unemployed each year in the country. With the introduction of NEP (New
Economic Policies) and the arrival of multinationals and, along with the open markets, the resulting international competition will force induction of more sophisticated & modern technologies which are known to employ greater automation and lesser man power". (KB Sahay, 1994). The country will have to face this menace with all the capacity at its command & no wonder, that the Prime Minister, while delivering his address at Harvard during his recent visit to USA has observed that, "In developed countries, the income of unemployed is protected through social welfare; yet social problem constantly arise...Compensated employment cannot be a substitute for employment. Unemployment becomes a symbol of rejection, of being unwanted in society." (Prime Minister Narsirnha Rao, as quoted by Vir Singhvi, 1994). India has to find employment for its teeming millions. Let us also see who are these "poor" households which, on account of their poverty, are unable to effectively register
their demand and purchase even the minimum quantity of foodgrains required for the entire family's nutritional well-being. These are essentially said to be those living below the poverty line. Quite a lot has already been written about the concept of the poverty line but it is necessary of briefly dwell on the concept here. In fact, the definition of poverty itself and the yardstick to measure it are matters of intense ideological and technical controversy. To complicate the issue further, the measure of poverty line itself is not able to adequately describe the "extent" of poverty of a large variety of people living within that "line". However, in a layman's language, people who have to go to bed hungry; people who do not know whether they will get work the next day; people who do not possess minimum clothes to wear; people who have no access to potable water and the very primary health care and people who do not have a shelter over their heads are the poor people. The poor
consist of not only the very poor who are as clearly visible in a society as 'a raw wound on a bare human body' but also those in whose case the raw visible manifestations of poverty are not noticeable at the first sight and who suffer from under-employment; non availability of regular wage earnings; farmers at risk; cultivators farming in risk areas prone to drought, floods, and people forced to migrate etc. and so on. There could also be households, albeit a small number, which could have afforded enough food for the entire family if first priority was given to food or where the male provider of the family is a drunkard or where some members do not get adequate food due to gender bias. However, while providing a reasonable standard of living to all may take some time, at least adequate food to all individuals has to be quickly assured. Without adequate food, people cannot break the vicious cycle of poverty. Thus, in our country, poverty has greatly influenced food
insecurity and we have, therefore, to determine the poverty line with relation to calories to be consumed. Accordingly! those people who do not have a daily calorie intake of 2100 kcal or more in urban areas and 2400 kcal or more in rural areas are said to be living below the poverty line. These calorie requirements are converted into per capita consumption expenditure i.e. "minimum money requirement of a person, which, considering a person's consumption pattern, will ensure sufficient food intake for satisfying average calorie needed." (Gupta SP in India's Econ. Dev. Strategies, Ed. Mongia, 1986). In 1987-88, the rural poverty line, in terms of percapita monthly expenditure was Rs. 131.80. Families found, during surveys, to be having consumption expenditure less than the required are considered to be living below the poverty line. Of course, the ideal thing would have been to measure poverty against a set of parameters which go to make a "life of good quality", at least a
life with minimum standard of living. In other words, not only food and nutrition security for all but also good healthy drinking water, choice of a balanced diet, a reasonable house, proper clothes to wear and access to education, health and employment. This is, of course, beyond the scope of this presentation. However, the average incidence of rural poverty conceals wide interstate differences which suggests that greater attention needs to be paid to the regions which have greater concentration of poor. (Eighth Five Year Plan, Min of R.D.). The figure below shows the proportion of people living below poverty line, both in various states and in India as a whole:
PERCENTAGE POPULATION BELOW POVERTY LINE
It will he observed from the above that surveys prior to 1987-88 and results published by the Planning Commission estimated that 29.4 percent of the people in India were living below the poverty line. The earlier estimates were of 1983-84 when the Planning Commission had estimated that proportion of below poverty line (BPL) population was 37.4 percent. Thus in percentage terms, the BPL population dropped by 8 percentage points during the decade in question. It will also he observed that there are wide variations amongst the states within the country. While Punjab has only 7.2 percent people below poverty line, Orissa has as many as 44.7 percent. It is also worth noting that while a food deficit state like Kerala has only 17 percent BPL population, for a substantially food surplus state like Uttar Pradesh, the figure is as high as 35.1 percent. This only proves the point, that even in situation when adequate food is available, large number of people are not able to gain
access to it-cannot encash their entitlement in the words of Amartya Sen.
It has to be, however, appreciated that the figures of population below poverty line (BPL), as given above, have become outdated now. These are as published in the year 1987-88 and based on surveys undertaken prior to that. It is understood that the new figures will he available during the latter part of this year itself. When those are published, it is quite likely the proportion of BPL population will sharply decline. This assumption is essentially based on the fact that per capita availability of cereals, which alone give around 70 per cent of calories, has in recent years been even more than recommended levels and better off people cannot be eating more than recommended levels to lift up the averages. The other factors which will also contribute are: (i) increased purchasing power with poor due to various poverty alleviation programmes (ii) increased production/availability of non-food items providing energy; (iii) improved drinking water and health care facilities; (iv)
revamping of PDS to focus on poor areas (v) data showing a decline in proportion of per capita consumer expenditure an cereals etc. Such reduction in BPL population will also he able to explain the contradiction, brought out starkly in case of Orissa, between higher than required availability of cereals and of the population consuming less than the required levels of energy as brought out in the NNMB surveys, even though there was enhanced energy intake among the children up to 6 years age. These factors will he discussed in greater details in the appropriate chapters and we can, for the time being, proceed to examine various programmes that constitute the frontal attack on poverty.
Poverty Alleviation Programmes
Banishing the poverty from the face of the country is one of the most cherished goals of India's development planning. It is felt by almost all the policy framers and the experts that the predominant thrust of development in rural areas should be on generation of higher growth by rapid acceleration in the growth of agriculture and allied activities and a rapid increase in production jobs. Some economists (Mongia, 1986) have calculated that a minimum rate of growth of four percent in the rural economy will be necessary in order to reduce the absolute number of rural poor. It will also be necessary to pointedly direct the poverty alleviation programme towards economically weaker sections of the rural people. In the urban sector, where rate of growth is, in all probability, expected to be rapid and higher than the rate of growth of population, deliberate redistributive policies, including what are nowadays popularly referred to those providing a safety net to the poor, need to
be put in place. This will ensure that such growth is not consumed entirely by the richer section of the population, in short- the social engineering within the economic policy framework.
We can now take a brief look at the progress so far made in reducing the proportion of people living below the poverty line, before we move on to social distributive policies like poverty alleviation programmes and public distribution system. It is observed that the proportion of people below poverty line has been declining since early seventies, when the rural poverty started getting a sharply focused attention in our developmental strategies. However, there is some dispute about the number of people living below the poverty line as can be observed from the tables given below :
Table 15 PERCENTAGE OF POPULATION LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE
Area
Rural
Urban
Combined
Source: Planning Commission
Area
Rural
Urban
Combined
Source: Report of the Expert Group set up by Plancom July, 1993.
It will be evident from the above, that there is some difference in the above two sets of data although the percentage of poor has declined according to both. Percentage of people below poverty line, both in rural and urban areas, has declined by 21.6 percentage points as per the estimate of the planning Commission between 1972-73 and 1987-88, whereas it declined by 15.6 percent points according to the estimate of the Expert group. Considering the handicaps that a big developing country like India has to face, a decline of even 15.6 percentage points is not too bad and if it is 21.6 percentage points, it is quite commendable. This points to an improved household food security scenario. The worrying thing, however, is that even if the estimate of 29.9% are taken as correct, in absolute terms around 240 million people roughly 48 million households were still living below the poverty line in India in 1987-88. As per 43rd round of NS Survey conducted in 1988-89, 196 million
persons i.e. 36 million families were living below the poverty line in rural areas. A vast majority of Indian poor, thus, live in rural areas. This not only puts in correct perspective as to what India has achieved so far through the combined strategy of growth and direct attack on poverty but also the daunting task that lies ahead, Of course, it also brings in sharp focus the need to contain the burgeoning growth in population.
Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation
Although alleviation of rural poverty has been one of the primary objectives of planned development in India, it was only during the Sixth Five Year Plan that the problem of rural poverty was brought under a sharper focus. The Seventh and Eight Plan have continued with this strategy i.e. emphasis on growth with social justice. "It was realised that a sustainable strategy of poverty alleviation has to be based on increasing the productive employment opportunities in the process of growth itself. However, to the extent growth by-passes some sections of the population, it is necessary to formulate specific poverty alleviation programmes for generation of certain minimum level of income for the rural poor." (Draft VIII F.Y. Plan, Ministry of R.D.). In more concrete terms, the aim is enabling every one to have adequate employment and afford at least the minimum desirable requirement of food, clothing and shelter.
The underlying philosophy in poverty alleviation programmes in India has been "decentralisation of planning and also renewed emphasis on wage employment and asset oriented self-employment programmes. Although resources constraints have been the major hurdle in providing wage employment to all those who are in need of it, it may not be before long that a national programmes guaranteeing wage employment to all may be introduced in the country." (Draft VIII F.Y. Plan, Ministry of R.D.) It is also recognised that rural development programmes, including those concerned with a direct attack on poverty, cannot succeed unless these are people oriented and people themselves are involved at various levels in planning, approving and implementing such programmes. To operationalise such a concept, an entirely new wing of development administration, the Panchayati Raj, has been developed as an adjunct of developmental planning in India over last forty years or so, It traces its origin
from the olden days when every village in India used to be governed by a Panchayat, an assembly of five (Parch) elders, who would self-govern (raj) the village in almost all matters, even dispensing justice. In the post-Independence period, the structured (rather than the informal of oldern days) Panchayati Raj institutions functioned with various degrees of effectiveness in different States of the country. There was a wide differentiation in the statutory backing, the number of tiers and power of such Panchayats. It was however experienced that except in a few States, these rural local self government bodies could not raise adequate resources and planning and implementation of projects by these bodies also left much to be desired. The biggest drawback noticed was that elections for these bodies were not held regularly and over long periods of time, resulting in their losing the status of being "people's elected bodies".
In order to rectify the shortcomings noticed in the functioning of these Panchayat Raj bodies, the Constitution of India has recently been amended and all the State Government were required to enact their own legislations on the pattern set by the Constitution Amendment Act. These bodies will now be unique and the Prime Minister recently observed, "The Pradhan (President) of these bodies will be even more powerful than the Prime Minister, as he combines in himself both the legislative as well as executive head of the State. When Nyaya (justice) panchayats are created, even judicial powers will be enjoyed by some of the office of these bodies". (Address of the Prime Minister to Minister's Conf., New Delhi, April, 94). It is hoped that the statutory strengthening of the panchayat raj bodies with compulsory provision for regular elections coupled with increase in the outlays for rural development, these programmes will further contribute to the removal of poverty and thereby
help in better food and nutrition security for the rural poor.
At this stage, I would like to only mention the various programmes being implemented under the rural development sector in India. These include Jawahar Rojgar Yojna (rural employment programme named after the First P.M. of India, Jawaharlal Nehru); Employment Assurance Scheme; Rural Housing; Rural Water Supply and Sanitation, Integrated Rural development; Marketing Improvement; Land Reforms; Desert Development/Drought Prone Area Programme etc. For the urban poor, a new programme, Prime Minister's Rojgar Yojna has been launched since last year. In this study, I would like to later discuss in a little more details, the Jawhar Rojgar Yojna inclusive of Employment Assurance Scheme and Integrated Rural Development Programme as they are the two most important programmes to eradicate the rural poverty, ultimately leading to improved household food security. Separately, an important complementary programme, the Public Distribution System, will also be discussed in details as it,
along with poverty alleviation programmes, forms the main plank for launching the country towards the achievement of the goal of food security for all.
It will be appropriate at this juncture to also give the outlays for some of the important rural development programmes for the last and current financial year (April to March) to give an idea of the sweep and extent of these programmes as also the substantial step up for the current year:
Table 16 OUTLAY & EXPENDITURE FOR 1993-94 AND PROPOSED OUTLAY FOR 1994-95 (In Rs. Millions)
Scheme
Outlay
Tentative Outlay
1. Rural Employment
(a) Jawahar Rojgar Yojna
(b) Employment Ass.Scheme
2. Integrated Rural Dev. Programme
3. Accelerate Rural Water Supply
4. Promotion of Voluntary Action in Rural Dev.
5. Drought Prone Programme
6. Desert Dev. Prog.
7. Rural Housing
Total
It will be observed from the above that the outlay for the rural development programmes has been substantially increased for 1994-95, an increase of huge 86 per cent. In fact, the outlay for 1993-94 was also a major step up over the previous year, Rs. 50,100 million as compared to Rs. 31,000 million in 1992-93, an increase of 61%. The reason for these hikes in rural development programmes is not only to intensify the direct attack on poverty but also to shelter the poor from the economic reforms and structural adjustment programmes started by the Government two years back. The Economic Survey 1993-94 says "To ease the costs of adjustments, promote human resource development and to generate more employment opportunities, allocation for plan programmes in social sectors, rural development and employment schemes were stepped up in 1993-94 budget. The budget for elementary and adult education was increased by 53 percent, health by 60%, family welfare plus integrated Child
Development Services programmes by 28 percent and Integrated Rural development Programme plus Jawhar Rozgar Yojna by 63 percent". As is clear from the table above, the process of strengthening these sectoral outlays, containing programmes in the nature of "safety net" for the disadvantages sections of the society, were continued in the current year and budget for these sectors including rural development, agricultural development, food subsidy etc. were further increased for 1994-95. As mentioned earlier, the biggest income transfer programme for the poor ie. Jawhar Rozgar Yojna and Integrated Rural Dev. Programme and the public distribution system with accompanying food subsidy will be discussed in greater details in the succeeding chapters. Incidentally the outlay for food subsidy also stands increased to Rs. 36500 million in 1994-95 as against Rs. 28,000 million in 1993-94 and Rs. 28500 million in 1992-93.
Jawahar Rozgar Yojna
Primary objective of this employment generation scheme (as also its predecessors National Rural Employment Programme and Rural Landless Employment Gurantee Programme) in operation since 1985-86 is "generation of additional employment on productive works which would either be of sustained benefit of the poor or contribute to the creation of rural infrastructure". (Min of Rural Dev. 1993-94).Within the outlays provided under this programme, six percent is earmarked for Indira Awas Yojna i.e. Rural housing scheme named after Indira Gandhi, former PM, houses being meant for scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and freed bonded labour. Another 20 per cent resources are earmarked for Million Wells programme under which open wells, suitable for irrigation on small holdings, are provided to the same disadvantaged groups as covered in Indira Awas Yojna. The physical and financial performance of these programmes is given below:
Table 17
Year
Expenditure
In Rs. Millions
Employment generation
In Million mandays
NREP
RLEGP
JRY
Source: Min of RD. Government of India, Eighth Five Year Plan.
These programmes have resulted in substantial reduction in the incidence of unemployment in rural areas, especially during the lean season. It will be noticed from the above table that since their inception in 1985-86, a total of 4371 million mandays employment was created by these programmes up to 1990-91 itself. If it is assumed that a family was able to secure on an average 100 mandays employment, 44 million families should have benefited and in other words 44 million families could have secured at least 100 days food security directly through this programme. If it is considered that there were 250 million families living below poverty line in 1990-91, as high as 18 percent of them were covered under this single programme. For rest of the year, the families would have been able to get employment in agricultural operations.. The programme could also indirectly help in increasing the wage rates in rural areas because it sets a bench mark, below which wages should not fall.
In an study undertaken in Alwar district of the State of Rajasthan (Surendra Kumar unpub., 1992), it was noticed that people were not keen to enrol for JRY since most of the time they were able to secure better wages elsewhere than the minimum wages offered in JRY. Of course, such a picture cannot be considered representative of the entire rural India but this illustrates the potentiality of the indirect benefit from this programme in enhancing and stabilising the wage rates. Further, wherever foodgrains were provided as part of the wages, there was double benefit to poor, since foodgrains were supplied at subsidised rates.
Employment Assurance Scheme
One of the Indian states, Maharashtra has been implementing an Employment Guarantee Scheme. It guarantees employment in government projects if workers come forward with a plea that they are not able to get any employment in and around villages. On similar pattern, the Employment Assurance Scheme has been started at the national level with effect from 2nd Oct. 1993. It seeks to combine employment guarantee with seasonal unemployment under an area approach. The scheme is being implemented in 1752 identified backward blocks (of the total of more than 4500 blocks in the country) in 257 districts (out of more than 460 districts). These blocks are situated in the drought prone, decertified, tribal and hilly areas in which the revamped PDS is in operation. Thus, there is a synthesis between creation of purchasing power and availability of foodgrains within the same disadvantaged areas.
The primary objective of this scheme is to "provide gainful employment during the lean agricultural season in manual work to all the able-bodied adults in rural areas who are in need and who are desirous of work, but cannot find it, either on farm or on allied operations or on the normal plan/non plan works during such period. The secondary objective is creation of economic infrastructure and community assets for sustained employment and development". (Draft Annual Plan, Ministry of R.D., 94-95). A beneficiary can get up to 100 days of the work under this scheme and a maximum of two adults in a family can be provided with work. An amount of Rs. 2000 millions has been proposed in the budget for the current financial year, 1994-94.
Integrated Rural Development Programme
The Programme extends assistance to families living below the poverty line and enables them to acquire productive assets or appropriate skills for self employment which in turn should enable them to generate enough income to get out of the poverty zone on a permanent basis. The families to be covered are identified, their bench mark survey done and bankable project prepared for each family. Government provides part of the investment as subsidy, the remaining coming as a bank loan. The scheme is supposed to be intergreated with the developmental plans of the area without which it may not be possible of establish forward and backward linkages and assets provided would either give very poor financial returns or may even became a liability to the beneficiary. The scheme also requires presence of a strong banking infrastructure in the area as banks are not only required to provide credit over and above the subsidy payable but scrutinise the individual projects and access their
economic viability. There has to be a continuous and close overseeing of the programme by the concerned development agency to help a poor family to turn into a successful entrepreneur. A total of 42 million families have been assisted under this scheme since its inception in 1980-81. It is proposed to assist about 4 million families during the current year 1994-95 with an implicit subsidy of Rs. 3750 million. (Ministry of RD, Annual Plan 1994-94).
IRDP is no doubt a difficult programme to implement. The biggest impediment is that a poor family, with no background of entreprenuership and management skills is be suddenly transformed into an Entrepreneur-Manager family. The other problems relate to availability of inputs in required quantities locally; developing suitable & durable marketing outlets and tendency amongst some beneficiaries to dispose off the asset, especially in the face of difficulties in managing it economically and profitably. Considering these difficulties, measures like tripartite discussions of likely project to be undertaken between the beneficiary, the representatives of the local development administration and bankers; training of beneficiaries to upgrade their technical and managerial skills; establishment of marketing organisations/links; dovetailing with area development programmes etc. are required to be taken up. At the same time, it was decided to have concurrent evaluation of the programme
so that the drawbacks were noticed quickly and corrective action taken. In any case, as many as 42 million families have been covered under this programme between 1980-81 and 1993-94 and this must have gone a long long way in reducing rural poverty.
There are a number of other programmes in the rural development sector that contribute towards rural poor attaining higher incomes and better quality of life. This is- not the proper place to discuss the details of such programmes It may, however, be worthwhile to just mention those to complete this chapter. Training of Rural Youth for Self Employment (TRYSEM) is to supplement IRDP by equipping the rural youth to acquire technical skills or upgrade their traditional skills. Development of Women and Children in Rural Areas (DWCRA) revoles around women as the target group. It provides one time financial assistance to groups of women to take economically viable activities so that it could be used as a ravoling funds. Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP) is specifically designed for arid and semi arid areas with poor resource endowment. It provides financial assistance for activities like landshaping, soil conservation, afforestation, pasture development, water resource
development etc. so that dryland agriculture could be made more productive. Land Reforms is also an important aspect of rural development, aiming at more judicious redistribution of rural land, redistribution of surplus land by giving it to the landless, tenancy reforms are implemented to provide security to the actual tiller, scattered holdings are consolidated and like. Panchayats, the local self Government bodies in rural areas are given the supreme place in the entire philosophy of rural development. Last, but quite important, is the encouragement being given to voluntary action so they could play an effective role in generation of awareness, inculcation of appropriate skills and bringing about a convergence of developmental programmes They could also foster the spirit of self reliance and innovativeness amongst the rural people and work as a bridge between technologies developed in the urban laboratories/institutions and their adoption in rural areas.
It can now be appreciated as to how the various programmes in rural development sector, especially rural employment (JRY) and the asset creation (IRDP) programmes, have contributed towards alleviation of poverty in rural India. The performance of these programmes may not be uniform over the whole country but generally speaking they have succeeded in providing additional purchasing power in the hands of rural poor and thus helped in improving the food and nutrition security of the rural households. These programmes have been substantially stepped up recently, and in conjunction with the reformed public distribution system, can go a long way in ensuring a very high level of food and nutrition security for poor households in India.
<section>6</section>
6. Public distribution system in India-evolution, efficacy and need for reforms
6. Public distribution system in India-evolution, efficacy and need for reforms
Evolution of public distribution of grains in India had its origin in the 'rationing' system introduced by the British during the World War II. In view of the fact that the rationing system and its successor, the public distribution system (PDS) has played an important role in attaining higher levels of the household food security and completely eliminating the threats of famines from the face of the country, it will be in the fitness of things that its evolution, working and efficacy are examined in some details.
It was really the generation of World War's own compulsions that forced the then British Government to introduce the first structured public distribution of cereals in India through the rationing system-sale of a fixed quantity of ration (rice or wheat) to entitled families (ration card holders) in specified cities/towns. The system was started in 1939 in Bombay and subsequently extended to other cities and towns. By the end of 1943, 13 cities had been brought under the coverage of rationing and by 1946, as many as 771 cities/towns were covered. Some rural areas, suffering from chronic shortage were also covered. The Department of Food under the Government of India was created in 1942, which helped in food matters getting the serious attention of the government. When the War ended, India, like many other countries, decided to abolish the rationing system. This was in 1943. However, on attaining Independence, India was forced to reintroduce it in 1950 in the face of renewed
inflationary pressures in the economy immediately after independence "which were accentuated by the already prevailing high global prices of foodgrains at the end of the War, which were around four times higher than the prewar prices". (Bhatia, 1985)
Public distribution of foodgrains was retained as a deliberate social policy by India, when it embarked on the path of a planned economic development in 1951. It was, in fact, an important component of the policy of growth with justice. In the first five year plan, the system, which was essentially urban based till then was extended to all such rural areas which suffered from chronic food shortages. It was also decided to have two variations of the system, Statutory Rationing Areas, where foodgrains availability was. supposed to be only through the Ration Shops and Non-Statutory Rationing Areas, where such shops would only supplement the open market availability. The system, however, continued to remain an essentially urban oriented activity. In fact, towards the end of the first five year plan (1956), the system was losing its relevance due to comfortable foodgrains availability. The net (gross minus 12.5 per cent for seed, feed and wastage) retail level availability of
foodgrains had jumped from 54.0 million tonnes in 1953 to 63.3 million tonnes in 1954 and remained at 63 plus million tonnes up to end of the first five year plan. This situation even prompted the government to abandon procurement of foodgrains and remove all controls on the private trading in foodgrains. However, true to its cyclic nature, the production dropped to 58.3 million tonnes in 1958, when the second five year plan had just started and forced the government to not only restart the procurement of cereals and put control on trading of foodgrains but re-examine the need for public distribution system (PDS). It was decided to re-introduce PDS. Other essential commodities like sugar, cooking coal, kerosene oil were added to the commodity basket of PDS. There was also a rapid increase in the Ration Shops (now being increasingly called the fair price shops-FPSs) and their number went up from 18000 in 1957 to 51000 in 1961. Moreover, quantity of foodgrains distributed
through PDS started getting increased with PL-480 availability. Thus, by the end of the Second Five Year Plan, PDS had changed from the typical rationing system to a social safety system, making available foodgrains at a 'fair price' so that access of households to foodgrain could be improved and such distribution could keep a check on the speculative tendencies in the market. The concept of buffer stocks was also incorporated in the overall food policy, although no buffer worth the name was required to be created in view of easy and continuous availability of PL-480 grains.
Creation of Food Corporation of India and Agricultural Prices Commission in 1965 consolidated the position of PDS. Government was now committed to announce a minimum support price for wheat and paddy and procure of quantities that could not fetch even such minimum prices in the market. The resultant stocks were to be utilized for maintaining distribution through the PDS and a portion of these were used to create and maintain buffer stocks. In fact, if stocks happened to be inadequate for maintaining a certain level of distribution through PDS, government had to resort to imports to honour its charge to PDS consumers. All through the ups and downs of Indian agriculture, PDS was continued as a deliberate social policy of the government with the objectives of:
i) Providing foodgrains and other essential items to vulnerable sections of the society at resonable (subsidised) prices;
ii) to have a moderating influence on the open market prices of cereals, the distribution of which constitutes a fairly big share of the total marketable surplus; and
iii) to attempt socialisation in the matter of distribution of essential commodities.
The PDS seeks to provide to the beneficiaries two cereals, rice and wheat and four essential commodities viz. sugar, edible oil, soft coke and kerosene oil. However, state governments, which actually manage the system at the ground level, are exhorted to add other essential commodities like pulses, salt, candles, matchboxes, ordinary clothes, school text books/copies and the like. Supply of additional items through PDS is especially relevant in interior areas, which are away from markets and where one or two traditional shopkeepers, who also double up for money-lenders, have the market monopoly. A number of state governments have set up Civil Supplies or Essential Commodities Corporations to buy such additional items directly from the manufacturers and use the existing structure of PDS to arrange for the sale at lower than market rates.
Making available the six essential commodities (rice, wheat, sugar, edible oil, soft coke and kerosene oil) to the state government is the responsibility of the central government. Taking commodities other than cereals (rice and wheat) first, the arrangement for such supply is as under:
Sugar:
Central government, under the provisions of the Essential Commodities Act, fixes a levy percentage and accordingly every sugar factory has to deliver that percentage of production to the government. Presently, the levy is 40 per cent. Central government allots to the state governments every month share of the sugar out of the overall levy quantity on the basis of 425 gins/capita on 1991 population. State govts then arrange to lift it from the nominated factories and arrange to sell it through the PDS. Sugar factories deliver the sugar at the cost fixed by the central government which in turn is based on the minimum support price payable by the factories to the sugarcane farmers. The non-levy or free sale sugar can be sold by the factories in the open market at whatever price they like.
Edible Oil:
The distribution of edible oil through PDS has now become an occasional phenomenon. Whenever production of oilseeds dips and prices of edible oils rise steeply making it too expensive for poor people, central government imports oils like Palmoelin or Rapeseed through its trading agencies and allots it among state governments who sell it through PDS. Depending on its international prices and the domestic prices, it may be sold at subsidised or at no loss no profit basis.
Soft Coke:
Soft coke is allotted to state governments from out of the stocks held by the public sector coal companies. As this is a cheap cooking medium for very poor households, it is sold at substantially subsidised rates. As and when areas are covered by distribution of LPG gas, in cylinders or piped, the allocation of soft coke to states in reduced.
Kerosene Oil:
Kerosene oil is used both as a lighting material and a cooking medium by poor households-as cooking mostly in urban areas and as lighting material mostly in interior rural areas. The supply to the state governments, on the basis of allocations made by the central government, is arranged by the public sector oil companies either from domestic production or by imports. It is also sold at subsidised prices.
Rice and Wheat:
As far as rice and wheat are concerned, it is the Food Corporation of India which builds, holds & distributes them. The stocks of these commodities are built almost entirely through domestic procurement. As detailed elsewhere, imports are now occasional and in small quantities. These stocks are utilized both for allocations to the state governments for distribution through PDS and also for maintaining a national buffer. In good years of production, procurement levels are normally high, distribution is less and there is a build up of buffer stocks. In years of poor production, the distribution is more due to higher demand and better lifting by States/Union Territories and the buffer stocks get drawn down. The procurement, distribution and stocks picture in respect of rice and wheat since 1985-86 is given in Table No. 18.
It can safely be surmised that two or more successive years of good production will ease the open market prices, leaving no incentive for farmers and traders to hold back stocks and thereby result in good procurement.. This situation will also reduce offtake and buffer stocks will be built up. On the other hand, two or more successive years of poor production will harden open market prices, give rise to speculative tendencies, reduce procurement, increase the demand on PDS resulting in heavy offtake and lowering of stocks.
Table 18
(in lakh tonnes)
Year
Procurement
Wheat & Rice
Imports
Distribution of
Rice and Wheat
PDS
EGP
Stocks on
1st July, 86
onwards
Source: Bulletins of the Ministry of Food, GOI, May 1994.
Note :
1. 10 lakhs = 1 million.
2. Imports shown in 1989-90 & 1993-94 are balance quantities received from out of contracts entered into during previous years.
3. EGP: Employment Generation Programmes.
Review of PDS in India
The PDS has been functioning for more than four decades now, if we leave aside its predecessor, the rationing system. Its greatest achievement lies in preventing any more famines in India. As recently as during the 1987 drought, considered worst in the century, the PDS helped the country overcome it with dignity and effectiveness. "The result of diet and nutrition survey during the 1987 drought showed that widespread hunger and its consequences experienced earlier in 1960, & 1970 were arrested in 1987". (Nutrition assessment & Analysis NIN, March 1992). Of course, build up of a buffer in preceding years provided the wherewithals to PDS as well as food for work type of programmes Its major drawback, however, has been its lack of effective contribution towards household food security. In fact, it remains one of the weaker components of the food policy trioka of procurement, distribution and stocking. The other two components have fully exhibited their worth. But for carefully
worked out support prices with a structure to guarantee these, the farmer would not have been induced to produce more and more foodgrains. In fact, without FCI and other procuring agencies ready at thousands of purchase centres to step in and purchase grain if the producer was not getting higher price than the Government announced procurement price, the private trade could never have handled the huge quantities that come to market at harvest time and prices would have crashed, making all the efforts and investment of farmer go waste. As for the buffer stocks, it was the stock built in the preceding years (which had reached an all time high of 27 million tonnes on 1.7.1986), which came handy and enabled the country to meet the challenge thrown up by the great drought of 1986-87, a challenge which was met successfully without seeking any food aid from any quarter. No desperate purchases were required and import of some wheat and rice could be deferred to 1988-89 when the
country could import on its own terms. The PDS also, no doubt, played a great role by making available rice and wheat at the fixed prices to consumers in all nooks and corners of the country, thereby preventing the spectre of famine in any part of the country. This distribution network also supplied grains for the "food for work" type programmes taken up on a large scale to fight the drought. The shortcomings noticed in the functioning of PDS as it is structured presently, range from it being urban baised and pro-rich to its ineffectiveness in reaching the poor. The system has, however, come to stay, notwithstanding its shortcomings, because millions of India's poor derive direct or indirect benefits from the very existence of this system. The World Bank in their report of 1991 has observed that "poverty consideration will compel India to sustain publicly sponsored foodgrain procurement, storage and distribution efforts. These programmes are even more important in a period
of economic downturn and adjustment, to ensure an adequate safey net". As regards urban bias, a study has shown that "in case of all commodities except coal, more than 50 per cent of the total quantity purchased under PDS is in the rural areas... PDS is rural based at all-India level for rice, coarse cereals, sugar and cloth. These items constitute more than 60 per cent of the total PDS purchases. Hence, it appears that PDS is not urban biased but pro-rural" (Mahendra Dev & Suryanarayana, 1991). As regards its being pro-rich, the same study finds that "more or less all the population [income] groups depend uniformly to the same extent on the PDS with respect to all commodities in rural areas, even though there were slight variations", (Dev & Suryanarayana, 1991). Thus, even though PDS appears to be even-handed for all income groups, this very finding points to its failure in achieving its basic goal of helping the poor.
It is also said that PDS is not cost effective, its operations are too costly and the ratio between procurement and transportation is too high pointing to 'wasteful' movements. It is also mentioned that storage losses are very high. However, if one was to analyse the various costs of FCI, it will be seen that almost 80% of the costs of FCI are non-controllable and FCI just cannot do anything if these rise. Example of such costs are minimum support price/ procurement price which have increased by almost 20% per annum in the past four years; interest rates for bank credit; rail and road transportation cost etc. Thus, hardly 20% of the costs are amenable to cost reduction by FCI and efforts need to be intensified in increasing labour productivity i.e., handling costs; rationalisation of movement plans to avoid cries-cross movement; reduction in transit and storage losses etc.
Another valid criticism of the PDS is its marginal impact, as far as income transfer to poor households is concerned, with too many or everyone being eligible to draw foodgrains from PDS, the per capita transfer of income is very small. In an study based on National Sample Survey's 42nd round (NSSO, 1990), it has been found that "the value of the subsidy is so little even for those households who make all their purchases of cereals from rationshops. For the bottom 20% of the rural population, the subsidy is no more than Rs. 2.08 per capita per 30 days. With the average family size of 6, the subsidy per family is almost Rs. 12.50 per month. In other words, it is useful to note here, one person day of additional employment per family per month would provide the same income support as provided by the cereals distributed under PDS" (Parikh, 1993).
Most of the above shortcomings flow from the universal nature of the present PDS, with benefit having been thinly spread over all the beneficiaries, be they rich or poor. "While a number of studies have suggested proper targeting of PDS, none of them have discussed the costs and political feasibility of targeting. The administrative costs of targeting have been reported to be high in some developing countries. Many studies have also reported a high percentage of leakages in the event of targeting". (Radhakrishnan & Rao, 1993). The main weakness in PDS i.e. not reaching poor effectively stems from the universality of the PDS coverage. Every household, irrespective of its income, can have an entitlement card and draw foodgrains against it. This in turn leads to low scales per household and first come first served system of delivery. These two combine to allow leakages and diversions on the one hand and "no commitment" syndrome on the part of the poor households on the other.
If PDS could be targeted to the poor, a larger proportion of the household's requirement could be met by enhancing the scale and it would also be able to generate a commitment on the part of card holders on the system. Beneficiaries could then be organised and educated. They would then monitor the supplies and sales themselves to ensure that supplies reach the fair price shop in proper quantity and quality and are sold to genuine beneficiaries. The entitled households would also then demand their quota from the FPS owner and would not be turned away by the shopkeeper by saying that whatever quantity had come has been sold away or that the bad quality grains were supplied (in some cases replaced by unscrupulous vested interest) and beneficiary would find such stocks not worth purchasing at that price. Targeting of PDS to the really needy is, therefore, immediately required and an effective PDS maintained till such time the country has poor, needy households.
Suggestions for Improvement of Existing PDS
The author had conducted a survey of the actual operation of the PDS in the two Himalayan hill districts of Uttar Pradesh state in the Northern India (Nawani, N.P., Unpub, Sept. 1993). PDS beneficiaries (i.e. head of the household) as well as Fair Price Shop (FPS) owners were selected on random basis although in case of FPSs, effort was made to select FPS, on the basis of distance from the motorable road. In all, 16 FPSs and 128 households were taken up for detailed survey on the basis of two different sets of questionnaires. Attempt was also made to select households from amongst various income groups i.e. under each FPS, two households each from out of farmers, salaried/businessman, part-farmers and labourers/unemployed. Research methodology adopted consisted of detailed survey of households and FPS owners as also personal discussions with selected households, people at large and local officials. Such talks and on the spot discussions were mainly held by the author himself
although the two supervisors of Investigators in each of the two district also did this as they visited all villages selected for survey and they, in turn, had detailed discussions with the author. The survey threw up some suggestions for improvement in the functioning of PDS which without going into their details, are briefly mentioned below:
i) Delivery of Stocks to FPSs should be on actual and not on sample wieghment.
ii) Retail price at FPSs should be uniform throughout the state/area after weight-averaging the transport cost for the FPS.
iii) Regular supply of good quality grains has to be ensured. iv) Entitlement card's easy availability and improvement in its design and durability.
v) FPS doorstep delivery of PDS commodities instead of delivery to FPS owners at FCI godowns.
vi) Improvement in the viability of FPSs.
vii) Enlarging the basket of PDS commodities to enhance its utility as also to improve economic viability of FPSs.
viii) Steamlining of the supply chain by construction of small intermediary godowns between FCI's base godown and FPSs in the interior.
ix) Introduction of a more effective Mangement Information System.
Policy Reforms Required in PDS
Almost all food-managers, experts and even members of the political executive feel that targeting PDS to poor is a fundamental reform that cannot be deferred for too long. In the study report submitted by the author to the Minister for Civil Supplies (Nawani, N.P., Sept. 1993) not only the targetisation of PDS has been strongly recommended but the way it can be implemented, keeping the twin objectives in mind, that of making PDS an effective safety net for poor and keeping distribution within limits set by domestic procurement and subsidy budget. As an effective PDS will greatly enhance food security for poor households, it is proposed to deal with it in somewhat greater detail. However, before we go on to that, a brief description of some measures already initiated by the Prime Minister (When he was also holding the portfolio of the Minister for Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution) in 1992 will be in order.
Revamping of PDS
With the change of the political executive at the national level in 1991, the present Prime Minister accorded very high priority to the PDS and for quite some time himself looked after the Ministry. It was felt that the really vulnerable areas and people were not getting the desired benefits of PDS due to their disadvantageous geographic location, weak PDS infrastructure and low purchasing power. It was, therefore, decided that PDS should be reoriented for ensuring effective reach to the remotest and the most disadvantaged areas of the country which also had the concentration of poor. Accordingly, around 1750 blocks, composed of tribal, hilly, drought prone and 'decertified areas, were identified and included in crash programme designated "Revamped PDS" or for short "RPDS". The plan of action included:
i) A number of new FPS to be opened so that physical access of beneficiaries is improved;
ii) Special campaign to be mounted by the state governments to cancel the bogus entitlement cards and to issue new cards to households found to be without them;
iii) To progressively bring more and more FPS under the system of FPS doorstep delivery of PDS commodities;
iv) Set up vigilence committees of local people with substantial representation of women for each FPS at the village level and also at higher levels;
v) Improve the supply chain by constructing or hiring small intermediary godowns; and
vi) Introduce additional commodities through FPS, in these areas.
"An analysis of the implementation of RPDS has shown that during 1992-93, per capita allocation in RPDS areas was higher than other areas and whereas offtake (actual distribution) against allocation was only 73 per cent in other areas it was 91% in RPDS aeas. States were also moving towards the norm of 20 kg./family/month. The positive trend that emerges from the analysis is that the PDS, which was predominantly urban till the mid 1980s has now been effectively targeted for the traditionally deficit areas covered by RPDS." (Min. of Civil Supplies etc., 1993).
Targeting PDS to only Poor Households
Poverty and associated hunger is a curse and every civilized society endeavours to alleviate extreme manifestations of poverty in their own way. Every country tries to do it-be it an economic giant and torch-bearer of the free markets like USA or a small happy go lucky Jamaica. The underlying policy approach is, however, more or less same and is basically built on 'providing direct assistance to poor households' so that their access to essentials of life like food is improved. The policy could be implemented through an income transfer mechanism like Food Stamps or cash doles (as in USA etc.) or a dual price system (e.g., through a PDS as in India etc.). These mechanism or their variations, cost money and this has to come from the food subsidy budgets of the country. In India, a country of around 900 million people, of which around one third lived in poverty as per 1986-87 estimates, any programme seeking to achieve such a goal will require vast sums of subsidy and it,
therefore, becomes imperative that it is utilised in the most cost effective manner so that it helps poor households to attain adequate levels of food security in the true sense. An important question that arises is whether, in the present scenario, when availability of subsidy is greately constrained by overall fiscal deficit, can we continue to fritter away whatever amount of food subsidy we can mobilise? Since we simply cannot do this, we just cannot continue with a PDS which consumes none-too-small Rs 30000 million subsidy annually, but allows it to be available to anybody who wishes to draw on it, irrespective of whether he is poor or rich. Besides, the inherent weakness of a universal PDS, as organised now, allows quite a bit of diversion and leakage. Part of the subsidy is, therefore, going to the non-poor and even to the FPS dealers, handling contractors and some state functionaries involved in unscrupulous siphoning off and replacement of commodites. Such wastage of
this precious and limited subsidy cannot be allowed any longer, and therefore, there is no alternative but to direct the subsidy to the poor and nobody else. Once this is accepted, the mechanism for achieving such focus can be chosen, depending on the situation prevailing in the country. We will also have to decide whether to create an altogether new mechanism or build upon the four decades old foundation provided by the PDS. It will also be necessary to ensure that the size of the population to be covered should be such that they all can be effectively accommodated under the newly created safety net, the largeness of the net being limited by the physical (government stocks of foodgrains) and financial (amount available for food subsidy) resources of the country. The present PDS can hardly be described as a safety net. Each and every Indian and also some ghost card holders, presently constitute the unorganized crowd that jostles under the ungainly net, nobody knowing who is
able to receive the shelter under it or who, requiring such shelter badly, is being kept out or pushed out. As explained earlier, in this vast country, with millions of poor, we cannot dispense with the net altogether; there is therefore, no option but to mend the net, erect it afresh with only the needy households under it.
<section>7</section>
7. Production and availability of foodstuffs other than cereals
7. Production and availability of foodstuffs other than cereals
The status of basic food security, limited really to the availability of cereals, has been examined in quite some details in the earlier Chapters. The performance of the three most important instruments being utilised to improve access to food viz. the PDS, the JRY and the IRDP have also been dwelt with in some details. In this Chapter, it is proposed to undertake a brief review of the production and availability of the foodstuffs other than cereals.
It needs hardly any emphasis that malnutrition is a multi-faceted phenomenon and requires multi-disciplinary strategy to tackle it. It so happens that various elements of such strategy fall into different jurisdictional areas being handled by various Ministries in the Central and State Governments. In India, the Ministry of Agricultural has the overall responsibility of planning and producing the foodstuffs required for the country. It has many Departments within it. The Department of Agricultural & Cooperation is concerned with agricultural production including horticulture, fisheries etc. as also disaster management. The Deptt. of Animal Husbandry looks after all aspects of livestock management. Deptt. of Agricultural Research is charged with the responsibility of carrying out and coordinating research and transfer of research from laboratories to farms. The Min. of Food is responsible for all activities relating to foodgrains after harvesting. These include ensuring price
support to growers, feeding public distribution system, guiding trade so as to function smoothly, curbing hoarding and speculative tendencies. Ministry of Food Processing Industry also plays an important role as it not only seeks to enhance income of growers but makes available nutrition all over the year through processed food items. The Department of Women & Child Dev. is concerned with nutrition policy. Ministry of Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution coordinates the activities of all Ministries in the matter of availability of essential commodities. The problem of nutrition is the concern of all these Ministries and effective convergence of their activities is a big challenge. The nutrition problem originates with what all of the required food items are produced, how lack of some can be tackled, the arrangement for the marketing and conversion of all food stuffs into edible form and ultimate consumption by people in required quantities and in
appropriate quality. Any gaps in production, distribution and consumption should be a matter of concern for all policy makers. "This general problem of under nutrition should be seen as a part of a larger set of processes that produces and consumes agricultural commodities on farms, transforms them into food in the marketing sector and sells the food to customers to satisfy nutritional, aesthetic and social needs." (National Nutrition Policy, 1993). These processes are spread over the entire gamut of human activities with strong linkages between factors like resource endowment; technological attainments; investment capacities; price policies; cropping pattern and inter-se importance given to various crops; storage; marketing and processing infrastructure; growth of the industrial and scientific sectors and the health of the economy; the rate of growth of population and above all, the commitment of the Government and the political system towards improving the quality of life
of all the people living in the country. In the ultimate analysis, the most effective yardstick is-whether the country is able to produce all the foodstuffs required for the nutritional well being of all its people on a sustained basis and if not, whether it has the wherewithal to procure by import what it does not produce or produces in inadequate quantity. As far as India is concerned, it has already been established that it has been able to produce all the cereals it requires and now we can examine the production and availability of the foodstuffs, other than cereals. Their availability is as important as that of cereals because various nutrients required come from different foodstuffs and human potential cannot be optimised, without intake of various food items.
The data about other foodstuffs is, unlike cereals, not available uniformly since the independence of the country. However, whatever data is available in various statistical publications of the Ministry of Agriculture, will be used to examine the status and progress of production and availability of some of the more important foodstuffs like pulses, fish, milk, oils, sugar etc. and the same is analysed hereinafter to examine the trend of their production and availability.
Pulses
As far as pulses are concerned, the picture has been rather unsatisfactory. In the decade between 1950-51 and 1960-61, the production of pulses jumped by more than four million tons, an increase of 51 percent or 5 percent per annum. This came about both by increase in area (3.39 million hectares or 16.8 percent in the decade) and increase in per unit production (441 kg per Ha to 539 kg per Ha i.e. an increase of 22 percent during the decade). During the next two decades, the production declined to 10.63 million tons, area as well as yield declining in 198081 due to unfavourable monsoon rains. During the next decade i.e. ending 1990-91, the production reached a high of 14.06 million tons, area and yields both registering an upward increase. There was again a decline to 12.02 and 13.60 million tonnes during 1991-92 and 1992-93. It is expected the production will go up to 14.8 million tonnes during 1993-94. The per capita availability of pulses has, therefore, been showing
sharp fluctuations, the extent and spread of monsoon rains greatly determining the production by influencing both area under pulses and yields. Against the requirement of 50 gms per capita per day, the availability has been as shown below:
Table 19 AVAILABILITY OF ALL PULSES
Year
Availability (gms/capita/day)
Source: Economic Survey, 1993-94
It is apparent that production of pulses has been at best stagnating and its availability has really shown a decline. Although pulses have been on Open General Licence for imports even during the stricter IMPEX policy, the annual imports of pulses never exceeded one million tons. Thus imports would have only marginally improved the per capita availability. Net imports of
pulses have been added to the production to work out the per capita availability in the table above. In view of the urgent need to raise production of pulses in the country and reach self -sufficiency, pulses were brought under the Technology Mission in August 1990. Two special schemes, namely, National Pulses Development Programme (NPDP) and Special Pulses Development Programme (SPDP) have also been taken up for implementation since 1990. Serious efforts are being made in the area of R & D so that high yielding varieties, both for irrigated and dry farming, could be evolved and popularised. The increasing trend in production seen since 1990-91 augurs well for the country but lot of ground is yet to be covered. Even though increase in the production of fish, eggs, milk and milk products has added to availability of protein, pulses are going to continue as the single most major source for supply of protein. In fact, this poor man's protein has such importance in the diets of
Indians that a meal is commonly called Dal-Roti (pulse plus flattened bread) or DalChawal (pulse plus rice). Increasing the production of pulses, is thus a big challenge for the Indian agriculture.
Fish
Fish production has gone up substantially as can be observed from Table No. 20:
Table 20 PRODUCTION OF FISH (INLAND + MARINE)
(In million tons)
4.572 (Estimated)
Source: Food Statistics, Min. of Agriculture
The production of fish, taking together inland and marine fishery, is thus steadily rising and for the latest available three year period, it has gone from 3.386 million tonnes in 1990-91 to 4.572 million tons in 1993-94. No specific RDI has been prescribed with respect to the fish (refer Table No. 5) but its availability will certainly contribute to the overall dietary intake, especially in respect of protein, oil and some other micro nutrients.
Mutton
Production of meat, from all sources has increased more than five-fold between 1971-1992 as can be seen from Table No. 21.
Table 21
Year
Production of meat
(In Million Tons)
Source: Food Statistics, Min. of Agri.
The availability of meat has thus, shown a steadily increasing trend. This increased availability would make up for decline in per capita availability of pulses and at the same time provide more easily absorbable protein to body.
Milk
It has often been said that India has recently gone through a white revolution. The "Operation Flood" strategy of cooperativising the entire milk production programme not only paid rich dividends in Gujarat State but was duplicated in many other States successfully. There has been good progress in cross breeding of cows and provision of extension as well as veterinary services. This, coupled with entry of private sector in the dairy industry, starting from captive hinterland, has resulted in sharp increase in milk production, especially from 1990-91, as can be observed from Table No. 22.
Table 22 MILK PRODUCTION IN INDIA
(In Million tonnes)
Egg Production
Impressive progress has also been made in poultry and production of eggs, as can be seen from table below:
Table 23 Production of eggs.
(In million Numbers)
Source: Deptt. of Animal Husbandary, Min. of Agriculture
In order to further increase production of this commodity, which is becoming very common even amongst poor household, especially amongst slum dwellers, labourers and migrant labourers, a number of poultry estates are planned to be set up. Tremendous progress has been made in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh, which now supplies eggs to at least half of the country. Similar progress is sought to be duplicated else where.
EDIBLE OILS
India has been importing edible oils on regular basis from 1980-81 to 1990-91. The annual imports were as high as 1.6 million tons in 1983-84 and touched a peak of 1.8 million tons in 198788, when the drought had badly reduced the production of oilseeds. However, in the meantime, India had launched a Technology Mission on Oilseeds in May 1986 to harness latest technology in all aspects of oil production, starting with production and going on to processing and marketing. Schemes like price support operations and market intervention were also started. A special Oilseeds Production Programme (OPP) is also being implemented in 324 districts in 21 oilseeds producing states in the country. The programme covers nine oilseeds. The results were quite dramatic. The dependence on imports started getting reduced after 1987-88. In 198889 the production of nine oilseeds jumped to 18.03 million tons from 12.63 million ton in 198788. It remained at the high levels in the subsequent years
and crossed the 20 million tonnes mark during 1992-93. Import of oils correspondingly dropped to 0.32, 0.53 0.23 and 0.10 million tons in the period 1989-90 to 1992-93.
Even though the availability of edible oils has improved dramatically in recent past, it is still short of nutritional requirements. During 1993-94, the domestic requirement ~ 7.53 kg./ capita/year, works out to 6.84 million tonnes but production is expected to be only around 6.17. Even though import of edible oil has been out under OGL. the shortfall in availability during current year is expected to be even more than what it was during 1993-94. In earlier years also, there was a shortfall. This shortfall is duly reflected in consumption data.
Sugar and Jaggery
Sugar and jaggery are important sources of energy, especially in rural areas. In urban areas also, the poor migrant families working at construction sites and moving from place to place along with shift of work or living in slums have started taking bread and tea for breakfast in a big way. In fact, very sweet tea is not only a glass that cheers but provides energy for the tough work these migrant labourers do. In urban slums too this brew is very popular. We can study the progress made in production of sugar and jaggery by examining the sugarcane production. It exhibits an increasing overall trend even though there have been sharp fluctuations as can be seen from the table below:
Table 24 PRODUCTION OF SUGARCANE
(In million tonnes)
Source: Economic Survey 1993-94.
Per capita consumption of sugar has steadily been going up from 2.5 kg./capita/year to reach 13 kg. during 1991-92. In fact, on the basis of ICMR norm of 31 gins/capita/day, the annual consumption should be only around 12 kg. This indicates excess consumption of sugar, which is not such a nutritious item (containing only energy).
Potato, Sweet Potato and Tapioca
These are important supplements to food intake for poor people, especially the tapioca. As can be noticed from the table below, while the production of potato has made a quantum jump since country's independence, whatever data is available for sweet potato and tapioca indicates a stagnation in the production of these two food items. Of course, potato received lot of attention from research and extension workers and it has now become an important cash crop with huge production in some areas creating problems of surplus, notwithstanding establishment of a number of cold storage. Sweet potato is grown only as a risk crop on rain fed marginal lands and tapioca is popular in only a few states. The position regarding production of potato is shown in the table below:
Table 25 Production of Potato
(In million tonnes)
FRUITS
It is only recently that serious attention is being given to improve production, processing and marketing of fruits. At the central level, the National Horticulture Board has been set up to coordinate all the activities and give the necessary push to all the horticulture related activities. As per the Board, the production of fruits has been as under:
Table 26 Production of Fruits
Year (In million tonnes)
It appears that production of fruits registered a quantum jump in 1991-92 and it is hoped that this progress will be maintained. Availability of fruits will greatly help in improving the nutritional status of people, especially children, who tend to get a bigger share of fruit consumption within the family.
<section>8</section>
8. Other important programmes to combat malnutrition in India
8. Other important programmes to combat malnutrition in India
Two major programmes designed to improve food security viz. the PDS (making available foodgrains at affordable prices) and employment generation schemes (improving purchasing power through self and wage employment) have already been discussed in detail. However, it will be in the fitness of things to briefly mention other programme which attack malnutrition directly or indirectly, since ultimate test of food security lies in nutritional well being of all. Direct attack on malnutrition has become necessary because it was felt that hopes of aggregate growth percolating down to most disadvantaged and vulnerable groups did not come true. "In the face of continuing poverty and malnutrition, an alternative strategy of development, comprising a frontal attack on poverty, unemployment and malnutrition became a national priority from the beginning of the Fifth Five Year Plan. This shift in strategy has given rise to number of interventions to increase the purchasing power of the
poor, to improve the provisions of basic services to the poor and to devise a security system through which the most vulnerable sections of the poor (viz. women and children) can be protected" (NNP, 1993).
A. WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT SECTOR
1. Integrated Child Development Service Programme (ICDS)
This is a unique programme under which a package of integrated services consisting of supplementary nutrition, immunization, health check up, referal and education service are provided to the most vulnerable groups even within children and women, i.e. children up 6 years of age and expectant/nursing mother, through a common focal point called Anganwadi (the courtyard centres) in each of the village/urban slums.
The objectives of ICDS (Annual Report, Department of Women and Child Development, 199394) are:
- to improve the nutritional and health status of children in the age group 0-6 years;
- to lay the foundation for proper psychological, physical and social development of the child;
- to reduce the incidence of mortality, morbidity, malnutrition and school drop out;
- to regulate effective coordination of policy and programme implementation amongst various departments to promote child development;
- to enhance the capability of the mother through proper nutrition education for taking care of the normal health and nutritional needs and health of the child
One ICDS project covers either a tribal or a rural Block, the territorial unit at sub-district level or a cluster of urban slums in an urban project. Preference in selection of Blocks is given to those which have comparatively larger proportion of the population of tribal people and other disadvantaged categories. The ICDS programme was launched experimentally and rather modestly, by covering 33 Blocks/slums in 1975-76. The author happened to be the Director incharge of the programme in the then Ministry of Education and Social Welfare immediately thereafter, when programme was internally evaluated and expanded to 66 Blocks. Since then, the programme has been expanded gradually in a phased manner and by the end of March 1993, it consisted of 3066 projects with 19.5 million children and mothers receiving supplementary nutrition under the programme. In addition, 9.34 million children were receiving pre-school stimulation. The entire expenditure of the 2871 centrally sponsored
ICDS projects (of the total 3066 projects in place by the end of March 1993) is borne by the Central Government, barring expenditure on supplementary nutrition which concerned State Governments incur. Expenditure on rest of the projects is borne of the state governments. How massive is the programme can be gauged by the fact that "21.4 million women and children are likely to have been covered by one or other aspects of this programme in 1993-94 and an amount of Rs. 4618 millions is likely to have been spent by the Central Government itself. UNICEF and some other international agencies are also assisting the programme. (Annual Report, Min. of Women & Child Dev., 1993-94)
An evaluation of the ICDS programme carried out in 1990-92 has revealed that some of the positive impacts of programme are (i) IMR in ICDS covered areas was significantly lower (66.6/1000) compared to IMR in the non-ICDS areas (86/1000); (ii) immunization coverage in ICDS areas has been much better (iii) there has been better coverage of prophylaxsis programme of Vit. A and iron; (iv) the nutritional status of covered children was going up and (v) the percentage of low birth weight babies was also found to be lower. On the negative side, the report has brought out inadequate community participation and perhaps too much dependence on Government. Another status appraisal of ICDS, carried out in four States by the National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad revealed that "Nutritional status of ICDS beneficiaries in Bihar was better than their non-ICDS counterparts and only marginal differences were observed in the remaining three States of Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and
Orissa". This report, therefore, suggests better training and motivation of ICDS workers to monitor growth properly and continuously identify the children and mothers at risk, arrange for clinical intervention in their cases, increase the quantum of their supplementary nutrition and so on. In fact, NIN is now starting the "nutrition surveillance" in ICDS blocks in Andhra pradesh on pilot basis for achieving the abovementioned purposes.
It is now well recognised that proper and continuous training of ICDS functionaries at all levels and functional monitoring is vital to the success of a programme like ICDS which seeks of deliver a package of services. At the same time, motivation of the village people to support the programme is also a much needed element. In fact, the worker incharge of the focal point of delivery in the village i.e. Anganwadi worker is supposed to be a girl from the village itself so that she does not have too many overheads and does not take it as a job being performed like by a Government employee. She must be able to feel that she is enabling the children and women, many of whom are her relatives in her own community, to derive the benefits from the programme.
2. Special Nutrition Programme (SNP)
This programme was launched way back in 1970-71 for the same target group as in ICDS i.e. children below 6 years age and expectant and nursing mothers. The programme is confined to tribal areas and slums. Main activity under this programme is to provide supplementary feeding to the beneficiaries for 300 days in a year, although some individual initiatives were made in some States to link some other services with supplementary feeding. For example, in early seventies in the small State of Tripura in North Eastern India, a school drop out tribal girl was selected for running the feeding centre, provided with some motivational training and then encouraged to impart pre- school education to the children, teach them simple personal hygiene etc. Tribal communities were exhorted, and they invariably did so, to construct a small hall where the pre-school activities could take place. Under this programme, every child is to receive 300 calories and 8 to 15 gms of protein and every
expectant and nursing mother 500 calories and 20 to 25 gms of protein per day. As and when ICDS projects coyer 'tine areas having the SNP, the programme is merged with ICDS.
Balwadi Nutrition Programme
Bal (children) wadi (home or centre) Nutrition Programme is a contemporary of SNP and is being implemented since 1970-71 by the Central Social Welfare Board and national level nongovernmental voluntary organisations, namely, Indian Council for Child Welfare, Harijan (Scheduled Castes) Sevak (Service) Sangh (Board), Bhartiya (Indian) Adimjati (Scheduled Tribe) Sevak Sangh and Kasturba (wife of Mahatma Gandhi) National Memorial Trust. This segment of nutrition programme is thus implemented essentially by non-governmental organisations. The Central Social Welfare Board, which is a semi-government umbrella organisation in the field of social work, gives in turn, grants-in-aid to voluntary organisations to actually run the programme and so do the other four national level voluntary organisations, which also extend assistance to various voluntary organisations beside running some centres directly.
The beneficiaries of SNP are basically from the disadvantaged section of the society like tribal/scheduled caste people, urban slum dwellers and also migrant labourers. The in-charge of the Balwadi Centre is an honorary worker, like Anganwadi worker of ICDS, and is paid an honorarium which is Rs. 200 per month for trained and Rs. 150 for untrained. She is assisted by a helper who is also an honorary worker. The Balwadis not only provide supplemental nutrition but also look after the social and emotional development of children attending these Balwadis.
A total number of 5641 Balwadi centres are presently being run by the five organisations. About 229 thousand children in the age group 3-5 years are covered under the programme. The budget for the SNP during 1993-94 stood at Rs. 100 million.
3. Creches for Children of Working and Ailing Women
The scheme, implemented since 1975, has been designed to free the working, and in some cases ailing mothers, from the task of looking after their children while they are on work or are sick. The coverage under the scheme is available only to those children whose parent's total monthly income does not exceed Rs. 1800. Children generally belong to casual migrant vendors, construction labourers groups etc. The services available to the children include sleeping and daycare facilities, supplementary nutrition, immunization, medicines, entertainment and checkups at weekly intervals.
The scheme is implemented by the Central Social Welfare Board which gives grants-in-aid to various non-governmental organisations to manage the creches. Two other national level voluntary organisations namely, Indian Council for Child Welfare and Bhartiya Admijati Sewak Sangh also implement this scheme.
A total of 12470 creches are being run under this scheme; during 1993-94, covering three hundred thousand children. Assistance to the tune of Rs. 230 million is being provided to the CSWB and voluntary organisations to implement the scheme.
4. Wheat Based Supplementary Nutrition Programme
The scheme was started with the twin objective of providing supplementary nutrition to children and popularising wheat intake. Min of Food places at the disposal of the Department of Women and child Development about 100 thousand tonnes of wheat from the central reserves annually and that Department, in turn, sub-allocates this wheat among States which utilise the wheat mostly to produce wheat based ready-to-eat nutrition supplements. With the spread of ICDS, this wheat or its products are increasingly being utilised for distribution of supplementary nutrition in ICDS and mid-day-meal programmes The wheat is supplied to the State Governments by the Food Corporation of India at the same subsidised rates as for the public distribution system.
5. World Food Programme Project
World Food Programme-UN provides food-stuffs so that supplementary nutrition could be provided through the projects supported by them. WFP-India project has been extended from time to time and the present extension would last till the end of March 1995. WFP currently supports 12 projects in India, with a total commitment of 292 million dollars worth of food aid. "The major part of WFP's assistance to India supports projects in forestry, irrigation and supplementary nutrition. WFP's food assistance to India is focused on poverty alleviation, directly targeting the most vulnerable section of the society" (WFP News letter April 94). The WFP provides Soya Fortified Bulger Wheat, Corn Soya Blend and edible oil to benefit about 2.1 million pre-school children, expectant and nursing mothers. For the last three years or so, the WFP obtains wheat or rice locally from the Food Corporation of India in exchange for the butter oil it gets as donation from some European countries.
6. CARE Assisted Nutrition Programmes
Under the Indo-CARE Agreement of 1950, CARE-India extends food aid so that supplementary nutrition can be provided to pre-school children of age less than six years and expectant/nursing mothers. The CARE assistance is now dovetailed with ICDS projects and some of the ICDS projects utilise this assistance for the nutrition component of the programme. The programme covers ICDS projects in 10 States of the Indian Union. CARE has also monetized oil received by it as donation for generating funds worth Rs. 100 million for implementing activities supportive of ICDS programme.
During 1993-94, CARE would provide slightly above 200 thousand tonnes of food commodities to cover around 9 million beneficiaries.
7. Tamilnadu Integrated Nutrition Project
This project located in the Southern State of Tamilnadu, was started sometime in 1980-81 with the World Bank first time extending assistance for nutrition programmes in India. Second phase of the project with a life of six years has started in 1990-91.
The project would ultimately cover 316 of the 385 development Blocks in Tamilnadu. This will enable all the rural areas of the State to come under the coverage of either this project or ICDS, as in most of nutrition programmes discussed earlier. The target groups in this project are also children up to 6 years of age and pregnant/nursing mothers. Like ICDS, pre-school education is provided to children in 3 to 6 years group. The project seeks to provide enhanced inputs in the areas of health, communications, training, project management, operations, research, monitoring and evaluation. The NNMB repeat surveys for rural areas in Tamilnadu showed that "the prevalence of severely underweight 1-5 (i.e below 60% NCHS median weight for age) dropped from 12.6% in 1975-79 to 4.2% in 1980-90, at a faster rate than all India improvement of 15% to 8.7% in the same period The rural IMR decreased from 121 in 1976 to 85 in 1988, as compared to all-India IMR decrease from 139 to 102. A
comparison of deaths among children 0-4 yrs. to total deaths shows that Tamil Nadu at 22.2% (in 1987) is second only to Kerala (13.3%) (with all India average was 42.0%)". (Ready, Mrs. Vinodini, 1992) It, therefore, appears that this project, implemented in just one state with strong political and administrative back up, has been able to secure better coordination between nutrition, health and educational services and certain strong points observed in this project need to be replicated in other nutrition programmes
8. UNICEF Assistance for Women and Children
India has been associated with UNICEF since 1949 and is one of the major countries as far as activities of UNICEF are concerned. The activities are guided by the provisions of the Master Plan of Action, the latest of which was signed between India and UNICEF on 30 May 1991 and extends up to 1995. During the Five year period, UNICEF is likely to spend around U.S. $ 175 million in India from its general resources. UNICEF's assistance covers a wide spectrum and is available in the sectors of health, education, nutrition, water and sanitation, rural development urban basic services etc. Of course, the focus of all its programmes is essentially on children and also on women, with the ultimate objective of better child health survival & development.
B. INTERVENTIONS IN THE HEALTH SECTOR
Inspite of a drop in the growth rate of population (from 2.22% during 1971-81 to 2.14% during 1981-91), "every year around 17 million people are added to the population, which creates a demand for additional resources for clothing, housing, food, education, health, schooling etc. With 2.4% of the world land area, India supports 16% of the world's population." (Annual Report Min. Health, 1994). Population control, therefore, remains a key to the resolution of not only food and nutrition security in India, but almost all the problems that the country faces. The ultimate objective of all socio-economic development is to bring about a meaningful and sustained improvement in the well being and welfare of the people and there is no better index of the well being of people than the state of their health. The importance of the status of the health of people can, therefore, scarcely be over emphasised. Whether directly or indirectly, all health programmes are as important in
combating malnutrition as programme that make available purchasing power, foodgrains at the subsidised prices and supplementary nutrition to children and mothers.
In fact, now a days the sensitive index of a community's health status is the chance of survival and growth of its children below five years of age. It is another matter that the author himself, in the early stages of his service (1969-71), had an occasion to observe a community of tribal people whose philosophy to life was, and I hear still is, entirely different from ours. This community, the Nishi Tribe (earlier known as Daflas), inhabited the high hills in one of the districts of the North East Frontier Agency, now the State of Arunachal Pradesh in North East India. Author's own headquarters, as the administrative head of that area, was full 13 days foot march from the nearest motor head. The area was thus, completely cut off from rest of the world, the only contact being the wireless net used by the government and once in a while helicopter sortie. The people were completely self sufficient and the only thing they needed from the outside world was salt which earlier
used to come from Tibet and was later on air dropped. It was observed to be a simple and happy community, producing enough to feed themselves for the whole year by slash and burn (Jhum) cultivation on hill slopes and supplementing their diets with mutton obtained from hunting & smoked inside their huts for use throughout the year. I never saw them grieving for the death of a child, they would simply accept it matter of factly, explained away by the jungle law of the survival of the fittest. Of course, when a child passed the age of 13-14 years, he would develop into a beautiful specimen of human being, well built, tough and happy go lucky. The author, bred in a different environment, could neither understand not appreciate their philosophy. However, it appeared that high child mortality was perhaps necessary in order to maintain the balance between humans and nature, especially the need to maintain a long cycle in the shifting cultivation. Child births were many but women
were tough and did not appear to have any adverse effects of frequent deliveries, probably because of being used to hard labour all the year round. My wife was amazed one day when she saw the wife of my Political Interpreter returning home from her Jhum Khet (slope of shifting cultivation), about 4 kms away, with a new born baby in her arms. The area was free from various infections and I have myself seen a man's intestines having come out through wound inflicted by a spear, but the local medicant put it back, covered the wound with some paste made of local leaves and sewed it with pig's hair ! Of course, the area could not remain isolated forever and even without completion of the motor road under construction those days, the market economy and modern civilization slowly entered the area. We, the change-agents, introduced wet rice permanent cultivation in valley lands to replace jhum cultivation. Valley lands being limited, land disputes erupted for the first time. With
money and markets, entered terylene shirts, radio transistors, cosmetics and so on. Gradually their uncomplicated simple life started giving way to a life like ours, one not infrequented by greed, disputes and selfishness. This digression, though not necessary, was spontaneous, and only serves to establish the fact that the earth has now shrunk and global standards of life styles have to be adopted by every community sooner or later. In India as a whole, Mahatma Gandhi's philosophy of reducing wants has been given up. Substantial improvement in various health indicators have to be therefore, achieved by 2000 AD and some of these as given in the country paper for International Conference of Nutrition (Min of Food, 1992) are listed below:
1. Infant Mortality
- To be brought down from estimated 80 per 1000 live birth in 1990 to 60.
2. Child Mortality Rate
- From 20 in 1990 to Below 10 per thousand live births.
3. Crude birth rate
- From 29.9 to 21 per thousand.
4. Crude Death Rate
- From 9.6 in 1990 to below 9 per thousand.
5. Low Birth Weight Infants
- From 18 percent in 1990 to 10%.
6. Protein Energy Malnutrition (Kwashiorkar)
- Negligible presently, to be eliminated.
7. Severe Protein-Energy Malnutrition (Marasmus)
- From 8.7 percent in 1990 to below 1 percent.
8. Protein Energy Malnutrition (Moderate)
- From 43.8% in 1989-90 to below 15%.
9. Xerophthalmia (Keratomalacia)
- Present incidence resulting in blindness is estimated at 0.04 percent. It may be eliminated.
10. Xerophthalmia (Bitot's spots)
- Presently estimated 0.7% to below 0.1%
11. Iron Deficiency Anaemia
- To be reduced significantly.
12. Iodine Deficiency
- To be brought down drastically
Ministry of Health and F.W. is responsible both for the health as well as family welfare programmes Its basic goal is to ensure Health for All (Alma Ata Declaration) and achieve a Net Reproduction Rate of Unity by 2000 AD. One of the most important programmes is to establish Primary Health Centres (PHC) and sub Centres so that health care service are within easy reach of the people. At present, a PHC covers a population of 30 thousand in plains and 20 thousand in hilly areas, whereas Sub-centre covers 5 thousand in plains and 3 thousand in hilly/tribal and backward areas. Approximately 10 percent of the PHCs work as rural hospitals with provision of 30 beds.
The Health and Family Welfare Ministry also provides maternal and child health services as an important part of the total health care. These services include immunisation of infants, children and expectant mothers; prophylaxis programmes to combat nutritional anaemia and Vitamin A deficiency induced blindness; goiter control programme through production and distribution of iodised salt; popularisation of oral rehydration therapy against diarrhoea; control programme for various diseases ranging from Malaria to AIDS etc. Some of the social initiatives that have a bearing on health are also taken-such initiatives include increase in the minimum age for marriage, social marketing of contraceptives etc.
C. INTERVENTION IN EDUCATION SECTOR
It has now been well demonstrated, including the example of Kerala State in India, that higher educational attainments in a society have a positive influence on health and nutritional status of the people. The education also helps in economic development, which in turn improves food and nutrition security and ultimately improves the quality of life of all people. Female literacy is still more important because "empirical evidence in Indian context has shown a high negative correlation between female illiteracy on the one hand and fertility and infant and maternal mortality on the other. UNESCO studies have also brought out that a stabilised adult literacy level of 70 percent is a positive indication of universal primary education and a critical threshold for economic growth" (ECONOMIC SURVEY 1993-94)
India has made significant progress in this sector. The Gross Enrollment Ratio in the Primary School level has gone up from 42.6 percent in 1950-51 to 105.7% in 1992-93 and at the stage of Class VI to VIII (Upper primary stage), from 12.7 to 67.5 percent. Proportion of children moving up from the primary to Upper Primary stage has also increased from 16.3 percent in 1950-51 to 34 percent in 1991-92. Substantial progress has also been made in literacy levels as can be seen from the table below:
Table 27 LITERACY LEVELS (PERCENT)
YEAR
MALE
FEMALE
TOTAL
Source: Census of India, 1991.
The programme, though substantial, has not yet reached desirable levels. Lot of work is still to be done in the area of female literacy, which is all the more important in improving the nutritional status of members of the family especially infants and children. Further, "personal hygiene and wholesome dietary practice can be best promoted in the impressionable i.e. formative years of a child. Therefore, an improvement in the level of education has a positive impact on the level of nutrition too." (Country paper for ICN, Min of Food 1992)
Lot of progress has also been made in the growth and spread of educational institutions, right from primary school to the Universities, as will be evident from the table below. Optimum use of these facilities is now required to he ensured.
Table 28 GROWTH OF RECOGNISED EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
(Number as on 31.3.1993)
Type
1. Primary Schools
2. Upper Primary
3. Secondary Schools Degree Colleges
4. Colleges for Education
5. Colleges for Professional education
6. Universities
* Includes Engineering, Medical and Teachers Training Institutions, whereas data for previous decades also included Physical Education, Mid wifery. Agri. Vet. & Music etc.
Source: Economic Survey, 1993-94
Implementation of the Directive Principle of the Constitution to universalise elementary education and eradication of illiteracy in the age group 15-35 years is the basic objective for the education sector for the current Five Year Plan. It is a gigantic task, since about 19 to 24 million children in the age group 6-14 and over 121 million adult illiterates in the age group 15-35 (with over 60 percent females in both the groups) are estimated to constitute the target group in this context. (Econ. Survey, 1993-94). Investment in education will have to be stepped up and more and more of higher education will have to be made self-paying. At present, around 75 percent of the financial resources for educational institutions come from central and state governments and share of fee and endowments and other resources have shown a declining trend. This has to be reversed and more and more funds made available for elementary education and adult literacy. This has been put into
practice and 1993-94 budget has seen an increase of 37.6 percent in the central plan for education.
D. WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION
Water is the next most important basic need after air. Even now, in many areas people (really speaking womenfolk) have to spend lot of time and energy in collecting potable water for the family's use. The water used for drinking should be free of all infections, otherwise intake of any amount of nutrition may turn out to be useless. For example, if a person is having worms or suffering from water borne diseases like diarrhoea, what nutrition he consumes will just come out of the body without providing the body with any nutrients, the leaking pot phenomenon ! Provision of safe and potable drinking water to all is, thus, also an important element of nutritional improvement.
Provision of safe drinking water in all the cities, towns and more than hundreds of thousand villages is a major challenge. It is not only the question of physical provisioning of sources but educating people in villages to use these properly and maintain them. The problem is much more difficult in hilly, tribal and decertified areas. Habits of the people also play a part, because it has been observed that many a times, especially in tribal areas, people would prefer to take water from a running stream, even if it has been made dirty by use upstream, rather than from a tube well or a ring well. Considerable progress has, no doubt, been made in arranging for safe drinking water to all but there are still a few interior villages which either do not have a source or are very much undeserved.
Sanitation is also of great importance in upgrading the nutritional status of people, especially those who are more busy with day to day existence. The concept of total environmental sanitation is being propagated in the current plan, making information, education and communication (IEC) an integral part of the programme. The integrated scheme of low cost sanitation and liberation of scavengers is already in operation in 760 towns in various states
The status of water supply and sanitation programme is given in the Table No. 29.
Table 29 POPULATION COVERED WITH DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION FACILITIES
(Percentage coverage as on 31.3.1993)
ITEM/AREAS
Drinking water supply
Rural
Urban
Sanitation Facilities
Rural
Urban
Source: Econ. Survey, 1993-94
It must be appreciated that the concept of sanitation in rural India is still tradition bound to a great extent and people tend to keep following them till breaking point is reached. This is one of the reason why the percentage of people covered under sanitation facilities in rural areas is still so low.
The National Drinking Water Mission is the specialised agency which is tackling the problem and it aims to provide safe drinking water in all rural area & maintain hygienic standards of sanitation.
<section>9</section>
9. Consumption of food & nutrition
9. Consumption of food & nutrition
Various food and nutrition related policies, initiatives and programme in India have already been discussed in preceding chapters. An attempt can now be made to see the impact of these on the consumption of various food items and consequently on national and household level food and nutrition security. It is proposed to first look at food or rather "cereals" consumption and then move on to the consumption of other food and nutrition items. Normally one should take foodgrains i.e. cereals plus pulses for such an exercise, but it is proposed to concentrate on cereals first, since cereals not only provide around 70 percent of energy and protein but averages in their case are quite representative for all, including poor households. Consumption of cereals actually goes down as incomes of households increase. Thus, if average consumption of cereals is found to be equal to recommended levels, it projects quite a satisfactory picture, with poor households also consuming at least
average, if not higher quantity. Same thing cannot be said of pulses, or for that matter other food items. The consumption, and resultant cereals security, is very important for a country like India which was characterised by a history of famines, has vast and expanding population; low per capita income with around 29 percent or almost 250 million people living below poverty line; poor access to health, education, safe drinking water, sanitation and other social services etc. Top most priority for such a country is to get each and every one of its people out of the clutches of hunger and starvation and assure them security of at least cereals or what is loosely called 'staple diets'. In a way this can also be described as food security, albeit in a very narrow sense. Let me, however, hasten to add that it will not be prudent for any country to confine itself to only such food security; not certainly for India, which has been endowed with such resources that providing a
complete nutritious diet to every Indian should not be beyond the capabilities of the country. The country must, therefore, work towards achieving complete food and nutrition security, even though elimination of hunger may have been the first objective. In the ultimate analysis, the task is really one of around development of the human resource and "human beings need tote] nourishment for their growth, development and productivity. They need a wide range of nutrients to perform various functions in the body. These nutrients include protein, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins and minerals" (Rag, and others, 1989). As is well known, energy is vital for activity, growth and rest while protein supplies the body building material and help in recouping loss on account of wear and tear. These two are the most important nutrient but there are many vitamins and minerals that are needed by human body not only for carrying out many vital functions of the body but also for helping in
utilisation of many nutrients like proteins, fats and carbohydrates. These are required in small quantities but their importance is now being seriously recognised. "It is now being increasingly realized that in the absence of just one vitamin (Vitamin A) and two minerals (iron and iodine), individuals and families suffer serious consequences expressed as increased mortality, morbidity and disability rates; communities and nations suffer losses in human potential, the social and economic costs of which no country can afford". (Ramalingaswami, Montreal Conference, 1991). What is, therefore, important is not only to assure staple diets to all people but, in the meantime, work for dietary education and diversification in ultimately achieving such a goal. However, cereals availability and consumption to the full extent can certainly be the starting point.
It is, therefore, proposed to first examine the consumption of cereals against the norms set by the experts. While production and availability projects a macro picture as discussed in Chapter 4, it is the consumption data that indicates the household food security. It is proposed to look essentially at the data on consumption of cereals and other food items generated by the NNMB and Food and Nutrition Board (FNB). Earlier in Chapter IV, we have already looked at the per capita monthly consumer expenditure data thrown up during the household surveys conducted by the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO). Such data is also very useful in that it indicates the ability of the households to stave off hunger if they spend less than certain proportion of their incomes on food. "Households who spend 80 per cent of their incomes on food and cannot meet at least 80 per cent of their defined calorie needs are considered vulnerable and insecure". (Bapna, 1993).
We can now look at the NNMB data on consumption of cereals and other foodstuffs generated during their two surveys, 1975-79 and 1988-90. The Recommended Dietary Intake (RDI) has also been given. The picture that emerges is given below:
Table 30 Average Consumption of Foodstuffs (gms/cu/day)
Foodstuff
Year
Posted avg.
consumption
RDI
Coarse cereals &
millets
Pulses
Roots & Tubers
Green Leafy Vegetables
Other Vegetables
Milk & Milk Products
Fats & Oils
Sugar & Jaggery
Source: NNMB (1991)
Before we proceed to analyse the NNMB data on food consumption, it must be mentioned that the data suffers from some limitations. It is based on a small sample of 750 households in only 10 states out of a total of 32 states and union territories. Per consumption unit consumption is assessed by one day weighment method in 80 per cent households and 24 hour recall method in the rest; but success of these methods depends on how forthcoming the lady of the house is and how accurately she can recall. Further, the two surveys, cover a time span of hardly 15 to 18 years, which is too small to assess the trends very correctly. However, notwithstanding such limitations, the NNMB surveys remain the only authentic, reliable and scientifically collected information on nutritional consumption in India and its examination and analysis, especially that of the disaggregated data, is expected to present a fairly representative picture of the both national and household food security.
It can be observed from Table No. 30 that consumption of cereals of 490 gms/cu/day in 198890 was higher than the RDI levels, which confirm adequate production and availability of cereals in the country, as brought out in Chapter 4. In fact, average consumption of cereals was 30 gms. more than RDI or, in other words, there was a cushion of 6.5 per cent in the availability and consumption of cereals as recently as in 1988-90. In view of the fact that around 70 per cent of the energy comes from cereals alone, and better-off households consume less cereals as their income rise, with their consumption of other food items like milk, milk products, fruits, vegetables, eggs, mutton etc. increasing, the cereal intake for even poor households should be quite satisfactory; richer households would not normally overconsume a commodity like cereals. The Working Group set up by Ministry of Agriculture (April 1994) has found that average availability of cereals during biennium 1991-93 has
been of the order of 434 gins/capita/day, which is equivalent to energy availability of 1501 kcal/capita/day. With calories available from other foodstuffs, the total average energy availability has been worked out to be 2400 kcal against the weighted average energy requirement of only 2200 kcal. Thus, it appears that availability of cereals at the macro level and through cereals, the energy availability has been quite satisfactory during 1991-1993. However, as far as intake of energy is concerned, there is absolutely no certainty that the balance weighted average requirement of energy i.e., 2200 minus 1501 or 699 or 700 kcal, would be available to poor households from the other food items as given in the Working Group of Agriculture, (April, 1994) calculations. Some poor households may be consuming less than average quantities available for consumption as shown in Table No.9 on account of inadequate purchasing power and the better off households may be consuming more energy
than average.
Against the above background, a question can legitimately be posed. If the availability of cereals and to a great extent energy, (and availability can be the proxy for consumption, on account of insignificant exports) is so comfortable, how come that 1987-88 estimate of the Planning Commission indicate that 29 per cent of people were living below the poverty line, not being able to consume 2200 kcal of energy, the weighted average requirement for the entire population or 2400 kcal in urban & 2400 kcal in rural areas ? How is that 8.7 per cent of preschool children suffered from severe and 43.8 per cent from moderate malnutrition as found by NNMB surveys during 198890 ? The explanation probably lies in the variety of factors that may contribute to malnutrition, even if a person may be consuming more than RDI levels of cereals and other foodstuffs. These factors could be unbalanced diets; poor food habits; unsafe drinking water; prevalence of diseases like diarrhoea,
gastroenteritis etc.; worms infestation; other health problems and so on. One is, however, still prompted to persist with the above question because granting presence of such factors, the very fact that against the weighted average requirement of 2200 kcal energy and 50g protein, with the availability is 2400 kcal and 64.9 gms, the nutritional status of average Indian should have been better than what emerges from data on poverty and malnutrition. An examination of disaggregated data may be, therefore, important.
The mismatch can be examined by analysing the NNMB data on average consumption of foodstuffs collected during 1988-90 according to various groups in rural areas:
Table No. 31 Average Consumption of Foodstuffs by Per Capita Income (PCI)
Consumption in gms/cu/day
PCI in its/Capita/month
Per
Cereals
Pulses
Total Vegetable
Roots & Tubers
Fats & Oils
Milk & Product
Sugar & Jaggary
Source: NNMB Report of Repeat Surveys, 1991.
It may be observed from the data given above that the well accepted thesis of decline in cereal consumption with rising incomes is reflected in the general trend evident from the data. While cereal consumption was 475 gm/cu/da for the lowest PCI group, it was only 454 am. for the highest income group. It is also observed that except for the two highest PCI groups, the rest of the five groups have cereal consumption higher than the RDI and even in case of two lowest PCI groups, it is more than the ICMR norm of 460 gms. Intake of other foodstuffs was below RDI for all groups except highest.
The NNMB had also carried out surveys on intake of food stuffs in urban areas during 197579. The population was divided on occupational lines-(i) High Income Group (HIG) consisting of highly educated households occupying high positions in government (ii) Middle Income Group (MIG) composed mainly of administrative staff at middle rungs, (iii) Low Income Group (LIG) consisting of those occupying lowest position in the government, (iv) Industrial Labour (IL) and Slum Dwellers (SD). (NNMB Report on urban population, 1984). The result of the survey were as given in Table No. 32.
Table No. 32 Average intake of Foodstuff in Urban Areas (gm/cu/day)
Income Group
Cereals
Pulses
Total vegetable
Milk
Fats & Oils
HIG
MIG
LIG
IL
SD
Source: NNMB (1984)
The picture relating to cereals consumption is more or less similar in urban areas also. It is lowest at 316 gm/cu/day for HIG and highest at 428 gm/cu/day for LIG. In fact, the cereals consumption in urban areas for all income groups is lower than in rural areas-the lowest income group in rural areas with PCI less than Rs. 30 per month consuming 427 gms/cu/day as against only 420 gms/cu/day for LIG in urban areas. Consumption of pulses was however higher than RDI except for SD and consumption of other stuffs was much better than rural areas, except for SD groups.
We also find that the lowest cereal consumption in urban areas was amongst SD group (416 gms/cm/day) but this is substantially, lower than the lowest PCI group in rural areas (475. gm/cm/day). In fact, the cereal consumption of slum dwellers is even lower than the highest PCI group in rural areas. The diversification of diets away from cereals in urban areas is partially explained by better income opportunities in urban areas. This also possibly explains, in a large measure, migration to urban areas. In case of slum dwellers, however, the lower intake of cereals is not accompanied by higher intake of other cereals, suggesting special policy measures of this group of people.
I have not come across any empirical studies that have attempted to explain this mismatching between consumption of cereals (providing about 70 per cent of calorie requirements as also 75 per cent of protein) and poverty (based on ability to have intake of certain quantity of energy). There can, however, be a number of factors working singly or in tandem, that may be able to explain this situation. At this stage, these probable factors can be only posed as questions beseeching some competent people to tackle them exclusively. Is it that NNMB surveys based on a small sample and sampling methodology have not been able to capture a truly representative picture ? Is it that in the absence of superior or high energy foods, the people with low incomes consume more than the RDI quantity of cereals to make up for any shortages in the balanced diets ? Are the RDI norms laid down for average Indian by the ICMR Expert Group lower than what they should be, especially when one notices
that the DES of a Chinese in 1986-88 was 2637 kcal against only 2104 kcal for an Indian ? Is it that with the recent disappearance of the old situation of hunger for many people, they tend to eat more than RDI levels in the short run simply to achieve a certain psychological satisfaction ? Is any change in food habits or taste, influencing cereal consumption, responsible for this ? Is this due to health related factors essentially ? Do low per capita income have a relationship with this and if so, how NSSO data on consumption expenditure can establish such relationship ? These and such others are the highly complicated questions that may have to be examined and the entire matter covering them should become a subject for a separate in depth study.
Consumption of Foodstuffs other than Cereals
As far as consumption of other foodstuffs is concerned, the picture as thrown up by NNMB surveys is not as promising as in case of cereals. Tables 31 and 32 will establish this. In case of all these foodstuffs, there is a negative gap between the average consumption and RDI. The brief analysis for each of the foodstuff is attempted hereunder:
Consumption of Pulses
The average RDI for pulses is 40 gms/cu/day. However, average intake of pulses in rural areas is 32 gms/cu/day only. The weighted average per capita requirement for the entire population, has, however, been taken as 50 gins/capita/day (Agriculture Group, 1994). For different income groups in rural areas, the intake of pulses is highest at 43 gms for highest income group (over Rs.300 per capita per month). It is 33 arms for the next highest as also for the sixth PCI Group out of seven. For all the other income groups, it varies between 25 gm to 29 gms/cu/day. In urban areas, the NNMB surveys indicate that except for slum dwellers (consumption of pulses 33 gms/cu/day), all the other income groups have higher than RDI consumption of pulses, with HIG topping with a consumption of 57 gms/cu/day. Even LIG and IL groups have slightly higher than RDI level with 42 and 41 gms/cu/day. Protein intake of slum dwellers has to be monitored closely and it is quite possible that due to lack
of nutritional awareness, these people are spending money on entertainment, drinking, clothes etc. but not sparing enough for pulses or alternate sources of protein.
It is, however, clear that majority of Indians, especially in rural areas consume less than RDI levels of pulses. For a majority of them, pulses are the most important source of protein as they happen to be vegetarians and cannot, therefore, make up for short-consumption and poor absorption of cereal based protein by consuming meat, fish, egg etc.
It is therefore, very important for India to increase production of pulses by developing high yielding varieties, suitable both for rainfed and irrigated conditions and usher in a mini-revolution in pulses production.
Consumption of Milk
The ICMR Expert Group's RDI for milk is 150 gm/cu/day. In rural areas, only the highest PCI group has average consumption of milk higher than RDI (230 gms/cu/day). Consumption of next highest PCI group is 121 gms/cu/day, whereas the lower five groups have intakes between 42 and 86 gms/cu/day. In rural areas, intake of milk is not only a function of purchasing power but also of availability. Lot of work still remains to be done in improving the breed of the non-descript cattle we have in large parts of the rural India. Nutrition education and awareness also needs to be improved.
In urban areas, HIG and MIG groups have milk consumption higher than RDI at 424 and 250 gms/cu/day. That of LIG and IL group is low at 95 and 98 gms. However, the milk intake of slum dweller is extremely low at 42 gms/cu/day. Similar efforts, as in case of pulses and protein foods including awareness drive, need to be taken up amongst slum dwellers.
Cosumptions of Fats/Oils
The RDI for fats/oils is 20 gms/cu/day. It is only the highest of the 7 PCI groups in rural areas, which consumes higher than RDI levies (25 gm/cu/day) with all the other PCI group, consuming between 9 to 14 gms/cu/day. Lowest PCI group was found to be consuming (9 gms) slightly higher than next two higher PCI groups. In urban areas, all occupational groups, except the slum dwellers (13 gms/cu/day) consume higher than RDI levels of fats/oils with HIG consuming higher than double at 46 gms/cu/day. It will be useful for this group as well as for the country, if their intake of oils/fats is reduced through proper education.
Consumption of Vegetables
As against RDI of 100 gms/cu/day of all (40 gms of green leafy vegetables plus 60 gms of other vegetables), the intake of all groups in rural areas and those other than HIG & MIG groups in urban areas is lower than RDI. It is as high as 134 gms. in case of HIG and 110 gms. in case of MIG. For LIG, IL & SD groups, it ranges between 51 and 71 gms i.e. less than RDI. Surprisingly, the intake is lower than RDI for all PCI groups in rural areas. Apart form availability, optimum use of vegetables is also very important so that washing and cooking of vegetables is done in such a way that loss of nutrients is reduced to minimum. This will go a long way in improving the general health of the people and reduce anaemia which is still a big problem especially amongst expectant and nursing mothers.
Intake of Foodstuffs by States
It will be very useful to also study the desegregated statewise data with respect to average intake of foodstuffs, as it can help policy makers in initiating special efforts in those States where situation is unsatisfactory. The Figure Nos. 5 to 8 given hereinafter show the average intake of the four important foodstuffs viz. cereals, pulses, milk and fats/oils in 10 States surveyed by NNMB and another 8 surveyed by the FNB.
AVERAGE INTAKE OF CEREALS
AVERAGE INTAKE OF PULSES
AVERAGE INTAKE OF MILK
AVERAGE INTAKE OF FATS AND OILS
An analysis of the data given in the figures 5 to 8 gives following picture:
Intake of Cereals
The cereals intake has been less than the RDI of 460 gms/cu/day per day only in case of Tamil Nadu, Goa and Meghalaya. While a relationship with poverty may not be accurately available for Goa and Meghalaya, which are very small in size but in case of Tamil Nadu, low intake of cereals is against the background of the State having 32.8 percent of its people below poetry line. Punjab which has the least number of poor as a percentage to its population (only 7.2 percent), is 7th highest cereal consuming state out of the 18 States, On the other hand, for Orissa which has the highest percentage of poor amongst all the 18 surveyed States, the average cereals intake at 628 gm/cu/day is not only very much higher than RDI of 460 gms but the highest in the country.
Intake of Pulses
The RDI of pulses is 40 gm/cu/day. Only Karnataka (50 gms), M.P. (56 gms) Rajasthan (50 am) and UP (45 am) exceed it. All these states have quite high proportion of population below poverty line. Interestingly, Orissa, the State with maximum poor, has an average pulses intake of 40 gms/cu/day, exactly the same as RDI. The averages based on the sample surveys conducted by both NNMB and FNB seem to throw up a confusing picture since Orissa has the highest percentage of poor (44.7 percent) in the country yet its average cereals intake is a record 628 gms against RDI of 460 gms and that of pulses is exactly equal to RDI of 40 gms/cu/day. Its fats & oil consumption as we will see later, is also third highest in the country. Orissa not only has highest proportions of poor but also has recently acquired some notoriety due to distress conditions in Kalahandi district of the State.
Consumption of Milk
The RDI for milk/milk products is 150 gms/cu/day. We find that only Punjab (very high at 396 gm/cu/day) and Karnataka (282 am) exceed it. Milk consumption is not only a function of purchasing power but also of local availability (because it cannot be easily transported to all places and over long distances) and consumption behaviour. In tune with its poverty, the milk intake in Orissa is one of the lowest, only West Bengal and Meghalaya (more consumption of tea than milk?) being lower than Orissa.
Consumption of Fats/Oils
The RDI for fats and oils is 20 gms/cu/day. Gujarat, which is the biggest producer of oil seeds and manufacturer of oils naturally tops the list with consumption of 21 gms/cu/day Next in consumption are Punjab (also consumes lot of fresh butter, cheese) with 17 gms/cu/day. Orissa, inspite its higher proportion of poor is third with an intakes of 16 gms/cu/day. On the other side of the spectrum, Utter Pradesh a food- surplus, state and a state which also grows quite a bit of oilseeds, ranks lowest with fats/oils intake of only 4 gms/cu/day. Bihar, Goa, Meghalaya, Rajasthan & Tripura also have very low consumption of fats/oils at 7 gms/cu/day.
Changes in food consumption
Before we move on to examine the status of intake of nutrients, we may have a look at the changes in foodstuff consumption at the national level between 1975-79 when NNMB carried out first surveys and 1988-90 when it undertook repeat surveys. The position is shown in Figure No. 9.
Figure 9 CHANGES IN FOOD CONSUMPTION
(During 1975-79 & 1988-90)
It is seen that per consumption unit intake of cereals, pulses, roots/tubers, other vegetables and milk/milk products has declined during this period while that of green leafy vegetables, sugar/jaggery and fats/oils has increased. However, the position must have undergone a change recently for the better in case of almost all the foodstuffs, because production of almost all food items has shown an increasing trend since 1988-89, the year following the severe drought of 1987.
INTAKE OF NUTRIENTS
Energy intake
Figure No. 10 shows the statewise average intake of energy in rural areas as against the RDI (2400 k cal.cu/day). Incidentally, the RDI of energy of 2400 kcal also defines poverty in rural areas. The average dietary intake per consumption unit per day is 2280 kcal which is quite close of RDI. however, there are sharp inter-state variations as shown in Table 10.
AVERAGE INTAKE OF ENERGY
Punjab having the least percentage of poor and surplus food production, logically enjoys the highest average energy intake of 2760 kcal. However, as was observed in respect of cereals, pulses and fats/oils intake for Orissa, it has a high average intake of 2700 kcal of energy, much higher than the RDI, which also happens to be next only to Punjab. Madhya Pradesh, which also ranks very high in the poverty scale enjoys third highest energy intake, again substantially higher than RDI. West Bengal and Karnataka also have energy intake higher than RDI. State of Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat fall behind RDI only marginally. In the remaining States, it is less than the RDI. It, therefore, appears that although the energy intake of 2400 kcal/cu/day defines the poverty, the direct relationship between energy intake and poverty does not hold good universally and may be influenced by more consumption of carbohydrates and that too in larger quantities as can be experienced during visits to
rural areas of Orissa or Madhya Pradesh.
The energy intake among rural and urban proxy income groups is shown in Figures No. 11 and 12.
ENERGY INTAKE OF RURAL POPULATION
ENERGY INTAKE OF URBAN POPULATION
It is observed that in the rural areas, average energy intake is highest among cultivators (2514 kcal./cu/day) against pooled average of 2340 kcal. This is understandable as the cultivators tend to keep a portion of their produce for self consumption. The lowest (2043 kcal) is amongst the landless agriculture labourers, which, therefore, is the category that needs maximum attention as far as food & nutrition security is concerned. In urban areas, highest energy intake is by HIG (2603 kcal) and lowest (2008 kcal) by slum dwellers who consume less energy even as compared to the lowest income rural category of landless agricultural labourers and therefore, require special attention if food & nutrition security is it be assured for them.
Protein intake
The national average intake of protein as reflected in NNMB surveys comes to 62 gms/cu/day which is slightly above the RDI of 60 gms/cu/day. However, here again, pronounced Statewise variations are seen as will be observed from Figure No 13.
AVERAGE INTAKE OF PROTEIN
Punjab again leads all other States with an average protein intake of 85 gms. Madhya Pradesh, even though having large proportion of poor in its population, is second with 82.5, probably because of very high production of pulses and soybean, part of the production being kept back by even poor growers for self consumption. High average intake of protein in Uttar Pradesh and Gujarat can also be explained by same logic. Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Goa, Jammu and Kashmir, Meghalaya and Rajasthan also have protein intake higher can RDI. The States which are lagging behind are Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal. Sikkim and Tripura appear to be low due to poor production of pulses and high transport cost of pulses imported from other parts of the country, as also poor state of the milch animals.
Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and W.Bengal can increase their protein foods and supplement it by fish and should quickly attain at least RDI levels of protein intake. In fact, with tremendous increase in fish and eggs in A.P., the protein intake in that state will be quite different in next surveys.
Intake of Micro-nutrients
It is observed from the NNMB surveys during 1975-79 that in the urban areas, the aggregate intake levels of iron were higher in all income group than ICMR recommended level. In respect of Vitamin A, however, deficiencies existed among all groups except the High Income Group. As shown below, the slum dwellers are at the bottom for both, as they were in case of energy and protein intake:
Table 33 AVERAGE INTAKE OF IRON AND VITAMIN "A" IN URBAN AREAS
IN TAKE OF
GROUP
IRON (in ma)
Vit "A" (in ug.)
HIG
MIG
LIG
UK
SD
RDA (ICMR)
SOURCE: NNMB Report, 1981.
The data on intake of iron and Vitamin A in respect of rural areas is given below:
Table 34 AVERAGE INTAKE OF IRON AND VITAMIN A IN RURAL AREAS
IN TAKE OF
YEAR
IRON (in ma)
Vit "A" (in ug.)
RDA (ICMR)
It will be observed from the data for rural areas that average iron consumption has remained around 30 mg/cu/day against the ICMR norm of 24 ma. Thus, iron intake for rural population as a whole appears higher than RDI. These high intakes of iron should however be taken with a pinch of salt. It is common knowledge that there are large groups at risk, especially pre-school children and pregnant/lactating mothers, who suffer from iron deficiency anaemia. It has been estimated in various studies, particularly those conducted by NIN, that "roughly 55 percent preschool children and almost 50 percent of the expectant mothers in the third trimester of pregnancy, suffer from iron deficiency, which is basically due to inadequate or poor absorption of iron form a predominantly cereal based diet". (NIN, 1993). The problem is vegetarian diets, which have iron but not much of that is absorbed by the body in view of blocking substances that such foods, especially cereals, contain. Iron
deficiency anaemia is also prevalent amongst non-vegetarians also, because very few of them can afford non-vegetarian food on a regular basis. "It is therefore, necessary to educate the masses about the rich sources of iron and associated factors like positive influence of Vitamin 'C' or the citrus fruits on the absorption of iron, negative influence of tea/coffee in the diet and role of hookworm infestation, material parasites etc. in aggravating the situation" (Dr. Smt. Ramachandran, 1993). India was, however, among the very first amongst developing countries to take up a prophylaxis programme amongst pregnant women and children, essentially through iron foliate administration. Besides, fortication of common foods with iron and required medical interventions are also indicated.
IODINE DEFICIENCY
It is only recently that experts and policy makers have fully realised that endemic goiter and cretinism is not the only manifestation of iodine deficiency. "The term iodine deficiency disorders (IDD) now covers a wide spectrum of effects leading to human misery and degradation that are largely irreversible, once manifested. The long list of clinical disorders which are now ascribed to iodine deficiency, starting from still birth and abortion to goiter and various types of mental retardation and finally to cretinism, the most cruel form of IDD, is indeed scaring" (Kalyan Bagchi, July 1993). To make things worse, IDD can affect human beings at any stage, even during his intra-uterine existence. In meeting the challenge of IDD, the policy makers have to appreciate that iodine deficiency is not really related to dietary deficiency but originates from lack of adequate iodine in the soil itself. Thus, whoever lives off that soil, rich or poor, will have IDD because neither the
water nor any other produce will supply him adequate iodine which is considered to be just 120 to 150 microgram per day. Those living in coastal areas have, of course, the advantage of intake of large quantity of sea food which contains substantial quantities of iodine. The only way to tackle the IDD is, therefore, to either add iodine to food or water consumed by people at risk or through oral/injected medication. The most popular method, which is also followed in India, is to iodise the salt at the time of manufacture and ensure that only such salt is consumed in endemic areas. Considering the problem of non-iodised salt being cheaper than iodised, Govt. of India has decided that statutory change over to iodised salt will be undertaken in phases and completed by 1995. In India, IDD is highly prevalent in a broad sub-Himalayan belt, almost 2400 km. long, stretching from Kashmir in North to Naga hills in the East. Surveys conducted by the Central Goitre Survey team during
past two decades indicate that around 54 million people suffer not only from endemic goitre and cretinism but other manifestations of IDD, like deaf-mutism, mental retardation and various degrees of neuro-motor dysfunctions. It is estimated that "with every passing hour 10 children are born in this country who will not attain their optimum mental and physical potential due to neo-natal hypothyroidism caused by iodine deficiency". (IDD Project document, Min of H.& FW, 1993)
Government of India had launched a National Goitre Control Programme in 1962 with focus on consumption of iodised salt in endemic areas. This programme was converted into National Iodine Deficiency Disorder Control Programme in August 1992 to emphasise the wider spectrum of the fight against IDD. An important element of the new programme was to ultimately ban non-iodised salt. 22 of the 32 States /UTs have accordingly banned entry of noniodised salt in these States/UTs. Programme includes establishing more plants to manufacture iodised slat, privatisation of the industry, provision of subsidy to such industries, monitoring consumption of iodised salt, conducting surveys to identify extent of IDD, conducting training and improving communications.
It is, thus, brought out by NNMB data on consumption of food items and nutrients that:
a) While energy and protein intake at the national level may appear quite satisfactory, which is also indicated by the availability of foodstuffs as worked out by the Working Group of the Ministry of Agriculture (April, 1994), the situation varies greatly between states. Although there is a mix-match between consumption of energy and proportion of people below poverty line, exemplified forcefully by Orissa, the difference in consumption would really be due to prevalence of poverty, status of health and educational attainments.
b) While food security, especially limited to cereals or staple diets, appears quite satisfactory, even at the household levels, such security appears to have been achieved by poor households by paying a social cost, like making their children work, working at lower than statutory minimum wages, putting long hours of hard work, working in hazardous and unhealthy environment etc.
c) It has been brought out that notwithstanding some improvements, certain' groups of households like those having no land and agricultural labourers in rural areas and slum dwellers in urban areas are still relatively more food-insecure. The most satisfying indication is an improvement in the nutritional status of pre-school children.
d) While food security position is somewhat satisfactory, the nutritional security is still a distant reality. No doubt, production of other foodstuffs like milk, mutton, eggs, fish, fruits etc. has shown sharp increases in recent years which may give an improved picture of nutrition security during surveys conducted in future.
<title>Indian experience on household food and nutrition security</title>
10. Summary and conclusions
10. Summary and conclusions
1. DEMOGRAPHIC SITUATION
India is the second most populous country in the world. With 2.4 percent of world's land area, it supports 16 percent of world's population. Inspite of being one of the first developing country to adopt the family planning programme, the population explosion continues unabated, with population equivalent to Australia's being added every year. A small ray of hope is that the growth rate of population has declined for the first time in recent years from 2.2 percent to 2.14 percent during the decade 1981-1991. However, even if the growth rate is reduced to 1.6 percent, the population might cross one billion mark by 2000 AD. The main reason for such population growth has been, "the fall in the crude death rate from 22.8 (per 1000 population) in 1951 to 10.2 in 1989, is greater than the fall from 41.7 to 30.5 in the birth rate, during the same period." (RGI of India, 1991). "The fertility rate and mortality level on the one hand and age distribution of the population on the other
are such that even after attaining NRR:1 by 2000 AD, the Zero growth rate of population may be achieved only after several decades". (Ministry of Health & F.W., Annual Report 1993-94). The burgeoning population not only marginalises the achievements that the nation has made on the economic front but also does not allow the country to substantially enhance the Food and Nutrition security of the people.
2. PER CAPITA INCOME
It is extremely important for household food security in a low income country like India, that the growth rate of per capita income is substantial and its distribution among households is commensurate with prevailing disparities in incomes. However, it is imperative that there is sustained and substantive growth in the first instance, otherwise the country can neither have distributive mechanisms nor can it find resources for poverty alleviation and food security programmes. The growth in per-capita incomes in India has not been what one would have desired, although it has also not been too insignificant. Index number of the per capita Net National Product, which was 100 in 1950-51 at 1980:81 prices is estimated to have risen to 196.6 during 1992-93, thereby registering an average increase of 2.36 percent per annum. During last five year period between 1988-89 and 1992-93, the average annual growth, however, declined to 1.0 per cent. In fact, 1990-91 was a year of crisis for
Indian economy, with overall economic growth declining to 1.1 percent in 1991-92. The programme of stabilisation and economic reform measures helped restore economic growth to 4 percent in 1992-93". (Economic Survey, 1993 94) In any case, these modest growth rates in per capita income or in the economy as a whole, coming as they were on an already poor base were not good enough to leave a strong impact on the food and nutritional well being of the poor households and but for the existence of extensive rural development programmes backed with a massive public distribution system, the quality of life of the poor households could not have been maintained at the existing levels. Matters were certainly helped by a quantum jump in foodgrains production in 1988-89, when it reached the level of around 170 million tonnes against around 140-143 million tonnes high of previous two years. Foodgrains production thereafter remained between 170 to 180 million tonnes during the next four
years. The index of industrial production also rose from 180.9
(Base: 1980-81) in 1988-89 to 212.4 in 1991-92, registering an average annual growth rate of 4.3 per cent. (Economic Survey, 1993-94)
3. FOOD SECURITY AT MACRO LEVEL
(i) Banishment of raw hunger and starvation
Famines, the extreme form of hunger and starvation, were a regular feature in India's history, the last one being the great Bengal famine, which is known to have consumed around 3.5 million lives. At the time of independence in 1947, India started with a handicap as far as food security was concerned, with India getting 75 percent of the cereal production and 82 percent of the population of the undivided country. However, the food and agriculture policy; the PDS and employment generation programmes; the enterprise and hard work of the Indian farmers; the development of new high yielding varieties by scientists and the transfer of new agricultural technology with arrangements for supply of inputs by agricultural administrators, saw to it that India was never again ravaged by famines. The country developed the capacity to meet the challenges posed by sharp decline in harvests due to droughts and other natural calamities. The last drought of 1987, considered one of the most
severe of the century, was faced with country's own food and other resources and it was ensured that foodgrains were made available in each nook and corner of the country through public distribution system and food for work programmes. No part of the country suffered from starvation, even during the worst period of drought. The country has, thus, made substantial progress in improving the food security, at least in ensuring that no household is required to face hunger and starvation.
(ii) Self Sufficiency in Cereals
The country has achieved self sufficiency as far as the requirement of cereals is concerned. The food policies, including maintenance of national buffer, have seen to it that year to year fluctuations in the production of cereals are taken care of, without any adverse impact on cereal availability and prices. Import of cereal has become an occasional affair, the last imports having been made in 1988 and 1992. Even when imports are required to be made, these constitute hardly 1.5 percent of the indigenous production. The comfortable situation, as far as availability of cereal is concerned, has been discussed in chapter IV. The requirement and availability of cereals has been determined under two scenarios. The first one uses the ICMR (1990) standards of deduction factor from production to availability for consumption and norms for daily per capita requirement and the second one uses the standards adopted by the Inter-Ministerial Working Group set up by the Ministry of
Agricultural (April 1994) for the same two parameters. The data has been analysed for the triennial 1991-93; Under the first scenario, with stiffer standards, it is found that the total availability of cereal during the three years period was 369.60 million tonnes against the requirement of 389.91 million tonnes, the satisfaction ratio being about 95%. Under the second scenario, net availability of cereals has been found to be 412.79 million tonnes against the requirement of 364.38 million tonnes, giving a satisfaction ratio of 113.4%. Even if the mid-view is taken, it appears that availability of cereals during this latest biennium at the national level has been quite satisfactory.
(iii) Consumption of Cereals and Energy
The surveys conducted by the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) of the National Institute of Nutrition (NIN) during the two sets of periods, 1975-79 and 1988-90, indicate that the daily per consumption unit intake of cereal has been more than recommended dietary intake of 460 gm/cu/day. It was found to be 504 gm during the first survey period and 490 gm during the second (1988-90). Even at 490 gms, the average intake of cereals is about 6.5 percent higher than RDI. The average intake of energy at 2280 kcal was, found to be slightly less than recommended 2400 kcal/cu/day (for male sedentary workers). The working group set up by the Min of Agriculture (April 1994) has, however, found that on an average, 1501 kcal of energy is. available from cereals alone. It has further been indicated that considering the availability of energy from other food stuffs, including food from animal source, the overall energy availability from all the food stuffs is 2400 kcal, against the
weighted average per capita requirement of 2200 kcal for the entire population. It, therefore, appears that availability of energy also is quite satisfactory. The contradiction between adequate intake of cereals and energy on one hand and high proportion of people below poverty line as well as prevailing malnutrition on the others, has been discussed in detail in chapter 4.
(iv) Consumption of Pulses & Protein
The consumption of pulses, which is the most important source of protein in India's predominantly vegetarian society is, however, found to be less than RDI levels. The main reason for this is stagnating production of pulses and consequent decline in the per capita availability. Access to available pulses is further impaired due to their high cost. The intake of pulses between two NNMB surveys has come down from 36 gm to 32 gm/cu/day, against the ICMR norm of 40 gms/cu/day. The Working Group of Min. of Agriculture has, however, found that taking into consideration availability of protein from various food stuffs, the total per capita availability comes to 54.9 gm against the weighted average per capita requirement of 50 am. This may have happened due to substantial increase in the production of milk, eggs, mutton, fish etc. But unlike cereals, the average protein consumption at macro level does not indicate the required consumption at household levels also, as there could be
over consumption of protein rich food stuffs unlike that of cereals. It is also necessary to look at Net Protein Utilization against the background of predominantly cereal based diets of Indians.
(v) Consumption of other food stuffs & nutrients
It has also been brought out from available data (Ref Chapter 9) that production, availability and consumption of other food stuffs like vegetables, milk/milk products, Fats/oils, roots/ tubers etc. is below what is nutritionally required. There has been hardly any change in the consumption of various food stuffs between 1975-79 and 1988-90, with marginal decline in pulses and slight increase in green leafy vegetables and fats/oils with substantial increase in sugar/jaggery. In case of intake of nutrients also, the situation remains more or less same between the two periods. Intake of energy, protein, iron and Thiamine remained more or less unchanged but equal to or higher than RDI levels. Vitamin 'A', Vitamin 'C' and Riboflavin remained below RDI levels and more or less unchanged except Vitamin 'A', which showed a welcome increase. The overall poor status of nutritional security thus did not show any marked sign of improvement, mainly because of burgeoning population and
purchasing power of poor households not keeping pace with rising prices.
4. HOUSEHOLD FOOD SECURITY
(i) Improvement in Poverty situation
There has been a progressive decline in the prevailing poverty in India, which must have left its positive impact on household food security. The proportion of population below poverty line declined from 51.5 percent in 1972-73 to 29.4 percent in 1987-88. The decline has been observed in both rural and urban areas, although it was substantially higher (51 percent) in urban areas as compared to rural areas (38 percent). It only confirms that the problem of household food security is much more serious in rural areas, requiring special and enhanced efforts for enabling the poor households in rural areas to generate a certain minimum level of income. Large variations have been seen within states, the range being from 7.2 percent in Punjab to 44.7 percent in Orissa. The decline in poverty has, however, been noticed in all states, the credit for which, in large measure, goes to various employment generation and asset building programmes in rural development sector, existence of
PDS which helps in keeping a check on prices if not fully meeting the foodgrains requirement of poor and special nutrition programmes aimed at the most vulnerable groups.
(ii) Consumption of cereals & other nutrients
NNMB surveys, though a little outdated with last repeat survey having been done during 198890, show that inspite of more than RDI level consumption of cereals at macro level, certain groups of households like no-land and agricultural labourers in rural areas and slum dwellers in urban areas are able to consume much less than the national and even state level intake of cereals. However, situation may have improved now, with substantially stepped up outlays in rural development sector and agricultural production, including food from animal sources, having gone up substantially during last few years and fresh surveys, as and when published, may demonstrate this. However, the very absence of any reports of hunger or scarcity conditions from any part of the country indicate that the household food security, at least limited to cereals or staple diets, has improved significantly. As regards consumption of pulses, other food stuffs and various nutrients, the consumption of lower
per capita income households in rural areas and low income occupation groups and slum dwellers in urban area is less than the averages at macro level. Thus, while security of cereals for even poor households seems to be quite satisfactory, the nutrition security at household level is still a distant dream.
(iii) Consumer expenditure on food
The per capita monthly consumer expenditure data generated by the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) indicates a healthy trend of decline in expenditure on cereals. Such decline has been noticed both in urban and rural areas as also in various income groups. However, the poorest households were still earmarking around 60 to 65 percent of their monthly consumer expenditure on food items, of which 42 percent in rural areas and 25 percent in urban areas was on cereals alone. There was pronounced variation amongst states. For example, while the share of expenditure on cereals in Punjab was only 17 percent during 1972-73 and declined further to 10 percent during 1980-91, it was as high as 52 and 40 percent respectively in case of Orissa. The structure of per-capita consumer expenditure corroborates the consumption picture that emerged from the surveys or NNMB and FNB. In any case, the overall picture indicates a shift of expenditure from cereals to other items which
indicates an improvement in household food security. Since no income group was found to be spending 80 percent or more on food, it can be inferred that families at risk would be an exception.
(iv) Employment and asset generation
Recognising that unemployment is the real breeding ground for poverty and as an important part of the endeavour to launch a direct attack on poverty, India has been implementing employment generation and asset building programmes since eighties. A total of 4371 million mandays of work has been created since its inception till 1990-91 under programmes like National Rural Employment Programme, Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme and Jawahar Rojgar Yojna which would have provided 43 million poor households with at least 100 days of food security in a year. A new scheme, the Employment Assurance Scheme, has been started in 1750 Blocks covered by Revamped PDS to guarantee employment during lean agricultural season. The asset building programme, Integrated Rural Development Programme, has assisted another 42 Million families since its inception in 1980-81 and notwithstanding the inherent problem in transformation of a poor family into an entrepreneur-manager, quite a few
of these families must have permanently come out of poverty zone and substantially improved their access to food and nutrition.
(v) Public Distribution System
This biggest grain distribution programme in the world, though it still suffers from non-targeting to poor and allowing some benefits to be used by non poor, has contributed substantially to assuring food security to trillions of households, especially during periods of stress. The programme has recently been revamped in 1750 Blocks, covering poor and disadvantaged tribal, hilly, drought prone and decertified areas. It is expected that with such revamping, no household will be left uncovered, monthly entitlement of rations will go up, they would get foodgrains at prices even lower than normal PDS and consequently the food security of households living in these poor areas will improve. The next step, strongly recommended by the author in a study report presented to the Minister, Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution in Sept. 1993, is to keep only poor households under the converge of PDS to make it a sharper instrument of household food security.
(vi) Direct attack on malnutrition
It is also necessary to launch a direct attack on malnutrition by providing supplementary nutrition to vulnerable groups like children up to 6 years of age, expectant and nursing mothers. Of the many important programmes in this area discussed in detail in Chapter VIII, the Integrated Child Development Services Programme is the most important and biggest and seeks to provide a package of integrated services consisting of supplementary nutrition, health check up and educational services to children up to six years and expectant/nursing mothers. The programme now includes 3066 projects with 19.5 million children and mothers receiving supplementary nutrition. An evaluation of the programme has revealed that in ICDS areas IMR, immunisation coverage, Vit 'A' prophylaxis programme, the nutritional status of children and percentage of low birth weight children was significantly better than other areas. The programme, therefore, appears to be contributing significantly to food and
nutrition well being of the poorer household, although there are many areas where the programme needs to be improved. The other programmes like Special Nutrition Programme, Balwadi Nutrition Programme, Creches for Children of working and ailing women, Wheat based nutritional programme, World Food Programme, CARE assisted nutrition programme, Tamil-nadu Integrated Nutrition Project etc. are all attempting to directly intervene and improve the food and nutritional status of the vulnerable categories in poor households.
5. HEALTH AND NUTRITIONAL RELATED INDICATORS OF FOOD AND NUTRITION SECURITY
(i) Nutritional Status of Children and Mothers
The nutritional status of children in 1 to 5 years group has improved. Severe malnutrition amongst them has declined from 15 percent during the NNMB surveys of 1977-79 to 8.7 percent during 1998-90. Simultaneously, the percentage of normal children has gone up from 5.9 percent to 9.9 percent. However, there has not been a substantial change in the infant mortality, the decline being from 129 per 1000 live births in 1971 to 80 in 1991. Below 5 mortality, has came down from 53 per 1000 children in 1970 to 35 in 1987. It is considered necessary to pay special attention to children, when they are 6 to 8 months old, since it is the time when they are likely to be more vulnerable to infections. Role of education and extension becomes very apparent in tackling these problems.
Birth weight of infants is an important indicator of the nutritional status of a society. It has a direct bearing on chances of survival of the child and this indirectly influences the adoption of family planning by couples. NIN has indicated that infants weighing less than 2.5 kilogram can be considered low birth weight and of the children born, as high as 30 percent fall in such category. However, from our practical experience in field, including ICDS, it seems that the standard of 2.5 kg. in Indian conditions for birth weight appear to be high and 2 Kg. seems to be nearer the average and only those with birth weight less than that may be considered as low birth weight babies. It is felt that focus and programmes should be on such babies.
Birth weight of infants also exhibits a pronounced relationship with the nutritional status of the mothers. As the Body Mass Index (BMI defined as weight in kg. divided by square of height in metres) of mothers increases, the mean birth weight of children was also increasing. The incidence of low birth weight babies was highest (53 percent) amongst the nutritionally poorest mothers falling in CED Grade III (BMI less than 16). It gradually declined and was only 14.7 percent amongst normal mothers (BMI 18.5 to 25). (NIN, 1993)
Infant morality, child morality, birth weights and overall nutritional status of children is closely linked with mothers nutritional status and this clearly brings out the relevance of tackling at risk children and mothers together, which a programme like ICDS should be able to do.
Child rearing practices also influence the nutritional and health status of both children and mothers. In India, child bearing begins early, with 8 percent births at age less than 18 years. On the average, there are 6/7 pregnancies of which there are 5/6 live births and 4/5 children survive. (Ready, Vinodini & others, 1992). Such early and heavy child rearing naturally affects the health & nutrition status of mothers & babies.
(ii) Life expectancy at birth
India has made steady progress in the matter of life expectancy, which indicates overall improvement in the health conditions of the people. It was 45 years during the decade ending 1971, 54 years in 1981 and 62 years in 1991. During the earlier decades, female life expectancy was less than male, but since 1981-86, the females are enjoying better life expectancy than males ( 59.1 years as compared to 58.1 years for males) and thus balancing to some extent, higher mortality rates among women. ( Reddy, Vinodini and others, 1992).
(iii) Nutritional status of adults
There is slight improvement in the nutritional status of adults as per NNMB data of the surveys done between 1975-79 and 1988-90. Adopting a BMI value less than 18.5 to indicate chronic energy deficiency (CED), it has been found that 42.1 percent of the adult males were normal during 1975-79 while their percentage increased to 48.4 during 1988-90. In case of female adults, the percentage of normal females declined marginally from 44.8 to 46.6 percent during the same period. However, in the severest category CED with BMI less than 16, the percentage improved both for male and female adults-declining from 11.4 to 8.8 percent in case of males and from 12.7 to 11.3 percent for females. (N.I.N., 1993). It has also been found that only 39.2 percent of the landless agricultural labourers were normal with 60.3 percent having CED. Cultivators and artisans had better nutritional status than the landless agricultural labourers but variation was not more than 15 percent.
6. MICRONUTRIENT DEFICIENCIES
(i) Vitamin A deficiency
Deficiency of Vitamin A in conjunction with Protein-Energy malnutrition is estimated to cause nutritional blindness amongst millions of children and "it has been estimated that around 60 thousand children get blind, "(NNP, 1993). Starting with no manifestation in infants, its prevalence increases with age with school age children from all income groups showing high incidence. Government of India has been implementing a Vitamin A prophylaxis programme whereunder children between 9 months and 3 years age are administered a massive dose of Vitamin-A every 6 months. However, the menace has also to be fought by educating and encouraging people to consume more of Vitamin-A rich foodstuffs, both vegetative and animal source. In a country like India, promotion of horticulture, kitchen-gardening and nutrition education can also play an important role.
(ii) Iron deficiency
Iron deficiency anaemia impairs physical work capacity, mental development and enhances maternal morbidity and mortality. It is widely prevalent, especially amongst pregnant women and children. In India, although the consumption of iron has been found to be above RDI levels, the inadequate and poor absorption of iron creates the problem. In case of pregnant women, if Haemoglobin levels below 11 g/dl in considered anaemic, as many as 87 percent would be anaemic. If, however, 7-9 g/dl are considered as normal, 46 percent pregnant woment will fall in this category. About 13% having less than 7 g/dl hemoglobin are very much at risk. Around 56 percent of pre school children have also been categorized by NIN as anaemic. National Anaemia Prophylaxis Programme, targeted on these vulnerable groups, and based on distribution of iron folate tablets has been in existence since 1970 and is being now given a new thrust. Efforts are also on to double fortify edible salt with iron also
besides iodine.
(iii) Iodine Deficiency
Prevalence of goitre and, even worse, cretinism due to iodine deficiency disorders in endemic form is another serious public health problem in India. Nearly 54 million persons are estimated to be suffering from goitre in known endemic areas covering entire Himalayan and sub-Himalayan belt. An ICMR survey (1989) of 14 districts in India recorded an overall goitre prevalence rate of 21 percent and cretinism rate of 0.7%, (NIN, 1993). "In these areas, apart from cretinism, children show varying degrees of thyroid deficiency and developmental defects. In villages of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, where goitre prevalence was high, deaf mutism, mental retardation and other clinically detectable problems of environmental iodine deficiency were found in 4 percent of the children." (Ready, Vinodini and others, NIN, Dec. 1992). Realizing the seriousness of the problem, Government of India has revamped the Iodine Deficiency Disorders control programme.
7. MATERNAL AND CHILD CARE
It hardly needs any emphasis that within the overall health services in a country, it is the extent and spread of maternal and child care that greatly influences the status of household food and nutrition security. The type of care received at child birth is often critical for the health and survival of both infant and mother. A significant proportion of neo-natal deaths is attributed to poor birth practices. During 1987, only about 32% of births in rural areas and 74% in urban areas were in institutions or attended to by a trained personnel. "Recent reports show that tetanus toxide immunization coverage is 77% for the pregnant women in India. Started in 1960 and boosted in the second half of 1980s by the Immunisation Mission, this intervention is picking up. The national average of tetanus toxide coverage however masks the variations between states ranging from 16% in Assam to 99% in Kerala". (Ready, Vinodini and others, NIN, 1992). Illegal abortions is yet another big
problem. A UNICEF report (1990) has estimated that only around half a million pregnancy terminations were performed through health services in the fiscal year 1987-88, which is around 9% of the induced abortions likely to have been performed. As far as family planning is concerned, the trends are not very encouraging. Present protection of couples by all methods is only 41%. The National Health Policy seeks to raise it to 60% by 2000 A.D.
Exclusive breast feeding of child up to at least 4 months is now being vigorously promoted. Lot of progress is yet to be made regarding timely and adequate supplementation with proper weaning food. Gender bias in breast feeding, weaning and supplementation practices, apportionment of quality food etc., reported by some experts and recent reports of foetal killings are also new areas to be tackled.
8. FEMALE LITERACY
It is often said that education is the source for all development. It's impact on food and nutritional well being of people cannot be ignored, Kerala being the shining example. Within education, it is the female literacy that is one of the very important indicators of food and nutrition security. Progress of literacy in India has been quite impressive, both for males and females. At the time of independence in 1947, the female literacy in India was just 6 percent. Now in 1991, it is 39.4 percent. However, the growth in female literacy has been lower than that for males. This needs to be corrected. There is also great variation among states in female literacy rates. It was as high as 79 percent in Kerala but between 20 to 32 percent in the four most populous and poor states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. A massive endeavour to improve female literacy rates, especially in states having very large populations and low rates, needs to he undertaken since
female literacy is known to have close correlation with early marriages, fertility rates, child mortality and even optimum use of food and nutrition already available at the household level. Literacy must include functional literacy and awareness building, without which optimal utilization of available resources and services is also not being achieved.
To sum up food security seems to have improved in India, both at the national and the household levels. The trends in consumption of energy and protein during the fifteen years covered by surveys conducted by NNMB, FNB and NSSO have been positive but modest. This progress, especially in consumption pattern of poorest households like landless agricultural labourers and in reduction in proportion of severely malnourished pre-school age children has been achieved in the face of burgeoning population. These surveys covered a period only up to 1988-90. A recent exercise undertaken by the Ministry of Agriculture (April. 1994) has indicated that because of an improvement in the availability of various food stuffs, including those from animal source where a major breakthrough seems to have been achieved, a comfortable picture is noticeable as far as availability of energy and protein is concerned. India can legitimately take pride in the fact that inspite of a history of famines and
16 to 18 million people being added to its already huge population, it has developed the capacity to ensure that no household is again required to face famines, widespread hunger and starvation. Whatever the data and their analysis may indicate, the fact remains that no manifestation of raw hunger and starvation is there since it just cannot go unnoticed in India with a press and host of political parties out to pull up the government at the very first opportunity. The food, at least of cereals, availability is thus, quite comfortable, even though poor households may have achieved this security at a certain social cost, like many children going to work rather than to schools; labourers being forced to work at wages less than statutory minimum wages; people having to migrate to agriculturally more prosperous states or to urban areas with all the attendant socio-health-sanitational problems; people having to work with no leisure; men women and children forced to work in
unhealthy and hazardous environment and so on. While these problems are receiving the attention of government at different levels, the fact remains that availability and consumption of at least staple diets and through them at least energy, appears quite satisfactory at this juncture. Unfortunately such an optimistic picture is not available when one looks at the nutritional well being of all the households. A nutritionally balanced diet is still a far cry for millions of poor families, their present income levels are too low to register their demands on agricultural sector and induce that sector, which still has tremendous untapped potential, produce all in food stuffs required. The policy options that emerge, very briefly could be:
- Rapid economic growth with steep rise in per capita incomes, backed by effective redistributive policies;
- A second green revolution in crops other than rice & wheat and in areas other than present ones;
- Maintaining and further increasing the tempo in growth of horticulture, animal husbandry and fisheries sectors.
- Special programmes for development of agro and fruit processing industries especially in States/areas with concentration of poverty;
- Technical education and development of human resources.
- Sharply focused and people-led and implemented employment generation and asset building programmes in rural areas;
- Legislation to safeguard interests of agricultural workers who form the hard core of poor in rural areas;
- Targeting of public distribution system to provide an effective safety net, only for identified poor households;
- Integration of nutrition programme with health and education;
- Higher investment on health care, especially maternal and child care as also on elementary education;
- Better utilisation of existing health and educational facilities through awareness development programmes;
- Sanitation and environmental improvement, essentially through people's own efforts;
- Expansion of training and extension in nutrition to achieve optimum use of available and easily producible food stuffs;
- Finally, and the most important, an effective population control programme.
India appears on the threshold, ready to move on to total food and nutrition security for all. First phase of battle against raw hunger is more or less won. The battle ahead is still more difficult; it must be waged with great resolve on the part of everybody concerned, including of course, the affected people themselves.
<title>Indian experience on household food and nutrition security</title>
<section>1</section>
References
References
Acharya, KCS, "Food Security System in India" Concept Publishing Co. New Delhi, 1983.
Alderman, Harold, "Food Subsidies & Poor", International Policy Research Institute (1991)
Bapna, S.L, "Options for Ensuring Household Food Security in India" Indian Instt. of Management, Ahmedabad, 1993.
Bhatia, B.M, "Food Security in South Asia", Oxford & IBH Publishing Co. New Delhi, 1985.
Bennett, Jon with Susan George, "The Hunger Machine", Polity Press, Cambridge U.K., 1985.
Bagchi, Kalyan, "The IDD problem in India and its Management", Technical papers, Seminar on IDD.
Chakravarty, Sukhamoy, "Development Planning: The Indian Experience, "Oxford University Press, New York, 1988.
Dantwala, M.L, "Agricultural policy: Prices and Public Distribution System - A Review", Indian Journal of Agri, Economists, April - June 1993.
FAO/WHO, "Declaration and Plan of Action adopted at International Conference on Nutrition", Rome, 1992.
FAO, "The State of Food & Agriculture", 1992.
FAO, "Food Nutrition and Agriculture Newsletter," Vol. 2 1992.
Food & Nutrition Board, Govt, of India. "Proceedings of National Workshop on Dietary and Nutritional Guidelines", 4-6 Oct. 1989 New Delhi.
Gittinger, Leslie & Hosington, Ed. "Food Policy: Integrating Supply. Distribution and Consumption", The Johns Hopkins University Press, Maryland USA, 1987.
ICMR "Towards the Implementation of National Nutrition Policy," Report of National Seminar, New Delhi, 1986.
ICMR, "Report of Committee on Dietary Allowances" New Delhi, 1990.
International Wheat Council, Trade Report No. 214, "London, 1994.
Khan, Dr. (Mrs.) Sakiya, "Poverty & Nutrition Levels of the Rural Population in Assam," Guwhati University.
Kumar, Surendra, "JRY in Rajasthan", Unpublished.
Lappe, Fances Moore & Collins. Joseph, "World Hunger: Twelve Myths", Earthscan Publications, London.
Maithani B.P, "Poverty alleviation through Growth: Policy Option for N.E. India," unpub paper, 1993.
Mahendra Dev & Suryanarayan, MH, "Is PDS Urban Biased and Pro Rich," Econ & Pol, Weekly, October 12, 1991.
Mongia J.N., Ed, "India's Economic Development Strategies 1951 - 2000 AD," Allied Publishers, New Delhi, 1986.
Ministry of Rural Development, "Approach: Eighth Five Year Plan".
Ministry of Health & FW, Govt, of India "Iodine Deficiency Disorder Control Programme India", July, 1993.
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Annual Report, 1993-94.
Ministry of Food, Govt. of India "Country Paper for Joint FAD/WHO International Conference Nutrition 1991.
Ministry of Food, Govt. of India, Annual Report 1993 - 94.
Ministry of Food, Govt. of India, Sectoral review of ICN Declaration and Plan Action.
Ministry of Agriculture, Govt. of India, 'Agricultural Statistics at a Glance, May 1992.
Ministry of Agriculture, Govt. of India, Food Statistics, 1991.
Ministry of HRD, Deptt. of Women & Child Dev, Govt. of India, Annual Report 1993-94.
Ministry of HRD, Deptt. of Women & Child Dev, National Nutrition Policy (NNP) 1993.
Ministry of HRD, Deptt. of Women & Child Dev, Govt. of India "Update on Mircro nutrient": paper presented by Dr. (Smt.) Ramachandran, New Delhi Sept, 2-3, 1993.
Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India, Economic Survey 1993-94.
Ministry of Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs & PD "Report of the Committee of Ministers on National Policy on PDS" New Delhi July 1993.
Ministry of Civil Supplies, "Background Paper on RPDS for Advisory Council," New Delhi, 1994.
Ministry of Agriculture, "Report of Working Group on Foodgrains Requirements by the year 2000 AD," New Delhi April 1994.
Nawani N.P, "Price Policy for Wheat & Current Scenario," Yojna, Planning Commission, June-July 1994.
Nawani N.P, "Food Security & Role of PDS - Inclusive of a Study in UP Hills, Unpublished, (1993).
National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), NNMB "Report on Repeat Surveys (1988-90)" Hyderabad, 1991.
NIN, "Integrated Child Dev, Services: Status Appraisal in Four States" Hyderabad, 1992.
NIN, "Nutrition Trends in India", Hyderabad, 1993.
Nehru, J.L, "Discovery of India", Modern Book Depot Ltd. London 1946.
Parikh, Kirit, "Who gets how much from PDS: How Effectively does it reach th Poor", Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research," Bombay, 1993.
Planning Commission, "Report of Expert Group on Estimation of Proportion & Number of
Poor", New Delhi, July, 1993.
Reddy, Vinodini (Dr.), Shekar, Meera, Rao, Prahlad & Gillespie, Stuart, "Nutrition in India", NIN, Hyderabad Dec. 1992.
Roy, Sunando, "Public Distribution of Cereals", Econ, & Pol, Weekly, June 6 1992.
Radhakrishna, R and Hanumantha Rao.K, "Food Security and PDS"
Sen, Amartya "Poverty & Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation", Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1981.
Sharma, R.P, "Monitoring Access to Food and Household Food Security", Paper presented at FAO Committees on World Food Security, 17th Session Rome, March 23-27 1992.
Sahay, "Unemployment: Problems and Propaganda", Hindusthan Times daily, New Delhi, 14 June 1994.
Singhvi, Vir "The Human Touch", Sunday Weekly, Calcutta, 28 May - 4 JUne 1994.
Timmer, C. Peter, "Getting Prices Right: The Scale and Limits of Agricultural Price Policy", Cornell University Press, London U.K, 1986.
Tyagi, DS & Vyas V.S. Ed, "Increasing Access to Food: An Asian Experience", Sage Publication New Delhi 1992.
UNICEF, "Children and Women in India": Situation Analysis New Delhi.
Venugopal, K.R, "Deliverance from Hunger - PDS in India", New Delhi, 1993.
World Bank, "India 1991: Country Economic Memorandum Vo. II", April 29, 1991.
WHO etc. "Ending Hidden Hunger", Proceedings of Conference Foreword by prof. Ramalingaswamy, Montreal. Canada Oct. 10-12 1991.
<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
India is often called a sub-continent because of its size and population, but it is much more complex than a sub-continent. The religious, linguistic and cultural diversity amongst its 900 million people is truly mind-boggling. Apart from the birth place of Hinduism and Buddhism, it has people from almost all the religions of the world. It has the second largest Muslim population in the world and some of its states are predominantly Christian. There are 18 languages recognised by the Indian constitution and there are hundreds of other languages and directs. India's cultural diversity needs hardly any mention. Above all, it is a highly vibrant democracy with a vigorous free press. Policies have to, therefore, take into consideration pulls and pressures from various quarters. While this makes it difficult to take decisions which are perceived to have potential for creating controversies, it also allows non-optimum use of available resources. Population control policies or
targetisation of public distribution system are some of the examples, even though these and such other policies have serious implications for household food security. The continuing population explosion is marginalising all the socio-economic development achieved by the country and nowhere it is reflected as prominently as in the case of removal of poverty.
In a country of the size and complexities like India, having low per capita incomes and around 60 million households living below poverty line (defined in terms of certain minimum calorie intake), it is necessary to first remove the spectre of famines, raw hunger and starvation altogether, then move to food security for all households and finally achieve total food and nutrition security for all, which only will enable each and every individual to lead an active and healthy life and attain his or her full potential.
In this presentation, more emphasis has been, therefore, given to production, availability and consumption of cereals, which are known to contribute around 70 percent of the energy and protein requirement and which happen to be the first objective to be attained by a poor household. The production, availability and consumption of pulses and other foodstuffs as also all the nutrients has also been examined to see the position of availability of staple and balanced diets. The concept of food security, the global scenario, the norms against which consumption of food and nutrition is to be examined and the evolution of food policy has, of course, proceeded such examination, as a brief discussion of these was felt necessary to put things in correct perspective. Since poverty is central to food and nutrition 'insecurity' and unemployment and lack of assets breeds poverty, these issues and programmes to alleviate poverty have also been discussed in some detail. In India, public
distribution system has played a great role in substantially improving the household food security and logically a detailed examination of this programme as also needed reforms also merited attention. Programmes that attack malnutrition directly have also been examined. A chapter has been devoted to examine the consumption of cereals, pulses, other foodstuffs as also the trends in consumption of these and intake of all nutrients. The available data has been examined both at macro level, as also to find out the disaggregated picture in various states and for various income groups. I must confess that while undertaking this exercise, I have viewed the food and nutrition security scenario in India through the eyes of a practicing administrator and it may, therefore, fall short of the expectations of nutrition experts. I do, however, hope that readers will find this work useful in its own way.
As brought out in the concluding chapter, India seems to have achieved a fairly high degree of food security, at least if limited to staple food. The spurt in foodgrains production and its stability at the fairly high levels has resulted in almost cent percent satisfaction levels when requirement and availability of cereals are compared. A breakthrough also seem to have been achieved in the production of milk, eggs, fish etc. The biggest achievement lies in banishing famines and hunger and development of capacity to fully meet any fluctuations due to droughts and natural calamities. The way the challenge posed by the 1987 drought, considered one of the severeest in the century, was met, illustrates this. It is also creditable that inspite of burgeoning population, the nutritional status of people has not only been maintained but there has been substantial improvement in nutritional status of severely malnourished pre-school age children. India seems to have won the first
phase of battle against hunger and undernourishment but the second phase of battle will be a much bigger challenge; that of assuring a healthy and active life for all households and for every member within the household.
I am extremely grateful to the Asia Pacific Regional Office of the FAD-UN for offering me this opportunity and allowing me to gainfully utilize the five year's experience I acquired in managing the food economy of the country as Joint Secretary in the Union Ministry of Food at New Delhi. Of course, writing this has been, in itself, a great learning process for me because nutritional well being of people is a highly complex subject with cross linkages and underlying influences amongst almost all the sectors of the socio-economic development of the country. I had to rely very much on the data and information available in various Ministries, Departments and Institutions. As far as consumption data is concerned, I depended heavily on the surveys conducted by the National Nutrition Monitaring Bureau (NNMB). The data on monthly consumer expenditure, collected by the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) was also utilized. The information regarding production and availability
of various foodstuffs was obtained from the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Food and their specialised divisions. I visited NIN and would like to place on record my profound gratitude to Dr. (Mrs.) Vinodini Reddy, the Director and her colleagues with whom I had long discussions over two days. I also visited some areas in western and hilly regions of Uttar Pradesh and some villages of nearby Haryana to update my earlier, field experience. A visit to desert areas around Jaisalmare in Rajasthan turned out to be very informative as far as working of the Revamped Public Distribution System was concerned. I am also grateful to a number of officers in Ministries of Food, Agriculture, Rural Development and Health and Family Welfare as also of the Food Corporation of India and the Central Warehousing Corporation who spared their time to discuss various issues having a bearing on their respective organisations and also for allowing me access to their libraries. My grateful thanks
are also due to many friends, whom I am unable to mention individually due to their numbers, in government, universities and institutions for frank discussions and exchange of views. It will not be fair if I do not mention the contribution made by my daughter, Swati, who with her computer expertise, helped me in researching and analysing the literature and data and also extended various other assistance.
August, 1994
N.P. Nawani
