<title>My very own. Training manual micro-enterprise development for project officers and field workers</title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
This Manual has been developed as a cooperative effort between FAO and China's WPD local project officers. In an attempt to develop a suitable and usable tool for training, the process of work went through three stages. The first stage was when FAO trained Core Facilitators in 1993. The output of this training was a draft Manual. Those trained used this draft Manual to train other project personnel in their respective provinces and counties. Based on the experience of Core Facilitators in the use of the first draft, FAO developed a second draft. This was used for refresher training of Core Facilitators as well as in "echo training" by these Core Facilitators for township project personnel. As a result of experience from these training activities, modifications were made and incorporated into this third and final version. This final version was then used to train project personnel from all 35 counties.
Since the training is heavily participative, this Manual in effect is the result of the modifications which the Core Facilitators and field workers have contributed as FAO finalized this version of the Manual. A note of thanks therefore goes to the Core Facilitators: Lan Xiu Hua, An Guo Dong, Bai Zhan QI, Zheng You Mei, Wu Qi Ji, Deng Yun Ping, Liang Yan Chao and Zhang Zhi Feng.
Special thanks also goes to five persons who besides the Core Facilitators and field workers drafted the original and the enhanced versions at various stages. Mr. Ramon Yedra, an FAO consultant assisted in the first and last stages of this work. Ms. Cora Bakker, United Nations Volunteer serving in FAO has been instrumental in the processing of the results of work at various stages; redrafting at various stages and the write-up of the final version of this Manual. Mr. Andrew Adzic of UNFPA helped in documenting the process and changes at the first workshop for Core Trainers. Mr. Fang Jia Wen translated the English versions to the Chinese language. Ms. Song Jing provided secretarial support.
<section>2</section>
A note on how to use this manual
A note on how to use this manual
I. Main Body of the Manual
The main body of the Manual is organized into Modules. For each of the 5 modules there are four major parts:
1. Rationale and Objectives
The description of the rationale and objectives of the Module are for the facilitator to have a clear focus on the major objectives of the Module, Topics and Activities. This will help the facilitator in preparing for the topics and to put the content in context.
2. Outline of the Workshop Sessions
This consists of the Steps and the major Pointers in facilitating the content of the topics and activities. Reference is made to the Visual Aids, Cases and Standard Tools to be used in the activity.
3. Visual Aids
The Visual Aids for the Module are put together at the end of the Outline. Facilitator should prepare these on newsprint before each session.
4. Cases
The Cases are for participants to practice what they have learned. Note that there are two parts in the Cases namely: task and outputs.
II. Standard Tools for Field Workers and Women's Groups
Manual standard tools for field workers and women's groups are to be found in the Annexes. These standard tools are the Field workers' essential tools when they assist members of women's groups. During the workshop, participants should therefore make sure that they have a good understanding of these tools and on how to use them. These standard tools are the following:
1. Work Sheets for Field Workers
These include work sheets for project viability assessment, cash record, income statement and the field workers' report of the monitoring visits.
2. Business Plan Forms
The Business Plan Forms are an important tool for field workers and group members for feasibility studies purposes.
3. Group Financial Records
This is a sample of the records women's groups need for their financial administration of their savings and loans operations.
4. Loan Application Forms and Agreements
These forms and agreements are samples to be used by project management, field workers and women's groups. They form a part of the required control system in the management of the project revolving funds.
III. Evaluation Forms
The Manual Evaluation Forms for each Module are found in the last section of the Manual. Facilitators are advised to have participants fill up these forms at the end of each Module.
IV. The Workbook
The workshop has been designed in such a way as to have few lectures but many opportunities for experience sharing, simulation and other exercises with the use of case studies and other output-oriented tasks. The workbook for participants contains all the cases, exercises and tools. Participants learn through "doing and thinking" rather than through "listening and reading". The Manual proper contains the "answers" and "important pointers" as guide for Facilitators. It is therefore important that participants are not "spoon-fed" with these "answers" and "important pointers". The Manual should therefore not be given to participants until after completion of the workshop. The workbook in the Chinese version is found in the last section of the Manual. The English version contains only a table of content of the workbook.
<section>3</section>
Introduction
Introduction
A Perspective
Women's Groups play an important role within, the village economy through the micro-enterprises members engage in. Once women realize their own potentials, they are able to raise their own resources and develop the capacity to manage external resources as well. Through the Women, Population and Development Programme, rural women proved that they can manage loans from external sources, such as those provided through the project revolving fund. Women themselves are determined to address common weaknesses and constraints of their micro-enterprises. They are able to take risks and adopt innovative approaches in problem-solving. In certain instances, after two years of membership in Women's Groups, they were able to build up enough business skills and confidence to source their capital requirements from local banks.
But often times we hear remarks like "the poor will not be able to repay... they do not know how to manage their business.... they are used to hand outs... etc..."
Our experience in this Women Population and Development (WPD) Programme of China, does not validate the above remarks. On the contrary we have found that the poor can be accountable and actually repay their debts. They have good instincts about business and are realistic in gaging risks according to their estimate of their own capacity. They would rather determine and decide on resources they need rasher then outsiders determine this for them. They have a sense of pride in being able to achieve their own goals which they themselves determine.
Rural poor women engage in micro-enterprise activities which start as small household activities like vegetable gardening or raising a small number of small animals like pigs and chickens. Lack of cash for investment and the need to take care of their household tasks as well as the farm are among the major limiting factors why they are not able to expand their operation. When credit facilities are made available, they generally opt to either expand their existing micro-enterprise operation or engage in a new area of business.
As a component of the WPD programme, the development of women's own chosen micro-enterprise is an important component. Meeting subsistence needs is the most urgent preoccupation of the poor before they can entertain other options.
Engaging in micro-enterprise is not only improving the women's economic position, but it also provides the women an opportunity to improve their skills in business. "Small victories" against their reticence or lack of confidence serve as building blocks towards regaining control of their own lives.
When women realize their own strengths and potentials and when they realize that they need to operate as a group to consolidate their resources, the first risk they take is to mobilize their own resources. This risk comes in the form of savings mobilization in a disciplined process. As they lend out to one another what they have saved as a group, they are again taking a risk on one another. When women choose a micro-enterprise to engage in, they are deciding to take another risk. These decisions are the next building blocks toward regaining control of their own lives. The consequence of these decisions are solely theirs whether the result is success or failure. The development of their own policies and procedures, managing themselves as an organization, the operation of their savings and loan fund, the identification of the micro-enterprise, the planning, the management and control of their chosen micro-enterprise enhance their skills as well as their sense of confidence in
themselves. As a consequence, they achieve an increasing level of a sense of control over their own lives. In short, micro-enterprise development is Important for the empowerment process to occur.
Field workers need both the positive attitude and skills to assist groups in the various phases of development of the group and women's micro-enterprises. Field workers assist groups through training in group formation, development of their organizational policies and procedures, the operation of their savings and loan fund as well as in the process of tapping from the project revolving fund.
Women Population and Development Programme (WPD) Manuals
The Women Population and Development Programme has developed a series of Manuals. There is a separate Manual for Group Formation For Rural Women. This Manual addresses areas of value clarification and change; mechanics of organization; basic elements in the establishment of micro-enterprise, and action planning.
Micro-Enterprise Development Manual
The Manual on Micro-enterprise Development focuses more deeply on the requirements of micro-enterprise development; the use of the revolving fund and the group savings fund.
Project personnel et county and township levels need to provide three major types of assistance for Women's Groups, namely: (a) development of policies and procedures for savings and loan operations as well as the management of the group capital fund (sourced from the group savings and loan operations and their loan from the project revolving fund); (b) at the inception stage in assisting individual women in developing a feasible business plan; (c) follow through assistance during the women's micro-enterprise operation.
No previous education in micro-enterprise economics is required for participants in the training where this Manual will be used. Although primarily developed for training of county and township level personnel, with little modification the Manual can be used for training of women group members.
The training methodology used is highly participative, meaning that few lectures are utilized. Rather a problem-solving methodology is applied using case studies, exercises and group work. The Manual has five major content areas.
The first Module focuses on the role of micro-enterprise development as a mea . to achieve group goals, major among which is to improve women's status and self reliance. The following concepts are dealt with: the fundamentals of what a business is and the characteristics of micro-enterprise: the role of micro-enterprise in the WPD programme; elements which leads to success or failure of a business: the major weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs and finally identification of the major areas of needed project assistance.
The second Module deals with the required attitude, knowledge end skills for business planning. The tools, the basic information required and the financial indicators for preparation and assessment of business plans anti loan applications are discussed. What trainees would have learned are then applied. Trainees are given an opportunity to work with village women entrepreneurs to develop an actual Business Plan. It may be noted that part of the Field Workers' responsibility is to assess funding proposals from members of the women's groups.
The third Module deals with the needed attitude, knowledge and skills in performing the Field Worker's task of providing technical assistance during the operational phase of the women's micro-enterprise operations. This is what project implementors call the "follow thorough" phase. Emphasis has been placed on the preparation and interpretation of business records. since we have observed that there is an absence or poor quality of business records among micro-entrepreneurs.
The fourth Module deals with fund utilization and management both at project and women's group level. Although the Manual on Group Formation for Rural Women deals with the importance of savings mobilization and utilization for self reliance, this aspect is given further emphasis in this Module. The relationship between the savings fund and the project revolving fund is addressed; how these funds need to be managed and controlled; the preparation and processing of loan applications from the women's groups; how to monitor loan utilization; and the establishment and maintenance of the required record systems.
The fifth Module deals with a review of the Field Worker's tasks and the development of a training plan for "echo" training in their respective counties after returning to their respective duty stations.
<section>4</section>
Training orientation
Activity 1: Introduction of participants and facilitators
Activity 2: Expectation setting
Activity 3: Training design and schedule
Annex 1. Visual aids: T-1 Training design
Training orientation
Introduction
All Facilitators and participants in this workshop have been designated to serve in the Women Population and Development project in their respective counties and have the following tasks:
 assist women in setting up and running their micro-enterprises;
 assist women's groups in managing their savings and loan operations;
 assist women's groups in applying for loans funded from the project revolving fund;
 assess women's group applications for project loans;
 management of the project revolving fund.
The major objective of this training is to equip participants with the tools, knowledge, attitude and skills required to perform these tasks. Whereas some basic knowledge could be acquired through lectures, the workshop methodology primarily encourages experience sharing. The purpose of this use of methodology is not just for knowledge and skills acquisition but to provide participants the opportunity to acquire positive attitudes and values which they will need for their work with rural women.
The training orientation consists of three parts namely (a) introduction of participants; (b) expectation setting; (c) presentation of the training design and schedule.
Output Objectives
By the end of the training orientation, participants will have:
1. Learned each other's name and acquired some understanding of each person's background and specific skills applicable to workshop content areas.
2. Agreed on learning/training objectives, methodologies, content areas and schedule.
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, thick felt tip pens.
Activity 1: Introduction of participants and facilitators
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator starts this session by explaining that Facilitators and participants in this workshop serve the WPD project and have shared tasks in assisting rural women, particularly through women's groups, with regard to the development of their micro-enterprises and their savings and loan operation. Participants may have varied educational background and working experience. Knowing each other's background will facilitate experience sharing and fruitful cooperation in this workshop, just as this sharing would when field workers conduct workshops among rural women. We therefore go through this exercise, not only for ourselves in this workshop, but that we would be doing the same when we assist women's groups.
2. Facilitator then asks each participant and co-facilitator to introduce themselves: name, where from, position in project and specifics on educational background and working experience with relevance to the workshop.
3. After the introductions, Facilitator thanks the participants for their cooperation.
Activity 2: Expectation setting
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator writes the following two questions on the blackboard and asks participants to answer:
1.1. What do you want/need to learn in this workshop?
1.2. What other expectations do you have, e.g. regarding the Facilitator, the methodology, cooperation between Facilitator and group, logistics, etc.
2. Divide the participants into sub-groups of about 5 persons and give 10 minutes to discuss the questions and to write the answers on newsprint.
3. Each sub-group is asked to present its output.
4. Facilitator reviews participant learning objectives (output to Question I ) and informs participants whether their concerns will be covered in this training (some participant objectives may not necessarily be addressed in this workshop).
The general objectives of the training are for participants to have acquired the knowledge, skills and attitude on:
a. The role of micro-enterprise development as a means to improve the status of women;
b. The role of project officers in assisting women micro-entrepreneurs;
c. Micro-enterprise planning and assessment;
d. Micro-enterprise management;
e. Fund utilization and management (group and project level).
5. Step No. 4 is repeated for the other expectations (output to Question 2).
Activity 3: Training design and schedule
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. The Facilitator the Training Design on newsprint. Use Visual Aid Tel.
Visual Aid T-1 Training Design
2. Facilitator briefly explains the consent of each module, the output and the methodology. Since this is a skills training and all participants have at least some experience in the project and with micro-enterprise development there will be few lectures and many opportunities for experience sharing and practicing through exercises and case study analysis.
3. Facilitator asks participants for questions and comments.
4. Facilitator distributes the Workbook to each participant She explains to the participants that this contains the exercises and cases as well as the tools and forms which will be needed in this workshop. Participants will be guided by the Facilitator in the use of this Workbook as the workshop progresses.
Annex 1. Visual aids: T-1 Training design
Visual Aid Training Design
MODULE 1
MODULE 2
MODULE 3
MODULE 4
MODULE 5
Concept Building and Role Identification
Micro-Enterprise Planning and Assessment
Micro-Enterprise Management
Fund Utilization and Management
Action Planning and Evaluation
Topics
Topic 1 Concept of Micro-Enterprise
Topic 1 Financial Indicators
Topic 1: Management areas, skills, And tools
Topic 1: Fund Utilization and Management in Women's Group
Topic: Action Planning
 Defining Business
 Defining Micro-Enterprise
 Role ME in WPD Project
 Introduction to Business Planning
 Net Cash Income
 Net Profit
 Risk Analysis
 Cash Flow
 Introduction to ME Management
 Introduction to Financial Records
 Preparation and Reading of Financial Records
 Importance of Savings Mobilization and Utilization
 Group Financial Records
 Monitoring of Group Savings and Loans Operations
 Role Delineation
 Training Plan
Topic 2 Causes of Success or Failure of a ME
Topic 2 Business Plan Preparation and Assessment
Topic 2 Systematic Financial Analysis and Diagnosis
Topic 2 Project Revolving Fund Management
Topic 2 Evaluation
 Business Cycle and Aspects
 Factors affecting the Success of a Business
 Key Elements of a Business Plan
 Introduction of Tools for Business Planning
 Practicum Business Planning
 Financial Analysis and Diagnosis
 Options for the Entrepreneur
 Policies and Procedures of Revolving Fund
 Planning Disbursements of Loans to Women's Groups
 Preparation and Procedures of Loan Applications
 Evaluation
Topic 3 Role Identifications in ME Development
 Common Weaknesses and Constraints of ME
 Role of Project Officers in assisting ME
Methology
Workshop, Cases, Lecturette
Cases, Exercises, Workshop
Exercises, Cases, Workshop, Lecturette
Cases, Lecturettes, Workshop
Workshop
Outputs
Clear concept of ME, its role in project, areas of needed assistance by project officers.
Able to prepare, explain and assess
Business Plans
Able to effectively monitor ME and advise micro-entrepreneur
Understanding role of funds and elements in fund management
Defined follow through action training evaluated
Time Frame
1 day
1 day
1 day
1 day
 day
<section>5</section>
Module 1: Concept building and role identification
Topic 1: Concept of micro-enterprise
Activity 1: Defining business
Activity: 2: Defining micro-enterprise
Activity 3: The role of micro-enterprise development in the WPD project
Topic 2: Causes of success or failure of a micro-enterprise
Activity 1 : Business cycle and aspects
Activity 2 : Case study analysis
Topic 3: Role Identification in micro-enterprise development
Activity 1: Common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs
Activity 2: Role of project officers in assisting micro-entrepreneurs
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-1 Characteristics of micro-enterprise
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-2 Roots, indications and consequences of women's low status
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-3 The business cycle
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-4 Factors affecting the success or failure of business
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-5 Common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-6 Type of project assistance for micro-entrepreneurs
Annex 1. Case: 1-1 Lin's cabbage garden
Annex 2. Case: 1-2 Xie Feng Yun's tea processing project
Annex 2. Case: 1-3 Pai Lou grocery shop
Annex 2. Case: 1-4 Ms. Yuan Wang Ti's tobacco production project
Module 1: Concept building and role identification
INTRODUCTION
Module 1 addresses important basic concepts about micro-enterprises, micro-enterprise development, the place of micro-enterprise development within the broader development framework of the Women, Population end Development Project, end the role of project officers in micro-enterprise development.
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES
At the end of Module I, participants will be able:
1. To understand the role of micro-enterprise development within the broader context of the objectives of the WPD project.
2. To identify the characteristics of micro-enterprises and the types of enterprises.
3. To identify the causes of success/failure of micro-enterprises.
4. To identify the common weaknesses and constrains of micro-entrepreneurs.
5. To identify the proper roles of their project office in micro-enterprise development.
Topic 1: Concept of micro-enterprise
Background and Rationale
The Women, Population and Development (WPD) project aims at improving the status of women through income generating activities and social development activities. Income generating activities therefore are not an end in itself, but a means to achieve the overall goal of improved status of women. This implies that the project supports those income generating activities which contribute most to improving women's status, namely micro-enterprises.
For participants to be able to provide effective guidance for women and women's groups in identification, development and maintenance of micro-enterprises a clear understanding is needed of what a micro-enterprise is, and what the role of micro-enterprise development is in the context of the WPD project.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to:
1. Define what a business is and distinguish the different types of business;
2. Analyze the characteristics of a micro-enterprise;
3. Analyze the importance of micro-enterprise development in achieving the broader development goal of improving the status of women.
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, thick felt tip pens
Activity 1: Defining business
Time: 45 minutes
Steps:
1. The facilitator asks the participants to give examples of businesses and poses the question "what is a business?"
2. The facilitator writes the examples provided by the participants on newsprint and asks "What is it that makes each of these a business?".
3. The facilitator will respond to the answers of the participants and gradually arrive at a definition by discussion, accepting or rejecting components of their definition.
4. The facilitator then asks the group to name the 4 different types of business. The examples on newsprint are categorized and the main characteristics of each type of business are discussed.
Important Points
 A business is "any venture which involves production of goods and/or services to obtain profit".
 The four types of business in rural areas are:
a. Production: producing goods for selling, e.g. tobacco growing, sheep raising
b. Processing/manufacturing: converting raw materials into finished product, e.g. processing wheat into flower
c. Trading: buying and selling of the same product(s), e.g. grocery shop, market stall
d. Services: main line of business is providing a service e.g. barber shop, transportation.
Activity: 2: Defining micro-enterprise
Time : 45 minutes
Steps :
1. Facilitator asks participants to break into sub-groups of about 5 persons to list at least 5 characteristics of a micro-enterprise
2. Groups have 20 minutes to discuss and write up responses on newsprint before presenting the findings to the whole group.
3. Facilitator discusses group outputs and explains which characteristics are correct.
Visual Aid 1-1 Characteristics of Micro Enterprise
4. Facilitator summarizes the session by presenting Visual Aid 1-1 and emphasizes the important points below.
Important Points
 Although capital requirements of a micro-enterprise may be low, to the poor it is high. Therefore, the risk of undertaking micro-enterprise is not low. For the poor it is very hard to recover from failure of the micro-enterprise.
 The main differences between micro-enterprises and other enterprises (such as township enterprises) are:
- level of capitalization
- number of people involved
- ownership: for micro-enterprises the owner is likewise the manager and worker
Activity 3: The role of micro-enterprise development in the WPD project
Time: 1.5 hours
Steps:
1. Facilitator asks the question "What is the goal of the WPD project" and participants are invited to answer.
2. Facilitator states the title of the project: "improving the Socio-economic Status of Women through Income generating and Social Development Activities". This implies that women's engagement in income generating activities is not the final goal of the project, but a means to achieve the broader project goal of improving the status of women.
3. Facilitator explains that project loans for women's groups is intended to enable women to start or to expand their own micro-enterprises. For our work as project officers it is important that we understand why we focus on micro-enterprises and not on other enterprises such as village and township enterprises.
4. Facilitator asks sub-groups to discuss what the root causes of women's low status are ( 10 minutes) and to present the findings on newsprint.
5. After discussing the group outputs, Facilitator puts Visual Aid 1-2 (Roots, Indications and Consequences of Women's low Status) on the wall next to Visual Aid 1-1 (Characteristics of Micro-enterprise) and asks participants to discuss the following Questions for 15 minutes:
"How does engaging in micro-enterprise by women contribute to improving their status? Which root causes for low status are addressed and how?"
6. Each sub-group reports the findings and the facilitator summarizes, using the important points below.
Important Points
 Traditional thinking and culture of dependence are two root causes of low status of women. Major characteristics of a micro-enterprise are that it is self-initiated and self-managed. By encouraging women to engage in micro-enterprise, we encourage initiative, risk taking, making their own decisions and earn their own income. Because all these undertakings are done through their own initiatives, women have a more direct opportunity to experience more independent thinking, they gain more self confidence and self reliance. They are able to participate in socio-economic activities in their communities.
 Limited technical, literacy and business skills are other major reasons for low status of women. Micro-enterprises undertaking requires relatively simple technology and management. When they engage in micro-enterprise women can gradually improve their skills.
 Women have a high burden and sometimes many children. Micro-enterprises usually are household based and women can choose an enterprise which they can combine with their other chores. When women engage in business their desire for more children usually diminishes. A value change occurs whereby women would rather provide better education, nutrition, etc. to fewer children than having many children.
 Employment in other enterprises (e.g. township enterprises) would not contribute as much to improving women's status, because women would be employees rather than managers. Except for technical skills and earning their own income, women are not provided the opportunity to exercise initiatives and are not generally personally accountable for the over-all success of the business. As a consequence, they are not able to experience the personal changes which have been enumerated above.
7. Facilitator then asks sub-groups to discuss why forming women's groups as a self: reliance strategy are important for the women entrepreneurs.
8. Sub-groups discuss for 10 minutes and report. Facilitator summarizes the outputs. using the important points below.
Important Points
 Lack of funds is an obstacle for women to develop micro-enterprises. As a group, women can mobilize resources through savings from which members can borrow for micro-enterprise development. Project loans to the group augment their own funds.
 Group members can study together and share experiences, e.g. on technical and financial matters, market information, etc. Through these group activities member's skills improve faster and to a higher extent.
 As a group, micro-entrepreneurs can be more organized and can use group strength in addressing constraints. For example, the group can arrange training, can buy inputs or run facilities together, can negotiate with buyers, mobilize support from village leaders, etc.
Topic 2: Causes of success or failure of a micro-enterprise
Background and Rationale
In general, the poor cannot take unnecessary risks. Their resources and condition are such that they do not have enough to be able to incur losses. If their venture fails, they lose more than their material resources. It erodes their self-confidence. Furthermore, the poor have some kind of distrust of external assistance. When they fail in projects with external assistance, this could reinforces their lack of confidence in external agents. The field worker therefore has a great obligation that sufficient safeguards are provided so that success and not failure results in women's micro-enterprise undertaking.
This topic gives the participants an opportunity to examine the factors contributing to success or failure of a micro-enterprise.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to:
1. Understand the stages in micro-enterprise development
2. Analyze case studies of typical micro-enterprises and identify the critical aspects of micro-enterprises
3. Distinguish external and internal factors affecting the success of a business
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, thick felt, tip pens
Activity 1 : Business cycle and aspects
Time: 60 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by saying that the resources and conditions of the women who participate in the WPD project are such that they do not have enough to be able to incur losses. If their venture fails, they lose more than their material resources. It erodes their self-confidence and they will even be more dependent on others than before. The field worker therefore has to make sure that sufficient safeguards are provided so that success and not failure results. Providing capital funds alone is not enough. To be able to provide adequate assistance we need to have a thorough understanding of the factors that cause success or failure of a micro-enterprise. These will be discussed in this topic. In the next topic we will discuss the tasks which field workers need to undertake to help rural women entrepreneur succeed in their micro-enterprises undertaking.
2. Facilitator continues and says that first we will refresh our knowledge on this topic through a short discussion about Lin's Cabbage Garden (Manual Group Formation, Module 3).
3. Facilitator forms sub-groups of about 5 persons and reads the case study.
Case 1-1 Lin's Cabbage Garden
Tasks
4. Facilitator asks the sub-groups to discuss the following questions (15 minutes):
a. Is Lin's business successful?
b. If so, what are the factors which contributed to her success?
c. Does the undertaking contribute to more self-reliance?
5. Sub-groups report results of their discussion.
Case 1-1 Lin's Cabbage Garden
Output
6. Facilitator then presents Visual Aid 1-3 to explain the business cycle. In explaining the four aspects of business (production, marketing, management, financial) facilitator asks participants to categorize their outputs of the case. E.g. Lin keeps financial records under the financial aspect. In explaining the stages in business (planning, implementation, evaluation), facilitator asks again to categorize the outputs, e. g. Lin keeps financial records under the implementation stage.
Visual Aid 1-3 The Business Cycle
Activity 2 : Case study analysis
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator puts a newsprint with Visual Aid 1-4 on the wall and explains the meaning of external and internal factors affecting the success or failure of a micro-enterprise.
a. Internal factors are those that are within the control of the entrepreneur. These include the knowledge, skills, attitude and resources of the entrepreneur. If the factors contribute to the success of the project they are called "strengths" or positive internal factors. When internal factors are an obstacle to success, they are called "weaknesses" or negative internal factors.
b. External factors are those that are outside the control of the entrepreneur. These include the market situation, economic situation of the community, the weather, etc. External factors that contribute to the success of the project are called "opportunities" or positive external factors. When external factors may become obstacles to the success of the project they are called "constraints".
2. In order to check whether the meaning of external and internal factors is clear, facilitator refers to the format of Visual Aid 1-4 and asks participants to classify the outputs of Case 1-1 (Lin's Cabbage Garden), e.g. is Lin's financial record keeping a strength, weakness, opportunity or constraint?
3. Participants then are asked to break into sub-groups to analyze a case (Facilitator chooses from Case 1-3, 1-4, 1-5) using the format of Visual Aid 1-4 (give 20 minutes).
Visual Aid 1-4 Factors Affecting the Success or Failure of Business
4. After each sub-group's presentation, other participants are encouraged to comment on the outputs. After the presentation of all groups, each group is asked to select the most critical success/failure factors from those they have identified.
5. Facilitator processes and consolidates the findings on newsprint, using the filled in Output format which is attached to each of the individual cases and adding participants' major conclusions.
6. Facilitator ends the topic by saying that analysis of the factors affecting the success or failure of a business serves as a guide to determine:
 what external factors (constraints) must be avoided or need to be solved
 what external factors (opportunities) facilitate the success of the micro-enterprise
 what internal factors (weaknesses) should be improved
 what internal factors (strengths) must be capitalized on
This helps to identify what actions need to be taken by either the field worker or the micro-entrepreneur.
Topic 3: Role Identification in micro-enterprise development
Background and Rationale
The WPD Project seeks to assist women micro-entrepreneurs to overcome their weaknesses and reduce the constraints of their micro-enterprises. Project staff needs to be clear about the type of assistance they need to provide.
This topic will focus on the most common problems micro-entrepreneurs encounter and the required project assistance to help them overcome their problems.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to: a. Identify the most common areas of weakness and constraints encountered by micro-entrepreneurs; b. Identify the major areas and types of assistance project staff needs to provide to micro-entrepreneurs.
Materials
Newsprint, pens
Activity 1: Common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs
Time: 45 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator reminds the participants that in the previous topic, strengths and weaknesses; positive and negative external factors in the planning and implementation stages of several cases were analyzed.
2. Facilitator asks the sub-groups to discuss the following question:
"Combining those identified in the cases with your own experiences, what do you think are the common weaknesses (attitudes, skills, resources) as well as negative external factors (constraints) often encountered by micro-entrepreneurs?"
3. Give participants 20 minutes to discuss. Ask them to use the format of Visual Aid 1-5 for presentation.
4. Groups present their outputs. Facilitator discusses and summarizes, using Visual Aid 1-5 and group outputs.
Visual Aid 1-5 Common Weaknesses and Constraints of Micro-Entrepreneurs
Activity 2: Role of project officers in assisting micro-entrepreneurs
Time: 45 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator points out the fact that the outputs of the previous activity provided a short list of problem areas for micro-entrepreneurs. It is the project officers' task to turn the weaknesses of the micro-entrepreneurs into strengths and to turn the constraints into opportunities.
2. Facilitator notes that lack of market information is one of the common weaknesses of micro-entrepreneurs and asks what project officers need to do in this area and asks for details on how they will provide assistance.
3. Facilitator asks the sub-groups to use the output of Activity 1 (Visual Aid 1-5, common weaknesses and constraints) to define the type of assistance the project should provide to the micro-entrepreneurs.
4. Give 20 minutes for discussion. Ask to use the format of Visual Aid 1-6 to present outputs.
5. Groups present their outputs. Facilitator summarizes and emphasizes the fact that the role of project officers does not end when the loan is released. Monitoring and follow-through assistance during the implementation stage are as important as assistance at the planning stage.
Visual Aid 1-6 Type of Project Assistance for Rural Women Micro-Entrepreneurs
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-1 Characteristics of micro-enterprise
Characteristics of a micro-enterprise include:
a. small level of capitalization;
b. initiated and managed by a household or few individuals;
c. self employment (owner is manager and worker);
d. simple technology and equipment;
e. utilization of local resources/raw materials;
f. transactions are often informal (no written agreement, based on personal contacts); and
g. ease of entry.
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-2 Roots, indications and consequences of women's low status
Reasons
Indications
Consequences
- culture of dependence
- low self esteem
- low contribution to household and community development
- afraid to take risk
- role in decision-making in household and society is limited or small
- traditional thinking
- short-term vision
- many children
- mother and child health poor
- time for productive activities limited
- quality of life generally poor
- heavy burden
- quality of children not so high
- lack of technical skills
- low productivity
- poverty; inefficient use of resources
- limited business skills
- income generation limited
- limited or small contribution to household income
- limited experience in business
- low literacy
- lack creativity
- narrow world view
- lack of funds
- income generation limited
- contribution to household income limited
- lack of organization
- local resources not tapped
- waiting for government to help
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-3 The business cycle
The four stages in micro-enterprise development are:
a. Opportunity scanning
b. Business planning
 production
 marketing
 finance
 organization
c. Implementation
 production
 marketing
 finance
 organization
d. Evaluation
Once an enterprise has completed a business cycle there are three choices:
a. to open a new business
b. to continue with the existing business
c. to cease to operate the existing business
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-4 Factors affecting the success or failure of business
Internal Factors
External Factors
Stage in Business Cycle
Positive
Negative
Positive
Negative
Strength
Weakness
Opportunity
Constraint
Planning
Production
Marketing
Financial
Organization
Implementation
Production
Marketing
Financial
Organization
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-5 Common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs
Most common constraints and weaknesses of micro-entrepreneurs
Internal (weaknesses)
External (constraints)
PLANNING STAGE
Marketing
No thorough market investigation due to lack of information
Information not available to micro-entrepreneur
Production
Limited technical skills
Government services limited to certain groups; not all micro entrepreneurs reached by technical advisory service of the government.
Financial
Lack of capital
No access to credit
Organization and Management
Limited skills in estimating income, shortsightedness, low business consciousness
Lack of information/education
IMPLEMENTATION STAGE
Marketing
Lack of market information,
No contracts/lack of negotiating skills
Inability to adjust to market changes
Market fluctuations/price control
Information not available
Production
Problems with quality of product
In-efficient production
No adequate training and advisory service available
Financial
No record keeping
No profit/loss statements
Mixed accounts of the project with other projects/household accounts.
Lack of training programs in household budgeting and financial recording
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 1-6 Type of project assistance for micro-entrepreneurs
Stage of Business
Type of assistance by project office
Planning Stage
 assist in market investigation and provide market information to micro-entrepreneurs
 linkage with relevant institutes to provide technical skills training
 training and assistance in business planning for any aspect of the enterprise (production, marketing, financial, management)
 encourage savings mobilization and provide project loans
Implementation Stage
 link to market to provide timely market information
 link with relevant bureaus to provide regular technical assistance
 training, monitoring and assistance in:
- record keeping
- areas in which the entrepreneur is weak, which can be in any aspect of the enterprise (production, marketing, financial, management)
- savings mobilization
 continuous assessment of entrepreneur's needs and provision of
 appropriate training/technical assistance
Annex 1. Case: 1-1 Lin's cabbage garden
Task
Lin is a farmer in the Dazhai village in Inner Mongolia. She has 2 children. Her husband works as a factory worker.
Lin tills 5 mu of rice land. For many years she has been tanning rice and has not made good profits.
Because of her very low profits from cultivating rice, she thought about planting vegetables. But before she made a decision, Lin made a careful survey in the market of which types of vegetables are in demand and commands higher price. She went to several market places and found out that cabbage sells at a very high price and were in high demand.
She went to an agricultural technician from the Agricultural Bureau and asked how cabbage is grown. Fortunately there was a workshop to be given on cabbage for 2 days. She attended the 2 day workshop and learned how to raise cabbage. Since the workshop was basically conducted through demonstration and field practicum, Lin learned how to plant' water, fertilize, weed and harvest cabbage. She also learned that on 5 mu of land, she will need 200 yuan for land preparation, fertilizers, chemicals, labor and other incidental expenses.
Lin has only 100 yuan. She went to her parents and requested for a loan of 100 yuan at 2% interest per month. Then she went to the market place and secured the commitments from buyers for her cabbage produce. With a ready market for her cabbage, she started to grow cabbage in her land. She religiously followed what she had learned from the workshop at the Agricultural Bureau. I in recorded all her production expenses on cabbage production.
After 3 months, she started harvesting cabbage and selling them to her buyers. She also recorded all her sales. Her total sales amounted to 600 yuan. She made a profit of 400 yuan. Out of the profit, she paid her loan of 100 yuan to her parents including the interest. All the rest of the profit, she reinvested in cabbage production by renting an additional 5 mu of land.
Tasks
1. Is Lin's business successful?
2. If so, what are the factors which contributed to her success?
3. Does the undertaking contribute to more self-reliance?
Output
(a) Marketing
 Lin conducted a market survey;
 She determined the demand and price of cabbage;
 She secured her sales through negotiations
(b) Production
 Lin attended workshop in production of cabbage;
 She knows the proper practices involved in cabbage production from land preparation to harvesting of produce;
(c) Financing
 Lin used her savings and secured a loan;
 Lin reinvested all her earnings in cabbage so she can expand her business;
(d) Management/Organization
 Lin took care of all stages of production according to what she learned from her workshop (land preparation to harvesting);
 She kept a record of her transactions.
(e) Self-reliance
 Lin has the principle of self-reliance, since she showed initiative of thinking about something new by herself;
 Lin was realistic in that the micro-enterprise she chose was small, relatively low risk and can be managed together with her other tasks; relatively simple technology and low investment; relatively short production-cycle (less than a year), so quick return of investment; contribute to cash income;
 Because Lin succeeded, her confidence and enthusiasm has increased;
 Lin's management skills have improved because now she has first hand experience; she has learned a new technological skill.
Annex 2. Case: 1-2 Xie Feng Yun's tea processing project
Tasks
Ms. Xie Feng Yun is one of the active members of the women's group in the Guidun village, a farming community with rolling terrains located some 30 km from the Tongshan county. Like other households in the village, her husband is engaged he farming and wood gathering. She's 33 years old and takes care of the household work and their three children.
Since she joined the group she has been thinking how to help her husband generate additional income for the family. At first, upon discussion with other women members, she thought of a small scale furniture workshop. But the capitalization required was 50,000 Yuan and she could not afford such capital.
She finally decided on a tea processing project. The raw materials (tea leaves) are readily available in the village since most farmers, including her husband, grow tea in the village. Moreover, she learned from the peddlers who often visit their village looking for tea leaves, that processing tea would earn her good income. She learned from them that if she sells in Tongshan county, she can make a gross profit of 20 rmb per jin and or even higher at 1 20 rmb if she sells in Wuhan. Also, she has a younger sister who used to work in a tea processing factory and she was confident she could learn the techniques required in such activity.
Encouraged by the potential of the project she obtained a loan from the women's group. In addition, she had some savings of her own and she was able to start the project in March 1993.
In spring the tea crops produce the best quality lea leaves. Ms. Xie decided to process tea only during this season For the whole season she was able to sell 56 jin. In selling at Tongshan she later learned that there are different prices depending on the quality of dried tea. Nevertheless after investigating which among the three buying stations in Tongshan offered the best price, she settled into one station.
She however incurred losses when she tried to sell in Wuhan. About 20 jin was not paid for at all.
She personally took care of the project. Her husband and children assisted her in some of the activities of the project like gathering of wood for the stove and stirring the leaves on the pan. They could process 5 jin of wet leaves per day. She had minimal expenses for the project. She bought about 50% of the wet tea requirements from the village. The rest of the wet tea leaves, she obtained from their own harvest. She also had sufficient wood oil which was already good for the whole season She did not buy the needed pans as she had already two before the project and these were enough for the quantify she has been processing.
She was not able to keep records of the financial transactions but she is confident she was able to earn from her business. Although the income of the project is mixed with their other household income, she was sure that the whole net profit was used to invest in another project, a chair manufacturing project. At the same time, she is planning to expand her tea processing project for the whole three seasons that is including during summer and autumn. She also plans to hire workers so that she can process more.
Task
1. Analyze the internal and external factors that affect this micro-enterprise, using the format of Visual Aid 1-4.
2. Is this a good project for Ms Xie Feng Yun to become more self-reliant? If so, why, how?
Xie Feng Yun's Tea Processing Factors Affecting the Success or Failure of Business
Output Task 1
Internal Factors
External Factors
Business Stage
Strengths
Weaknesses
Opportunites
Constraints
A. Planning Stage
Production
 Raw materials grown by family
 No skills. but sister can assist
 Villagers grow tea
 Sister has skills in tea processing
Marketing
 No concrete market info (relied on informants info)
Tea factory in town
 No anticipation of quality requirements
Financial
 Own savings
 Loan from women's group capital available
Organization
 Husband supportive
B. Implementation
Production
 Raw materials availability
 Skills learned easily
Marketing
 Lack negotiating skills
 Only 1 good market outlet
Financial
 No records
 Mixed accounts
 Can not determine
real net income
Organization
 Supportive family
Output Task 2
Undertaking of this micro-enterprise strengthens Ms. Xie's self reliance, because:
 she learns technical skills as well as business skill, eg. negotiating, decision-making, risk taking
 she has acquired the support of her family members
 she raises capital by herself and increased her own income
 she plans and manages the enterprise herself
 others will respect her for her achievements (break through in traditional thinking)
Annex 2. Case: 1-3 Pai Lou grocery shop
Tasks
Pai Lou is a farming village with 102 households (940 population) of Fuyou township. Since the village is quite far from the township proper, people used to buy their groceries in the township operated grocery shop in the village. the shop however was not very well run as the operator was ill for some time.
Realizing this situation. Ms. Tao Tong Lian thought of operating her grocery shop right in the village. Their house is located in the center of village, hence it is very convenient for most villagers to come to her store. She constructed a small shed to convert part of her house into the grocery shop.
She obtained a loan for the shop from the women's group. I his amount plus her own savings (total 1000 rmb) enabled her to refurbish the shed and to buy in wholesale grocery items from the township.
Seventy percent of her groceries are food products, like canned goods, soft drinks and beer while 30% are basic necessity items such as soap. She goes to the township about 5 to 6 times a month to buy her groceries. Besides transportation she has to pay a tax regularly.
About fifty percent of the villagers buy from her shop on credit which they pay witch 10 to 30 days. The rest buys on cash. She reported a gross sales of 1,500 Yuan/month and gross margin of 20% on her groceries.
So far her business is doing well. Fast selling items are usually the consumable items like beer, soft drinks and cigarettes. Since she's also busy with other work, she let her child look after the store. Likewise, she has not enough time to regularly record her financial transactions. She accepts that sometimes the family consumes some of the grocery items of the shop and these are not recorded.
Task
1. Analyze the internal and external factors that affect this micro-enterprise. using the format of Visual Aid 1-4.
2. Is this a good project for Ms Tao Tong Lian to become more self-reliant? If so, why, how?
Pai Lou Grocery Shop Factors Affecting the Success or Failure of Business
Output Task 1
Internal Factors
External Factors
Business Stage
Strengths
Weaknesses
Opportunities
Constraints
A. Planning Stage
Production
Marketing
 house at center of village
 township grocery no good (clients not satisfied)
 far from source of goods
 knows goods that sell well
Financial
 own savings
 loan from women's group capital available
 knows margin decision
Organization
 supportive husband
 time available
B. Implementation
Production
Marketing
 correct commodities inventory
 no inventory record (consumption mixed
 wholesale purchase possible
Financial
 no records
 income not clear
Organization
 child available as keeper
 time availability of husband and wife
Output Task 2
Ms. Tao has shown that she has the principle of self-reliance in that she has identified the opportunity for a successful enterprise, has raised the capital, prepared well before starting and makes a profit. However, since she does not manage and oversee (no financial records, mixed accounts) her business, she does not fully develop her talent to grow into a skillful and successful entrepreneur.
Annex 2. Case: 1-4 Ms. Yuan Wang Ti's tobacco production project
Tasks
Ms. Yuan Wang Ti is one of the members of the women's group in Pai Shu village. Pai-Shu is a farming village with hilly terrain and located some 4 km away from the town proper of Huangxia. Her family plants rice and corn. Within the year, her husband can make two croppings of rice and corn. The rest of the year, particularly during winter season, her husband grows other crops such as wheat and beans.
To help her husband, Yuan Wang Ti raises pigs and ducks. But these crops as well as the livestock raised arc mainly for consumption. The family has three children, the youngest about a year old. Her father also resides in their household.
In the beginning of 1993, the township government campaigned in the villages to grow tobacco. they promised that they would buy all their produce at a fixed price and seeds would be given free to interested growers. They also promised to give the coal on credit. ( l he coal is used for fuel for the drying facility). Further, the township was willing to provide fertilizer, pesticides and plastic films on credit.
Encouraged by the prospects of tobacco growing, Ms. Yuan's family decided on engaging on such activity in March 1993. They invested their earnings from duck raising into the project. In addition. Ms. Yuan applied and got a loan from the women's group.
Her husband constructed 2 drying facilities and he got coal for the facility from the township.
Her husband chose the sloping areas for tobacco growing. Since March until the succeeding tour months, the township technician provided him technical advice and has been visiting them frequently. He was able to learn the skills and technological requirements.
His whole family assisted him in the undertaking, including his wile. But since they couldn't do the planting alone, they hired 10 workers to finish the work in one day. For harvesting, they will have to hire again 10 workers. He estimates his harvest will be the highest in the village.
He carefully followed the technical advice on growing tobacco. He obtained on credit from the township the recommended plastic film, fertilizer and pesticides in the amount the recommended by the technician. He also acquired on credit (i.e. to be deducted from sales proceeds) the initial ton coal for drying.
The rest of the farmers in the village did not harvest the same level as he did. In fact. some of them were not able to harvest anything at all. The villagers accounted this was due to the heavy rains in the past months. As most of them grew the tobacco in the plain areas, most of their fields got flooded.
However, when he sold part of his first harvest to the buying station, he found out that the price dropped considerably. The price was way below the price the township had promised to pay. With the new price. the gross sales of the harvest will be far less than expected and he expects a net loss of 170 rmb. He cannot sell to any other buying station since it is the only one licensed by the township to procure tobacco. Neither can he sell it directly to the tobacco factory.
Another problem is that he needs to harvest the remaining standing crops soon so that it will not lose quality. But to do that, his fuel requirements (coal) must be ready. He needs another 3 tons of coal. Before, the township allowed him to have the coal on credit, but now he has to buy it in cash.
Both husband and wife did not keep any financial records. He said he can remember every transaction accurately. However he could not give exact estimates on how much he actually invested. He mixed the accounts of the sugarcane and tobacco production. In the end Ms. Yuan was not able to repay her loan to the group.
Task
1. Analyze the internal and external factors that affect this micro-enterprise, using the format of Visual Aid 1-4.
2. Is this a good project for Ms Yuan Wan, Ti to become more self-reliant? If so, wins, how?
Yuan Wang Ti's Tobacco Production Factors Affecting the Success or Failure of Business
Output Task 1
Internal Factors
External Factors
Business Stage
Strengths
Weaknesses
Opportunities
Constraints
A. Planning Stage
Production
 farmer, trainable
 does not yet know tobacco growing
 technician will provide advice
 land available
 inputs available on credit
Marketing
 no market investigation
 township will buy
 no other buyers known
 relied on government information on pricing
 no contract
Financial
 own savings
 did not estimate well loan from women's group available
 price change not anticipated
Organization
B. Implementation
Production
 good farming skills
 inputs no longer available on credit
Marketing
 can not negotiate higher price
 no other buyer
 buyer dictates price (price dropped)
Financial
 mixed accounts
 no more cash for input requirement
Organization
 no decisions by wife
Output Task 2
Undertaking of this micro-enterprise does not strengthen Ms Yuan Wang Ti's self reliance, primarly because it is not she who is in control of the business, but her husband
 she does not make decisions about the use of the loan nor about the management of the enterprise
 she does not learn any new skills
 she can not repay her Ivan to the group and has not made any personal achievements, which may erode her self confidence
 she does not have her own income and is us (or even more ) dependent on others as before
 there is no break through in traditional thinking
<section>6</section>
Module 2: Micro-enterprise planning and assessment
Topic 1: Financial indicators
Activity 1: Introduction to business planning
Activity 2: Net cash income
Activity 3: Net profit
Activity 4: Risk analysis
Activity 5: Cash flow
Topic 2: Business plan preparation and assessment
Activity 1: Key elements of a business plan
Activity 2: Introduction of tools for business planning
Activity 3: Practicum phase: Business planning
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-1 Net cash income
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-2 Production type of enterprise key elements production aspect
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-3 Production type of enterprise key elements marketing aspect
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-4 Service type of enterprise marketing aspects
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-5 Key elements of a business plan
Annex 2. Case: 2-1 Assessing the viability of Ms. Zhang's starch processing enterprise
Module 2: Micro-enterprise planning and assessment
Introduction
Module 2 addresses the first initial stage of micro-enterprise development. This module focuses on preparation of good business plans and assessment/evaluation of micro-enterprise projects within the context of both business viability as well as the project spirit of self-reliance.
Output Objectives
At the end of module 2, participants will be able to:
1. Apply, analyze and explain the basic financial indicators in business planning for micro-enterprises.
2. Prepare and assess business plans together with the micro-entrepreneur.
3. Advise women micro-entrepreneurs and women's groups in preparation and assessment of business plans and loan applications.
4. Advise the project Governing Body regarding approval of applications for project loans.
Topic 1: Financial indicators
Background and Rationale
The goal of the entrepreneur in starting a business is to make a profit. Before starting the business, the entrepreneur needs to be convinced that her goal is achievable. She needs to know what the risks are' and she needs to know whether she can finance and manage the business. In order to assess whether the entrepreneur can achieve her goal, it is necessary to have a thorough understanding of the basic financial indicators.
Through reviewing a case. participants will acquire the knowledge, skills and attitude in applying and analyzing the basic financial indicators.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to:
1. Analyze and explain the basic financial indicators in assessment of a business plan
2. Know and analyze the major risk factors of a business.
3. Review loan applications.
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, thick felt tip pens.
Activity 1: Introduction to business planning
Time : 15 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator says that in Module I we have identified the causes of success or failure of micro-enterprises as well as the common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs. The conclusion was that at the early stages of participation in the women's group, the women entrepreneurs need our assistance in both the planning and implementation stage of the enterprise. In this module we will focus on the planning stage.
2. Facilitator asks several participants "What is planning"? Through discussion the group arrives at the following definition:
Planning is thinking through, and then working out in detail, what you intend to do in a future period of time and how you expect to get there.
Facilitator compares business planning to planning a trip, you ask yourself where you want to go. then how you will get there. Then you plan in detail how much money you need, what you want to do and who you wish to take on your journey, etc. It is not until you are quite sure that you can get where you want to go that you start to buy tickets and pack your suitcase. In business planning it is the same. You first plan what kind of business you want, then you plan in detail how you can realize it and how you will operate it. It is only until you are quite sure that you can be successful do you start to borrow money or buy goods.
2. In module I we have defined business as "any venture which involves production of goods and/or services to obtain profit". Our goal, or where we want to go is to make a profit or income. In planning the business we must estimate as accurately as possible how we will run the business, what we need to buy, what we need to do, etc. and finally we have to decide whether we are satisfied with the expected result in terms of profit/income.
3. In this topic we will study a case in order to become familiar with the basic financial indicators in assessment of the viability of a micro-enterprise and loan applications. We will also analyze the risks involved in starting an enterprise.
Activity 2: Net cash income
Time : 1.5 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator starts the activity by saying that before starting a business the woman entrepreneur will be concerned whether she can make profit or not. To determine this, we must know the income, sales and costs involved.
2. Facilitator then explains that the first thing the entrepreneur will think of is the required capital to be able to start the first production cycle. She writes on the black board that this includes:
a. capital for acquisition of fixed assets, such as land, buildings, facilities, equipment, etc.
b. working capital
Facilitator explains that the latter shall be used for the production costs required for the first production cycle.
3. Facilitator proceeds by explaining that production costs are the costs incurred each time the output volume is produced. She explains that these are variable costs as these costs change with the output volume produced. Fixed assets are not bought for each production cycle, therefore the costs of fixed assets are not included in production costs.
4. Facilitator then asks participants to mention items that are included in the production costs. Facilitator lists the three components below on the blackboard and categorizes the participants' examples. Facilitator then explains further using the important points below. Facilitator tells that for trading enterprises, production costs refer to the cost of goods sold.
Important Points
 Production costs include all costs that have to be made each time the estimated output volume is produced. These costs can be categorized as follows:
Materials: these are the costs we have to make to purchase the materials that are consumed in producing the estimated output volume, e.g. raw materials, chemicals, fertilizer, seeds, feed stuff, etc. The costs of durable materials, such as buildings, tools, equipment are not included here.
Paid labor: this is the costs of hiring external labor force or for paying family members to do certain tasks. Unpaid labor costs are not included. Usually micro-entrepreneurs do not pay salaries to themselves and therefore no costs are included here.
Cost of use of facilities: these are the costs like rent or fees paid to use land or facilities like drying facilities, storage, etc. This includes also any other costs directly related to the use of facilities/ equipment, such as energy, water, maintenance, etc.
5. Facilitator then explains that total income is gross sales plus other income.
6. Facilitator then proceeds by writing on the blackboard that Gross Profit is total Income minus Production Costs. She reminds participants that costs of fixed assets are not included in this computation. Furthermore, she explains that Gross Profit determines whether production costs can be recovered from the total income that the business generates.
7. Facilitator then explains that: Net Cash Income is Gross Profit minus other Expenses. She asks participants to give examples of other possible expenses. She then explains that these include expenses incurred in selling, delivery or general administration. Examples of other expenses are transportation, cost of sacks for grain delivery, tax etc.
8. Facilitator continues and explains that: Net Cash Income is what remains from the income after deducting all costs and expenses of the enterprise. This is what the woman entrepreneur will be concerned about since it will show her whether she has cash left for the next production cycle. If she has no other source of financing (ed. she cannot avail of succeeding loan or she has no additional savings), the net cash income becomes her source of working capital for the next cycle.
Visual Aid 2-1 Net Cash Income
9. Facilitator then reviews Visual Aid 2-l with the complete formula for computation of gross profit and net cash income.
10. Facilitator asks participants to do task l of Case 2-1 (Computation of Net Cash
Income). Participants are asked to do the tasks individually. Give 15 minutes.
Case 2-1 Assessing the Viability of Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Task 1
11. Ask two participants to write their outputs on newsprint.
12. First focus on Total Income. Review the outputs of the two participants, asking the other participants to comment or add their views. Emphasize/add the important points mentioned in Case 2- l, Output Task I, Total Income.
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Output Task 1
Total Income
13. Discuss the questions raised by the participants and then move on to Production Costs. Review the outputs of the participants, asking others to comment. Emphasize/ add the important points mentioned in Case 2-1, Output Task 1, Production Costs.
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Output Task 1
Production Costs
14. After discussing the outputs, the Gross Profit and Net Cash Income can be computed.
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Enterprise
Output Task 1
Net Cash Income
15. Facilitator reviews the major [earnings in this activity, emphasizing the important points below.
Important Points
 Production Costs include all costs that have to be made each time the output volume of the enterprise is produced, such as for materials that are consumed, cost of the use of facilities and the costs of hired labor. Acquisition costs of fixed assets are not included.
 Other expenses are those incurred in selling, delivery and general administration.
 Positive Gross Profit means the entrepreneur can recover all production costs from the total income of the enterprise. A negative (dross Profit would either mean:
a. inefficient production
b. the price of the product is low
c. the price of inputs is high
 Positive Net Cash Income means that the entrepreneur has recovered all the production costs and other expenses from her total income from the enterprise. It also means that she has reserve funds either for payment of loans and interest, or for use as working capital for the next cycle. Note that this is under the assumption that the sales in the computation are the cash sales only. Sales on credit are not included. If sales on credit were included, we would have to deduct the sales on credit from the Net Cash Income for the above statement to be true.
Activity 3: Net profit
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator reminds participants that in the previous activity we only considered the costs and expenses that are directly related to the production. There are however other costs involved in a business: the costs of fixed assets and interest on loans. These costs should also be generated by the business. Facilitator writes on the blackboard that Net Profit is Net Cash Income minus Depreciation minus Interest on loans.
2. Facilitator asks participants to say in their own words what depreciation is and then explains that depreciation is the amount of money the enterprise should generate to be able to replace the fixed assets on time. For example, Ms. Zhang's grinder which she bought at 600 rmb will have to be replaced after 10 years. So, each year from Ms. Zhang's Net Cash Income we need to deduct 60 rmb (600 rmb investment/ 10 years ) for depreciation of the grinder. If her business cannot generate enough to buy a new one, she cannot continue her enterprise.
3. Participants are asked to do task 2 of case 2-1 individually. Give 10 minutes.
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Task 2
Net Profit
4. Facilitator asks a participant to write her computation on the newsprint. Ask whether others have different outcomes.
5. After participants are clear about the way of computing, ash to discuss the following questions in sub-groups (20 minutes). Ask the sub-groups to write their conclusions on newsprint.
Questions
1. What is your conclusion on the profitability of Ms. Zhang's enterprise?
2. What can the entrepreneur do with the profit?
3. What will happen to an enterprise if the Net Profit is negative?
6. Ask the sub-groups to report and write their important insights on newsprint. For the answer on Question 1, show the percentage return on investment and on own capital as given in the output of Case 2-1. If there are disagreements, make participants try to convince each other in an organized manner. Add significant statements of participants to the newsprints. Clarify unsolved issues and add other points.
Important note: Discussion in sub-groups is essential! Generally, participants tend to be focused on the computations. Facilitator needs to redirect the attention to what the outcome of the computations means for the business. Field workers need to be skillful in explaining this to the entrepreneur, hence it is important to give participants time to reflect and to formulate their interpretation of the outcome.
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Output Task 2
Net Profit
7. Summarize the learnings, emphasizing the important points below.
Important Points
 Depreciation:
Depreciation is the minimum amount of money that the enterprise should generate to be able to replace the fixed assets in time. If the enterprise can not generate this amount, the net profit is negative. It means that in the long term the business can not continue, unless money from other sources is added to it. Such a business of course can not be considered viable.
 The net profit reflects the entrepreneur's return on her labor, management and capital investments. A negative or zero net profit means that the entrepreneur does not get any return on her labor, management and capital investments.
 The entrepreneur can utilize profits in several ways:
- investment in expansion or improvement of her enterprise
- investment in new enterprises
- savings (ea. for child education, future investments, old age security)
- consumption
 In the long run reinvestment is the best way for utilizing profits, since it leads to further increase in income in the future. On the short term utilization of profits for consumption may be equally important however, ea. to improve nutrition or health care, to be able to pay the school tuition, etc.
Activity 4: Risk analysis
Time: 45 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by saying that in computing Gross Profit, participants raised many questions regarding the completeness and the validity of the data we used in the computations. We realized that many factors have to be taken into consideration and that there are external factors, such as the weather or market prices, that can affect the profitability of the business. Since we can never be completely certain about our projections, it is important that the entrepreneur knows what the major risk factors and their implications are.
2. Facilitator asks the participants to do the Task 3 of the Case individually (15 minutes).
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Task 3
Risk Analysis
3. The facilitator puts the Table format in Output Task 3 on newsprint and asks participants to give the outcome of their computations. Participants probably do not have problems in computing anymore, but it is important to check whether all have the same outcome. In case there are differences, the complete computation should be presented on the blackboard.
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Output Task 3
Risk Analysis
4. The facilitator discusses the alternative situations one by one using the important points in Output Task 3. She emphasizes the fact that what looks like a small change ( 10-20 % different from our estimates) can make a substantial difference for the income.
5. The facilitator summarizes areas of learning of this activity using the important points below.
Important Points
 Small deviations in the estimated volumes and prices in the business plan can have a big effect on the profitability of the business. It is therefore important that we try to estimate as accurately as possible. But even if we do so, we can never be completely certain about what happens in the future. There will always be a certain risk. The entrepreneur needs to be aware of the major risk factors and amount of their implication. This will help her to pay attention to those factors which are under her control and when the results are lower than her projection due to external factors, it will not undermine her self-confidence.
 The following basic factors are most critical for micro-enterprises:
- sales price of products
- price of raw materials
- quality of products
- efficiency of production (ratio between output and input volume)
- costs of fixed assets
Activity 5: Cash flow
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. The Facilitator introduces this activity by saying that when profitability and income are considered high enough, we can start planning the financing of the investment in detail. The Cash Flow of the enterprise is one of the factors that needs to be considered.
2. The Facilitator presents the Cash Record which is attached to Task 4 of Case 2-1 .
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Task 4
Cash Flow
3. The Facilitator asks the participants to carry out task 4 individually. Give 15 minutes.
4. The Facilitator asks one participant to write her output on newsprint, and asks others to comment.
Case 2-1 Ms. Zhang's Starch Processing Enterprise
Output Task 4
Cash Flow
5. When participants are clear about how to use the form, the Facilitator asks whether Ms. Zhang can repay her loan in January as planned. The answer is no (see Output task 4): Ms. Zhang is short by 254 rmb and would not be able to continue the production as she has no working capital left.
6. Facilitator then asks what decision Ms. Zhang and the group should take about the loan application. Allow discussion among participants about changing the conditions of the loan (e.g. longer period in installments, other sources of cash for loan payment, profit of business is high, net cash income can be increased by enlarging production volume after each cycle, etc.). Facilitator wraps up these discussions by saying that the assessment of this case is that in its present form the business plan is profitable, but the financial plan is not feasible. The Cash Flow projection shows this.
7. Facilitator then summarizes the areas of learning in this activity and the topic, emphasizing the important points below.
Important Points
 In assessment of the viability of an enterprise Gross Profit, Net Cash Income and Net Profit are key elements.
 Accuracy in the computation of Gross Profit is crucial in business planning, since it affects all other computations and indicators. Field workers can not be expected to be knowledgable on all types of enterprises, and may need to call on experts to ensure complete and reliable data for estimating cost and income factors, such as input and output volumes, quality, prices, etc.
 Risk Analysis is an integral part of business planning. The entrepreneur needs to know what the major risk factors are, how big the risks are, so that she can decide whether the risk is acceptable to her. It will also help her not to get discouraged when the results are lower than projected in the business plan.
 Enterprises with a negative or low profitability are not sustainable. Project officers always be advised against such enterprises.
 The Cash Flow Projection is important to determine whether the entrepreneur has sufficient working capital for the production costs and other expenses for the next production cycle and whether she will be able to pay her loan and interest at a given date.
Topic 2: Business plan preparation and assessment
Background and Rationale
Field workers need the skills to prepare and assess business plans for micro-en/reprises to be able to (a) assist the women entrepreneurs in planning for their micro-enterprises; (b) assist women's groups in credit management and in preparation of application for a project loan; (c) pre-assess loan applications before final approval by the Governing Body.
In this topic, participants will work together with women entrepreneurs in preparation and assessment of business plans.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to:
1. Use the tools for business planning for each type of business.
2. Prepare a business plan together with the micro-entrepreneur.
3. Explain and assess business plans for each type of business.
Activity 1: Key elements of a business plan
Time : 6 hours
Steps :
1. Facilitator starts by saying that from the previous topic we have learned to assess business plans based on financial indicators. But in Module 1 (in the Case of Lin's Cabbage Garden) we have seen that there are actually four business aspects which effect the success or failure of a business. Facilitator asks participants to mention all four:
 Production Aspects
 Marketing Aspects
 Management (organization) Aspects
 Financial Aspects
Proper planning of the first three aspects is very important, because this will determine the financial outcome of the business.
2. Facilitator then explains further that for each type of business we will tackle what critical information which are needed in planning of a micro-enterprise.
3. Production type of enterprise
3.1 Facilitator asks participants which of the four aspects should be planned first in the production type of project. Participants will agree that this is the production aspect.
3.2 Facilitator then asks participants what the most critical information is that we need in planning for the production aspect. Facilitator synthesizes by using Visual Aid 22.
Visual Aid 2-2 Production Type of Enterprise
Key Elements Production Aspect
3.3 Facilitator then asks participants to mention the most crucial information needed in planning for the next aspect: marketing. She explains further that the key question is whether the product can be sold or not. Facilitator uses Visual Aid 2-3 in explaining the critical elements of the marketing plan.
Visual Aid 2-3 Production Type of Enterprise
Key Elements Marketing Aspect
3.4 Facilitator then proceeds with the financial aspect. She reminds participants of Topic 1 of this Module (Ms. Zhang's starch processing case) and asks the participants what they think should be included here. Facilitator clarifies the inclusion of the following in the projection:
 Net Cash Income, Net Profit (Income Statement)
 Risk Analysis on price and volume changes
 Investment Plan
4. Processing type of micro-enterprise
4.1 Facilitator starts by asking the participants which of the four aspects should be considered first in planning for the processing type of micro-enterprise. Participants will agree that this is the production aspect.
Visual Aid 2-2 Processing Type of Enterprise
Key Elements Production Aspect
4.2 Facilitator asks participants what they think is the critical information required in planning the production aspect in the processing type of enterprise. She refers to Visual Aid 2-1 and asks if there are differences. Facilitator points out that the differences are:
 Land is usually not critical in processing projects
 Information on the production process is critical. This involve the steps required in processing the product.
Facilitator furthermore adds that after listing all the raw materials, labor requirements, etc. the entrepreneur can start computing the production costs per unit. Facilitator illustrates the fact that unit production costs is the total production costs divided by the production volume. She points out that the unit production cost is needed for the next aspect: marketing.
4.3 Facilitator proceeds with the marketing aspect. She shows Visual Aid 2-3 and asks participants for differences between the processing and production type of business.
Visual Aid 2-3 Production Type of Enterprise
Key Elements Marketing Aspect
4.4 Facilitator points out that in these two types of micro-enterprise, if there are definite buyers, the critical elements are the same. However, in case there are no definite buyers, eg a bakery enterprise which has the village as its target market, the marketing aspect will include the following:
a. First, determine the demand
What is the estimated number of people who may buy your product? What quantity? What frequency? Are there existing competitors selling the same product? Are the estimates reasonable?
b. Second, determine the price
First check the unit production cost. The selling price should be higher than the unit production cost. Second, in setting the price consider the existing competitors and how to attract more buyers.
c. Third, determine the strategy to attract buyers
What will the entrepreneur emphasize? Examples: good quality, low price, fast delivery?
d. Fourth, determine the estimated sales volume
Are there demand seasonalities in demand? Determine sales volume at peak, normal and low demand periods. Estimate sales volume for the appropriate period (e.g. one month, one year).
e. Fifth, determine how to distribute/deliver the product
Where will she sell, ea. through sales outlets or directly? What are the costs involved in delivery and selling?
4.5 Facilitator then proceeds to the financial aspect and asks participants which financial projections are needed. These are the following:
 Gross Profit, Net Cash Income and Net Profit (Income Statement)
 Risk Analysis on price and volume changes
 Cash Flow
 Investment Plan
5. Trading type of micro-enterprise
5.1 Facilitator starts by asking participants what they think is the first critical aspect in the trading type of enterprise. Participants will agree that it is the marketing aspect.
5.2 Facilitator explains further that trading basically is buying and selling of the same commodity or good. The entrepreneur may buy in wholesale and sell in retail. She proceeds by explaining the two basic principles in trade:
 Buy at low price, sell at high price.
 The faster the turn-over, the better.
5.3 Facilitator proceeds with the practical steps in planning the marketing aspects of trading projects.
a. First, determine what to sell (inventory listing)
The entrepreneur first considers which goods will sell well in the community. Then she projects how fast a certain quantity (bought in whole sale) of each of the goods can be sold (turn-over rate). Then she lists this information and the purchase price in the following way:
Goods
Quantity
Unit Purchase Price
Total cost
Turn-over Rate
Cigarettes
5 cartons
50 rmb
250 rmb
5 days
Beverages
1 box
48 rmb
48 rmb
6 days
Total
298 rmb
b. Second. determine the price
The entrepreneur then decides on the margin, (difference between unit selling price and unit buying price). In setting the price, she considers the price of competitors and whether this price is attractive to buyers. She also needs to consider the costs of other expenses in buying and selling the goods (e.g. transportation, tax), and the costs of the use of the facilities (e.g. rent, power).
c. Third determine the estimated sales
What will be the total sales income in a certain period, ea. one month? For each item the sales is determined as the unit selling price times the estimated quantity sold in the period (determined in the inventory listing under a. ). If seasonalities are anticipated' these must be reflected in the sales projection for the whole year.
d. Fourth, determine the selling strategy
Considering other competitors how will the entrepreneur attract more customers? What will the entrepreneur emphasize'? Examples: good quality, low price, suitable location.
5.3 Facilitator then proceeds with the financial aspects. She asks what the participants think are the critical indicators. The conclusion will be:
 Gross Profit, Net Cash Income, Net Profit (Income Statement)
 Risk Analysis of prices and sales volume
 Cash Flow
 Investment Plan
6. Service type of micro-enterprise
6.1 Facilitator asks participants whether they agree that in the service type of micro-enterprise the first critical aspect is also marketing. Facilitator explains the marketing aspects using Visual Aid 2-4.
Visual Aid 2-4 Service Type of Enterprise
Key, Elements Marketing Aspect
6.2 Facilitator proceeds with the production aspect and explains that it involves determining: raw materials or supplies needed labor requirements facilities and equipment needed costs of the above items
6.3 For the financial aspects, facilitator explains the fact that these will include:
 Gross Profit, Net Cash Income, Net Profit (Income Statement)
 Risk Analysis of prices and volume
 Cash Flow
 Investment Plan
7. Organization and Management
7.1 Facilitator explains that in all four types of micro-enterprise planning of the organizational aspects is very important. Proper organization and management is needed to realize the projections made for the other three aspects.
7.2 Facilitator asks participants who the managers of micro-enterprises are in the WPD project and why. Facilitator synthesizes by saying that the WPD project encourages micro-enterprise development by women with the goal to improve their self-reliance and status (Module 1, Topic I, Activity 3). Through engaging in micro-enterprise women learn technical and business skills; learn to take decisions and risks, obtain own income. All of these contribute to more self-confidence and self-reliance.
7.3 Facilitator then continues by saying that women either run micro-enterprises individually with usually some support of household members (household-based enterprise), or they undertake a micro-enterprise with a small group of women (group enterprise). We will discuss the critical information in planning for these two types of enterprises.
Management of household-based micro-enterprise
Important considerations for the woman entrepreneur in planning the organization and management of her enterprise are:
 Do I have the necessary skills to manage the enterprise (e.g. record keeping, income computation, production and marketing skills)?
 Can I acquire the skills which I do not have and how (e.g. training, help from group members, others)?
 Who among household members will be involved in the enterprise? What will be their tasks?
Management of group enterprise
Important considerations for women who plan to start a micro-enterprise together are:
 Who among the group are to be involved? What will be the roles and tasks for each?
 Who will perform the following key roles of: manager, accountant and cashier?
 Do the members have the skills required for the assigned tasks? If not, how will it be solved?
 How will financial control be instituted? e.g. how often will they meet, how often will there be reporting on the financial status, how will they keep and disburse funds, etc.?
8. Facilitator ends the activity with a summary of what has been discussed using Visual Aid 2-5.
Visual Aid 2-5
Key Elements of a Business Plan
Activity 2: Introduction of tools for business planning
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator introduces this activity by saying that in this topic participants will have a chance to apply their knowledge and skills which they have learned so far. Some women micro-entrepreneurs have been invited to come to the workshop, and they all have a plan to invest in the expansion of their existing business or to start a new enterprise. Two participants will work together with one entrepreneur and make a complete business plan in half a day. Afterwards the business plan will be presented and discussed by the whole group.
2. Facilitator hands out Worksheet 1 and the Business Plan Forms for each type of business. She tells the participants that we will use these tools in business planning with our guests.
3. Facilitator explains further that there are two interrelated components which make an enterprise viable, The first one is the entrepreneur herself (strengths and weaknesses in attitude and skills), the second is the micro-enterprise's economic viability.
To assess the economic viability of an enterprise we use the business plan form. This is a tool for organizing the data relevant to the four aspects of business (marketing, production, management and financial) and to make calculations.
To assess both components (entrepreneur and enterprise) we use Worksheet 1. After making the Business Plan field worker and entrepreneur review the questions in this worksheet to formulate the conclusions and recommendations. The field worker can use this:
 to make recommendations to township and county Governing Body on loan application and required assistance (e.g. training, technical assistance, etc.)
 in monitoring the implementation of the project
The entrepreneur gets a copy of both the Business Plan and Worksheet 1 for future reference.
4. The facilitator explains further that the tasks for the practicum are:
a. Make a comprehensive business plan together with the entrepreneur by completing the Business Plan Form and Worksheet 1.
b. In the process, educate the entrepreneur in business planning by explaining questions, computations and interpretation of the results.
5. The participants are then given some time to review the forms.
Business Plan Form 1: Production Enterprise
Business Plan Form 2: Processing Enterprise
Business Plan Form 3: Trading Enterprise
Business Plan Form 4: Service Enterprise
Worksheet 1
Business Viability Assessment
Activity 3: Practicum phase: Business planning
Time: 7 hours
Steps:
1. The Facilitator welcomes the women entrepreneurs and asks the participants and entrepreneurs to introduce themselves.
2. Facilitator introduces the activity, by saying that this workshop is for Field Workers to learn how to assist micro-entrepreneurs and that one of the areas of assistance is in Business Planning. Facilitator thanks the women entrepreneurs for their cooperation and encourages them to ask whatever questions they have. We hope this activity will be useful for the entrepreneur in developing their Business Plan.
3. Facilitator makes a list on newsprint with the name of the entrepreneurs and the type of business and adds two names of participants to each entrepreneur. These three people will work together in making the Business Plan. The women entrepreneurs are given Worksheet 1 and the Business Plan form for her particular type of business.
4. Give the groups 3 hours to complete the Business Plan form and Worksheet 1. Ask to write the projected income statement (from Business Plan) and the conclusions and recommendation (Worksheet 1) on newsprint.
5. Facilitators go from group to group to see whether there are any questions. Facilitators should pay special attention to participation of the woman entrepreneur in the discussions and redirect participant's focus if necessary.
6. When participants are ready, Facilitator starts with the review of the Business Plans. If there are more than 15 participants in the workshop, split up into two groups in such a way that in both groups each type of business (production, processing, trade, service) is represented.
7. Put the two newsprints of the first type of business on the wall.
8. Ask for a presentation of the conclusions and recommendations and invite other groups to comment and give suggestions.
Important note: Micro-entrepreneurs often do not know the risks involved in starting a business. Some tend to be too afraid of taking the risk and others tend to be too optimistic. Facilitator should therefore raise critical questions in assessment of the Business Plan, so that the entrepreneur gets a realistic insight in the risks involved and the critical aspects she has to pay attention to once she starts implementing her project. This will help her to make the right decision.
Sample Questions for Review of Business Plan
For Production Type Enterprises
Production:
- is the projected harvest reasonable?
- is the quantity and price of crucial inputs, such as seeds, fertilizer, labor reasonable?
- in animal raising, what is the mortality rate?
- are estimates of amount and price of feed, medicines correct?
Marketing:
How sure is it that the buyer will really buy the quantity at the time and price that she projected?
Financial:
Project net profit for worst scenarios, ea. harvest 60 % of estimate, price 25 % lower?
For Processing Type Enterprises
Production:
- is the output volume reasonable?
- is the quantity and price of inputs reasonable?
- can the quality be assured?
Marketing:
How sure is she that she can sell the projected volume at the projected time and price?
Financial:
Project net profit for worst scenario, e.g. lower sales price or volume, higher price raw materials.
For Trading Type Enterprises
Marketing:
Are the projections on inventory turn-over reasonable?
Financial:
Project net profit for the worst scenario, e.g. sales 50 % of estimate.
For Service Type Enterprises
Marketing:
What is the basis for assumptions on demand, attractiveness of her business? Is the demand seasonal?
Financial:
Project net profit for the worst scenario, e.g. half of the estimated demand.
9. Facilitator summarizes and moves on to the next enterpreneur to present their Business Plan.
10. After reviewing all Business Plans, Facilitator asks the women entrepreneurs whether the activity has been useful to them. Ask them to give specific examples of what they have learned.
11. Facilitator ends the day by thanking the women entrepreneurs and participants.
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-1 Net cash income
Total Income
Sales
Other Income
Less:
Production Costs
Materials
Labor
Use of facilities
Gross Profit
Less:
Other Expenses
Transportation
Administration
Tax
Other costs of selling and delivery
Net Cash Income
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-2 Production type of enterprise key elements production aspect
Key Questions
Criticical Information
1. What will be produced?
 Product
 Quality Specifications
 Estimated Volume
2. What are the requirements in producing the item?
Land (suitable for the crop, how many mu?)
 Raw Materials (seeds, feed, etc.)
 Technological requirements (skills, training needed?)
 Labor
 Tools, equipment, facilities
 Costs of each of the requirements
3. When are you going to produce?
 Production schedule and activities
 How many cycles per year?
4. Where will you produce?
 Far from source of raw materials?
 Far from buyers?
 Cost implication of location?
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-3 Production type of enterprise key elements marketing aspect
Key Questions
Criticical Information
1. To whom will you sell?
 Who are the identified buyers and whet volume, whet qualify requirement, how frequent, written contract?
 Are there alternative buyers?
2. At what price?
 Price per quality
 Risk of price change
 Total expected sales income
3. How to deliver?
 Mode of delivery
 Costs involved
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-4 Service type of enterprise marketing aspects
Key Questions
Criticical Information
Where will you sell?
Is the location convenient to customers?
Is there demand for the service?
Competitors assessment:
 why do people go or not go there?
 are there too many competitors already?
How will you sell?
Service strategy:
 what will be your service/ product?
 what will be your speciality?
 what will make you more attractive than competitors?
At what price will you sell?
Pricing
 Is the price acceptable to the customer?
Is the price competitive?
Sales
 Are there seasonalities in the demand?
 What is the estimated sales income?
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 2-5 Key elements of a business plan
Business Aspect
Type of Enterprise
Production
Processing
Trading
Service
Production Aspect
Product description (quality)
Production volume
Production requirements
Costs of production
Production cycle
Schedule
Process
Marketing Aspect
Buyer description
Inventory
Location
Risk analysis (price change)
Margin
Demand
Alternative buyers
Demand
Competitors
Competitors
Demand seasonalities
Pricing
Estimated Sales
Estimated Sales
Financial Aspect
Investment Plan, Gross Profit, Net Cash Income, Net Profit, Cash Flow
Organization Aspect
Household based enterprise:
 financial control and records skills
 task household members
Group enterprise:
 clarity role and tasks members
 financial control
 skills
Annex 2. Case: 2-1 Assessing the viability of Ms. Zhang's starch processing enterprise
Ms. Zhang wants to start her own micro-enterprise. She thinks about processing potatoes into starch. In September she wants to buy an electric grinder at 600 rmb; three basins at 50 rmb each; and three sieves at 30 rmb each. In October she plans to buy 500 jin of potatoes at 0.4 rmb per jin. After processing she will sell the starch within the same month. In November and December she plans to do the same.
Since she only needs the grinder for one week a month, she agreed to rent her grinder to her neighbour, who will pay 50 rmb rent at the end of each month.
Ms. Zhang's fixed assets can be used for 10 years, except for the sieves, they need to be replaced every 3 years.
Ms. Zhang has only 350 rmb in savings of her own, and needs to borrow 800 rmb from the women's group to be able to realize her plan. She will borrow et I September and plans to repay the full amount on January 1. The duration of the loan is then 4 months. The group charges 2 % interest per month.
To improve the quality of the starch' Ms. Zhang will use a chemical. To process the 500 jin of potatoes 0.5 jin of the chemical will be enough. but this chemical is only sold by the jin, at 30 rmb/jin, so she has to buy I jin in September.
Ms. Zhang thinks she can produce a total of 150 jin of starch out of 500 jin of potatoes. She will sell this to the local vermicelli factory. The factory's price depends on the quality. Ms. Zhang thinks she can sell 80 jin of the highest quality at a price of 3 rmb/jin; 40 jin of medium quality at 2 rmb/jin and 30 jin of low quality. which sells at 1 rmb/jin. Each time she sells, a total of 80 rmb of other expenses, such as for transportation are made.
Ms. Zhang invited you to come and review her preliminary business plan with her. She wants to know whether this is a good business and wants your advice on how to proceed.
Task I
Net Cash Income
Task 1: Net Cash Income
1. Compute the Net Cash Income for Ms. Zhang's enterprise.
2. List questions you have regarding:
a. verification of the above data
b. additional information you need to compute and assess more accurately
Output Task 1
Total Income
Per cycle
Sept.-Dec
Sales:
high quality starch:
80 jin x 3 rmb/jin
240 rmb
720 rmb
medium quality starch:
40 jin x 2 rmb/jin
80 rmb
240 rmb
low quality starch:
30 jin x 1 rmb/jin
30 rmb
90 rmb
Sub-total
350 rmb
1050 rmb
Rent from neighbour
50 rmb
50 rmb
Total Income
400 rmb
1200 rmb
Output Task 1
Production Costs
Production Costs (recurring costs for each production cycle):
Per cycle
Sept.-Dec.
500 jin potatoes x 0.4 rmb/jin
200 rmb
600 rmb
0.5 jin chemical x 30 rmb/jin
15 rmb
45 rmb
Total Production Costs
215 rmb
645 rmb
Examples of Questions
 the grinder uses electricity, what are the estimated costs?
 the processing requires water, what are the estimated costs?
 will she have to pay any labor costs?
Important Points
 Production costs include all costs that have to be made each time the estimated output volume is produced. These costs can be categorized as follows:
Materials: these are the costs we have to make to purchase the materials that are consumed to produce the estimated amount of product, e.g. raw materials, chemicals, fertilizer, seeds, feed stuff, etc. Investments in- durable materials, such as buildings, tools, equipment are not included here. In the next activity we will see how to treat the costs of this kind of materials.
Paid labor: this is the costs of hiring external labor force or for paying family members to do certain tasks. Unpaid labor costs are not included. Usually micro-entrepreneurs do not pay salaries to themselves and therefore no such costs are included here.
 Cost of use of facilities: these are the costs like rent or fees paid to use land or facilities like drying facilities, storage, etc. It also includes any other costs directly related to the use of facilities or equipment, production, such as energy, water, regular maintenance of equipment, etc.
 Note that although Ms. Zhang has to buy I jin of chemical, we only count half a jin as production costs. This is because production costs are the costs that have to be made each time the planned volume is produced, which is the costs of half a jin.
Output Task 1
Net Cash Income
Per cycle
Sept.-Dec.
Sales:
high quality starch:
240 rmb
720 rmb
medium quality starch:
80 rmb
240 rmb
low quality starch:
30 rmb
90 rmb
Other Income (Rent)
50 rmb
150 rmb
Total Income
400 rmb
1200 rmb
Production Costs:
215 rmb
645 rmb
Gross Profit
185 rmb
555 rmb
Other expenses
80 rmb
240 rmb
Net Cash Income
105 rmb
315 rmb
Important Points
 A positive Net Cash Income means that the entrepreneur has recovered all the production costs and other expenses from her total income of the enterprise. It also means she has reserve funds for use as working capital in the next business cycle or for payment of loans and interest.
 A positive Gross Profit means that all production costs are recovered from the income of the enterprise. A negative or low Gross Profit would either mean:
- inefficient production (ratio outputs/inputs too low)
- low price for the product
- high prices for inputs
Task 2
Net Profit
Task 2: Net Profit
1. Compute the Net Profit of Ms. Zhang's enterprise.
2. Say in your own words what depreciation is. Why should we consider depreciation in assessing the viability of an enterprise?
3. What will happen to an enterprise if the Net Profit is negative?
4. What can the entrepreneur do with profits?
5. What is your conclusion on the profitability of Ms. Zhang's enterprise (very good, good, so so, low, too low) ?
Output Part 2
Net Profit
Net Profit is Net Cash Income minus Depreciation minus Interest.
Per month
Sept.-Dec.
Net Cash Income
105 rmb
315 rmb
Depreciation:
Fixed Assets of 10 life years:
Grinder
600 rmb
Basins
150 rmb
Total
750 rmb
Depreciation per year: 75 rmb
Depreciation in 1 month:
6 rmb
Depreciation in 4 months: 24 rmb
Fixed Assets of 3 life years:
Sieves
90 rmb
Depreciation per year:
30 rmb
Depreciation in 1 month:
2.5 rmb
Depreciation in 4 months:
10 rmb
Total Depreciation
8.5 rmb
34 rmb
Interest
800 rmb, 2 %/month
16 rmb
64 rmb
Net profit
80.50 rmb
217 rmb
% return on invested capital
(1150 rmb)
(57 %/year)
% return on own capital
(3 50 rmb)
( 186 %/year)
Important Points
 Depreciation: Fixed assets can be used in more than one production cycle, but sooner or later these need to be replaced. Depreciation is the minimum amount of money which the enterprise should generate at each production cycle to be able to replace the fixed assets in time.
 The Net Profit reflects the entrepreneur's return on her labor' management and invested capital. A negative or zero Net Profit means that the entrepreneur does not get any return on her labor and capital investments.
 A negative net profit means that in the long term the business can not continue, unless money from other sources is added to it. Such a business of course can not be considered viable.
 The entrepreneur can utilize profits in several ways:
- investment in expansion or improvement of her enterprise
- investment in new enterprises
- savings (e.g. for child education, future investments, old age security)
- consumption
 For long term reinvestment it is the best to utilize profits, since it leads to further increase in income in the future. Utilization of profits for short term, consumption may be equally important however, ea. to improve nutrition or health care, to be able to pay the school tuition, etc. Utilization for luxury goods of course should be discouraged.
 Ms. Zhang's net profit can be considered good. The net return on the total invested capital (1150 rmb) is 57 % per year (note: this is under the assumption that she produces all year round). This means that in just two years, she can already generate the required capital investment without the need to borrow. The net return on her own capital (350 rmb) is very high. At 186 % net return a year it means she is able to almost double her original capital in one year.
Task 3
Risk Analysis
Task 3: Risk Analysis
Compute Gross Profit and Net Profit for each of the following situations:
a. Sales price for each quality of starch is 0.3 rmb/jin lower
b. Price for 1 jin potatoes is 0.1/jin higher
c. The amount of starch per quality category is different: 60 jin of high, 50 jin of medium and 40 jin of low quality is produced (on average a lower quality).
d. 500 jin of potatoes produces not 150 jin of starch, but only 120 jin, of which 64 jin high quality, 32 jin medium quality, 24 jin low quality (total amount lower than in original plan, but proportion per quality category the same).
e. The price for the grinder is not 600 rmb, but 1000 rmb.
Output Task 3
Risk Analysis
PLAN
A
B
C
D
E
Total Income
Production Costs
Gross Income
Net Profit
Important Points
 The outcome shows that we have to be very careful in our computations. What looks as though there is little deviation from our estimates can mean the difference between profit and loss.
The entrepreneur should be aware of which factors are most critical before starting the business, so that she is clear about the risks are and for which factors she needs to pay more attention to.
 The following basic factors that we reviewed in this Case are most critical for all enterprises:
- sales price of products: market fluctuations of 10 % are not unusual (a)
- price of raw materials: market fluctuations of 10-20 % are not unusual of the
- quality of product: inexperience in the type of production and/or factors such as the weather or the quality of the raw materials easily can change the average quality of the products by 10 % (c)
- production efficiency (ratio between output volume to input): inexperience in the type of production and/or factors such as the weather or the quality of the raw materials easily can affect the output volume by 20% (d)
 When inquiring about the price of equipment, usually only the price of the machine is mentioned. Additional costs, such as installation costs, adjustments needed in buildings, etc. often are forgotten. Especially in processing/manufacturing enterprises these costs can be substantial and hence affect the income from the business.(e)
Task 4
Cash Flow
Task 4: Cash Flow
1. Fill in the attached Cash Record to project the cash situation of the business between September and January.
2. Can Ms. Zhang repay her loan with interest in January, as she has planned?
3. What decision should Ms. Zhang and the group make about her application?
Cash Record
Month
Cash In
Cash Out
Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
September
October
November
December
January
February
Output Task 4
Cash Flow
Cash Record
Month
Cash In
Cash Out
Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
September
Savings
Grinder
Loan
Basins
Sieves
Chemical (1 jin)
Total
Total
October
Potatoes (500 jin)
Sales
Expenses
Rent
November
Potatoes (500 jin)
Sales
Expenses
Rent
December
Chemical (1 jin)
Potatoes (500 jin)
Sales
Expenses
Rent
January
Loan
Interest
Important Points
 The Cash Flow Projection will determine whether the entrepreneur will be able to pay the loan or not at the time the loan matures. In this case Ms. Zhang by the end of December only has 610 rmb cash balance. This means she will not be able to pay the loan and interest (total 864 rmb) in full. She is short of 254 rmb. It also means that she cannot continue the business as she has nothing left for the next production cycle.
 For the business to continue, the ending cash balance should be sufficient to cover the production costs and other expenses for the next production cycle.
 We learn from this case that although a business can generate a positive net profit this is not a guarantee that a loan can be repaid. It is necessary to make a cash flow projection to check this.
 Rural households often have different sources of cash income. Perhaps Ms. Zhang's household has received a large amount of cash after harvest, most of which is not needed until spring. In that case Ms. Zhang could "borrow" from the household to repay the loan in January. since by March she will have enough cash from her starch processing enterprise. Another possibility would be to pay the loan in installments during a longer period of time. It is up to Ms. Zhang and the group to decide whether it is acceptable that the benefits of her business will not show in cash until after half a year of production.
<section>7</section>
Module 3: Micro-enterprise management
Topic 1: Management areas, skills and tools
Activity 1: Introduction to micro-enterprise management
Activity 2: Introduction of financial records
Activity 3: Preparation and reading of financial records
Topic 2: Systematic financial analysis and diagnosis
Activity 1 : financial analysis and diagnosis
Activity 2: Options for the entrepreneur
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-1 Management areas and skills
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-2 Income and expenditure record
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-3 Important learnings in preparing income statements
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-4 Analysis chart
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-5 Possible weaknesses bakery enterprise
Annex 2. Case: 3-1 Ms. Wang's rabbit raising enterprise
Annex 2. Case: 3-2 Ms. Wu's Shoe trading enterprise
Annex 2. Case 3-3: Income statement bakery project
Module 3: Micro-enterprise management
INTRODUCTION
Module 3 addresses the management of micro-enterprises at the implementation stage. It is important for field workers to assist micro-entrepreneurs in problem-solving of their micro-enterprises and offering useful suggestions as a result. This module is designed for participants to acquire the knowledge, skills and attitude in providing technical assistance to micro-entrepreneurs to ensure continued success or growth of their businesses.
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES
At the end of Module 3, participants will be able to:
1. Understand the requirements in micro-enterprise management and the importance of record keeping.
2. Assist women entrepreneurs in keeping financial records and preparing income statements.
3. Carry out financial analysis and diagnosis, and come up with recommendations and options to the micro-entrepreneur.
Topic 1: Management areas, skills and tools
Background and Rationale
To obtain profit is the main goal why micro-entrepreneurs engage in business. Proper management is the key for success. Field workers have a role in assisting micro-entrepreneurs in improving their management skills.
In this topic the major areas of management and the required management skills of micro-entrepreneurs will be identified, and participants will acquire the knowledge, attitude and skills in preparing and reading financial records and statements.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to:
1. Identify the critical areas in management, the common weaknesses of micro-entrepreneurs in business management skills and the importance of record keeping in business management.
2. Prepare, read and explain financial records.
3. Understand why it is important to exchange of business information in the women's group.
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, felt tip pen
Activity 1: Introduction to micro-enterprise management
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator begins this activity by saying that in Module 3 we will focus on the management of micro-enterprises. An enterprise must be properly managed to be successful.
2. Facilitator reminds the participants that in Module I they identified the common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs at both the planning and implementation stages. They also identified the type of assistance field workers need to provide to the micro-entrepreneurs. Through asking questions to the participants the Major factors at the implementation stage are repeated and summarized by the Facilitator, using Visual Aid 1-5 and 1-6, by using questions rather that lecturing.
Visual Aid 1-5 Common Weaknesses and Constraints of Micro-Entrepreneurs
Visual Aid 1-6 Type of Project Assistance to the Micro-Entrepreneur
3. Facilitator draws up the diagram of Visual Aid 3-1 and explains that the inner circle in the diagram shows the aspects (production. marketing organization, finance) that have to be managed and the outer circle shows the management skills that are required to manage the aspects properly.
Visual Aid 3-1 Management Areas and Skills
4. Facilitator points out that in Module 2 we concentrated on the planning stage. In this Module we will especially focus on the skills in controlling the business. A basic reason for difficulties of entrepreneurs such as inability to adjust to market changes and problems in production is a lack of records. Without records it is difficult to recognize changes and problems and it is not clear what the effect of changes and problems are for the income from the business. Unless the entrepreneur has thorough insight in her business, she is not really in control and hence can not take initiatives in problem solving.
5. Facilitator continues by saying that to be fully in control of an enterprise, the entrepreneur needs to be well informed about all aspects of the business. She needs to know how she is down in production, in marketing, in organization and in finance. Most of the information the entrepreneur will know without writing it down. but depending on the type of enterprise, it may be advisable to keep records for certain, aspects. E.g. for a chicken raiser, a daily record of the egg production can be helpful to detect problems with disease, room temperature, etc. For a trader, a daily record of her stock is useful to make sure that she can always serve her clients. For a vegetable grower. it may be beneficial to note down the market prices every day, so that she gets to know what time of the year the demand for certain vegetables is highest.
6. Keeping financial records is important for all entrepreneurs, since this keeps tract of the income in particular, which is a sign whether the business is successful or not.
7. Keeping records enhances the business conciousness and self-reliance of entrepreneurs. Field workers should encourage the exchange of information in the women's group. It will help each one to improve her own management skills and business results. Besides, for common problems (e.g. with pig feed from the same supplier, payment problems with buyers, lack of technical advisory service) the entrepreneurs together can take more forceful action than individually.
8. For field workers to be able to assist the entrepreneur in record keeping and in evaluating her business results, it is important to be familiar with the preparation and analysis of financial records and statements. In the next activities, we will practice these skills.
Activity 2: Introduction of financial records
Time: 45 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator tells that there are two major tools in financial record keeping: (a) the Cash Record, and (b) the Income Statement. Since these are important tools, they are part of the field workers set of Worksheets (2 and 3).
Worksheet 2 Cash Record
Worksheet 3 Income Statement
Visual Aid 3-2 Cash Record
2. Facilitator uses Visual Aid 3-2 (from manual Group Formation) to illustrate the principle of the Cash Record. Facilitator asks several participants why the Cash Record and Income Statement are important.
Entrepreneurs, who conscientiously keep a cash-book will notice fluctuations in production or the market quickly. E.g. a pig raiser who keeps a cash-book will notice changes in prices of pigs and pig feed. From regular computation of the income over a certain period or production cycle, the entrepreneur will furthermore become more aware of the impact of these fluctuations on her income. The pig raiser for example will learn from subsequent income statements that a difference of a few mao per jin of pig feed makes a big difference for her income.
3. To ensure that participants know how to prepare cash records correctly, facilitator asks participants for each of the following sample transactions whether it is (a) an inflow; (b) an outflow or (c) not recorded in cash record:
Transaction
Answer
1. loan from the group
Inflow
2. repaid loan to the group
Outflow
3. bought equipment
Outflow
4. bought materials
Outflow
5. husband paid back money he borrowed from the enterprise
Inflow
6. deposit additional savings to group
Outflow
7. goods consumed by husband
Not recorded, not a cash transaction
8. harvest reduced by half
Not a cash transaction, not recorded
4. Facilitator tells participants that in her experience micro-entrepreneurs who start to keep the Cash Record often need assistance regarding the three points below. Participants are asked to think about how they will explain/help the micro-entrepreneur. Divide the participants in sub-groups of about 5 persons and give 15 minutes for discussion.
(a). What is the beginning balance?
(b). Why is it important to separate the enterprise account from the household account and accounts of other enterprises? Eg. when part of the raw materials or finished products or goods are used for own consumption, how should it be recorded?
(c). Illiterates often are able or can learn easily to read and write numbers. Do you have suggestions on how they can keep the Cash Record?
5. Sub-groups are asked to write their outputs on newsprint. Each sub-group is asked to present. Sub-groups are encouraged to comment on each other's outputs. There are different ways in answering the questions and it is important for participants to hear as many ways as possible.
6 Facilitator summarizes by using participant's explanations and emphasizing the important points below.
Important Points
 The beginning, balance is the cash status at the beginning of the period for which the record will be kept. For a starting enterprise, this is the amount of savings (her own capital! that the entrepreneur will invest in her new enterprise. In an on-going enterprise, the beginning balance is the remaining balance at the end of the previous recording period.
 If the enterprise's account is mixed with other accounts, it is very difficult to compute the enterprise's income. Eg. in a grocery shop, the household may use some of the goods. It is important that these goods are treated as goods sold to the household. Otherwise we charge the business for the living expenses of the household and the income from the business will come out low, while it is the household which has less expenditures than it would have if we did not have the shop.
 Illiterates can ask family members to keep the records, but there are also alternatives. She can for instance use different colors or symbols for certain types of income and expenditures. ea. a different color or symbol for raw materials. other inputs, fixed assests, labor payments and other expenses.
Activity 3: Preparation and reading of financial records
Time: 3 hours
Steps:
1. Facilitator tells that in this activity, participants will practice in preparing and reading the financial records by reviewing two cases.
2. The first case is about a production type of enterprise: raising of rabbits. Participants are asked to carry out the tasks of Case 3-1 individually (15 minutes).
Case 3-1
3. Ask one participant to write the output on newsprint. Ask others to comment, until the computation of Net Profit is complete and understood.
4. Summarize the major learnings of Case 3-1 using Visual Aid 3-3.
Visual Aid 3-3 Important Learnings in preparing Income Statements
Case 3-1 and 3-2
S. Facilitator then asks participants to carry out the tasks of Case 3-2 individually (15 minutes).
Case 3-2
6. Ask one participant to write the output of task 1 on newsprint, ask another one for task 2. Ask others to comment, until the computation of Net Profit is complete and understood.
7. Summarize the major learning of Case 3-2. using Visual Aid 3-3.
Visual Aid 3-3 Important Learnings in preparing Income Statements
Case 3-1 and 3-2
8. Facilitator tells that in reality the situation often is more complex than the two cases we used here, because the entrepreneur has non-cash income or costs. We will discuss how to deal with those non-cash transactions in preparing an income statement for three common situations. Facilitator presents the situations and asks participants how to deal with it in preparing an income statement.
Situation 1: Goods consumed by the household
This is a situation in which the household consumes some of the products of goods of the business without paying for it, e.g. cigarettes of a grocery shop, beancurd of a beancurd processing enterprise, part of the vegetable consumed by the household.
1. The value of these goods must be treated as income and be added to the net profit.
2. It is advisable to encourage women entrepreneurs that goods borrowed or consumed by household members should be returned or paid for.
Situation 2: Sales on credit
In this situation we can think of a grocery shop, where the entrepreneur sells the goods on credit to certain customers, who then pay later.
1. Credit sales that the entrepreneur thinks can be paid by the buyer should be treated as income.
2. Credit sales that cannot be paid should be treated as a loss and be deducted from the net profit.
Situation 3: Use of own raw materials
Part of the raw materials may be produced by the household of the entrepreneur, e.g. a starch processing entrepreneur may have part of the potatoes from the household and buy part from other villagers.
1. The value of the raw materials should be treated as costs and be deducted from the net profit.
9. Summarize the [earnings in this activity and topic by reviewing the conclusions on newsprint and emphasizing the following important points.
Important Points
 Both the Cash Record and a regular Income Statement are a necessity for every entrepreneur, because:
- it gives the cash position at any time
- it helps the entrepreneur in detecting fluctuations in prices, market demand for goods, and in production
- it enhances the entrepreneurs business consciousness and control over her enterprise
- regular evaluation of the business is important for planning purposes
 The Cash Record should be kept separate from the household and other business accounts.
 The Cash Record should contain specific information such as volumes and prices to be able to prepare the Income Statement and to analyze the results.
 In preparing the income statement, we need to check the data in the cash record carefully, and ask about non-cash transactions as well. Correct inventory cannot be deduced from the cash record alone. A periodic inventory record is also needed.
 The Income Statement covers a logical period such as one production cycle (for production and processing type of enterprise) or a time period (e.g. a month for trade and service type of enterprise).
 From the Income Statement strengths and weaknesses of the business can be identified.
Topic 2: Systematic financial analysis and diagnosis
Background and Rationale
Financial records provide information on the strengths and weaknesses in the business operations. This requires thorough analysis and diagnosis in order to be able to come up with realistic recommendations and options for the entrepreneur for further strenthening of the operations.
In this topic, participants will learn how to systematically analyze income statements and to identify recommendations and options for the micro-entrepreneur.
Output Objectives
At the end of this topic, participants will be able to:
1. Understand how to diagnose problem areas based on a systematic financial analysis.
2. Understand how to make recommendations and offer options to entrepreneurs based on the analysis and diagnosis.
Activity 1 : financial analysis and diagnosis
Time: 1 1/2 hours
Steps:
1. Facilitator tells that in the previous topic participants practiced with analysis of financial records and statements. In this activity, a systematic way of analyzing will be introduced.
2. Facilitator hands out Case 3-3 with the Income Statement of a bakery enterprise.
Case 3-3 Income Statement Bakery Enterprise
3. Facilitator asks sub-groups to discuss the following questions:
- What do you think are the problem areas (major weaknesses) of the enterprise? What is the basis for saying so?
- What are your recommendations'?
4. Sub-groups are given 20 minutes for discussion and are asked to write the outputs on newsprint.
5. After presentation by sub-groups, facilitator discusses the step-by-step process of analysis of the sample income statement.
a. The first item to look at is the bottom line net profit. Is the net profit satisfactory? Is it considered low?
b. If low, then you start probing the causes why this is so. You look at the gross profit Is 12 % gross profit satisfactory for that type of business? If satisfactory, then probably selling and administrative expenses may be high But in the sample statement, these expenses seem to be reasonable at 731 rmb).
c. If the gross profit is considered low, then there are possibly two causes: (a) cost of gods sold (i.e. manufacturing costs) is high: and/or (b) the total income may not have been optimized.
d. If the total income is low, then possible causes are: (a) sales turn-over may be low, and/or (b) sales volume may be low or (c) the selling price is low.
e. If you look at the cost side, you should focus on those items with relative high percentage total costs. In the case, these are definitely the cost of materials (71 %) and labor costs (22 %). Thus, you are able to pin point the particular cost items that should be reduced to improve gross profit.
6. Facilitator then summarizes the assessment, using Visual Aid 3-4 (Analysis Chart). Facilitator checks items found in the case and compares these with the group outputs, focusing on items that have no basis. After that the summary of possible weaknesses is presented (Visual Aid 3-5).
Visual Aid 3-4 Analysis Char'
Visual Aid 3-5 Possible Weaknesses Bakery Enterprise
7. Facilitator explains that the next step is to use records and look at operations of the business in conjunction with the above indicative findings to ascertain which are the real and critical areas of weakness. In this case the "inventory turnover is low" explanation can be dismissed because the bread is sold every day and raw materials can last for a month. The other options can be further diagnosed.
8. The next step is to determine the possibility of improving these identified weaknesses (converting them into strengths) considering external factors.
For example:
Identified Weakness
Can this be converted into strength?
Is this possible given External Factors?
1. High Expense
Reduce Expenses
 Labor
Reduce number of workers?
Not possible (all are group members)
Reduce salary?
Possible if they all agree.
 Raw materials
Reduce prices? Buy wholesale volume? Reduce waste?
Yes, possible to purchase at township
2. Selling Price
Increase selling price?
Not possible. Market may no longer buy
3. Sales Volume
Increase production efficiency. (Possible if raw materials are available and capital for purchasing is available.)
Check if new sales volume can be sold
The above provides indications on how the business can be further improved and what concrete solutions to identified problems can be proposed.
9. Facilitator explains that financial analysis and diagnosis amounts to a replanning process, and that a new projected Income Statement can subsequently be created.
Worksheet 1 Business Viability Assessment
10. Facilitator encourages participants to use Worksheet 1 in drawing final conclusions together with the entrepreneur, who should have a copy.
11. Facilitator stresses that while project officers can make recommendations to micro-entrepreneurs based on the financial analysis and diagnosis, it is up to the women entrepreneurs to decide whether to accept this advice. The role of the project officer is to guide and assist not to dictate decisions to be made.
Activity 2: Options for the entrepreneur
Time: 15 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator explains that after evaluation of the business results, the entrepreneur has always three options:
a. To continue the existing enterprise, but improve on the identified weak areas by for instance:
 expanding production volume
 improving production efficiency
 improving customer relations
 improving quality of product
The entrepreneur must always look for better ways of improving her business to ensure its continued growth.
b. To diversify into other products or new business. This option can be considered when she is satisfied with her current business. If she decides on this option, she should repeat the process of planning.
c. To discontinue or close the business. This option may be considered if continuing the business would mean greater losses for the entrepreneur, particularly when weaknesses cannot be turned into strengths and/or when there are un-manageable constraints.
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-1 Management areas and skills
Management areas and skills
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-2 Income and expenditure record
Beijing
Balance
Income
Expenditure
Remaining
Balance
Cash at the begining of business
What is earned by the business what comes in
What is spent or what goes out
What is the cash position at a given time
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-3 Important learnings in preparing income statements
Case 3-1
 The costs of improving the building are not a production cost since the newly improved facility can be used for more than one production cycle. Thus, this is added to the investment and included in computation of depreciation.
 Depreciation cannot be found from the cash record, because it is a non-cash cost.
 Rabbits that died cannot be found from the cash record. It would have been good if the item description in the cash record is filled up well, ie. indicating quantity and price per rabbit (eg. sold 48 rabbits at 15 rmb).
 It would have been better if the amount and price of feed (ea. 400 jin at 0.5 rmb) also had been specified. This is helpful to check the inventory.
 31 % profit in 3 months is a good profit. Perhaps experts in rabbit raising have tips to further improve.
Case 3-2
Task 1
 By taking the difference between pairs of shoes sold and the number not yet sold, wee assumed an ending inventory of 190 pairs that are still available for sale. This is not necessarily so, ea. some shoes may have been given as a gift to friends. Losses in inventory cannot be accounted for in the cash record.
 It is Important therefore to have a periodic inventory counting, apart from the cash record. This is particularly Important for trading enterprises.
Task 2
 The Income Statement reflects the results of business operations within a given period.
 To compute the actual net profit within such a period, a beginning and ending inventory level must be determined. This is especially true in on-going projects.
 The overall conclusion is that Ms. Wu's enterprise is very profitable. She has been able to find a good market and seems to have good business skills. Eg. she started carefully and was able to gradually increase her sales volume, while she also was able to negotiate a lower purchase price when her volume increased. Furthermore she reinvests all her earnings in the business.
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-4 Analysis chart
Analysis chart
Annex 1. Visual Aid: 3-5 Possible weaknesses bakery enterprise
Possible weakness
Basis
1. High costs of raw materials
Raw materials cost is 71 % of gross sales
2. Too many workers
Costs are 22 % of gross sales
3. Sales volume not optimized
Average sales is 9754 breads per month, 325 per day
4. Selling price low
0.2 rmb per bread may be low
5. Inventory turn-over slow
An inventory of 847 rmb of materials may be too much, since average sales per day only are 65 rmb.
Annex 2. Case: 3-1 Ms. Wang's rabbit raising enterprise
Ms. Wang has been raising rabbits for quite some time but never kept records or computed her income until she joined the women's group a few months ago. Ms. Wang tells that she has used only half of the 400 jin of feed that she bought and two baby rabbits died. The existing building costed 350 rmb and will last for 10 years. Her Cash Record over the last production cycle is given below.
Tasks
1. Compute Ms. Wang's Net Profit for this production cycle on Worksheet 3.
2. What questions and advice do you have for Ms. Wang?
Worksheet 2
Cash Record
Name entrepreneur Ms Wang
Month:
May-July
Name enterprise: Rabbit Raising
Year:
Beginning Balance (Cash Status)
Amount:
Cash In
Cash Out
Remaining Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Amount
Date
Improvement of building
(additional investment)
Feed
50 rabbits at 5 rmb
Medicines, water, etc.
Rabbits
Output
Worksheet 3
Income Statement
Name entrepreneur: Ms. Wang
Name enterprise: Rabbit Raising
Address:
Period of Statement: May-July 1995
Signature:
Date: August 15,1995
Gross Sales
48 rabbits at 15 rmb
720 rmb
Less: Costs of goods/services sold
feed
200 rmb
rabbits: 50 x 5 rmb
250 rmb
medicines, water, etc
50 rmb
Total
500 rmb
Change in inventory:
Value at the beginning
0 rmb
Minus Value at the end
100 rmb
-100 rmb
Total costs of goods sold
400 rmb
= Gross profit
320 rmb
Less: Selling and other expenses
0 rmb
= Net Cash Income
320 rmb
Less: Depreciation
40 rmb
= Net profit
280 rmb
Return of Investment (900 rmb)*
*Total investment = 350 (existing building) + 50 (additional cost of building) + 500 (production cost) = 900 rmb
Annex 2. Case: 3-2 Ms. Wu's Shoe trading enterprise
Ms. Wu started trading in shoes in February. She has a loan (2% interest per month) from the women's group and keeps a Cash Record, which is given below.
Tasks
1. Compute Ms. Wu's Net Profit for the period 2/1 to 3/16 on Worksheet 3.
2 Compute Ms. Wu's Net Profit for the period 2/17 to 3/19 on Worksheet 3.
3. Ms. Wu asks for your opinion and advice. Please give.
Worksheet 2
Cash Record
Name entrepreneur: Ms. Wu
Month:
Febr.- March
Name enterprise: Shoe Trade
Year
Beginning Balance (Cash Status)
Amount
330 rmb
Cash In
Cash Out
Remaining Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Amount
Date
Loan Women's Group
Bought 100 pairs of shoes at 5rmb
Sold 100 pairs of shoes at 7r
Transportation
Bought 120 pairs at 5rmb
Sold 100 pairs at 7rmb
Stall
Loan Amortization (100rmb + 4rmb intere
Bought 120 pairs at 5rmb
Sold 120 pairs at 7rmb
Tax
Bought 170 pairs at 4.8 rmb
Sold 150 pairs at 7rmb
Transportation
Output Task 1
Gross Sales
100 pairs x 7rmb
100 pairs x 7rmb
120 pairs x 7rmb
(320 pairs x 7 rmb: 2240 rmb)
Other income
Total Income
2240 rmb
Less:
Cost of goods sold
Materials purchased:
2516 rmb
100 pairs
5 rmb
120 pairs
5 rmb
120 pairs
5 rmb
170 pairs
4.8 rmb
(510 pairs:
2516 rmb)
Labor:
Change in inventory:*
-916 rmb
Value beginning:
Minus
Value end
20 pairs x 5rmb = 100 (2/19)
0 pair x 5 rmb = 0 (3/5)
170 pairs x 4.8 rmb = 816 (3/16)
(190 pairs. value of 916 rmb)
Total Cost of goods sold
1600 rmb
Gross Profit
624 rmb
Less:
Other expenses
90 rmb
Transportation: 30 rmb (2/5)
Stall: 30 rmb (2/19)
Tax: 30 rmb (3/5)
Net Cash Income
534 rmb
Less:
Depreciation
0 rmb
Interest
4 rmb
4 rmb
Net profit
530 rmb
Return on invested capital (630 rmb)
Output Task 2
Gross Sales
100 pairs x 7rmb
120 pairs x 7rmb
150 pairs x 7rmb
(370 pairs x 7 rmb:
2590 rmb)
Other Income:
Total Income
2590 rmb
Leas:
Costs of goods sold
Materials Purchased:
1416 rmb
120 pairs 5 rmb
170 pairs 4.8 rmb
(410 pairs, at
1416 rmb)
Labor:
Change in inventory:
404 rmb
Value beginning:
120 pairs x 5 rmb = 600 (2/16)
Minus
value end:
20 pairs x 5rmb = 100 (2/19)
0 pair x 5 rmb = 0 (315)
20 pairs x 4.8 rmb = 96 (3/19)
(40 pairs, value of 196 rmb)
Total Cost of goods sold
1820 rmb
Gross Profit
770 rmb
Less:
Other expenses
30 rmb x 3
90 rmb
Net Cash Income
680 rmb
Leas:
Depreciation
0 rmb
Interest
4 rmb
4 rmb
Net profit
676 rmb
Annex 2. Case 3-3: Income statement bakery project
Name entrepreneur: Shi Xia Group
Name enterprise: Bakery
Address:
Period of Statement: 27 Aug. 1992
to 5 May 1993
Signature:
Date:
Gross Sales
80,960 breads x 0.20 rmb/bread
16,192 rmb
Less:
Cost of goods sold
% of Gross Sales
Materials purchased
11,500 rmb
Labor
3,529 rmb
Total:
15,029 rmb
Inventory (raw materials)
beginning
0 rmb
minus end
847 rmb
-847 rmb
Total Coat of goods sold
14,182 rmb
Gross Profit
2,010 rmb
Less:
Overhead expenses
327 rmb
Selling and administration
404 rmb
731 rmb
Net Cash Income
1,279 rmb
Less:
Depreciation
267 rmb
Interest on loan
108 rmb
375 rmb
Net profit
904 rmb
<section>8</section>
Module 4: Fund utilization and management
Topic 1: Fund utilization and management in women's groups
Activity 1: Importance of savings mobilization and utilization
Activity 2: Group financial records
Activity 3: Monitoring of group savings and loans operations
Topic 2: Policies and procedures in project revolving fund management
Activity: Policies and procedures of project revolving fund
Activity 2: Planning disbursement of loans to women's groups
Activity 3: Preparation and procedures of loan applications.
Annex 1. Visual Aid 4-1: Savings and loans build up capital
Annex 1. Visual Aid 4-2: Policies and procedures for loans to women's groups
Annex 1. Visual Aid 4-3: Sample project loan payments
Annex 1. Visual Aid 4-4: Loan application forms and agreements
Annex 2. Case 4-1: Savings and loan operations in women's groups
Annex 2. Case 4-2: Planning number of groups to be organized
Module 4: Fund utilization and management
INTRODUCTION
The previous modules focused primarily on the skills in micro-enterprise development needed for field workers to provide adequate assistance to women's groups and micro-entrepreneurs in micro-enterprise development. Women's groups have two kind of funds available to engage in micro-enterprises, the group savings fund and the project revolving fund loan. Field workers play an important role in assisting women's groups in utilizing both funds successfully. Project officers also have a second important role, viz. to prepare and implement decisions by the Governing Body on the use of the project revolving fund and in management of the revolving fund.
Module 4 focuses on the relationship between group savings, project revolving fund and group capital and on the Important elements in fund management.
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES
At the end of Module 4, participants will be able to:
1. Understand the importance of group capital build up through appropriate use of group savings and project loan.
2. Understand the relationship between the group savings fund and the project revolving fund.
3. Introduce the records women's groups need in managing their fund.
4. Apply the policies and procedures for project loan.;) to women's groups.
5. Understand the important elements and procedures in management of the project revolving fund.
Topic 1: Fund utilization and management in women's groups
Background and Rationale
Savings mobilization and utilization are the foundation for women's groups to become self-reliant through capital build up. At the start of a group, member incomes are low and hence savings are small. Once the group has some savings, members can borrow for investment in micro-enterprises and increase their income and hence their savings. The project loan augments the group's fund so that members can increase their incomes faster, which also means that the group can build up capital faster and can continue loan operations with their own funds.
In this topic participants review the importance of savings mobilization and utilization for sustainability of women's groups, the records that groups need for financial management, and the major issues in monitoring and technical assistance by project officers.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will be able to:
1. Understand the importance of savings mobilization and utilization for building up the group's capital and the role of the project revolving fund loans as a catalyst in this process.
2. Assist the groups in setting up a proper financial recording system for savings and loan operations.
3. Identify the major issues involved in monitoring of group savings and loan operations by project officers.
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, felt tip pen
Activity 1: Importance of savings mobilization and utilization
Time: 1.5 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator tells that field workers play an important role in assisting both Women's Groups and the Governing Body in adequate utilization of the available funds for micro-enterprise development. In this topic we will refresh our memory on the importance of savings mobilization and utilization, and on the relationship between savings fund and project loan.
2. Facilitator asks participants to discuss the following questions in sub-groups of 45 persons for 10 minutes and to write the conclusions on newsprint. a. What is the importance of saving for individual members? b. What are the advantages of saving as a group?
3. Facilitator asks each sub-group to present. After the presentations, facilitator uses the group outputs in summarizing and highlighting the important points below.
Important Points
 Savings are important for the members:
a. to be able to invest in micro-enterprises and
b. to be prepared for future expenditures, such as children's education, old age security, emergencies.
 By saving as a group it is easier to make savings a habit based on the concept "Income minus Savings is Expenditures".
 In the beginning individual saving amounts may be rather small, but the group can accumulate more capital. Through borrowing from the group, members can avail of sufficient capital for investment in micro-enterprises.
 In the group, members get ideas and can exchange experiences, which helps them to improve their business skills and self-confidence.
 Through saving group members start to gain, control over their own resources and a sense of self-reliance develops.
4. Facilitator hands out Case 4-1 and asks participants to perform the tasks in subgroups of 5 persons. Sub-groups are asked to write their findings on newsprint per aspect of the output of Case 4-1 (savings mobilization, savings utilization, project loan utilization, fund management and status of women). (Give 20 minutes)
Case 4-1 Savings and Loan Operations in Women's Groups
Task
Case 4-1 Savings and Loan Operations in Women's Groups
Output
Visual Aid 4-1 Savings and Loans build up Group Capita
5. Facilitator asks each sub-group to present their findings. After the presentations facilitator summarizes using the output of Case 4-1 and Visual Aid 4-1 and emphasizes the important points below.
Important Points
 The important elements in group policies regarding savings and loans are:
- The group starts lending to members for micro-enterprise development as soon as it has a few hundred rmb in savings
- The group regularly reviews and increases the monthly savings amount
- The group charges interest on loans to members. which is added to the group capital
- Loan duration is as short as possible and based on the requirements of the enterprise and entrepreneur
 These policies result in:
- faster capital build up of the group
- more benefits for the households (more, bigger loans)
- efficient use of savings fund and project loan
- faster improvements in members' business skills and self-reliance
6. Facilitator ends the activity by pointing at the differences between policies for loans from the group to members and loans from the project to the group:
a. Ratio savings and loan
The project loan to the group depends on the savings (loan is maximum eight times the group's savings). Within the group the ratio savings to loan is not relevant, loans should be based on the requirements and payback ability of the enterprise and the entrepreneur.
b. Duration of loan
Groups repay the loan to the project in three years. Within the group loan duration should be as short as possible, depending on the enterprise and entrepreneurs ability . Loans from the group to members should never be longer than 1 year.
c. Number of loans
Groups can only once avail of a project loan. There is no limit to the number of times that members can borrow from the group.
d. Interest
Besides 4 % per year for the social development fund, no interest is charged on project loans to women's groups. A higher interest on loans from the group to members is advisable for faster capital build up of the group and as incentive for early repayment.
Activity 2: Group financial records
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. FaciIitator introduces this activity by saying that when groups are in savings and loan operations they need a good financial record keeping system for their fund management. The records are not only important to keep track of the funds, but also to maintain trust among the members. All members have their savings in the group and hence all members should participate in decision-making on the use of the funds.
2. Facilitator then tells that at the start groups will need assistance from project officers in setting' up the record system. In this activity we will therefore discuss the basic records of groups.
3. Facilitator then asks participants to list what kind of information and records are needed. Give 15 minutes for discussion and ask to present the outputs on newsprint.
4. After presentation and discussion of the outputs. facilitator hands out the sample set of Group Financial Records. Facilitator then writes the list of records below on the black board and checks with participants outputs.
GROUP FINANCIAL RECORDS
GMF1
Individual Savings Record
GMF2
Individual Loan Record
GF1
Group Savings Record
GF2
Group Loan Record
GF3
Group Repayment Record
GF4
Group Cash Record
GF5
Group Statement Savings and Loans Operations
5. Facilitator then explains the forms one by one, using the points below. Facilitator should be aware that for some participants this is the first time they see these records. Prepare newsprints with the complete record and explain slowly and clearly, fill in examples, and check whether participants understand.
GMF1 Individual Savings Record
Each member has a record like this as evidence of her savings in the group. After depositing her monthly savings the treasurer signs for receipt on this record.
GMF2 Individual Loan Record
This record contains all the details about loans. Both the group accountant and the member have this record, so that no misunderstanding can occur on the conditions of the loan. See the attached Sample GMF2 for an example on how to fill in this record. Note that these forms are countersigned. After each payment, the accountant signs the member's record as the member's evidence that she has paid. The member signs the accountant's record to certify that her payment is recorded properly by the accountant.
GF1 Group Savings Record
From the group savings record the group at all times knows exactly how much the total savings is. It also is a tool to review the members' performance in that it shows clearly whether the pledged amount has been deposited on time. Groups should be encouraged to post this record in their activity room as a token of their progress. All members have a right to know the group's financial status and members can check whether their deposits have been recorded properly.
GF2 Group Loan Record
Transparency of decision making on loans to members is important to maintain trust among the members. This record therefore should be public for review by the members at all times, ea. by posting it on the wall in the activity room. For the project officer this form can be the basis to discuss the groups policies, ea. with regard to duration of loans. amount of loans and interest rate. It also can be used for planning of technical skills training and advisory services to the group.
GF3 Group Repayment Record
The group accountant needs to keep track of timely repayment of loans. In addition to GMF2, the Individual Loan Record, she makes a monthly summary of the payments due and the actual performance. Note that this is a rather complicated record. Give participants time to study the attached Sample on how to fill in this record. In every meeting this record should be presented for each month with a balance overdue.
GF4 Group Income and Expenditure Record
By keeping an Income and Expenditure Record, the treasurer will always know exactly how much cash is available. The Cash Balance plus the Balance on the Groups Bank Account together are the amount of money which the group has available for loans to members. In the montly meeting the treasurer reports.
GF5 Group Statement Savings and Loans Operations
The Group Statement of Savings and Loan Operations summarizes the performance of the group as recorded in the previous Group Financial Records. Groups should discuss this and submit quarterly to the county project office through the township officer. This Statement facilitates timely detection of problems by the field worker, such as low savings discipline, little activity in loans, bad repayment performance, etc. so that action can be taken.
6. Facilitator ends the activity by saying that the records that were discussed are samples that can be used to assist group financial officers in setting up their own system. If they prefer another format, they can adjust.
Activity 3: Monitoring of group savings and loans operations
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator tells that in this training we have identified that project officers need to assist women's groups to get started with developing their policies and procedures for savings and loans, business planning, loan applications and the financial recording system. These activities will contribute to successful utilization of the project revolving fund loan. In addition to this initial assistance, regular monitoring of group performance regarding savings mobilization, credit operations and micro-enterprise development will further strengthen implementation of the project.
2. Monitoring and assistance at group level is needed to ensure that group members benefit from the loan as planned. and with good result. Facilitator asks participants to discuss in sub-groups of about 5 persons what they need to monitor at group level and to write the output on newsprint (give 15 minutes).
3. After presentation by each sub-group, facilitator summarizes, using the group outputs and highlighting the questions listed belong.
a. Has the group loan been disbursed and utilized as per the agreement?
b. Are the group financial records up to date and correct?
c. Do the designated officers regularly submit an overview of the group's financial status to the group members and the field worker?
d. Does the group regularly review (increase) the monthly savings amount and interest rate on loans?
e. Does the group use its capital funds (savings and project loan) effectively: short loan duration, high percentage of capital in use by members for micro-enterprise development?
f Is the group able to make business plans and to assess loan applications?
g. Is the repayment rate 100 %?
h. Is there a mutual support system in the group (study together, exchange experiences, joint activities)?
i. Have micro-entrepreneurs started keeping records and making regular income statements, do they make a profit?
j. Does the group get the agreed upon assistance, eg. training, advisory service, market information, facilities, etc.?
k. What problems do the group and individual micro-entrepreneurs encounter. what can be done about it
4. Facilitator notes that monitoring aims at identifying weaknesses and constraints in order to take action for improvement. During monthly visits, the field worker can use Worksheet 4 to record the problems identified and the action taken or recommended. For more detailed assistance in micro-enterprise development Worksheet 1, 2 and 3 (Business Viability Assessment, C ash Record and Income Statement) arc useful tools.
Worksheet 4 Monthly Monitoring Report Savings Mobilization Credit Operations Micro-Enterprise Development
5. Facilitator then explains that increased income, Improved entrepreneurial skills and increased control over resources are Important objectives of the project and indications of achievement of the overall goal of the project: improved status of women. Hence, the Government and the United Nations are interested in the results of the women's groups in these areas. This is why the project monitoring system includes two sets of forms on group's progress in these areas. Once a year the forms have to be prepared for the annual project review. The first set of forms is about group savings and loan operations. group's financial status and income change of the members. The second set is about the purpose of loans and innovative income generating activities.
6. Facilitator explains the forms one by one, using the points below.
For all of the forms the reporting year is from 1 August last year until 31 July in the current year. Township officers prepare the forms together with the women's groups and submit to the county project office around 20 August. The county project office verifies. consolidates and analyses the data and submits to the Governing Body with recommendations for next years workplan. The county submits to DOFTEC no later than 15 September.
Form 8 (T) Group's Financial Status
Form 8(T) is a record per group. The township officer together with the group financial officers prepare this form for each group. Note that all the group financial records are needed in completing this forms. This is a good opportunity for a thorough analysis of the group records and a review of the group policies and procedures regarding savings and loans with the whole group. Good performance will be a further encouragement for the group. The result of group discussions including recommended action is submitted with the forms to the county project office.
Form 8 (T)-A Income Change Group Members
If groups do not keep record of the member's income, a survey needs to be undertaken. The survey sample should be prepared before the township officer goes to visit the group to fill up form 8(T). The county project office draws three to five members from each group randomly (is by chance) from the name list. These members should be asked what the change has been in her contribution to household income. E.g. before she joined the group, she made 300 rmb per year and now 1200 rmb; the change thus is 1200 minus 300 is 900 rmb. Township officers submit form 8 (T)-A to the county project office. The county project computes the average for the groups formed in a particular year.
Form 8 (C) Consolidated Report of Group's Financial Status
Form 8(C) is a consolidation of the 8(T) and 8 (T)-A forms by the year groups are formed' thus showing the difference in performance between older and younger groups. Facilitator explains with an example how to do the consolidation by year that the groups were formed.
Form 9(C) Report of Purpose of Loans
The Group Loan Record (GF2) is the basis for this form. The township officer together with the women's group fills up this form. The results can be presented to the whole group. Innovations will be an encouragement to the members, new ideas 'can be discussed and members can be given an opportunity to express their satisfaction or dissatisfaction with technical training and advisory services as well as their priority needs for future assistance.
Form 9 (T) Report of Purpose of Loans
The township officer consolidates the data of Form 9(G) on Form 9(T) by the year the groups were formed. This could for instance show that order groups undertake more new kinds of business and or are more active in certain types of business. Township officers submit this form with a report of the outcome of their discussion with the group. including recommended action to the township leading group. After review in the township leading group' it is submitted to the county project office.
Form 9(C) Consolidated Report of Purpose of Loans
On this form, the d al a of forms 9( 1 ) are consolidated.
Topic 2: Policies and procedures in project revolving fund management
Background and Rationale
In the previous modules and topics it was assumed that participants are familiar with the project policies and procedures for the revolving fund. This may not always be the case. This module therefore provides facilitators with training materials on the major elements and procedures in revolving fund management.
The activities in this topic cover the policies and procedures for project loans to women's groups, the planning of the number of groups and women that need to be organized to avail of funds and what procedures and documentation for processing of loan applications are needed.
Output Objectives
At the end of this topic, participants will be able to:
1. Understand the project policies and procedures for loans to women's groups.
2. Understand and apply the system of planning and preparation of loan applications and agreements.
Materials
Newsprint, adhesive tape, felt tip pen
Activity: Policies and procedures of project revolving fund
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator asks several participants why the project provides a loan to the women's groups and not a grant.
Project assistance comes in the form of a loan in the belief that this is the best way to achieve self-reliance. By providing a loan in stead of a grant project management shows their belief that women have capabilities and can be accountable for their commitments. Another reason for operating the project fund as a loan is that the assistance can be used by more women. When the loans are repaid the funds can be used for other groups. Women's groups therefore have a responsibility to the other women who are waiting to be able to use the funds as well. Project management are "trustees" of the funds, meaning that they are responsible to the real owners of the fund, namely all the women who want to use these funds.
Visual Aid 4-2 Policies and Procedures for Project Loans to Women's Groups
2. The facilitator explains the policies and procedures for the project revolving fund loans to women's groups, using Visual Aid 4-2. Facilitator especially emphasizes the following notes:
Note 1 Make sure there is no misunderstanding about group loan and individual loans:
 Group loan is for three years, individual loans can not be for more than one year.
 For group loans the 1:8 ratio between savings and loan applies: for individual loans this ratio is not relevant groups define their own policy for individual loans.
Note 2: The women's group savings fund is a condition as well as the basis for computing what will be made available to the group.
3. Facilitator presents the example in Visual Aid 4-3 to illustrate the repayment and social development payment scheme.
Visual Aid 4-3 Sample Project Loan Payments
Activity 2: Planning disbursement of loans to women's groups
Time: 30 minutes
Steps:
1. Facilitator explains that there are 3 important elements for successful management of the project revolving fund and writes these on the blackboards
a. Planning of the number of groups and women that have to be organized to avail of the next repayments.
b. Preparation and decision-making on loan applications.
e. Monitoring of the use of loans and repayments.
2. Facilitator tells that the Project Monitoring System includes records for Disbursement and Payment of the Revolving Fund and Social Development Fund. In Activity 3 of Topic 1 of Module 4. other major issues in monitoring were discussed.
3. In the next two activities we will therefore focus on the first step, the planning of the number of women and women's groups that can avail of the next repayments and on procedures for loan applications.
4. Since groups are required to save at least 6 months before the loan can be released, it is necessary to plan well ahead of time and to incorporate this in the county work plan. If this is not planned well, there will be delay in disbursements.
5. Case 4-2 is handed out or presented on newsprint and the participants are asked to carry out the task individually (give 10 minutes).
Case 4-2 Planning Number of Groups to be Organized
Task
6. Ask one participant to present the output, ask others to comment or correct.
Case 4-2 Planning Number of Groups to be Organized
Output
7. Facilitator ends this activity by summarizing that the planning depends on the following factors:
a. The amount of revolving fund that is available for loans to women's groups at a certain date
b. The estimated monthly savings of the women members
c. The average number of members per group
d. The requirement that loans to women's groups are maximum 8 times the group savings
e. The requirement of minimum 6 months savings before release of loans to groups, which means that groups have to be organized at least 6 months before the repayments are scheduled.
Activity 3: Preparation and procedures of loan applications.
Time: 1.5 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator introduces the activity as follows. As soon as groups have undergone the training group formation and started saving, the group can start with preparing the application for the project loan. Already during the training group formation the members have developed initial ideas and acquired some basic skills in preparing business plans. Earlier in this training, we have identified that at this stage most groups need our assistance, especially in the following areas:
- building up business consciousness and skills in business planning
- provide market information
- arrangements for technical training and advisory services
In this activity, we will focus on the procedures and required documentation for processing of loan applications.
2. Facilitator puts Visual Aid 4-4 on the wall and hands out the set of Loan Application Forms and Loan Agreements. Facilitator points out that the forms should be considered a sample and can be adjusted according to the actual situation and policies of a group, township or county. In this set of forms it is assumed that the township plays an active role in preparing and processing of loan applications and provision of assistance to groups. Facilitator explains the steps one by one.
Visual Aid 4-4 Loan Application Forms and Agreements
3. Step 1: Preparation by the women's group.
The first step is the preparation of the loan application by the women's groups with assistance of the field worker. The group prepares the following documentation for submission to the township or county project office
Group Application Form:
Part 1: Application Summary
Part 2. Allocation of Loans to Members
Part 3: Summary Purpose of Loans
Part 4: Areas for Improvement
Attachments to Group Application Form:
Individual Application Summary
Individual Business Plans or Basic Information
Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to group members)
Facilitator reviews the documents one by one. Below some key notes are listed for each of the forms.
Key Notes on Documentation Loan Application
Group Loan Application Part 1
 Four lines are available in the payment schedule. This is to make it clear that social development fund is deducted upon release.
 If there are any guarantee arrangements, these can be added on this sheet.
Group Loan Application Part 2
 The 1:8 ratio of savings and loan only applies to group loans. not to individual loans. Groups can decide that part of the members take loans directly after release and others wait for the first repayments. Of course, group consensus on such a decision is needed.
 Duration of loan to indivuals can not be more than 12 months.
Group Loan Application Part 3
 For each type of business, a description of the kind of enterprise can be given, e.g. if 12 members are involved in production, the number of members in the second column after Production is 12. In the first column a further specification then follows ea.: sheep raising (3), tobacco growing (7). silk worm raising (2). This listing can be used by both the group and the project office to determine priorities for technical training, advisory service and other assistance.
Group Loan Application Part 4
 Considering the areas for improvement when preparing the application will help the group in preparing for the implementation stage, and is useful for the project office and Governing Body in planning inputs from relevant bureaus.
 Ideas in this form may consist of training needs or other activities or assistance, such as provision of books, drying or storage facilities in the village, etc.
Individual Loan Application
 The repayment schedule has mans lines, so that payment in installments (ea. monthly. quarterly) can be registered.
 Any guarantee arrangement can be added to this sheet.
Loan Agreement (for loans to group members)
 Guarantors can be added as signatories, other agreements can be added.
Most essential in preparing the documentation is that all members participate in the decision-making process.
5. Step 2: Preparation by the township project office and leading group
The township project office/leading group has the following responsibilities in processing the loan applications:
a. Assessment of the loan applications (Tools: Worksheet 2)
b. Planning and coordination of needed assistance
c. Preparation of required documentation
d. Timely submission of the required documentation to the county project office
Usually, the field worker will have been very much involved in the preparations at group level, so that assessment of the business plans already has been done before the group submits its formal application. Hence the field worker can use Worksheet 2 as well as Part 3 and 4 of the Group Application Form for preparation of the Township Evaluation Report for decision making in the township leading group.
The following documentation is submitted to the county project office:
Township Evaluation Report on Loan Application
Attachments to the Township Evaluation Report:
Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to women's groups)
Complete documentation of the group's application
Facilitator reviews the Township Evaluation Report and the Draft Loan Agreement with the participants. Facilitator emphasizes that the Evaluation Report has two major components:
a. Recommendation on approval of the loan application
b. Decisions of township leading group on follow through action in assistance of the groups in implementation of the business plans, and suggestions for the Governing Body for additional action.
6. Step 3: Preparation by county project office
The county project office has the following responsibilities in preparing the decision-making in the Governing Body:
a. Verify and assess the loan applications and documentation submitted by the township
b. Prepare the documentation for decision making in the Governing Body
c. Timely submission of the required documentation to the county Governing Body
The time needed for verification and assessment of loan applications by the county project office will depend on the skills, experience and performance of the township project office and leading group.
The following documentation is submitted to the county Governing Body:
Evaluation Report on Loan Applications
Attachments to the Evaluation Report
Summary of Applications for Approval Governing Body
Summary of Purpose of Loans
Draft Loan Agreements per group (township)
Township Evaluation Reports
Facilitator reviews the documents with the participants using the key notes below.
Key Notes on Documentation Loan Applications
 As in the township evaluation report, the county evaluation not only contains recommendations on approval/disapproval, but also is an action plan for follow through assistance.
 The summary of applications enables the Governing Body to judge whether the applications are in line with the project's policies and procedures for group loans as well as with the planning.
 The summary of purpose of loans is useful for the Governing Body to plan inputs from the relevant bureaus in assisting the women entrepreneurs and for policy making purposes, ea. strengthening of relevant bureaus, addressing constraints in certain sectors (e.g. marketing. processing, transportation, facilities).
Annex 1. Visual Aid 4-1: Savings and loans build up capital
Savings and loans up capital
Annex 1. Visual Aid 4-2: Policies and procedures for loans to women's groups
I. Qualifying Criteria
Individual
1. Women must have undergone training group formation and must have participated in this training for at least 90% of the training time.
2. After training, women must have decided voluntarily to join the Group.
Group
3. Each member of the Group must have undertaken savings activities for a period of at least 6 months.
4. The Group must have an established bookkeeping and management system.
5. The Group must have a functioning loan committee with elected officers and clearly designated functions.
II. Procedures for Loans to Women's Groups
(A) Approval Procedures
6. Individuals and/or sub-groups submit a feasibility study to the Group loan committee.
7 The loan committee with assistance of the project office submits the Group proposal to the County Governing Body.
8. The County Governing Body assesses Group proposals and approves fund level for specific groups.
(B) Contract Signing Group and County Government
9. A contract is signed between the Group (with individuals signing) and the county Governor, with the township Governor as guarantor.
10. The contract will stipulate among other things the following:
(a) Group must repay in a 30%, 30%, 40% schedule in three years
(b) Penalties on default (10 % for every month of delay)
(C) Release of loan funds
11. Upon approval of the County Governing Body, the County Governor executes the decision by releasing the loan to the group president, treasurer and loan committee chairperson, who are jointly responsible.
12. The president, treasurer and loan committee chair person make sure that individual and/or sub-groups fund releases are made on the same day when funds are released from the county.
(D) Loan and Counterpart Proportion
13. For every one RMB beneficiaries can raise, a maximum of eight RMB can be borrowed from the project revolving fund.
III. Procedures for Loans to Individuals
These procedures apply to loans from both the project fund and the group's own savings fund.
(A) Approval procedures
14. Individuals or sub-groups submit a feasibility study to the group loan committee.
15. The loan committee and/or the group members assess the proposal and approve the fund level.
(B) Contract signing
16. A contract is signed between the individual or sub-group and the group president, treasurer and loan committee chair person.
17. The contract will stipulate among other things the following:
(a) the duration of the loan being less then I year.
(b) the interest rate, amount and date of payment.
(c) the repayment schedule with amounts and dates.
(d) penalties in case of default.
(C) Record of loans
18. The treasurer keeps record of al I loans and the terms of the loan.
19. The repayment schedule, including interest are copied by the treasurer to the individual's pass book.
IV. Social Development Fund
20. 4% of the group loan will be deducted upon fund release and collected on year 2 and 3 as the group's contribution to the social development fund (SDF), which is under the management of the County Governing Body.
21. The use of the 4% SDF is as follows:
 2% for MCH/FP related activities and services for village women
 2% for training and project-related activities of groups
Annex 1. Visual Aid 4-3: Sample project loan payments
Release in the year 1995
Group savings after 6 months:
1250 Rmb
Loan is 8 times group savings
10000 Rmb
After deduction of 4% Social the amount to be released is:
9600 Rmb
Payment Social Development Fund:
1995 (deducted at release)
400 Rmb
400 Rmb
400 Rmb
Repayment Loan:
1996 30% of 10000 Rmb
3000 Rmb
1997 30% of 10000 Rmb
3000 Rmb
1998 40% of 10000 Rmb
4000 Rmb
Annex 1. Visual Aid 4-4: Loan application forms and agreements
Groups apply for project revolving fund loan by submitting the following documentation to the township project office:
Group Application Form:
part 1: Application Summary
part 2: Allocation of Loans to members
part 3. Summary of Purpose of Loans
part 4: Areas for Improvement
Attachments to Group Application Form.
Individual Loan Application
Individual Business Plan or Basic Information
Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to group members)
Township project office/leading group prepares and submits to the county project office:
Township Evaluation Report on Group Loan Application
Attachments to Township Evaluation Report.
Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to women's groups)
Complete Documentation of Group Application
County project office prepares and submits to the county Governing Body:
Evaluation Report on Loan Applications
Attachments to Evaluation Report:
Summary of Applications for Approval Governing Body
Summary of Purpose of Loans
Draft Loan Agreements per group (or township)
Township Evaluation Reports
Annex 2. Case 4-1: Savings and loan operations in women's groups
Task
1. Xiao Cao Women's Group
Xiao Cao (Small Grass) Women's Group was formed two years ago. After the training group formation, the 20 members started saving 10 rmb per member per month and they still do so. The savings are collected every month and deposited on the group's bank account. The bank pays interest at an annual rate of 10 % at the end of each year. The group does not use their savings for loans to members.
After six months the group's total savings was 1200 rmb and they received a project loan, amounting to 8 times their savings (9600 rmb). All members received an equal amount of loan for micro-enterprise development from the project loan. Most members are engaged in traditional activities such as animal raising and crops. All members repaid after one year with interest of 0.5 /0 per month ( 6 % for the year), and the group has repaid 30 % after the first year and 30 % alter the second year to the project office. including the 4 % social development fee. After the first and second repayment they divided the remaining balance of the loan equally among the members on the same conditions.
2. Hong Mei Gui Women's Group
Hong Mei Gui (Red Rose) Women's Group (20 members) was formed at the same time as the Xiao Cao group. They also saved 10 rmb during the first six months, but after six months, the group decided they could save 15 rmb per month, since they now had established/he habit of saving. After 3 months of saving, they decided that 3 members would borrow 200 rmb each from the total 600 rmb in the savings fund. These members had to repay after three months with interest of 2 % per month (total 12 rmb each). The group each month decides how the new savings and the repayments and interest will be used. Their policy is that no more than 10-20% of the savings fund should be in the bank.
Twice or three times a year. the members discuss the monthly savings amount, and they have regularly raised it: to 20 rmb per month after month 12 and to 30 rmb after month 18.
Since Hong Mei Gui Group after six months had 1200 rmb in savings, they received the same amount of project loan as the Xiao Cai Group (9600 rmb). The total amount was lent to members for a variety of income generating activities. Besides in traditional activities, members have started engaging in shop keeping, trade, hair dressing, etc. The amount of loan per member depends on the kind of enterprise and the member's financial position. Interest on loans is 2 % per month and the duration of loans usually is between I and 6 months.
Task
Compare the savings and loans policies of the two groups. What are the differences and which group is more successful/self-reliant? Why'?
Output
Differences
1. Savings mobilization
 Hong Mei Gui Croup has internalized the concept of "income minus savings is expenditures?. When the habit of savings was established and when incomes increased, they raised the monthly savings amount.
 Because Hong Mei Gui Group regularly increased the monthly savings amount their total capital fund will be much higher than that of the Xiao Cao Group.
2. Savings utilization
 Xiao Cao Group keeps the savings in the bank, Hong Mei Gui Group actively uses the savings for micro-enterprise development. This difference leads to the other differences below.
 Because Xiao Cao Group does not use the savings for loans, the members do not see much of the benefits of saving and hence the concept of savings is not reinforced. Hong Mei Gui Group every month will discuss what to do with the savings. The benefits of savings then are very clear to the members and they develop more ideas and skills in micro-enterprise identification and planning.
 By using the savings fund for loans to members, more members in the Hong Mei Gui Group can avail of loans and loans can be bigger than in the Xiao Cai Group, so more households can increase their income and the increase can be higher.
Because Hong Mei Gui Group started loan operations as soon as they had some savings, they gained experience in decision-making on loan applications and the record keeping system. hey are better prepared for management of the bigger project loan.
3. Project Loan utilization
 In Xiao Cao Group the project loan is equally divided among the members, loan duration is fixed at one year and loans are mainly used for traditional activities. In Hong Mei Gui Group the amount and duration of loan is based on the requirements of the micro-enterprise and the member's financial position. In Hong Mei Gui Group more members benefit, funds are used more efficiently and for a variety of enterprises. The dynamic approach improves the members entrepreurial skills and income much faster than in the Xiao Cao Group.
4. Fund management
 Hong Mei Gui Group regularly reviews and increases the monthly savings amount. This means that the group's own capital grows faster.
A higher interest rate makes it more attractive to repay as soon as possible, which means more members can borrow sooner. Higher interest also means that the group's capital increases faster.
5. Status of women
 Members of Hong Mei Gui Group develop their entrepreneurial skills, their self-confidence and income much faster and to a higher extent than in the Xiao Cao Group. Family members will appreciate their potentials.
 The Hong Mei Gui Group will gain a stronger positive image in the community, because of their performance in fund raising, management, contribution to household and village economy and innovations.
 The positive image in the community, the higher group capital and more active group life of the Hong Mei Gui Group will also contribute to implementation of more social projects in the community, ea. establishment of kinder garden, improve health facilities, entertainment, etc.
Group's own capital (savings plus interest) two years after group formation
Facilitator presents the following table to illustrate the difference in capital build up between the two groups (since interest computation is rather complicated, do not ask participants to compute).
Xiao Cai Group
Hong Mei Gui Group
Total Savings
4,800 rmb
Total Savings
9,000 rmb
Total Bank interest
480 rmb
Interest savings utilization
2,000 rmb
Interest on RF loans (2 %)
259 rmb
Interest on RF loans (20 %)
2,590 rmb
Total Group Capital
5,539 rmb
Total Group Capital
13,590 rmb
Note: Hong Mei Gui Group after two years already has generated own capital higher than the project loan of 9,600 rmb.
Annex 2. Case 4-2: Planning number of groups to be organized
Task
Repayments are scheduled on the following dates:
January:
100,000 Rmb
September:
250,000 Rmb
Groups on average have 20 members, who save 15 Rmb/month.
Task
Fill in the Planning Form below.
Repayments
Year
Month
Amount repayments due
Group Formation
Groups trained and saving
Target numbers in next generation
Output/Remarks
Year
Month
Groups
Women
Output
Repayments
Year
Month
Amount repayments due
Group Formation
Groups trained and saving
Target numbers in next generation
Output/Remarks
Year
Month
Groups
Women
Computation
On average each woman saves 15 rmb/month times 6 months is 90 rmb
On average each woman is entitled to a loan of 8 times 90 rmb is 720 rmb
100,000 rmb is available. This is for 100,000 divided by 720 is 139 women
On average groups have 20 members, so 139 divided by 20 is 7 groups have to be organized
<section>9</section>
Module 5: Action planning and evaluation
Topic 1: Action planning
Activity 1: Role delineation
Activity 2: Training plan
Topic 2: Evaluation
Activity 1: Evaluation
Module 5: Action planning and evaluation
INTRODUCTION
Module 5 addresses the concerns on what happens next after this training. This will help guide the participants on the concrete follow-through activities and actions that need to be done after the training.
The second activity of Module 5 is the evaluation of the training.
OUTPUT OBJECTIVES
At the end of Module 5, participants will have:
1. Identified the concrete roles and tasks of staff involved in the WPD regarding micro-enterprise development.
2. Determined the content areas and training programs for project staff and women's groups in their own county/township.
3. Evaluated this training and made suggestions for improvement.
Topic 1: Action planning
Background and Rationale
In module I participants have identified the major areas of project assistance to women's groups in micro-enterprise development. In subsequent modules the role and tasks of project officers were detailed. In this topic participants will review the training content and concretize their tasks in relation to women's groups activities. They will also determine the content areas of training for project staff and women's groups and develop a training plan for their respective counties/ townships in the next half year.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will have:
1. Reviewed the training content and identified the concrete roles and tasks of staff involved in the WPD project regarding micro-enterprise development.
2. Determined the content areas for training of project staff and women's groups micro-enterprise development.
3. A training plan for training of project staff and women's groups in their respective counties/townships.
Activity 1: Role delineation
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator refers to the major areas of project assistance as formulated by the participants in module 1 (Visual Aid 1-6). Remind participants that this was based on the analysis of the most common weaknesses and constraints of micro-entrepreneurs.
Visual Aid 1-6 Type of Project Assistance to the Micro-Entrepreneur
Visual Aid T-1 Training Design
2. Facilitator then reviews the training design (Visual Aid T-1) for the content of the modules and asks the participants to concretize the specific tasks of township and county project officers in assisting the women's groups and in fund management. Facilitator asks participants to use the format of the table below and illustrates an example.
3. The participants are asked to break into sub-groups of about 5 persons. (Allow about 30 minutes). Ask each group to present the outputs on newsprint.
4. Each sub-group presents and other groups are given the opportunity to comment and add to it. Trainer uses the table below for his own reference. Note that this activity is primarily for participants to recapitulate the [earnings in order to internalize their roles and tasks and to be able to make a training plan for "echo training" in their own county/township. It is not necessary to have a standardized output, but it is important that all important aspects are mentioned.
Area
Women's Group
Township Officer
County Officer
Business Planning
 trained in ME development
 trained in ME development
 trained in ME development
 trains WG in ME development
 trains TS officers and/or WG in ME development
 prepare business plans, incl. market investigation
 assist WG with planning, market information, arrangements training, technical advisory service, etc.
 assist in opportunity scanning, finding markets, improving quality
 start technical skills training
 assist WG and TS officer when needed
Loan Applications
 prepare individual loan applications and group loan applications
 assist WG with preparation loan application
 assist WG and TS officer when needed
 assess applications
 assess applications
 formulate recommendations and follow through assistance
 assess TS evaluation report
 summarize data for Governing Body
 prepare TS evaluation report
 formulate recommendations and follow through action
 submit TS evaluation report to county
 prepare and submit evaluation report to Governing Body
 write agreements
 release funds
Implementation
 release to members incl. agreements
 monitor loan utilization monthly
 monitor monthly
 technical skills training
 train WG or arrange training by experts
 coordinate inputs relevant bureaus
 mutual support
 clear group financial system and records
 monitor and assist group in record keeping and policy formulation
 monitor and assist WG and TS officer
 individual financial records and analysis, incl. income statements
 assist micro-entrepreneurs, eg. with record keeping, market information
 assist micro entrepreneurs and TS officer in opportunity scanning, market information, improving quality
 monitor and review
 submit group financial status to members and TS officer
 regular review group financial status together with group
 repayments
 monitor, update records and submit monthly report to county
 monitor, update records and submit monthly report to Governing Body and DOFTEC
 identify and solve problems
 identify and solve problems
Activity 2: Training plan
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator requests the participants to refer again to the training design (Visual Aid T1 ). Facilitator asks the participants which topics/activities they feel should be included for (a) training of project staff and (b) training for women's groups. Let sub-groups discuss for 10 minutes before presenting the outputs on newsprint.
2. Facilitator summarizes the key agreements on the content areas of the two training programs. facilitator encourages especially the following content areas for training of women's groups: cash record, income statement. business planning and assessment of loan applications, savings mobilization and utilization and group financial records.
3. Facilitator then asks the participants to identify the training activities on micro-enterprise development that they want to schedule in their county/township for: a. township project officers b. women's groups
4. Facilitator asks participants to make the training plan for the training activities they want to undertake, using the format below (Give 20 minutes). Note that the training plan depends on the participants in the training. For example, county project officers may plan to train township officers: women's groups may plan to make income statements and study these in the group meeting.
No.
Facilitators
Content
Participant
Duration
Month
(township or county project officers, group accountant, how many)
(which modules, topics, what modifications)
(township or county project officers, women's groups, loan committees, other; how many of each)
(number of days)
6. Facilitator asks three participants to present their training plan and asks others for suggestions. Facilitator checks whether the outputs are realistic and makes suggestions such as regarding the number and type of participants, content areas, etc.
Topic 2: Evaluation
Background and Rationale
Participants will have filled in an evaluation form after each module. The facilitators therefore already have a consolidation of the written evaluation when this topic starts. In this topic participants will be asked to evaluate the whole training and to come up with suggestions for improvement for the facilitators. The evaluation will show which parts of the training require special attention, which were most useful for the participants and what follow through action can be expected.
Output Objectives
At the end of the topic, participants will have:
1. Evaluated the training and have made suggestions to the facilitators for improvement.
2. Identified critical elements in conducting this training.
Activity 1: Evaluation
Time: 1 hour
Steps:
1. Facilitator introduces the activity by explaining the purpose of the evaluation, which is for facilitators to get feed-back from the participants in order to improve in next training courses, and for participants to think about the critical aspects in conducting training, which can be useful when they will act as facilitators themselves after returning home.
2. Facilitator reminds the participants of the general objectives of the training as agreed upon at the start of the training, being for participants to have acquired the knowledge, skills and attitude on:
a. The role of micro-enterprise development as a means to improve the status of women
b. The role of project officers in assisting women micro-entrepreneurs
c. Micro-enterprise planning and assessment
d. Micro-enterprise management
e. Fund utilization and management
3. Ask participants to discuss the following three questions (write on the black board) in sub-groups of 5 persons:
a. Have the training objectives been achieved? Ask for specific examples.
b. What comments/suggestions do you have regarding the content of the training?
c. What comments/suggestions do you have on the methodology of the training?
4. Before breaking into sub-groups the facilitator presents the consolidation of the written evaluations on newsprint and raises some specific questions for participants to discuss in the sub-groups. Examples of these questions could be:
- for topics and activities that are not appreciated much' facilitator could ask participants about the reason (too difficult, not clearly explained, boring lecture, wrong methodology, etc. and to come up with suggestions on how to improve
- for topics and activities that are very much appreciated, facilitator could also ask about the reason
5. Ask sub-groups to write their conclusions on newsprint and give 20 minutes for discussion.
6. Ask each sub-group to present and thank participants for their suggestions.
7. To end the training in a cheerful way, facilitator could conduct a quiz among subgroups. Below some sample test questions are given. This will also give additional information to facilitators on the [earnings of the participants. Note that this kind of questions could also be inserted after each module.
Question 1
A business has a Net Profit of 200 rmb per cycle, 4 cycles per year. The total invested capital is 1000 rmb. Is this a profitable business?
Answer 1. Yes, return on invested capital is 80 % per year.
Question 2
A loan of 600 rmb (interest 2% per month) is requested to buy equipment (life time 5 years). Net Cash Income will be 200 rmb/month. The production costs are 100 rmb/month. Should the loan application be approved? If yes, how much can she repay each month?
Answer 2. Net Profit is Net Cash Income minus Depreciation minus Interest on loan: 200-10-12= 178 rmb. This is a good profit (why?), the loan can be approved. Monthly amortization can he Net Profit minus Production Costs for the next cycle. 178-100= 78 rmb.
Other
For example: some questions whether a certain item is recorded in the cash record as inflow, outflow, or not recorded because it is not a cash transaction (see Module 3).
For example: What information cannot be found in the cash record, but is needed in the income statement (depreciation, inventory, non-cash costs and income).
8 Then end the training by thanking the participants for their cooperation.
<title>My very own. Training manual micro-enterprise development for project officers and field workers</title>
Annexes
Annex 3. Worksheets for field workers
Worksheet 1: Project viability assessment
Worksheet 2: Cash record
Worksheet 3: Income statement
Worksheet 4: Monthly monitoring report savings mobilization credit operations micro-enterprise development
Annex 4. Business plan forms
A. Production enterprise
B. Processing enterprise
C. Trading enterprise
D. Service enterprise
Annex 5. Group financial records
GMF1: Individual savings record
GMF2: Individual loan Record
GF1: Group savings record
GF2: Group loan record
GF3: Group repayment (sample)
GF4: Group cash record
GF5: Group statement savings and loans operations
8(T): Group's financial status
8(T)-A: Income change group members
8(C): Consolidated report of group's financial status
9(G): Report of purpose of loans
9(T): Report of purpose of loan
9(C): Consolidated report of purpose of loan
Annex 6: Loan application forms and agreements (samples)
Group loan application
Individual loan application
Loan agreement (for loans to group members)
Township evaluation report on loan application
Loan agreement (for loans to women's groups)
Evaluation report on loan applications
Annex 7. Training evaluation forms
Evaluation module 1: Concept building and role identification
Evaluation module 2: Micro-enterprise planning and assessment
Evaluation module 3: Micro-enterprise management
Evaluation module 4: Fund utilization and management
Evaluation module 5: Action planning and evaluation
Annexes
Annex 3. Worksheets for field workers
Worksheet 1: Project viability assessment
Name of entrepreneur
Address
Type of Project
Amount of loan from group/project
Self-reliance
 What is your motivation, are you confident about starting the enterprise?
 Are your family members supportive?
 Will you manage the enterprise yourself?
 Will you handle the financial affairs yourself?
 Did you attend training group formation?
 How is your savings/loans performance in the group?
 Are you prepared to take the risk?
 Do/will you attend any training
- functional literacy and numeracy classes
- technical skills training
- enterpreneurial skills training
Remarks
Production
 Do you have the technical skills, or are they available?
 Can you oversee the whole production process?
 Will technical advice/training be obtainable?
- amount and price of non-durable inputs
- is the production volume achievable
 Can you produce good quality?
Remarks
Marketing
a Buying Inputs
 Are raw materials available? From whom?
 Are required inputs readily available
- durable goods (tools, facilities, equipment, etc )
- non-durable goods (fertilizer, seeds, etc )
 Are there any arrangements with suppliers
- about the volume, quality and time of supply
- about the price of supplies
- about the mode of payment (cash or credit, terms)
 Are the set prices for all inputs realistic?
b Selling products
 Do you know what the customers need/ require?
 Who will buy the products?
 Are there alternative buyers?
 Is the market stable/reliable?
 What volume and how frequent can you sell?
 Are there any arrangements with buyers
- about the volume that can be sold?
- about the sales price of the product?
- about the required quality of the product?
 Is the location of the business appropriate?
 Are the set prices realistic?
Remarks
Organization/Management
 What are the critical aspects for the success of the enterprise?
 Do you know the time requirements
- which tasks and how much time is required
- who will carry out the tasks
- what procedures will be applied
 Do you plan to keep financial records?
 Do you plan to make regular income statements?
 Will you separate household and enterprise accounts?
Remarks
Financial Viability
 18 the required investment reasonable?
 Is the sourcing of funds reasonable?
 Is the enterprise profitable?
 Can the enterprise adjust to market changes?
 Is the repayment schedule reasonable?
 Will you be able to pay amortization and interest on loans?
Remarks
Conclusion and Recommendations
Worksheet 2: Cash record
Name entrepreneur:
Month:
Name enterprise:
Year:
Beginning Balance (Cash Status)
Amount:
Remaining Balance
Cash In
Cash Out
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Amount
Date
Worksheet 3: Income statement
Name entrepreneur:
Name enterprise:
Address:
Period of Statement:
Signature:
Date:
Gross Sales
rmb
Other Income
rmb
Total Income
rmb
Less:
Costs of goods/services sold
Materials:
rmb
Labor:
rmb
Use of facilities:
rmb
Change in inventory:
value beginning
rmb
minus value end
rmb
rmb
Total Coats of goods sold
rmb
Gross Profit
rmb
Less:
Other Expenses
rmb
(transportation, tax. Administration, selling)
Net Cash Income
rmb
Less:
Depreciation
rmb
Interest on loans
rmb
rmb
Net Profit
rmb
Return on Investment
Worksheet 4: Monthly monitoring report savings mobilization credit operations micro-enterprise development
Township:_____________
Village:________________
Code:
1 = very good
Group Name:___________
2 = slight problem, but can be corrected easily
No. of members:________
3 = serious problem, need for project staff intervention
Indicators checked
Month/day of visit
Weekly or monthly savings by all members
Regular review/increase savings amount
Clear policies on savings and loans
Percentage of savings fund in use for micro-enterprise development
Project loan disbursed and utilized per the agreement
Interest rate on loans to members
Regular review/increase interest rate
Group able to prepare and assess business plans/loan applications
Decisions on loans based on business plan
Loan duration based on requirement enterprise/entrepreneur
100 % repayment rate
Members have individual savings record
Members have individual loan record
Group financial records up to date and correct
Members are informed about group's financial status
Members keep cash records
Members make regular income statements
Members enterprises are profitable
Members share experiences in group
Group receives required training/advisory service
Name Project Officer:______________________
Date:_____________________________
Annex 4. Business plan forms
A. Production enterprise
Borrower:_______________
Loan Application:_________
Date Received:___________
A. Production Aspects
1. What crop(s) / livestock you intend to produce?:
2. Please indicate the la size/no. of heads, projected harvest per cycle and the time period covered in producing # 1.
Crops / Livestock
Land Size / No. of Heads
Projected Harvest
Crop Season
Period Covered (Months)
a
b
3. Have you produced such crop/livestock before? --- If yes, what is your previous average
harvest?
4. If no, do you have skills in raising such crops (s) / livestock? ---
If no, where will you obtain the technical advice (state government agency and contac person):
5. Please list all raw materials/production inputs, labor requirements and costs involved in producing # 1. By accomplishing the "Production Plan Form". If more than I crop I livestock, please accomplish the Form for each crop or livestock.
6. What equipment, facilities, and/or fools you need"? Please list items already existing items to be bought/constructed, and items that can be obtained on credit ( to be deducted from sales proceeds) Indicate estimated I if e-years and costs of such items.
Borrower:
Production Plan for Year
Location:
Land Size/No.. of Heads:
Crop/Livestock
Land Description 4/
Production Inputs 2/
Labor Requirement
Schedule/Months
Acquisition 3/
Activities 1/
Item
Quantity
Unit Price
Total Cost
Cash
Credit
# of Workers
Wage Rate
# of Days
Total Cost
Notes:
1/ List all activities chronologically from production up to harvesting/post-harvest
2/ List all inputs required such as seedings fertilizers, pesticides or stocks/chicks, feed and chemicals.
3/ Check if such will be obtained on credit (to be deducted from sales) or to be bought in cash.
4/ For tend description, please state whether low-land irrigated, non-irrigated/rainfed or upland.
Equipment, facilities and tools which can be used for more than one production cycle.
A. Existing
B. To be bought / constructed
C. Can be obtained on credit
1 Item.
1. Item
1. Item:
Life:
Life:
Life:
Cost:
Cost:
Cost:
2. Item:
2. Item:
2. Item:
Life:
Life:
Life:
Cost:
Cost:
Cost:
3 Item:
3. Item:
3. Item:
Life:
Life:
Life:
Cost:
Cost:
Cost:
B. Marketing Aspects
1. Where will you sell your produce (location)?
2. To whom will you sell (specify name of company and address):
3. What is/are their buying price(s) and your expected volume to be sold? (If buyer requires specific quality, state the pricing per quality specification and estimated volume per quality).
Quality Category
Unit Price
Expected Volume to be sold
TOTAL
4. Have you sold to this buyer before? ----- If yes, what was the previous pricing and
volume sold? ----- Since when? -----. Do you know of persons in the village who have sold to this buyer before persons in the village who have sold to this buyer before (Please name them): -----
5. Do you expect changes in the pricing you stated in #3 within the year? ----- If yes, what price changes do you expect? -----
6. What additional costs will you incur in selling and delivering your produce to your buyer? (e.g. sacks, transport, etc.)
Items
Amount
7. Do you know of alternative buyers? If yes, please list them, their location and buying prices.
Buyer
Location/Address
Price
C Organization and Management
1. If household-managed
a. From your family, including yourself, who will be involved and what will be their role(s)/tasks?
Family Member
Tasks / Responsibilities
b. Do you intend to keep financial records? ----- Does your assigned accountant/bookkeeper know how to prepare cash book? ----- If no, when does your group wish to be trained? c. How often do you plan to meet as a group to monitor/evaluate the project? d. Do you intend to deposit cash balances in the bank? If yes, who are the signatories? If no, who will keep the cash?
2. If group managed
a. Who are the group members involved in the project and what are their responsibilities?
Name of Member
Tasks / Responsibilities
b. Do you intend to keep financial records? ----- Does your assigned accountant/bookkeeper know how to prepare cash book? ----- If no, when does your group wish to be trained?
c. How often do you plan to meet as a group to monitor/evaluate the project? -----
d. Do you intend to deposit cash balances in the bank? If yes, who are the signatories? If no, who will keep the cash? -----
D. Financial Aspects
1. Investment Plan Please fill up the following format.
Cost
Total
Own
Other 1/
Group
Items
Amount
Savings
Borrowings
Loan
A. Fixes assets (Eqpt., Facilities, Tools)
B. Production Costs 2/ Inputs:
Inputs:
Hired Labor
Use of facilities:
C. Other Costs 2/
Total
Note:
1) Other borrowings refer to loans acquired from friends, relatives, group fund.
2) Include only items to be bought on cash. Exclude those obtained on credit (that can be deducted from sale proceeds). Costs reflected here should be those needed for one cycle.
3) Expenses are those expenses incurred in selling and delivery, tax, etc.
3. Projected Income Statement. Please accomplish the projected Income Statement Form per crop/livestock.
Projected Income Statement
Crop/Livestock :
First Cycle
One Year
Gross Sales (*1)
Other Income
Total Income
Less: Production Costs (*2)
Materials
Hired Labor
Use of Facilities
Total Production Costs
Gross Profit
Less: Other Expenses
Net Cash Income
Less: Depreciation (*3)
Interest on loans
Net Profit
Note:
1 ) To compute gross sales
a) If only 1 quality requirement: Sales = Volume x Selling Price
b) If more then 1 quality required:
Quality A: Sales (A) = Volume (A) x Price (A)
Quality B: Sales (B) = Volume (B) x Price (B)
Quality C: Sales (C) = Volume (C) x Price (C)
Sales (Total) = Sales (A) + Sales (B) + Sales (C)
2) Include all costs including those items obtained on credit.
3) Depreciation/year = Cost of Equipment/Tool/Facility / Life years
For depreciation/cycle = depreciation/year / no. of cycles/year
Break - Even Levels
a. Break - Even Price = -----
b. Break - Even Volume = -----
3. Projected Cash Flow: Please compute using format below
Cash Flow Projection
Cash In
Cash Out
Balance
Item ( beginning cash, loans, sales, others inflows)
Amount
Item (expenses, other outflows)
Amount
Amount
Date
Ending Cash
Balance before
Loan Amortization
Loan Amortization
Ending Cash Balace
4. Loan Payment Plan
a. For the other borrowings, what are the terms of the loan(s)? (interest, maturity, frequency of payment):
b. For the P28 loan, what is your plan of payment?
Schedule
Months
Source and Amount
Project
Other Income
First 3 months
4th to 6th month
7th to 9th month
10th to 12th month
c. If you have other sources of household income, please specify:
Source of Income
Amount of Earnings
Month Earned*
* Please state the time (months) when you expect to get such earnings/income.
Submitted by:
(Signature Over Name of Borrower)
(Date)
B. Processing enterprise
Borrower:________________
Loan Application:_________
Date Received:___________
A. Marketing Aspects
1. What product(s) you intend to sell? -----
2. Please describe your target market and marketing strategy. -----
2.1 . If you don't have definite buyer(s)
a. Where will you sell (location of sales outlets)?
b. What is your estimated number of household in these target villages? ----- What
percentage of these do you expect will buy your product? ----- What do you think will be average quantity and frequency of one typical buyer?
c. Are these existing businesses similar to yours (selling the same product) operating in your target areas? ----- If yes, what is your estimate percentage of people from these areas that buy from them? ----- Are these people satisfied with them? ----- Why or why not? -----
d. What are the features that will make your product(s) more attractive that these existing businesses? -----
e. What will be the pricing of your product(s)? -----
Product/Quality
Price
f.. How will you sell/distribute your product(s) ? -----
g. What will be the costs of selling/distribution? -----
Cost Item
Amount
h. How will your product(s) be known to your target market? Will there be costs involved? ----- How much?
2.2 If you have identified definite buyer(s)
a. To whom will you sell? (State name of Company/person and address): -----
b. What is/are their buying price(s) and quality specifications? -----
Quality
Categories Price
c. Have you sold to this buyer before? ----- If yes, what was the previous pricing and volume sold? ----- Do you know of persons who have sold to this buyer? (please name them):
d. Do you expect changes in the pricing you stated in (b) within this year? If yes, what changes? -----
e. What additional costs will you incur in delivering/transporting the produce to your buyer?
Cost Item
Amount
f. Do you know of alternative buyers? ----- If yes please list them below:
Buyer
Location/Address
Buying Price
3. Please indicate below your sales projections/plan.
a. Frequency of selling/delivery, please check:
daily
monthly
others, please specify:
b. Sales Plan
Sales Volume Per Delivery 1/(1 )
No. of Delivery/ Selling 2/(2)
Total Volume 3/(3)
Unit Price(4)
Total Sales 4/(5)
Per
Per
Per
Per
Per
Per
Mo.
Yr.
Mo.
Yr.
Mo.
Yr.
Peak Season
Lean Season
Normal
Note:
1 ) State volume to be sold per delivery or selling cycle.
2) Fill up applicable box.. If selling/delivery is daily, fill-up both per month and per year.
3) Total Volume = ( 1 ) x (2)
4) Total Sales = (3) x (4)
B. Production Aspects
1. Do you have skills in processing ? ------ If yes, how did you learn them? ------ If no how and when will you acquire the skills?
2. What are the machineries, equipment, tools you need in the project? Please list, and state capacity, cost, life-years, and after sales service to be provided by manufacturer.
Equipment/ Machine
Capacity
Cost
Life-years
After-Sales Service
3. Where will your "factory"/project be located? -------
4. What basic raw materials are needed?
5. What minimum volume/quantity you plan to buy the above? ------- At what price? Total cost: -------
6. What is your estimated total volume of finished product that can be produced from the above quantity? -------
7. How much volume of finished product can you produce per day? -------
8. How much volume of finished product can you produce per day? -------
9. How much volume of finished product you plan to do per month? -------
10. Please list all other raw materials, supplies, labor and cost requirements needed to produce #5.
Item
Quantity
Unit Price/ Wage Rate
Total Cost
A. Other
Raw Material
B. Hired Labor
11. Please compute unit production cost
a. Total direct production cost:
Basic Raw Materials Cost 1/ :
Other Raw Materials Cost 2/ :
Hired Labor Cost 2/ :
= Total direct production cost :
Note:
1 / from # 5
2/ from # 10
b. Production volume stated in #6.
c. Unit Production Cost:
Note: Unit direct production cost = Production cost / Production volume
12. Please list all other costs (overhead costs) that may incurred in the production activities (e.g. electric bills, repairs, etc).
Cost Items
Cost / month
C Organization and Management
1. If household-managed
a. From your family, including yourself, who will be involved and what will be their role(s)/tasks?
Family Member
Roles / Tasks
b. Do you intend to keep financial records for the project? ------- Do know how to prepare cash book? ------- If no, when does your group wish to be trained? -------
2. If group managed
a. Who are the group members involved in the project and what are their tasks and responsibilities?
Name of Member
Tasks / Responsibilities
b. Do you intend to keep financial records? ------- Does your assigned accountant/
bookkeeper know how to prepare cash book? ------- If no, when does your group wish to be trained?
c. How often do you plan to meet as a group to monitor/evaluate the project? -------
d. Do you intend to deposit cash balances in the bank? ------- If yes, who are the signatories? ------- If no, who will keep the cash? -------
D. Financial Aspects
1. Investment Plan Please fill up the following format.
Cost
Total
Own
Other 1/
Group
Items
Amount
Savings
Borrowings
Loan
A. Fixes assets (Eqpt., Facilities. Tools)
B. Working Capital 2/
Raw Materials:
Hired Labor:
Use of facilities
C. Other Expenses 3/
Note:
1/ Refers to loans from friends' relatives, etc.
2/ Obtained from Part B # 10 and # 12.
3/ Refers to costs of selling for first delivery (ies) / or first month.
2. Projected Income Statement. Please compute projected income using the format below.
Projected Income Statement
Product:
Gross Sales
First Cycle
One Year
Other Income
Total Income
Less: Cost of Goods Sold
Raw Materials
Hired Labor
Use of Facilities
Total Cost of Goods Sold
Gross Profit
Less: Other Expenses
Net Cash Income
Less: Depreciation
Interest on loans
Net Profit
Note: (To be computed by the Project Staff)
a. Break-Even Price =
b. Break-Even Volume =
3. Projected Cash Flow: Please compute using format below
Cash Flow Projection
Cash In
Cash Out
Balance
Item (beginning cash, loans, sales,
Amount
Item (expenses, other ourtflows)
Amount
Amount
Date
Ending Cash
Balance before
Loan Amortization
Less:
Loan Amortization
Ending Cash Balace
4. Loan Payment Plan
a. For the other borrowings, what are the terms of the loan(s)? (interest, maturity, amortization): ----
b. For group loan, what is your plan of payment?
Schedule
Months
Source and Amount
Project
Other Income
First payment
Second payment
Third payment
Fourth payment
c. If you have other sources income, please specify:
Source of Income
Amount of Earnings
Month Earned
Submitted by:
(Signature Over Name of Borrower)
(Date)
C. Trading enterprise
Borrower:___________
Loan Application:_____
Date Received:_______
A. Marketing Aspects
1. Where is the location of your business or where do you plan to sell? ----
2. Are there existing traders/similar business in your target areas? ---- If yes, are the people satisfied with their business? ---- Why or why not? ----
3. What are the features of your business that will make you more attractive to them? ----
4. Please list the goods you plan to sell, expected turn-over rates and your planned gross margin, using the format below:
Goods
Quantity
Turn-over 1/ Expected
Margin 2/
Remarks 3/
Note:
1/ Expected duration quantity of goods will be sold, in no. of days.
2/ Difference between wholesale buying price and your selling price.
3/ State reasons or basis of decisions.
5. Please prepare your inventory and sales plan good for one cash cycle by using the form at below.
Cash Cycle: ---- (state whether one month, one week, or 1 day)
Goods
Quantity Cycle
Unit Buying Price
Unit Selling Price
Gross Sales 1/
Note: 1/ Sales = Quantity x Selling Price
6. What were/was your basis for coming-up with the above pricing? -------
7. What are the equipment, tools or facilities you need to buy or construct? Please list them including cost and life years.
Existing
To Bought
Item
Life Years
Cost
Item
Life Years
Cost
8. What other costs will be entailed in your project (e.g. transportation, water, taxes)? Please list them.
Item
Cost
B. Organization and Management
1. If household-managed
a. From your family, including yourself, who will be involved and what will be their role(s)/tasks?
Family Member
Roles / Tasks
b. Do you intend to keep financial records for the project? ------- Do know how to prepare cash book? ------- If no, when does your group wish to be trained? ---
2. If group managed
a. Who are the group members involved in the project and what are their tasks and responsibilities?
Name of Member
Tasks
b. Do you intend to keep financial records? ------- Does your assigned accountant/ bookkeeper know how to prepare cash book? ------- If no, when does your group wish to be trained?
c. How often do you plan to meet as a group to monitor/evaluate the project? -------
d. Do you intend to deposit cash balances in the bank? ------- If yes, who are
the signatories? -------
If no, who will keep the cash? -------
C. Financial Aspects
1 . Investment Plan Please fill up the following format.
Cost
Total
Own
Other
Group
Items
Amount
Savings
Borrowings
Loan
A. Fixes assets (Eqpt., Facilities, Tools)
B. Working Capital
Goods Purchased:
Hired Labor:
Use of facilities:
C. Other Expenses
Total
2. Projected Income Statement. If cycle is one month or less, please compute income statement for one month. If cycle is more than a month, please compute for one year. Use the format below.
Projected Income Statement
Goods
Product:
Gross Sales
Period
One Year
Other Income
Total Income
Less: Cost of Goods Sold
Raw Materials
Hired Labor
Use of Facilities
Total Cost of Goods Sold
Gross Profit
Less: Other Expenses
Net Cash Income
Less: Depreciation
Interest on loans
Net Profit
3. Projected Cash Flow: If there are anticipated monthly sale fluctuations (i.e. seasonality) within the year, please compute for a one year cash flow projection.
Cash Flow Projection
Cash In
Cash Out
Balance
Item (beginning cash, loans, sales,
Amount
Item (expenses, other ourtflows)
Amount
Amount
Date
Ending Cash
Balance before
Loan Amortization
Less:
Loan Amortization
Ending Cash Balace
4. Loan Payment Plan
a. For the other borrowings, what are the terms of the loan(s)? (interest, maturity, amortization):
b. For group loan, what is your plan of payment?
Schedule
Months
Source and Amount
Project
Other Income
First payment
Second payment
Third payment
Fourth payment
c. If you have other sources income, please specify:
Source of Income
Amount of Earnings
Month Earned
Submitted by:
(Signature Over Name of Borrower)
(Date)
D. Service enterprise
Borrower:_______________
Loan Application:_________
Date Received:__________
A. Marketing Aspects
1. Where will your business be located? -------
2. Are there existing businesses which offer similar services? ------- Are people satisfied with the service? ------- Why or why not? -------
3. What are your planned services/products? -------
4. What will make your business/service different from the others? -------
5. How would you price your service/products ? Please list.
Type of Service
Pricing
How is/are the above pricing differ from others (competitors)? -------
6. How will your business/service be known by your target customers? -------
7. Please indicate your sales projections. Consider seasonalities (peak, lean, normal seasons). Use the format on sales projection.
B. Product Aspects
1. What are the raw materials, labor requirements and costs involved in your business? Please list all cost items needed for one cycle (one month).
Item
Quantity
Cost
Project:
Sales Projection
Sales Forecast
Total Sales (A + B + C)
A. Peaks Season
B. Lean Season
C. Normal Season
Item
Pricing
Per Day
Per Month
No. of Months
Total Sales
Per Day
Per Month
Per Months
No. of Months
Total Sales
Per Day
Per Month
Total Sales
2. What are the equipment. facilities' tools you need to purchase for the business? Please list and indicate cost and life years.
Item
Cost
Life-years
C. Organization and Management
1. If household-managed
a. From your family, including yourself. who will be involved and what will be their role(s)/tasks?
Family Member
Roles /Tasks
b. Do you intend to keep financial records for the project? --- Do know how to prepare cash boor;? --- If no. when does your group wish to be trained? ---
2. If group managed
a. Who are the group members involved in the project and what are their tasks and responsibilities'?
Name of Member
Tasks
b. Do you intend to keep financial records? --- Does your assigned accountant/ bookkeeper know how to prepare cash book? --- If no' when does your group wish to be trained?
c. How often do you plan to meet as a group to monitor/evaluate the project? ---
d. Do you intend to deposit cash balances in the bank? --- If yes, who are the signatories?
If no, who will keep the cash? ---
D. Financial Aspects
1. Investment Plan Please fill up the following format.
Cost
Total
Own
Other
Group
items
Amount
Savings
Borrowings
Loan
A. Fixes assets (Eqpt.. Facilities, Tools)
B. Working Capital 11
Raw Materials:
Hired Labor:
Use of facilities:
C. Other Expenses
Total
Note: 1/ For working Capital needed for first cycle, please refer to Part B # I.
2. Projected Income Statement. Please use the format below.
Projected Income Statement
Service:
Period:
Gross Sales
Period
One Year
Other Income
Total Income
Less: Cost of Goods Sold
Raw Materials
Hired Labor
Use of Facilities
Total Cost of Goods Sold
Gross Profit
Less: Other Expenses
Net Cash Income
Less: Depreciation
Interest on loans
Net Profit
3. Projected Cash Flow: Please compute using format below.
Cash Flow Projection
Cash In
Cash Out
Balance
Item (beginning cash, loans, sales,
Amount
Item (expenses, other ourtflows)
Amount
Amount
Date
Ending Cash
Balance before
Loan Amortization
Less:
Loan Amortization
Ending Cash Balace
4. Plan of Payment
a. What are the teens of other borrowings? ----
b. For the group loan, what is your plan of payment? ----
Schedule
Months
Source and Amount
Project
Other Income
First payment
Second payment
Third payment
Fourth payment
c. If you have other sources income, please specify:
Source of Income
Amount of Earnings
Month Earned
Submitted by:
(Signature Over Name of Borrower)
(Date)
Annex 5. Group financial records
GMF1: Individual savings record
(Part 1 Member's Passbook)
Name:________
Date
Amount Deposit
Cumulative Balance
Signature Group Treasurer
Group Seal
Note 1: Each member holds this record as evidence of her savings in the gro
Note 2: The group treasurer signs after each deposit
GMF2: Individual loan Record
Name Wang Jing
Total Number of Loans from start of group until starting date of this record:
Total Amount of Loans from start of group until starting date of this record:
1300 rmb
Repayment schedule
Repayment Performance
Loan no
Purpose Loan
Date Loan
Amount of Loan
Installment No
Date
Amount
Amount Interest
Date
Amount
Amount Interest
Amount Penalty
Balance Over due
Date
Signature
Pig raising
Garment
Trade
Total
GF1: Group savings record
Name Group:_____
Name
Total savings at* beginning this year
Year:__________Month
Total savings this year
Total savings since start group
Signature Treasure
Member
r
Total
*Total savings at the beginning of this year is the total savings from the start of the group until the beginning of this record
Note that this is the Cumulative Balance of the Individual Savings Record
GF2: Group loan record
Name group:
Total Number of Loans to members from start of group until starting date of this record:______
Total Amount of Loans to members from start of the group until starting date of this record:_____
Date
Loan No*
Name Member
Purpose Loan
Amount Loan
Duration Loan (months)
Monthly Interest (%)
Remarks
Code**
Description
*For example, if until now 21 loans have been granted to members, start on this record with number 22
**Codes for purpose of loan:
1 = production type of enterprise
description e.g - silk worm raising, sheep raising, cotton planting, vegetable growi
2 = processing type of enterprise
description e.g.: mat weaving, starch or oil processing, bakery
3 = trading type of enterprise
description e.g.: buy/sell wallnuts, buy/sell garments
4 = service type of enterprise
description e g: restaurant, hairdressing, transportation, dancing hall
GF3: Group repayment (sample)
Background Information
On February 20, 1995, the group approved loans to 2 members, to Song Jing and to Wang Jin Hua with the following terms:
Song Jing borrows 300 rmb and has to repay:
on April
150 rmb with 6 rmb interest
Actually, she repays 300 rmb on May 1 with 12 rmb interest
on May
150 rmb with 6 rmb interest
and 15 rmb penalty
Wang Jin Hua borrows 500 rmb and has to re
on May
500 rmb with 20 rmb interest
Actually, she repays only 400 rmb on May 1 with 20 rmb interest
GF3 Group Repayment Record (Sample)
Name Group:___________Date: 20 April 1995
For the Month: 1995, April
Payments due in this month
Payments made
Name Member
Installment No
Day
Amount
Amount Interest
Date
Amount
Amount Interest
Amount Penalty
Balance Over due
Remarks (reason default, action taken)
Song Jing
Notes: This is the report of the repayments due in April meeting. Balance Overdue is 150mb.
GF3 Group Repayment Record (Sample)
Name Group:___________Date: 20 May 1995
For the Month: 1995, April
Payments due in this month
Payments made
Name Member
Installment No
Day
Amount
Amount Interest
Date
Amount
Amount Interest
Amount Penalty
Balance Over due
Remarks (reason default, action taken)
Song Jing
Notes: This is the report of the repayments due in April as reported in the May meeting. No more Balance Overdue
GF3 Group Repayment Record (Sample)
Name Group:___________Date: 20 May 1995
For the Month: 1995, May
Payments due in this month
Payments made
Name Member
Installment No
Day
Amount
Amount Interest
Date
Amount
Amount Interest
Amount Penalty
Balance Over due
Remarks (reason default, action taken)
Song Jing
Wang Jin Hu
Notes: This is the report of the repayments due in May as reported in the May meeting. Balance overdue is 100mb
GF4: Group cash record
Name Group:_______
Beginning Balance (Cash Status)
Amount:
Cash In
Cash Out
Remaining Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Amount
Date
The Remaining Balance shows how much cash is available for loans to members
GF4 Group Cash Record (Sample)
Name Group:_______
Beginning Balance (Cash Status)
Amount:
Cash In
Cash Out
Remaining Balance
Item
Amount
Item
Amount
Amount
Date
Savings January
Savings February
Loans to 2 members
Savings March
Subscription women's magazine
Savings April
Loan Repayments
Interest Payments
Loans to 4 members
Savings May
Note that the remaining balance shows how much cash is available for loans to members, e.g. in the May meeting there is 264 rmb available
GF5: Group statement savings and loans operations
(for quarterly submission to county project office)
Name Group:______
Signature Group Treasurer:_____
Number of members:_____
Signature Group Accountant:____
Date Statement:_____
Signature Group Auditor:_____
Period Statement (quarterly): month _ to month _
Item
Status at beginning of statement period
Status at end of statement period
Change
Explanation
1. Remaining Balance RF Loan
2. Average Savings/member/month
3. Total Savings
4. Total Number of Loans to Members
5 Total Amount of Loans to Members
6. Total Balance Overdue of Loans
7. Cash Balance
8. Balance Bank Account
Explanation:
Use Group Savings Record (GF1) for Item 3:
Average Savings per member per month
Total Savings
Use Group Loan Record (GF2) for Item 4 and 5:
Total Number of Loans to Members
Total Amount of Loans to Members
Use Group Repayment Record (GF3) for Item 6:
Total Balance Overdue
Use Group Cash Record (GF4) for Item 7:
Cash Balance
8(T): Group's financial status
For the Year_______
Name of Group:_______
Frequency: Once a Year
Date Submitted:
Township:__________
Prepared by:_______
Year group was formed
1. Number of members
2. Date group received RF loan
3. Total amount of RF loan
4. Total balance of RF loan at reporting date (total received minus repayments)
5. Total amount of savings since start group (from GF1, GF5)
6. Average savings per member in reporting year (from GF1)
7. No. of loans in reporting year (from GF2, GF5)
8. Total amount of loans in reporting year (from GF2, GF5)
9. Interest rate of loans in % per month (from GF2)
10. Total no. of loans since start of the group (from GF2, GF5)
11. Total amount of loans since start of the group (from GF2, GF5)
12. Total Balance overdue at reporting date (from GF3, GF5)
13. Total Cash Balance at reporting date (from GF4, GF5)
14. Balance Bank Account at reporting date (from GF5)
8(T)-A: Income change group members
Name of Group:_____________
Frequency: Once a Year
Year Group was formed:______
Township:__________________
Prepared by:_______
Total contribution to household income (rmb per year)*
Name Member
Before joining the group
At present
Change
Signature Member
*This is the total of the Net Profit of all enterprises the member undertakes by herself Remarks:
8(C): Consolidated report of group's financial status
For the Year______
Frequency: Once a Year
County:________
Date Submitted:______
Prepared by:________
Year group was formed
Total
1. Number of Groups
2 Number of members
3. Total balance of RF loans at reporting date
4. Total amount of savings since start groups
5. Average savings per member in reporting year
6. No. of loans in reporting year
7. Total amount of loans in reporting year
8. Interest rate of loans in % per month
9. Total no. of loans since start of the groups
10 Total amount of loans since start of the groups
11. Total Balance overdue at reporting date
12. Total Cash Balance at reporting date
13. Balance Bank Account at reporting date
14. Estimated Income change
9(G): Report of purpose of loans
For the year_______
of Group:__________
Frequency:
Once a year
up was formed:_______
Date Submitted:
Number of Members:_______
Prepared by:
Description
New?
No. of Loans
Description
New?
No. of Loans
Description
New ?
No. of Loans
Description
New?
No. of Loans
Production
Processing
Trade
Service
Explanation:
production type of enterprise
description e.g.: silk worm raising, sheep raising, cotton planting, vegetable growing
processing type of enterprise
description e.g.: mat weaving, starch or oil processing, bakery
trading type of enterprise
description e 9: buy/sell wallnuts, buy/sell garments
service type of enterprise
description e.g.: restaurant, hairdressing, transportation, dancing hall over engaged in this type of enterprise, put x in the column "New?"
contains the information needed to fill in this form.
9(T): Report of purpose of loan
For the year_______
Frequency: Once a year
Date Submitted:_______
Township:____________
Prepared by:__________
Year Group was Formed
Total Number of Groups
Total Number o Members
Purpose of Loan
Listing of New Types of Enterprise
Production No. of loans
Processing No. loans
Trade No. loans
Service No. loans
Total
9(C): Consolidated report of purpose of loan
For the year____________
Frequency: Once a year
Date Submitted:________
County:__________
Prepared by:_________
Purpose of Loan
Listing of New Types of Enterprise
Production
Processing
Trade
Service
Year Group was Formed
Number of Groups
Number of Members
No. of loans
% of loans
No. of loans
% of loans
No. of loans
% of loans
No. of loans
% of loans
Total
Annex 6: Loan application forms and agreements (samples)
Groups apply for project revolving fund loan by submitting the following documentation to the township project office:
Group Application Form.
part 1: Application Summary
part 2. Allocation of Loans to members
part 3. Summary of Purpose of Loans
part 4 Areas for Improvement
Attachments to Group Application Form:
Individual Loan Application
Individual Business Plan or Basic Information
Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to group members)
Township project office/leading group prepares and submits to the county project office:
Township Evaluation Report on Group Loan Application
Attachments to Township Evaluation Report.
Draft Loan Agreement (for loans to women's groups)
Complete Documentation of Group Application
County project office prepares and submits to the county Governing Body:
Evaluation Report on Loan Applications
Attachments to Evaluation Report.
Summary of Applications for Approval Governing Body
Summary of Purpose of Loans
Draft Loan Agreements per group for township)
Township Evaluation Reports
Group loan application
1. Name of Group:______________________________
2. Address:____________________________________
3. Number of Members:__________________________
4. Monthly Savings per Member:__________________
5. Total Savings at date:__________________________
6. Total Amount Group Loan Application:___________
(To be used as specified in part 2 of this statement)
7. Payment Schedule
Year/Month
Loan Repayment
Social Development Fund
xxx
xxx
Our group meets the qualifying criteria for project loans to women's groups, because:
- all members have undergone training group formation
- all members have undertaken monthly savings for 6 months
- our group has established a proper book keeping and financial management system
- our group has elected officers with designated officers
- our group conducts monthly meetings and makes decisions democratically
- each applicant has submitted a business plan
- our group has reviewed the loan applications carefully
On behalf of all members, the signatories of this application certify that the above information is true and that the group accepts full liability for repayment of the loan.
Signatories:
Date:__________
(Group president)
(Group Treasurer)
(President Loan Committee)
The total amount of the Group Loan will be disbursed to the members according to the following specification.
Name Member
Amount at Loan (rmb)
Duration of Loan (months)
Monthly Interest (%)
Type of* business
Purpose** of Loan
*Indicate the type of business: production, processing, trade or service
**Specify the kind of business: pig raising, vegetable production, beancurd processing, garments, grocer v shop. hair dressing, transportation
Summary of Purpose of Loans
Total No of Members
Description
No of members
% of members
Description
No of members
% of members
Description
No of members
% of members
Description
No of members
% of members
Production
Processing
Trade
Services
Areas for improvement
Our group has identified the following priority areas for improvement (describe what is needed, why it is needed and give suggestions on how it can be arranged: by the group themselves, with assistance from other villagers, the project, bureau, etc.)
Technical skills training:
Technical advisory services:
Market Information:
Entrepreneurial skills:
Other:
Individual loan application
1. Name of Applicant: _______________________________________
2. Address: _______________________________________________
3. Type of business: ________________________________________
4. Monthly savings: _________________________________________
5. Total amount of savings: __________________________________
6. Purpose of Loan: _________________________________________
7. Amount of Loan Application:________________________________
8. Repayment Schedule
Year/Month
Amount of Loan Repayment
Amount of Interest
I pledge to use the loan in accordance with the attached planning for my business and the principle of self reliance. I accept full liability for repayment of the loan to the group.
Date:_________
Signature:_______
Attachments: Complete Business Plan or Basic Plans for Investment Production, Marketing and Management
Loan agreement (for loans to group members)
The president and treasurer, representing women's group__________________(name), hereafter called Party A, and group member________________(name), hereafter called Party B. agree to the following.
1. Party A shall provide a loan in the amount of ____________ rmb to Party B on (year)______, (month), ________, (day) ________ .
2. Party B shall use the loan solely for the purpose stated in the Loan Application and its attachment.
3. Party B shall repay the loan with interest according to the schedule below. In case of default a penalty of 10 % per month of delay will be charged.
4. Party B shall submit an Income Statement to Party A after the first production cycle.
5. _________________(any other agreements? ea. guarantor, collateral, etc.)
Repayment Schedule
Year/Month
Amount of Loan Repayment
Amount of Interest
Party A:
Party B:
(Group President)
(Applicant Group Member)
(Group Treasurer)
Date:________________
Township evaluation report on loan application
1. Assessment of Croup Application
(Include comments on group performance, decision making and management skills, commitment, individual skills, type of business, viability of proposed enterprises, contribution to achieving the project goals regarding self-reliance and improved status, etc.)
2. Decisions on Follow Through Assistance
(Based on worksheet 2 and 3, and the Group Application Form Page 3 and 4, list the weaknesses and constraints and the action that will be taken by the township/village to address these limitations. Identify areas which require attention of the Governing Body. The headings below cover the most common needs for assistance.)
 Training needs (technical skills, entrepreneurial skills)
 Technical advisory services
 Marketing and other external constraints
 Other
3. Specification Loan Agreement
(Explain the contents of the Loan Agreement, ea. guarantee arrangements)
Date:_________
Signature__________
(Township Governor)
Loan agreement (for loans to women's groups)
The County (Township) ______________ Governor (name), hereafter called Party A. and the president and treasurer representing women's group _______________ (name) in (township, village), hereafter called Party B, agree to the following.
1. Party A shall provide a loan in the amount of ___________ rmb to Party B on (year) _____ ,(month), ________ (day) ________ .
2. Party B shall use the loan solely for loans to its members for the purposes stated in the Group Loan Application and its attachments.
3. Party B shall repay the loan and the contribution to the Social Development Fund according to the schedule below.
4. Party B shall submit the required quarterly reports on its financial status to the project office.
Payment Schedule
Year/Month
Loan Repayment
Social Development Fund
xxx
xxx
Party A:
Party B:
(County or Township Governor)
(Group President)
(Group Treasurer)
Date:
Annexes:
Evaluation report on loan applications
1. Introduction of proposed approvals
(Refer to planning of number of groups and women to avail of repayments, the attached summaries of applications and purpose of loans to introduce the proposals for approval.)
2. Summary of Township Evaluation Report;
2a. Assessment of Applications and Recommendation for approval
2b. Township commitments for follow through action
2c. Township suggestions for action Governing Body
3. Conclusions and Recommendations
The points listed below can serve as a check list for defining conclusions and recommendations of the report:
 Approval/disapproval and reasons
 Assessment township performance, action needed
 Action plan for training (technical and entrepreneurial skills)
 Action plan for provision of market information
 Recommendations for technical advisory services
 Recommendations for addressing external constraints
 Specific conditions of Loan Agreements
 Other
Date:
Signature.
(Head Project Office)
Summary of Applications for Approval Governing Body
Date training group formation
Savings
Loan
Name Group
No. of members
First session
Last session
Starting date savings
Recording date total savings
Total amount savings
Total application
Proposed amount for approval
Amount approved
Approval date
Disbursement date
Summary of Purpose of Loans
Description
No of members
% of members
Description
No of members
% of members
Description
No of members
% of members
Description
No of members
% of members
Production
Processing
Trade
Services
Annex 7. Training evaluation forms
Evaluation module 1: Concept building and role identification
1. Evaluation of Topics and Activities
Rate usefulness for you work in the project: 1= not useful; 2= little use; 3= useful; 4= very useful
Rate the degree of satisfaction with content and methodology: 1 = not satisfied, 2= not completely satisfied; 3= completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Topic/Activity
Usefulness
Content
Methodology
Remarks
Topic 1 Concept of Micro-Enterprise
Activity 1: Defining Business
Activity 2: Defining Micro-Enterprise
Activity 3: Role of Micro-Enterprise in the WPD project
Topic 2 Causes of Success or Failure of a Micro-Enterprise
Activity 1: Business Cycle and Aspects
Activity 2: Factors affecting the Success of a Business
Topic 3 Role Identification in Micro-Enterprise Development
Activity 1: Common Weaknesses and Constraints of Micro-Entrepreneurs
Activity 2: Role of Project Officers in assisting Micro-Entrepreneurs
2. Evaluation of Workshop
Rate the degree of satisfaction with the workshop arrangements:
1 = not satisfied
2 = not completely satisfied
3 = completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Arrangement
Rate
Remarks
Work room/facilities
Seating arrangement
Time schedule
Clarity of objectives
Variation of methodology
Pace of training
Training work book
3. Suggestions to further improve the Training Activities
a. For facilitator:
b. For participants:
Name _________
Date ___________
Evaluation module 2: Micro-enterprise planning and assessment
1. Evaluation of Topics and Activities
Rate usefulness for you work in the project 1 = not useful; 2= little use; 3= useful; 4= very useful
Rate the degree of satisfaction with content and methodology 1 = not satisfied; 2= not completely satisfied; 3= completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Topic/Activity
Usefulness
Content
Methodology
Remarks
Topic 1 Economic Principles and Indicators
Activity 1: Introduction to business Planning
Activity 2: Net Cash Income
Activity 3: Net Profit
Activity 4: Risk Analysis
Activity 5: Cash flow
Topic 2 Business Plan Preparation and Assessment
Activity 1: Key Elements of a Business Plan
Activity 2: Introduction of Tools for Business Planning
Activity 3: Practicum Business Planning
2. Evaluation of Workshop Arrangements
Rate the degree of satisfaction with the workshop arrangements:
1 = not satisfied
2 = not completely satisfied
3 = completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Arrangement
Rate
Remarks
Work room/facilities
Seating arrangement
Time schedule
Clarity of objectives
Variation of methodology
Pace of training
Training work book
a. For facilitator:
b. For participants:
Name _________
Date ___________
Evaluation module 3: Micro-enterprise management
1. Evaluation of Topics and Activities
Rate usefulness for you work in the project: 1= not useful; 2= little use; 3= useful; 4= very useful
Rate the degree of satisfaction with content and methodology: 1= not satisfied; 2= not completely satisfied; 3= completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Topic/Activity
Usefulness
Content
Methodology
Remarks
Topic 1 Management Areas, Skills and Tools
Activity 1: Introduction to Micro-Enterprise Management
Activity 2: Introduction to Financial Records
Activity 3: Preparation and Reading of Financial Records
Topic 2 Systematic Financial Analysis and Diagnosis
Activity 1: Financial Analysis and Diagnosis
Activity 2: Options for Entrepreneur
2. Evaluation of Workshop Arrangements
Rate the degree of satisfaction with the workshop arrangements:
1 = not satisfied
2 = not completely satisfied
3 = completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Arrangement
Rate
Remarks
Work room/facilities
Seating arrangement
Time schedule
Clarity of objectives
Variation of methodology
Pace of training
Training work book
3. Suggestions to further improve the Training Activities
a. For facilitator:
b. For participants:
Name _________
Date ___________
Evaluation module 4: Fund utilization and management
1. Evaluation of Topics and Activities
Rate usefulness for you work in the project 1 = not useful: 2= little use; 3= useful; 4= very useful
Rate the degree of satisfaction with content and methodology: 1 = not satisfied; 2= not completely satisfied; 3= completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Topic/Activity
Usefulness
Content
Methodology
Remarks
Topic 1 Fund Utilization and management in Women's Groups
Activity 1: Importance of Savings Mobilization
Activity 2: Group Financial Records
Activity 3: Monitoring of Group Savings and Loans Operations
Topic 2 Project Revolving Fund Management
Activity 1: Policies and Procedures of Project Revolving Fund
Activity 2: Planning Disbursement of Loans to Women's Groups
Activity 3: Preparation and Procedures of Loan Applications
2. Evaluation of Workshop Arrangements
Rate the degree of satisfaction with the workshop arrangements:
1 = not satisfied
2 = not completely satisfied
3 = completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Arrangement
Rate
Remarks
Work room/facilities
Seating arrangement
Time schedule
Clarity of objectives
Variation of methodology
Pace of training
Training work book
3. Suggestions to further improve the Training Activities
a. For facilitator:
b. For participants:
Name _________
Date ___________
Evaluation module 5: Action planning and evaluation
1. Evaluation of Topics and Activities
Rate usefulness for you work in the project: 1= not useful, 2= little use; 3= useful; 4= very useful
Rate the degree of satisfaction with content and methodology: 1 = not satisfied; 2= not completely satisfied; 3= completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Topic/Activity
Usefulness
Content
Methodology
Remarks
Topic 1 Action Planning
Activity 1: Role Delineation
Activity 2: Training Plan
2. Evaluation of Workshop Arrangements
Rate the degree of satisfaction with the workshop arrangements;
1 = not satisfied
2 = not completely satisfied
3 = completely satisfied
Please explain or make suggestions in the last column
Arrangement
Rate
Remarks
Work room/facilities
Seating arrangement
Time schedule
Clarity of objectives
Variation of methodology
Pace of training
Training work book
3. Suggestions to further improve the Training Activities
a. For facilitator:
b. For participants:
Name _________
Date ___________
WOMEN POPULATION AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
TRAINING MICRO-ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT
Work Book
<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
Rural women are the main food producers in China as well as globally. However, many of these rural women do not see themselves as important contributors to their families and to society at large. They feel powerless and confined to performing a role which society has imposed on them and which they themselves have quietly accepted unwittingly. One major reason why they are in such a state is that they generally do not have direct access and control of resources. They do not own and control the resources themselves. As a consequence they have very limited control over their own life. Their potentials are underestimated and underdeveloped.
The "Women, Population and Development Programme" (WPD) in China is based on the belief that rural poor, women in particular have the basic right to control their own lives. They are entitled to be recognized as worthy members of society.
Engaging in their own micro-enterprise which they themselves choose and for which they have personal control and are accountable for, has helped rural women to regain this control over their own lives.
When women start taking their own responsibility for their very own business based on their own idea and with their own savings and loan they earn not only their own income, but much more than that, they experience a personal transformation. Their own view of themselves changes. They begin to have a new world view as they personally experience what it means to acquire new skills in decision-making, risk-taking etc. to achieve a goal which they themselves have set for themselves and their families. Each woman can speak of her very own achievements which become apparent not only to herself but to her family and society.
When women in rural areas experience this transformation, we often hear them say
" this is my very own.. . I achieved this myself... . a true gift to my family.. "
In our work with the rural women in China and in other countries in the Asia and Pacific Region, we cannot but wonder how many more women need to find their own passage to reach a point when they can truly say "my very own".
This Manual on Micro-Enterprise Development has benefited from rural women entrepreneurs and field workers who patiently and tediously took the time to find the best way to help rural women achieve their goal towards greater control of their lives through micro-enterprise undertaking.
Although this Manual has been developed for the Women Population and Development Programme of China, it may also be useful for rural development workers. It is FAO's wish to share this Manual with others who may be interested.
Our most sincere appreciation is hereby expressed to Mr. Jacques du Guerny. Chief, Population Programme Service (SDWP), FAO, Rome, for his continuing technical guidance in this WPD work.
Felicidad L. Villareal
FAO Population and Rural Development
Adviser, China
Beijing, China
June 1995
