<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
This document contains guidelines for aquaculture planners on the type of information they need to ensure that gender issues are taken note of in aquaculture planning. How to obtain this information is also indicated.
Draft guidelines on the subject were prepared by ALCOM in 1992 on the basis of a review of available materials and documented experiences, mainly in Eastern and Southern Africa. These guidelines were reviewed and refined at a workshop held in Zimbabwe in January 1993, which was attended by specialists from the SADC region, ALCOM staff and consultants. The guidelines contained in this book represent the consensus of participants at the workshop.
The guidelines may be found useful in the SADC (Southern African Development Community) region, and elsewhere, for sectoral planning, project formulation, evaluation and monitoring concerning gender issues in aquaculture. Comments and feedback are invited.
The document has been made possible by collaboration between ALCOM and a project funded by Japan: "Enhancement of the role of women in inland fisheries and aquaculture development" (GCP/RAF/273/JPN).
ALCOM (Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme) is a regional aquaculture and fisheries programme of the FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). Based in Harare, Zimbabwe, it coven; the member countries of SADC -- Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
ALCOM is funded by Sweden and Belgium. Its preparatory phase began in October 1986, and its first implementation phase in October 1990.
ALCOM Address:
Mail: P O Box 3730, Harare, Zimbabwe Telex: 260 40 FAO ZW Tel.: 263-4-724985 Fax: 263-4-736847 E-mail: ALCOM@mango.apc.org
<title>Meeting information needs on gender issues in aquaculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Abstract
Abstract
What kind of information do aquaculture planners need to ensure that gender issues are taken care of in their planning? How can such information be collected? This document contains guidelines concerning both questions. The guidelines cover four areas: information needed for sector planning and project formulation at the macro-level; information required at the micro-level (which will be helpful for development interventions in local communities); monitoring and evaluation; and incorporation of gender issues in socioeconomic data collection.
These guidelines are contained in four chapters. A more comprehensive set of information needs is found in tabular form in the two Appendices. These detail sources and methods of collecting the needed information, and the uses to which this information can be put.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Draft guidelines on information needs concerning gender issues were discussed and elaborated upon by participants at a regional meeting of experts held in Zimbabwe during 19-22 January 1993. Besides the authors, the following people attended the meeting:
Mr Arne Andreasson, Programme Director, ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Hope Chigodu, Vice Chairperson, Zimbabwe Women's Resources Centre, Harare, Zimbabwe; Mr Steve Donda, Fisheries Economist, Salima, Malawi; Ms Elin Ersdal, Socio-economist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Elizabeth Harrison, Research Fellow Anthropology, University of Sussex, U.K; Ms Tilleke Kiewied, Advisor Gender Planning Section, Mansa, Zambia; Mr Kees Leendertse, Fisheries Planning Analyst (APO), FAO, Rome, Italy; Ms Rita O. J. Maly, Aquaculturist, Kunduchi Fisheries Institute, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Mr Burton A. S. Mwamoto, Fsheries-economist (Local Consultant), FAO, Bukoba, Tanzania; Mr Saidi Swedi Mwikongi, Programme Officer, TFNC, Dar-es-salaam, Tanzania; Mr Henrik Nilsson, Socio-economist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Synve Fosse Opsahl, Nutritionist (APO), ALCOM, Harare, Zimbabwe; Ms Erika Seki, Consultant, Socio-economist, FAO, Rome, Italy; Mr Uwe Tietze, Fisheries Industry Officer, FAO,
Rome, Italy.
<section>3</section>
1. Introduction
1. Introduction
Discussion of gender issues and aquaculture has led to little change in sectoral planning on the subject or in the formulation of projects or strategies to tackle the issues. This is mainly because little information is available on gender issues; further, planners are not certain where or how to obtain such information. The guidelines given in this report address these needs; they discuss the information which is required and the methods to acquire it in order to incorporate gender issues into mainstream aquaculture development planning and project formulation. Though based primarily on experiences in Eastern and Southern Africa, they are intended for wider application in Africa.
The guidelines are meant for use by aquaculture planners. As gender is a cross-disciplinary issue, these guidelines encompass many general aspects of aquaculture development. For those already involved in the sector, many of the issues raised may seem obvious. The purpose of the guidelines is therefore to present these issues from a gender perspective and ensure that information or data collected does not ignore these important considerations. They therefore assume that the user has a basic understanding of the aquaculture sector.
The main text of the guidelines is divided into the following four sections:
(1) Information required at the macro-level. This section identifies and details key questions on gender issues which should be answered during sectoral planning and project formulation (macro-level).
(2) Information required at the micro-level. This section identifies and elaborates on key questions which should be answered for development interventions in specific areas or communities.
(3) Monitoring and evaluation.
(4) Suggestions for incorporating gender issues in socio-economic data collection.
The main text focuses on key information needs related to gender in aquaculture. Users should consider selecting those issues which are most relevant to their needs. More detailed lists of all the information required and how this information can be collected and used in planning and project formulation are given in Appendices 1 and 2.
The guidelines arc structured in such a way as to introduce the user to key issues concerning gender in aquaculture for those less familiar with such issues. Having read these chapters, the user should then proceed to Appendices 1 and 2, where a more comprehensive set of information needs, how such information is used and sources/methods to collect it, are given.
For those familiar with gender issues, the user can proceed directly to Appendices 1 and 2 and only refer to the main text, if a particular topic requires some clarification.
Broadly speaking, macro-level guidelines are intended for sectoral planners and as a first step in project formulation. Micro-level guidelines are intended for project formulation, monitoring and evaluation. However, users should refer to both levels when carrying out a specific task, because many issues manifest themselves at both levels.
Users interested in setting up monitoring and evaluation systems may read Chapter 5 and then refer to the matrices presented in Appendices I and 2 for ideas on useful indicators.
The guidelines assume that users have some basic training in the application of socio-economic methodologies. Users interested in the application of such methodologies to collect gender-specific information are referred to Chapter 5. This presents general information on how to overcome problems associated with official statistics and field work and how to aggregate information once it has been collected.
<section>4</section>
2. Guidelines on gender information required for sectoral planning and project formulation: macro-level
Development policies and programmes/projects for aquaculture on gender issues
Institutional^1 capacities
Sectoral characteristics
Demographic characteristics
Health and nutrition characteristics
Legal status of women
Credit availability
Extension services structure and training
Biological and technical research
2. Guidelines on gender information required for sectoral planning and project formulation: macro-level
Although the need for socio-economic information on aquaculture planning and project formulation has gained recognition in the recent past, these data have not been included in conventional information collection systems in the fisheries and aquaculture administration of many countries. Neither has there been much consideration for developing operational and systematic approaches or strategies to consider gender concerns. For integration of gender issues into aquaculture planning, the starting point is better awareness of gender issues. Such awareness has to come through data.
This section highlights key issues which provide an entry point for planners in analyzing and incorporating gender-related socio-economic issues at the macro-level, including information for sectoral planning and project formulation.
There are several actions that a government department or a project could undertake to address gender issues. The areas of action vary from the structure of their own organization, their policies and working methods, to staff training. The effects of actions which do not take gender aspects into account as well as recommendations for courses of action to remedy this situation are discussed in more detail below.
Development policies and programmes/projects for aquaculture on gender issues
Key questions: What are the existing national/donor policies and objectives in support of gender issues in aquaculture? What strategies and programmes in support of gender issues have been undertaken? What are their achievements and constraints which need to be addressed?
Knowing existing government and donor policies and objectives on aquaculture and on gender issues is the first step in sectoral planning. This provides the basis for future development interventions. Past activities and current programmes in support of gender issues should be reviewed to establish the actions taken to meet national and donor objectives and the level of commitment to meeting these objectives.
Another area of consideration is budgetary allocation to gender issues by the national government and by donors. Special budget allocations for gender issues show a general commitment to implement policies. However, one must be aware that money allocated to gender issues does not necessarily represent actual activities implemented at the practical level on gender issues, unless specified.
Institutional^1 capacities
^1 Institutions include governments, research, training and educational institutions, universities and NGOs.
Key questions: What gender expertise is available within institutions? Which institutions are suitable for cooperation/collaboration on gender issues? Do the relevant institutions require assistance in gender skills?
Gender awareness, and competency in gender analysis in existing institutions, provide the starting point for the development and implementation of gender-sensitive programmes. In some countries, activities related to gender issues are administered by other ministries (Ministry of Women Affairs, Ministry of Community Development and Social Welfare etc.) with which aquaculture staff rarely have contact. Consequently, aquaculture officers often have limited access to general socio-economic information and gender-specific information in particular; moreover, when available they find it difficult to incorporate this information in sector and project planning.
One approach is to identify and collaborate with relevant institutions competent in collation, collection and analysis of gender-related information during sector planning and project formulation and for monitoring and evaluation. Where competency in gender analysis is weak or non-existent, another approach would be to strengthen skills in gender analysis by training.
Sectoral characteristics
Key questions: What are the roles of men and women in fish farming? How do the resource requirements of the different culture systems affect men and women ? Which fish species are kept in ponds ?
Few women own fish ponds. This does not mean that they arc not involved in fish production. The majority of women assist men in pond construction, feeding and fertilizing, as well as harvesting. Two main factors appear to have contributed to this situation:
- The choice of the technology and intensity of production. Past experiences have shown that more intensive fish culture systems are not within the reach of many small-scale farmers, especially women. Access to resources differ for men and women, and some of the biggest constraints women face are time and labour. A different kind of technical package may allow greater adoption by women farmers than is possible now.
- The planners' perception of women and their roles has led to the introduction of aquaculture as a male activity. Consequently, extension services have ignored women's work in aquaculture.
Regarding the choice of fish species to raise in ponds, different people may use different criteria to decide. For example, whether it is a fast growing and easily marketable species, whether the fish has scales or not, how many bones it has as this can be dangerous for small children. Moreover, women's choice may be governed by the many taboos during pregnancy and the lactation period.
Aquaculture planning should be done in close collaboration with other users of the land and water resources so as to avoid conflicts. Women are often the users affected. For example, before the adoption of fish farming (especially in the case of cage culture), women may have used those water resources, for drawing drinking water, washing dishes, for laundry, or for soaking cassava. Moreover, the water level in wells may have gone down through aquaculture development. As a result, women will have to look for other sources of water.
Demographic characteristics
Key questions: How does population growth and density affect resources and its users? How do demographic characteristics affect male and female labour availability in aquaculture? What is the dependency ratio for rural and urban areas?
Population growth and density will affect pressure on existing resources and the distribution of limited resources amongst existing and potential users.
In addition, population movements into and out of an area change household composition and the type of households in the area. For example, an increase in the number of female-headed households may mean this group needs special development intervention. The occurrence of female-headed households might also affect gender relationships in decision making and division of labour. However, care should be taken in assuming that female-headed households are a homogeneous group and are all resource-poor.
For aquaculture, the proportion between economically active household members and dependents as well as the ratio between adult men and women in different areas, are important indicators of the availability of labour for pond construction.
Health and nutrition characteristics
Key questions: Which areas have a relatively low nutritional and health status? What are the main problems? Who is affected? Will fish help improve the nutritional status of an area?
Improving the nutritional well-being of the population is often an important objective of aquaculture development. If the nutritional status of the rural population is generally low, and particularly if there is a shortage of animal protein, an increase in fish supply for local consumption should be considered. Women should be involved in the planning and implementation of projects aimed at improvement of health and nutritional status since they are usually primarily responsible for the nutritional welfare of the family.
Anthropometric measurements such as weight for height and weight for age are general indicators of the symptoms of malnutrition. These require to be analyzed in combination with other related socioeconomic indicators, in order to identify the causes of malnutrition. The gender-disaggregated measurement can be used, whenever available, to identify the relative well-being of men and women. During pregnancy and lactation, women need to eat well. In fish eating areas where the birth weight is low and infant mortality rate is increasing or higher than in other areas, special attention may be needed to augment fish consumption by women. Toward this end, special investigations will be required which clarify the types of fish preferred and allowed to be eaten by women and the intra-household distribution of fish.
Legal status of women
Key questions: Can men and women own and/or inherit productive resources? Register land? Obtain water rights?
Inheritance law and property ownership rights have gender implications. For example, if women lose their fish pond upon the death of their husband because they cannot own property, they may not be encouraged to invest time and/or money in these developments.
Specific laws relating to aquaculture do not exist in most African countries. However, there are laws regarding the ownership and inheritance of land, a prerequisite for fish farming. Land laws register land titles almost exclusively in favour of men. Where women do not have secure access to or control over land, development of commercial aquaculture will have different impacts on men and women. The lack of title deeds also limits access to credit for commercial aquaculture.
However, few farmers apply for land title deeds. It is mainly commercial farmers or farmers in resettlement schemes who do. In rural areas, customary laws that determine access to land, still prevail (see also micro level).
Credit availability
Key questions: Do men and women enjoy equal de facto access to institutional credit? Are credit programmes and lending procedures suitable for both men and women? Are there sources of credit which are more suited to either men or women? How can banks and other financial institutions be assisted to cater better to credit requirements of men and women?
Experiences in field projects show the potential for integrating a specific credit package for women into the banks' lending policies. For example, women entrepreneurs in Kigoma, Tanzania, who received credit for fish processing activities demonstrated a high economic return on their activities. The scheme was successful because lending policies and repayment schedules were tailored to women's seasonal work schedules and earning capacities. Credit facilities were combined with the production of seedlings for planting of trees, training on energy-saving processing techniques and other community development activities.
For aquaculture, the design of credit packages is usually based on intensive systems integrated with animal husbandry. When evaluating the feasibility of these systems, the different needs and constraints of men and women should be taken into account. Chances are high that different packages need to be designed for men and women fish farmers to suit their different situation.
There are also a number of other inhibiting factors which prevent women from obtaining credit such as low literacy levels, lack of collateral, and lack of guarantee of a regular salary. As a result, although conditions may be equal for both men and women, women find it more difficult to meet these conditions.
Extension services structure and training
Key questions: What are the number of persons working in the extension service, by position and by sex? Is the extension staff competent and motivated to integrate gender issues into extension work ? Are they developing and implementing extension methodologies which are gender sensitive ? Are there barriers to the entry of women in vocational training and higher education? Do the curricula of training institutions incorporate gender issues?
There are few female extension personnel at any level in most extension services. It is male personnel who are the decision makers who are able to affect programmes and policies. The few female extensionists that do exist (3% in Africa) are usually found in the junior ranks because of their lower educational level.
Education is not the only constraint to incorporating women in the extension service. It has been difficult to motivate women to take up field jobs because they might conflict with household duties.
One remedial approach is to utilize more women trainers in on-going training programmes. They can serve as an example and attract other women to the extension service. At the same time, the ongoing training programmes should be evaluated to determine their accessibility to women (e.g. whether there are structures which cater for both men and women, child care facilities, etc).
Once appointed, women should be given equal opportunities as men to carry out extension and to go on study tours, thus receiving informal on-the-job training. If female extension agents are marginalized, they will become less professionally competent than their male colleagues so that it becomes increasingly difficult for them to contribute to the extension service, and a vicious circle will operate.
Since there are usually few vacancies within extension services, the recruitment of additional female field workers is not always possible. Nor is it a guarantee that gender issues will be considered. Therefore, another and perhaps more practical approach is to utilize existing male extension agents as much as possible. Although conventional belief is that women prefer advice from female extension agents, experience in agriculture and aquaculture extension has shown that the sex of the extension agent is not necessarily a critical issue in reaching women. Good communication skills and sound technical knowledge are more important.
The training of fisheries officers and extension agents mainly concentrates on technical and biological aspects. Therefore, extension agents should be trained in extension methods which can effectively reach men and women.
Biological and technical research
Key questions: How relevant is existing research and development (R & D) to the needs of men and women involved in aquaculture? How do men and women benefit from the research results? Are there disadvantages? If so, who are affected?
The choice of culture systems and fish species for research, does have gender implications. Access to the resources required for the technology determines who can benefit from the research. On the other hand, men and women may prefer different fish species for pond culture. The choice regarding the species to use for research thus indirectly affects men and women. Consequently, if research is to benefit both men and women, it should focus on culture systems which are within the reach of women and on species which are of interest to women as well.
<section>5</section>
3. Guidelines on gender information required for sectoral planning and project formulation: the micro level
Aquaculture
Household structures
Location of fish ponds
Key factors affecting access to resources and control over them
Household availability and allocation of resources
Access to and quality of extension services
Division of labour and time allocation
Household decision-making
Economics of fish farming
3. Guidelines on gender information required for sectoral planning and project formulation: the micro level
At the micro-level, the aquaculture sector can be arranged into community and household levels. When formulating plans and/or projects for specific areas, information is needed for both levels. The key issues regarding gender which need to be taken into account at this stage, are examined in the following sections.
There are many factors at the community level which influence men's and women's activities and their access to and control over resources: the general economic conditions, the nature of government bureaucracies, socio-cultural factors, familial norms and religious beliefs, legal parameters, training and education. Most factors will not be amenable to change by a project. Therefore, an assessment should be made on whether and how these factors will affect or can be affected by a project.
Generally speaking, activities should focus on the community as a whole, with equal importance accorded to addressing the differing needs of men and women. Special women's projects should be the exception rather than the rule, in order to avoid the isolation and marginalisation of women. It is equally important to tackle the weaknesses in gender-sensitivity within existing institutions and services. Only in cases where a high degree of sexual segregation and separation of productive roles exists or there is a clear case of positive discrimination in a local community, will such components be necessary.
A community is made up of different types of households. However, a "household" is not a homogeneous undifferentiated grouping of people with a production and consumption function, i.e. with shared and equal access to resources for production and benefits from it. In many cases, individual household members may have different production priorities.
The relative bargaining power of the two sexes within the household will influence the allocation of productive resources as much as purely economic considerations do.
Aquaculture
It is necessary to study all the main actors in aquaculture and understand the extent of interrelationships between men and women with regard to labour, income and transfers in kind (fish, clothing, etc.). As a result, different aquaculture systems can be identified, not only on the basis of the intensity of the aquaculture system, but also on the extent to which men and/or women are involved in aquaculture.
- Dual aquaculture system; Both husband and wife are fish farmers but they have separate ponds. This situation often occurs in pert-urban areas, where the husband has a full-time occupation other than farming. He contributes some labour himself and hires labour (especially for pond construction) if needed. The wife usually feeds, fertilizes and manages his ponds. In exchange for her contribution, she is often given another pond over which she has complete control. The pond yield is hers.
- Male aquaculture system; Fish ponds are controlled by the husband but the wife provides a significant amount of labour.
- Female aquaculture system; This situation occurs in female-headed households where ponds are taken over by widows, or in case men have migrated and have relegated fish farming to their wives. There are also exceptional cases of divorced, single, or married women who have started fish farming on their own.
Projects should thus address the contribution of different actors in fish farming and their remuneration. Neglect of this "rule" may obscure the fact that what is in the best interests of the household may not be in the best interests of its members. The unpaid family labour of women or of younger members may increase the income, status and living standards of the household, but it may not be rewarded with an equitable share of the benefits. In this case, women often react by minimizing their input into aquaculture. This can affect the project or sector negatively.
Household structures
Key questions: What types of household structures are there in the community 7 What percentage do they make up of the total number of households? Are all household types equally reached with the information on aquaculture?
Demographic information at the household level is an indicator of differences between households on needs, resources and constraints on production. The appropriateness of an aquaculture system will depend partly on the composition of the household and their labour availability. Generally speaking, large households constitute a pool of labour. Female-headed households (about one third of all households in Southern Africa) are usually smaller and thus face a bigger labour constraint. However, it is important to know the type of household they head. For example, husbands may have migrated and may be sending remittances home regularly. On the other hand, there are widowed or divorced women who do not receive any material support. Female-headed households are often sub-divided into three categories:
- de lure female headed household where the head is either unmarried, divorced or widowed;
- de facto female headed household, because of male migration;
- periodically female headed household which may be one of several units attached to an adult male through polygamous marriage, or households where male migration is seasonal.
Female-headed households should thus not be grouped together, as they may have different needs and constraints.
By introducing new employment and income opportunities, aquaculture may reduce migration and thus affect the composition of the household.
Location of fish ponds
Key questions: Where are the suitable sites for ponds in relation to the village? And the sites of men's and women's major activities (e.g. agriculture, herding and watering of cattle, collection of firewood, fetching drinking water) ? Considering the location of other activities, who would find it easier to adopt fish farming -- men or women?
The location of suitable sites for fish ponds is physically constrained by the need for water resources adjacent to suitable land. Villages as residential areas are often separated from farm land and fish ponds. The distance between the village and the ponds, as well as between the fields of both men and women and the ponds, determines the time required to visit the ponds. If ponds are located at a distance from all the other major activities of a household, and thus special trips are required to visit them, women will be disadvantaged -- as time is a bigger constraint for them than for men.
When the extension service is oriented mainly toward men, they are the early adopters; women may have to be content with less suitable sites. Moreover, they may experience more theft in their ponds because they are further away from the village.
Key factors affecting access to resources and control over them
Key questions: How is access to resources (land, water, labour, inputs) and control over them regulated? What needs and opportunities exist for increasing women's access to resources? Hove men and women been consulted in identifying such needs and opportunities? Can an aquaculture project affect women's access to resources/and control over them?
Besides factors at the macro-level which affect access to and control over resources (like institutional structures, legal parameters, training and education, etc.) there are also community-level factors. Class stratification is characterized by a hierarchical distribution of social power, income and productive resources, while kinship systems are mainly concerned with resource allocation and its use - which lead to gender differences in access to productive resources.
Often, planners are concerned about the incompatibility of matriliny and male development because of their insecurity of tenure associated with it. In matrilineal systems the couple often settles in the wife's village upon marriage. The husband thus gains access to land and water required for aquaculture in his wife's village. The dissolution of the marriage means that the man loses such access as well as the activities he has developed. Therefore, it was often believed that this type of residence, which is related to the matrilineal system, inhibits aquaculture development.
Although matrilineal systems are now an exception, they have received more interest than the more common patrilineal systems. Moreover, evidence shows that the large majority of men manipulate the matrilineal system once aquaculture proves its benefits. The question is thus whether women can, to the same extent as men, find ways around the patrilineal system and gain access to the necessary resources and reduce the insecurity of tenure which is inherent in the patrilineal system.
Women's ability to gain access to resources within a community and within rural households depends not only on the kinship system or the class to which they belong, but also on their marital status, motherhood and age.
During project design, class or kinship systems which bar women's access to productive resources in the project area must be identified. The project should find ways to deal with these barriers, either bypassing them or by modifying project expectations.
Household availability and allocation of resources
Key questions: Does aquaculture development induce changes in resource availability for male and female users? How are these resources allocated within the household ? How much of these resources are men and women prepared to make available for aquaculture?
Fish farming is often a supplementary activity for small-scale farmers. The assumption is that idle
resources are made productive through aquaculture. However, if more intensive aquaculture systems are introduced, shifts in resource allocation (e.g. land, labour, capital) may take place.
Households make rational use of their available resources. Since men and women within the same household may have different production priorities, bargaining positions within the household will influence the allocation of resources by sex. For example, many men have adopted small-scale fish farming, which was introduced as a male activity. There was supposedly no resource competition for men since they had idle land, labour and on-farm by-products. In practice, feeding and pond management is often done by women, adding to their heavy work load. Conscious of the opportunity costs of working for their husbands, women will commit themselves to aquaculture only if they consider their remuneration sufficient. It is difficult for a project to intervene directly in the distribution of aquaculture benefits between household members. On the other hand, if women neglect feeding and pond management because they do not receive fair compensation for their efforts, aquaculture production
may go down. Therefore, this aspect could be taken up for discussion during extension visits/meetings as well as in preparing extension materials.
Another implication of the heavy workload of women is that the opportunity cost of their time is higher than that for men. If their decisions are based primarily on economic grounds, women will adopt fish farming only if it is more rewarding than the activities and incomes foregone. However, other aspects (e.g. household food security and the variety of available relishes) play an important role in the decision to adopt aquaculture.
In rural areas, access to land is determined by the kinship system. Women usually have use rights to land, but do not actually control it. The implication is that they must obtain the agreement on the use of the land of their husbands or male relatives first. In case women want to use the land for a different activity like fish farming, they need to obtain permission again. There are examples of women in pert-urban areas who wanted their own ponds but failed to get their husbands' permission - the latter feared that the wives would concentrate on their own ponds and neglect the husbands'.
Planning should be done in close collaboration with other users of the resources required for aquaculture. Women are often the users affected. For example, before the adoption of fish farming, women may have used those water resources for drawing drinking water, washing dishes and laundry or soaking cassava. Extension agents may discourage women from doing their washing or soaking of cassava in ponds. Moreover, the water level in wells may be reduced through aquaculture development. As a result, women will have to look for other sources of water and possibly have to travel further to obtain them.
On-farm by-products which can be used as an input in fish farming are often controlled by women since they do the food processing. They can thus decide whether and how much to use for fish farming or to keep it for other uses (e.g. maize bran for poultry) which may be more beneficial to them.
Men generally have closer contacts with extension agents than women, and consequently get easier access to fingerlings. When there is a shortage of government supplied fingerlings, they will have to be bought from other fish farmers who usually charge higher prices than the official government price. This may be a disadvantage to women since they usually have less capital available than men.
Since women generally face more resource constraints than men, it is often suggested that they should pool their scarce resources and start fish farming in groups. But field experience has shown that such groups are not always successful. Promoters of fish farming have not always taken into account the fact that women are not a homogeneous group and are divided among themselves along lines such
as age, wealth, social standing and ethnicity. Additional problems are related to the fact that it is frequently outsiders who have identified the needs of the groups, their objectives, pace of development, purpose and mode of operation. Therefore, collective fish farming undertaken by women's groups is not comparable to male farmers owning individual fish ponds.
Access to and quality of extension services
Key questions: Are both men and women reached by the extension service? Are they given appropriate information? Are the extension agents aware of the different needs and constraints that men and women are facing?
The person who disseminates information on fish farming can determine who receives it. This in turn may determine who takes up fish farming and who gains from it. Moreover, extension material often says who the fish farmer is: photographs, slides, drawings, usually showing men working on fish ponds.
Extension agents often assume that fish farmer husbands pass on information to their wives, especially when it concerns "feeding and management" since this is their wives' responsibility. Experience shows that in actual practice, little information trickles across between husbands and wives. Therefore, it is necessary that extension agents should have direct contact with women as well.
The attitude of extension agents, and their lack of awareness (even wrong ideas) about women's constraints and needs in fish farming, has contributed to the fact that women are not reached at all. Sometimes they are reached, but do not receive the same treatment as men. In Rwanda, for example, women gave the extensionists lower ratings for helpfulness than men did.
A purposefully designed communication process should therefore be formulated for men and women so that both get equal access to fish farming information. Some elements in designing a gender-sensitive extension approach are:
- A survey carried out by extension personnel, which describes the delivery of aquaculture extension services to men and women. The survey should include contacts with extension workers, attendance at group meetings and demonstrations, and participation in training courses by sex. The respondents should be a sample of fish farmers, their spouses as well as non-fish farmers (a stratified sample of male- and female-headed-households). The reason for including the last group is to determine whether everyone had equal chances to receive information on fish farming when it was first introduced. Discussion of the results can help awareness of a gender-balanced extension approach.
Recommendations for improving the delivery of aquaculture extension services to women:
* Consider the feasibility of village-level training. As most women cannot leave their families for a week at a time because of their substantial workload and their responsibilities around their homes, one could plan to implement training programmes to reach the women where they gather at health centres, under five clinics, local grinding mills, etc..
* When meetings conflict with important domestic duties such as fetching water, the women cannot attend. Women's daily and seasonal schedules should be taken into account when the extension service plans activities.
* Often women have had less schooling than men. Written extension or training materials as well as training courses in English (language other than the local language) are thus less effective for women than for men.
- Usually a male fish farmer is selected as "contact farmer", "model farmer" or for on-farm farmer-managed trials by extension workers. The farmers and their spouses should be asked who actually performs each operation. Often, women carry out many of the tasks in aquaculture and should therefore receive instructions directly.
Moreover, extension workers should receive instructions about which household types they must focus on for trials or as contact farmers. The various "types" for example, are: resource-poor and rich male farmers, resource-poor and rich female farmers, and women as both household heads and wives. Farmers do not get information on fish farming only from extension workers. Where the extension services have to operate on a limited budget, and face transport and personnel constraints, farmer-to-farmer extension becomes more and more important. Since men and women may have separate informal communication circuits, it is crucial to select men and women from a diversity of backgrounds.
- When analyzing farmer-managed trials for differences in fish farming skills between men and women, it is imperative that they have similar access to resources and are in the same life-cycle situation. Comparisons between male and female farmers in terms of management and yields are valid only then.
Recognition of these differences can also lead to recommendations for multiple technologies. For example, women in the Central African Republic constrained by labour, cash and lack of extension advice found it difficult to raise catfish, because of the recurring costs of fish feed, fingerlings and tight feeding schedules. Instead, the low-input, low-cost tilapia better suited their situation.
- Once the project has been successful in reaching female farmers, illustrated extension pamphlets or slide shows could be prepared to disseminate the information obtained. They should point out why it is important to reach women as well as men and present methods to involve women as contact farmers and in farmer-managed trials. They should discuss how male extension staff can work with female farmers.
Division of labour and time allocation
Key questions: What tasks (in agriculture, aquaculture, household) are performed and by which members? Are the peak and slack periods of various household members taken into account when planning extension? What positive/negative labour effects will the introduction of a new technology or a more intensive system have on men and women? Where women's workload is a constraint to the uptake of fish farming, is it possible to collaborate with other projects and introduce measures to ease their workload ?
Too often, planners have failed to recognize women's roles in male aquaculture systems. Both male and female activities must be specified, because the interrelationships can affect or be affected by a project. Separate activity profiles should be made for each project setting and distinct population groups in the area. A general typology of the division of labour in aquaculture will be used as an example to show the relationships.
In small-scale fish farming, men and women often join hands in pond construction. While men do the heavier work, women often transport dirt or prepare meals if they hire labourers. As mentioned before, women and children are usually responsible for feeding and pond management. Men apply manure to the ponds and/or make compost. Pond harvesting is a family affair. Where seine nets are used, men pull the nets. Women use basins to empty ponds and baskets to catch the remaining fish. Marketing of fish is done mostly by women, and they have always dominated in fish processing.
Targeting improved technologies efficiently demands an understanding of who is likely to use the technology. For example, both men and women should be addressed when improving dike construction or raising feeding and fertilizer levels since they both participate. Adoption of the advice will depend on the work it requires and whether the benefits will be substantial for both.
Since men and women often carry out different tasks in agriculture, they may have different peak and slack periods. This should be taken into account when planning aquaculture activities and extension programmes.
A change from extensive to more intensive fish farming may also change the division and allocation of labour. In agriculture men act more involved in cash cropping, likewise men may take over women's duties in aquaculture when it becomes more market oriented. If this results in women having less access to fish for home consumption, it may have a negative effect on family welfare. In that case it would be advisable to keep at least one pond which can be used to fish for home consumption.
The introduction of special processing facilities off-farm or near the market is often not acceptable to women. Processing at home is preferred because women are able to combine processing activities with other domestic duties. The development of industrial processing, which is often a consequence of the introduction of commercial aquaculture, has frequently excluded women from an important source of income.
There are very few women fish farmers (pond owners). A problem often cited is that women are heavily burdened by other activities and face a role conflict when aquaculture is added to the burden. Moreover, pond construction is considered a man's job, for which women would have to hire labour. A more fundamental problem is that fish farming has always been introduced as a male activity. Since men have received knowledge, resources such as tools and fingerlings and credit as well, communities perceive fish farming as a male activity. Women thus have to overcome stereo-typing before engaging in fish farming.
If the benefit of aquaculture is demonstrated to women, ways of easing women's other burdens could be considered. If women spend less time on fetching water or fuel and on preparing food, they could possibly free more time and labour for fish farming. Active cooperation with other development projects in the area and integration with other sectors, should be pursued.
Household decision-making
Key questions: Who allocates productive resources (land, water, labour, money, inputs)? Who decides when and how many fish to take for home consumption and/or for sale? Who prioritizes how the income from fish farming will be distributed? How do these decisions relate to the members' contribution to aquaculture?
Women's role in aquaculture production depends partly on the intra-household decision-making
process. In some areas, men decide on who will carry out what tasks in the household. Decisions concerning the timing and quantity of fish to be harvested, the fish to be consumed by the household, the sale of fish, and the distribution of proceeds influence women's motivations to contribute to aquaculture production. The owner of the pond -- usually a man -- consults his wife on these matters, but he is the sole decision-maker.
There are also examples of women and children fishing in the pond without informing the husband, or hiding fish during a complete drainage. This happens when women do not agree with the decisions taken. They then seize the initiative to get their "equitable share".
Economics of fish farming
Key questions: Who provides the production factors (land, labour, inputs, money) for fish farming and who gains the benefits? Is the balance between contributions and benefits likely to change when a more intensive aquaculture system is introduced ?
The analysis of the costs and benefits of different aquaculture systems should take gender into account. It is important to know who contributes to fish farming, who controls it, who gets the benefits -and relate the work done to the benefits obtained.
In practice, it seems that in small-scale fish farming this is not a big issue. The labour input is rather low, while the fish is often consumed within the household; the proceeds, if any, pay for household needs. In more intensive aquaculture systems which require higher inputs, it is imperative that a cost-benefit analysis includes a profile of the division of labour, as well as an "access and control" profile of the benefits. If the aquaculture system relies heavily on family labour while the family has no control over the benefits, its viability and sustainability is questionable.
<section>6</section>
4. Guidelines on monitoring and evaluation
4. Guidelines on monitoring and evaluation
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) are ways to ensure that the objectives of development programmes and projects are realized.
Monitoring^2 is a continuous process during project/programme implementation in order to achieve efficient and effective performance and to provide feedback to management for improving operational plans. This enables managers to take timely and effective action to redirect activities.
^2 Physical and financial monitoring measures a project's delivery of services and inputs. Beneficiary contact monitoring measures whether the project outputs reach intended target groups and beneficiaries.
Evaluation is a process to determine the relevance, effectiveness and impact of project activities in the light of its objectives. It is usually carried out half-way through the lifetime of a project to improve activities still in progress, or after the end of a project when the full benefits and impacts of a project are expected to have been realized.
Design of an M&E system should be included in project formulation for two important reasons:
- It encourages clearer thinking and a refined statement of objectives, assumptions and activities;
- Project budgets will then include the cost of an M&E system.
As few aquaculture projects have objectives which specifically or directly relate to gender, it is difficult for project implementors to monitor or evaluate gender-specific issues.
However, even if no gender-specific objectives have been set for a project or programme, M&E systems should seek answers to a few key questions in order to establish the effects or impacts of project activities on gender, and to enable reorientation of project activities and future development interventions, wherever negative effects on gender are occurring. Participants and beneficiaries and those not targeted should be included. These questions relate to the degree to which men and women participate and thus contribute to viable activities (effectiveness) and the distribution of project benefits or ill-effects between men and women (balanced development). The questions are formulated as follows:
(1) Who has been involved in decision-making during all stages of the project?
(2) What changes have taken place in the roles, activities and resource allocation among men and women? Which changes can be attributed to development interventions?
(3) a. Who benefits, who loses? How? Why? b. Who gets the fish and who eats it? Why?
(4) Have new conflicts arisen between men and women?
As a M&E should be included in project formulation and involves the collection and analysis of information, the matrices presented in Appendix 1 can also be used for developing a set of M&E indicators. Choosing indicators will depend on the type of project and can often be a difficult task. For gender, qualitative indicators may also have to be found, as effects and impacts may not be quantitatively measurable. In addition, indicators chosen might have to be replaced during the lifetime of the project, on the basis of the experience and availability of refined data.
<section>7</section>
5. Guidelines: suggestions for incorporating gender issues into socioeconomic methodologies
A. Use of official statistics
B. Field work
C. Aggregation
5. Guidelines: suggestions for incorporating gender issues into socioeconomic methodologies
A. Use of official statistics
Secondary data used for sectoral planning are often derived from sources such as statistics, surveys and censuses. How these data reflect women's economic contribution is important and will influence development planning.
1. Labour statistics often undervalue women's contribution. The bulk of women's production takes place in the informal and non-monetary sectors which are not included in most national statistics.
Moreover, labour force calculations often define a woman as two-thirds of a man-equivalent and a child as one-third. The result of this manipulation of statistics is that the work done by women and children is reduced to a fraction of a "man-unit". New calculations, using full units for both sexes, must be made by planners and their effects on sector plans demonstrated.
Care should thus be taken when using labour statistics to indicate the contribution and availability
of male and female labour. Review of other secondary sources or a special study may be needed to obtain a clear picture on labour availability by sex and season.
2. Population censuses are often conducted during slack periods of agricultural activity using short reference periods. Therefore, they are likely to omit persons such as migrants and women, who may be active during peak agricultural seasons, from the economically active population.
3. Numbers of female-headed households are not necessarily a good criterion for target group selection. Some types of female-headed households are likely to have less access to resources. On the other hand, they may be sole decision-makers -- this gives them more flexibility in deciding on allocation and use of resources. Information on female-headed households should be interpreted in conjunction with other data such as income levels, economic activities and household decision making.
4. Subsistence production in rural and fishing areas, as well as domestic work, is unpaid and therefore often little valued by statisticians. Thus without taking into account the extent of the informal economy, planners are often inclined to the development of the formal market economy. Generally speaking, men participate more actively in the formal economy than women do. Analysis of other secondary sources such as labour allocation studies may reveal the relative importance of different formal and informal market activities undertaken by men and women. When no information is available, a special study may have to be carried out on the roles and significance of the subsistence and market sectors.
5. Anthropometric measurements and health and nutrition indicators do not themselves reveal the causes of malnutrition and should therefore be analyzed in combination with other information, such as food availability, intra-household distribution of food, sanitary conditions, health status, etc. Moreover, protein energy malnutrition cannot be solved by increased supply of fish alone, but often requires other interventions such as increasing energy intake and the general improvement of health and sanitation.
6. Enumerators often confine their attention to male household members. Where information is given only by the men of the household, the census might understate the participation of women in economic activities. Data from such censuses should be supplemented with other information from special studies and secondary sources to provide a full picture of household activities.
7. Cost-benefit analyses to assist decision-making on development projects and programs is sometimes concerned only with total costs and total benefits and disregard the distribution of these benefits. For example, an analysis involving 'man-units' might obscure the importance of women to total labour inputs. The reduction of women to a fraction of a man-unit could mean that a project involving more men than women would be given higher ranking than an equivalent or better project involving more women than men.
An alternative is to separately show the costs and benefits of a given set of projects to different groups in society, and let the policy-makers decide on the relative weights to be given to each.
8. Government budgets and past expenditures are not necessarily a good indicator of commitment to gender issues. Often money is spent on buildings or equipment rather than on activities. Therefore, it is necessary to supplement these data with information from progress and annual reports of field staff or to interview key informants for details on activities.
B. Field work
Although the various methodologies used to generate socio-economic and socio-cultural data are qualitatively different (e.g. surveys, PRA, case studies), many contain a 'field work' stage. The design of the field work ascertains whether the data collected will be disaggregated by gender. Furthermore, the perceptions and attitudes of the persons conducting the field work are important. They need to have some knowledge of the local socio-cultural situation and a general understanding of gender issues in order to interpret the answers correctly. Several considerations, which apply to all methodologies, must be taken into account when planning and conducting field work.
1. Seasonal fluctuations in many agriculture and aquaculture activities have implications for field work. To address this problem it is suggested that:
* Long recall periods extending over the entire year should be used as the reference period (although the accuracy of the data decreases with a longer recall period), or
* If resources permit, collect data several times at different times of the year, or
* If resources do not permit field work to be carried out during different seasons, interview key informants about the activities of the categories of people not present.
2. Questions on women's activities should be put to women rather than men, as men are likely to omit activities. Even when women are interviewed directly, a precise description of the information solicited is needed. If not, women themselves may under-report their activities (e.g. reproductive activities).
3. In order to reach as many men and women as possible during field work, it is important that:
* both their time schedules are taken into account when planning the interviews; and
* the interview is conducted in the language of common use.
4. Since a household is not a homogeneous undifferentiated grouping of people with shared and equal access to resources for and benefits from production, it is often necessary to take individuals rather than the household as enumeration units. Whereas data obtained from two or more individuals could probably be combined, there is no way of dividing up household data such as income and expenditure or activities to correspond to individual holdings from household members.
Comparison of information (e.g. access to resources, seasonal calendars) obtained from husband and wife or groups of men and women belonging to the same community, will reveal gender differences. Moreover, a discussion of the differences in views and perceptions between men and women may lead to proposals for solutions. This could thus be used as an important tool in gender-sensitive planning.
C. Aggregation
Collected information has to be aggregated in some way to enable sectoral planning and project formulation. There are various ways to aggregate information, but the reliability of these methods depends on the compatibility of definitions for data collected with different methods. For example, two surveys based on the household as the enumeration unit may use different definitions of the household, making comparison and aggregation of data difficult.
Aggregation of data can be based on fairly simple statistical aggregation methods such as frequency distribution, or more sophisticated social cost-benefit analysis (SCBA) and Geographical Information Systems (GIS).
SCBA is a system designed to ensure that all relevant factors are taken into account to enable decision makers to analyse the costs and benefits of different strategies to achieve set objectives. It allows for weighting of information relating to key issues such as income distribution between sex and class within a community. This means that if gender issues are considered important by decision-makers, weights could be accorded to ensure their relevance when a decision is taken. Thus, a scale of importance of various gender issues needs to be developed so that weights can be accorded each issue when performing a SCBA. This could be an objective scale to consider different aspects of gender, it could be a relative scale which views these aspects in relation to other factors in the appraisal process.
GIS allows the interpreter to identify the geographical distribution of various characteristics of the sector and at different levels. This can apply to natural resources, market mechanisms, household composition or any other type or combination of variables. Mapping this can then assist decision-makers in taking appropriate measures for a given situation and allows for identification of problem areas. The importance accorded to gender by those using GIS will determine whether it plays a significant role in relation to other factors during the decision-making process. It is therefore important to ensure that gender related variables are integrated into information that is transferred to GIS systems.
<section>8</section>
Key references
Key references
FAO, Rome, (1988), Women in Fishing Communities: Guidelines, A special target group of development projects, FAO
FAO, Rome, (1989), Women in Community Forestry: Guidelines A field guide for project design and implementation, FAO
FAO, Rome, (1990), Gender Issues in Fisheries and Aquaculture: including proceedings of the workshop on enhanced women's participation in Fisheries Development, ALCOM, GCP/INT/436/SWE/REP.7, SIDA/FAO
Kandiyoti D., (1990) Women and Rural Development Policies: The Changing Agenda, SAGE, Vol. 21 (1990), 5-22
Mbozi E. H., (1991), Integration of Gender Issues into Fish Farming in Chibote, Zambia, ALCOM Field Document GCP/INT/436/SWE.17, FAO
Mohai P., (1992), Men, Women, and the Environment: An Examination of the Gender Gap in Environmental Concern and Activism, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Nash E. E., C. R. Engle, D. Crosetti, (1987) Women in Aquaculture: Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture Rome. FAO' 13-16 April 1987
Ostergaard L., (ed.) (1992), Gender and Development: A Practical Guide, Based on a study prepared for the Directorate-General for Development Commission of the European Communities, Routledge
Overholt C., M. B. Anderson, K. Cloud, J. E. Austin, Gender Roles in Development Projects, Kumarian Press, 1985
Tafilios-Rothschild C., Women as a Motor in Agricultural Development: Lessons Learned from Eastern and Southern Sub-Saharan Africa, Gender Studies in Agriculture, Agricultural University, Wageningen
Seki E., R. Maly, (1993), A Pilot Socio-Economic Survey of Aquaculture in Ruvuma Region, Tanzania, ALCOM Field Document No. 20, FAO van der Mheen-Sluijer J., and H. W. van der Mheen, (1988), Field Testing of Aquaculture in Eastern Province, Zambia, ALCOM, Fl: GCP/INT/436/SWE.6, FAO van der Mheen-Sluijer J., (1991), Adoption of Fish Farming: Promoting and Inhibiting Factors in Eastern Province, Zambia, ALCOM, GCPIINT/4361SWE.13. FAO
<section>9</section>
Appendices 1 & 2
Appendix 1 - Aquaculture (macro level)
Appendix 2 - aquaculture (micro level)
Appendices 1 & 2
Appendix 1 & Appendix 2 contain detailed lists of all the information planners need on gender issues in aquaculture, how this information can be collected, and how it can be used in planning and project formulation.
Appendix 1 - Aquaculture (macro level)
Matrix of gender information required and its use
Information needed
Dab to be generated
How to use the information
Sources/methods to generate the data
Development policies, strategies and programmes/projects for aquaculture, and for gender issues.
A - National and donor development objectives
A - Ensure that the plan's objective conforms with national policy; Examine compatibility of national development objectives with gender concerns; Assess whether donor/external objectives compatible with national sector/gender objectives
A-E - National development plans, progress reports and annual reports of government staff
B - Past and future activities/plans
B,C,F - Adaptation of interventions to past experiences, Coordinate development programme and activities
B - Project/programme documents, key informants
C - Current status of ongoing projects/programmes
A,D,E - Determine government priorities and relative importance accorded to the sector/gender
- Evaluation reports
D - Government spending and budget
F,G - Determine donor priorities and relative importance accorded to the sector/gender and ensure that these conform to national priorities.
C - Progress Reports, key informants
E - % of total government expenditure (trend)
D-G - Government/donor budgets, progress reports and annual reports of government staff, key informants
F - External assistance (type and spending)
B,C,F,G - Donor strategy/policy papers.
G - % of total external assistance and trend
Institutional capacities
A - List of relevant institutions
A-D - Identify institutions, potential opportunities or constraints and assistance requirements
A-D - Annual reports, human resource audit, key informants, civil service commission reports, staff associations/unions
B - Organizational structure of institutions
- Select cooperating institutions
E - Key informants in relevant government departments, and other institutions
C - Qualifications of personnel by positions and sex
E,F - Find out location and availability capacity for gender analysis; assess need for strengthening capacity
F - Annual reports, key informants in Ministry of Home Affairs/planning
D - Working conditions by sex
F - Assess collaboration possibilities
E - Data base on expertise in gender analysis
F - Data base on services relevant to women's needs provided by other organizations, departments, institutions
Aquaculture Sectoral characteristics:
A - Fish species kept in ponds, and criteria men and women have for fish preferences
A - Compare basis for preferences of men and women with options for fish species selection; who benefits?
A - Aquaculture statistics, quick survey, preferences by rank of separate consumer categories
B - Technology used and its requirements
B - Check whether men and women have resources to adopt technology
B - Annual reports Fisheries Department, GIS secondary sources(development technology centres, projects, women affairs, etc.)
- Resources available to men and women
- Assess whether technical package can be adapted to limited resources
C - Maps, key informants, group interviews - men and women
C - Other uses and users of resources needed for aquaculture
C - Assess impact of aquaculture on other users resources. Who gains, who loses?
Demographic characteristics of rural and urban population
A - Population growth and density
A - Indication for population pressure on resources
A-D - Population census, survey statistics, field reports, key informants
B - Dependency ratio for rural and urban areas
B - Indication for labour availability
C - Sex ratio for rural and urban areas
C - Indication for availability of male and female labour
D - % Female-headed-households
D - Indicator to assist planner to identify labour availability in households
Health and nutrition characteristics
A- Anthropometric measurements of children (weight for age, weight for height)
A-E - Choice of target area
A-E - Health and nutrition statistics, special surveys; key informants, demographic studies/surveys
B - Birth weight
A - Indicate relative wellbeing and of nutritional risk
F - Rapid eyelid and teeth inspection;
C - Infant mortality rates
B,C - Indicate health of mother, relative wellbeing and areas of nutritional risk
G - Key informants especially women. Reports
D - Occurrence and types of malnutrition in children and adults
D - Identify potential for fish to reduce malnutrition
E - Prevalence of diseases
E - Indicate general health status of communities; identify need for preventive measures for water-borne diseases in conjunction with fisheries/aquaculture development
F - Prevalence of anaemia, fluorisis calcium
F - Determine advisability of eating whole small pelagics
G - Taste preference for different species and attitudes to fish consumption
G - Targeting catches for consumption (e.g. weaning food production)
Legal status of women
A - Inheritance law for men and women
A - Identify who inherits productive resources and developments and thus motivated to invest. Identify (im)possibility of providing access to the other category.
A-C - Legislation and customary law.
B - Ownership of property for men and women
B - identify who owns resources and developments and thus motivated to invest. Identify (im)possibility to provide access to the other category.
C - Land registration procedures for men and women (aquaculture)
C - Identify who teas access to productive resources and thus in a position to invest. Identify(im)possibility of providing access to those that do not have acces.
Credit availability
A - Past experiences with disbursement, utilization and recovery of credit with regard to sex
A-D - Assess whether men and women have de facto access to credit. Identify needs and possibilities for improved procedures for disadvantaged groups (e.g. women, migrants). Identify credit sources suitable for men's and women's needs
A - Key informants
B - Lending programmes, credit and loan recovery (by sex); special credit programmes for women
B - Assess whether packages are suitable for men and women. If needed, identify different packages tailored to needs and constraints of women
A,B - Special studies
C - Source and recipients (by sex) of credit: institutional and informal
A,B,D - Assess whether lending norms and procedures are appropriate for men and women and propose changes
B-D - Report of financial institutions, NGOs, development agencies, government departments special studies
D - Lending policies, norms and procedures, cultural constraints
Training and education
A - Training institutes and their curricula
A - Assess whether gender concerns are taken into account; if not identify possibilities for integration
A - Brochure of training institutes; key informants
B - Enrolment of students by sex
B, C - Assess whether men and women have equal chances to receive vocational training and higher education; if not, is change in recruitment policy necessary as this will affect staffing
B - Key informants, informants, with students, social studies, arrival reports
C - Barriers preventing women from entering higher education
C - Indication for chances in career development for men and women; may in turn have impact on motivation and work performance
B - Annual reports, reports, informants
D - Literacy rate and school enrolment by sex
D - Indicator of relative status of men and women
D - Population census, Ministry of education
Extension services
A - Number of persons by occupation and sex employed by extension service
A - Assess whether men and women have equal chances to obtain pots change in recruitment policy necessary?
A, B - Annual reports relevant extension Departments
B - Training and qualifications of extension officers
B - Existing extension capability and training needs to reach men and women
C - Competence of staff to integrate gender issues
C - Assessment of capacity and willingness to incorporate gender concerns and identification of issues for further training
C - Interview personnel, evaluation reports, impact studies
- Assess what methods were effective in reaching men and women
Biological/technical research and development
A - Research and development on aquaculture systems
A - Compare relevance of research results to men and women's needs and resources
A - Reports and or key informants of Fisheries Department, Universities, Research institutes
B - Fish species used for research in aquaculture
B - Identify which population group will consume the species
B - Annual reports, quick survey of research stations, key informants
- Assess whether resources needed to raise fish species are within reach of men and women
Appendix 2 - aquaculture (micro level)
Matrix of gender information required and its use
Information needed
Data to be generated
How to we the information
Sources/methods to generate the data
Locations suitable/existing sites for fish farming
A - Suitable locations for fish farming
A, B - Distance between ponds and locus of other major activities is an indicator of relative ease with which men or women can include fish farming in their waking schedules
A - Maps, transects
- Present fish farming sites
- Locations of other activities of men and women
Key factors affecting access to/control over resources
A - How is gender - differentiated access to and control over resources regulated (class and kinship systems and their influence on tenure systems)?
A - Assess who has/does not have access to and control over productive resources required for aquaculture
A - Interview key informants; separate group discussions for each category
B - Needs and opportunities to increase access and control by disadvantaged groups
B - Assess possibilities for manipulation of the system by men and women
B - Mixed group discussions including community leaders, problem - opportunity matrices
- Can project affect (positively or negatively) women's access to and/or contra over resources?
Socio-cultural factors affecting adoption and diffusion of new technologies
A - Norms concerning order of adoption of innovations; where do women fit in this order
A - Assess who should be contacted first and impact on late adopters (i.e. available resources and markets for fish)
A - Interview key informants, ranking done by different groups
B - Rules affecting contacts between women and unrelated men
B - Assess possibilities of male extension agents contacting women farmers
B - Interview key informants, group discussion
- In case of difficulties, identify possibilities for bypassing the obstacles
Community organizations
A - Occurrence of community organizations, their composition (only men, only women or mixed?), functions and how often they meet
A-C - Assess whether they can be used for extension purposes (contact)
A-C - Interview key informants, discuss with members, discuss with non-members who are engaged in the aquaculture sector
B - Socio-economic characteristics of leaders of organizations
- Possibilities for collaboration between members regarding fingeding distribution, pooling of labour and, inputs, harvesting gear (not necessarily in the form of collective ownership of aquaculture production units)
C - Participation of men and women in decision making
B,C - Assess whether both men's and women's views are reflected in decision making
Farming systems
A - Description of gender-specific crops livestock and tasks
A - Get indications of land use and assess whether there arc possibilities for integration with aquaculture
A - Maps transects, interviews with key informants, and separate group interviews
B - Use of by-products of these farming systems
B - Assess availability and source of on- farm inputs for aquaculture; Contribution of inputs by gender
B - Seasonal calendar of by-products, interviews with key informants, group discussions with men and women
- Actual use of by-products indicates eventual benefits foregone
Household structures
A - Household composition, their activity profile, and their representation in the community
A - Create typology of household types
A - Surveys, key informants, social maps
- Household structure and labour profile indicate the labour availability for aquaculture
- Assess likely implications of introduction of culture systems of different intensities
Marketing of fish
A - Who markets different fish species, where, how and why?
A - Identify reasons for division in species and markets by traders and by sex
A - Case studies, interviews with traders and other key informants, matrices (species, market, volume, problems - opportunities)
B - Constraints and needs of different categories of traders
- Assess who will market fish from aquaculture, what their opportunities and constraints are
B - Case studies, interviews with traders, impact flow diagram
B - Assess positive and negative effects of changing marketing structure and/or locus on different categories of traders
Access to and quality of extension services
A - On-going extension programmes
A, B - Assess whether everyone had equal chances to obtain info on aquaculture
A - Secondary sources key informants, observation
B - Who was reached by extension services (not the same as who are the fish farmers)
C - Assess need far awareness and/or training programme
B - Surveys, semi-structured interviews, flow of information to men and women
C - Gender awareness of extension personnel and their skills to address gender issues
D - Assess need for changes existing to or for additional extension materials
C - Interviews with extension personnel at all levels, field observations
D - Gender sensitivity of extension material
D - Reviews of extension material
Involvement in natural fisheries
A - Inventory of men and women (can be more than one within household) fishing in the community
A, B - Assessment of effect of natural fisheries on interest in aquaculture for men and women
A - Surveys, social map
B - Seasonally of fishing efforts and catches per category of fishermen/women
B - Surveys (repeated for different seasonal calendar per fish catcher category, observation, ranking
Socio-economic characteristics of fish farmers
A - Sex of fish farmers
A, B - Assess need to influence adoption process and thus the categories of people who adopt fish farming
A - Survey
B - Distribution of male and female fish farmers over different socio-economic strata
B - Wealth ranking al individual level, social maps
Access to and control over production factors
A - Distribution of production factors(land, labour, inputs, fingerlings, etc) within households (between men and women)
A - Ability to adopt proposed aquaculture system by sex
A - Ethnographic literature, case study, separate group discussions with men and women far individual ownership, social maps
Hausehold decision-making
A - Decision making pattern and priorities within hausehold regarding:
A - Assess whether aquaculture is common or separate production goal of household members; list priorities of men and women
A - Ethnographic literature, case study,
* production priorities
- Assess how bargaining positions within households affect access to necessary resources by members implications for who can adopt aquaculture
semi-structured interviews with individual
* allocation of resources
- Assess impact of different expenditure patterns (additional income derived through aquaculture) on individual household members in order to determine the project direction
household members and compare answers of household members, decision-making matrix
* distribution of benefits from economic activities
Division of labour (productive and reproductive activities) and time allocation
A - Activity profile (who does what) by sex and age group
A-C - Assess relevant persons to be addressed by extension service
A,B - Ethnographic literature, key informants, semi-structured interviews with both sexes and different age groups responsibilities/tasks matrix, impact flow diagram, case studies
B - Percentage of time allocated to activities by sex
- A possibilities for alleviating time/labour constraints and collaboration with other projects
C - Agricultural reports, ethnographic literature, seasonal calendars for each group
C - Labour calendar for men and women
- Assess potential impact by sex of intensification of aquaculture system
C - Take slack and peak seasons for men and women into account when planning extension programme
Levels and sources of cash incomes
A - Cash needs, income and expenditure by sex
A - Assess time/money available for investment in aquaculture as well as when that money is required thus possible harvest
A - Separate semi-structured interviews for men and women, income-expenditure calendars by sex
B - Sources, uses, uses and conditions of credit
B - Assess possibilities of men and women using credit for fish farming
B - Case studies, interviews with key persons
Economics of fish farming
A - Costs and earnings
A - Assess balance between contributions and benefits in order to determine needs for project intervention
A - Case studies, impact flow diagram
- Sex of persons providing inputs and persons gaining benefits
- Assess potential impact by sex of intensification of aquaculture system
Food security and nutrition
A - Inventory of major health and nutritional problems
A - Assess possible impact of aquaculture on these problems
A - Health clinic data on anthropometric measurements and statistics on prevalent diseases, survey
B - Nutritional status by household type
B - Assess whether certain types of households are disadvantaged; assist in choice target group
B - Semi-structured interviews, social maps, anthropometric measurements
C - Seasonal Food availability
C - Assess seasonal shortages in food supply and role of aquaculture to alleviate these shortages
C - Separate semi-structured interviews by household type, food calendar for different groups and sex
D - Distribution and frequency of fish and other animal protein consumption within household (by age and sex)
D - Assess who benefits from increase in fish supply
D - Semi-structured interviews with both sexes, pie chart
E - Description of gender differences in perception of the hosehold's food security situation and its constraints
E - Get indications of differing interest/motivation for aquaculture adoption
E - Semi-structured interviews with both sexes, ranking by both sexes and household type
F - Description of gender differences in strategies to cope with shortages and contingencies
F - Get indications of possible role of aquaculture to diversify coping capability and reduce negative impact of these strategies on men and women
F - Semi-structured interviews with both sexes, ranking by sex
